Before proceeding further with these memoirs, I desire to give short sketches of two personages
with whom we were identified and closely associated until the winding up of the ball.  The
first is Colonel Hume R. Field.  Colonel Field was born a soldier.  I have read many descriptions
of Stonewall Jackson.  Colonel Field was his exact counterpart.  They looked somewhat alike,
spoke alike, and alike were trained military soldiers.  The War Department at Richmond made
a grand mistake in not making him a "commander of armies."  He was not a brilliant man; could
not talk at all.  He was a soldier.  His conversation was yea and nay.  But when you could
get "yes, sir," and "no, sir," out of him his voice was as soft and gentle as a maid's when
she says "yes" to her lover.  Fancy, if you please, a man about thirty years old, a dark skin,
made swarthy by exposure to sun and rain, very black eyes that seemed to blaze with a gentle
luster.  I never saw him the least excited in my life.  His face was a face of bronze.  His
form was somewhat slender, but when you looked at him you saw at the first glance that this
would be a dangerous man in a ground skuffle, a foot race, or a fight.  There was nothing repulsive
or forbidding or even domineering in his looks.  A child or a dog would make up with him on
first sight.  He knew not what fear was, or the meaning of the word fear. He had no nerves,
or rather, has a rock or tree any nerves?  You might as well try to shake the nerves of a rock
or tree as those of Colonel Field. He was the bravest man, I think, I ever knew.  Later in
the war he was known by every soldier in the army; and the First Tennessee Regiment, by his
manipulations, became the regiment to occupy "tight places." He knew his men.  When he struck
the Yankee line they felt the blow. He had, himself, set the example, and so trained his regiment
that all the armies in the world could not whip it.  They might kill every man in it, is true,
but they would die game to the last man.  His men all loved him.  He was no disciplinarian,
but made his regiment what it was by his own example.  And every day on the march you would
see some poor old ragged rebel riding his fine gray mare, and he was walking.

CAPTAIN JOE P. LEE

The other person I wish to speak of is Captain Joe P. Lee.  Captain Henry J. Webster was our
regular captain, but was captured while on furlough, sent to a northern prison and died there,
and Joe went up by promotion. He was quite a young man, about twenty-one years old, but as
brave as any old Roman soldier that ever lived.  Joe's face was ever wreathed in smiles, and
from the beginning to the end he was ever at the head of his company.  I do not think that
any member of the company ever did call him by his title.  He was called simply "Joe Lee,"
or more frequently "Black Perch."  While on duty he was strict and firm, but off duty he was
"one of us boys."  We all loved and respected him, but everybody knows Joe, and further comment
is unnecessary.

I merely mention these two persons because in this rapid sketch I may have cause occasionally
to mention them, and only wish to introduce them to the reader, so he may understand more fully
my ideas.  But, reader, please remember that I am not writing a history at all, and do not
propose in these memoirs to be anybody's biographer.  I am only giving my own impressions.
If other persons think differently from me it is all right, and I forgive them.

CORINTH FORSAKEN

One morning a detail was sent to burn up and destroy all the provisions and army stores, and
to blow up the arsenal.  The town was in a blaze of fire and the arsenal was roaring and popping
and bellowing like pandemonium turned loose as we marched through Corinth on the morning of
the evacuation.  We bade farewell to Corinth.  Its history was black and dark and damning.
No little speck of green oasis ever enlivened the dark recesses of our memory while at this
place.  It's a desert that lives only in bitter memories.  It was but one vast graveyard that
entombed the life and spirit of once brave and chivalrous men.  We left it to the tender mercies
of the Yankees without one tear of sorrow or regret, and bade it farewell forever.

CHAPTER IV

TUPELO

We went into summer quarters at Tupelo.  Our principal occupation at this place was playing
poker, chuck-a-luck and cracking graybacks (lice). Every soldier had a brigade of lice on him,
and I have seen fellows so busily engaged in cracking them that it reminded me of an old woman
knitting.  At first the boys would go off in the woods and hide to louse themselves, but that
was unnecessary, the ground fairly crawled with lice.  Pharaoh's people, when they were resisting
old Moses, never enjoyed the curse of lice more than we did.  The boys would frequently have
a louse race. The Pretended friends of the people, pretended or misguided, wait but the stilling
of the present ferment of loyalty to come forth. Mr. Grey has said so in the House. Mr. Fox
attended the St. George's meeting, after keeping back to the last, and was nobody there!

The accounts from France are thrilling. Poor M. d'Arblay's speech
should be translated, and read to all English imitators of French
reformers.

What a picture of the now reformed!

Mr. Burke's description of the martyred Duc de la Rochefoucault should
be read also by all the few really pure promoters of new systems.

New systems, I fear, in states, are always dangerous, if not wicked.

Grievance by grievance, wrong by wrong, must only be assailed, and
breathing time allowed to old prejudices, and old habits, between
all that is done. . . .



Billy took him and put him back in his bosom and said to the louse, "You stay there now; this
makes the fourth time I have put you back, and if I catch you out again today I'll martyr you."

Billy was philosophic--the death of one louse did not stop the breed.

THE COURT MARTIAL AT TUPELO

At this place was held the grand court-martial.  Almost every day we would hear a discharge
of musketry, and knew that some poor, trembling wretch had bid farewell to mortal things here
below.  It seemed to be but a question of time with all of us as to when we too would be shot.
We were afraid to chirp.  So far now as patriotism was concerned, we had forgotten all about
that, and did not now so much love our country as we feared Bragg.  Men were being led to the
death stake every day.  I heard of many being shot, but did not see but two men shot myself.
I do not know to what regiment they belonged, but I remember that they were mere beardless
boys.  I did not learn for what crime or the magnitude of their offenses.  They might have
deserved death for all I know.

I saw an old man, about sixty years old, whose name was Dave Brewer, and another man, about
forty-five, by the name of Rube Franklin, whipped. There was many a man whipped and branded
that I never saw or heard tell of.  But the reason I remembered these two was that they belonged
to Company A of the 23rd Tennessee Regiment, and I knew many men in the regiment.

These two men were hung up by the hands, after having their heads shaved, to a tree, put there
for the purpose, with the prongs left on them, and one hand was stretched toward one prong
and the other hand to another prong, their feet, perhaps, just touching the ground.  The man
who did the whipping had a thick piece of sole-leather, the end of which was cut in three strips,
and this tacked on to the end of a paddle.  After the charges and specifications had been read
(both men being stark naked), the whipper "lit in" on Rube, who was the youngest.  I do not
think he intended to hit as hard as he did, but, being excited himself, he blistered Rube from
head to foot.  Thirty-nine lashes was always the number.  Now, three times thirty-nine makes
one hundred and seventeen. When he struck at all, one lick would make three whelps.  When he
had finished Rube, the Captain commanding the whipping squad told him to lay it on old man
Brewer as light as the law would allow, that old man Brewer was so old that he would die--that
he could not stand it.  He struck old man Dave Brewer thirty-nine lashes, but they were laid
on light.  Old Dave didn't beg and squall like Rube did.  He j-e-s-t did whip old man Dave.
Like the old preacher who caught the bear on Sunday.  They had him up before the church, agreed
to let him off if he did not again set his trap.  "Well," he said, "brethren, I j-e-s-t did
set it."

RAIDING ON ROASTINGEARS

At this place General Bragg issued an order authorizing citizens to defend themselves against
the depredations of soldiers--to shoot them down if caught depredating.

Well, one day Byron Richardson and myself made a raid on an old citizen's roastingear patch.
We had pulled about all the corn that we could carry. What is there there to merit her? What kind
of animals have you left her with? Anything capable of understanding her?"

During this we mounted up-stairs, into the dining-room. Here all looked
cold and comfortless, and no Mrs. Young appeared.  I intend to take you there, by the living
God!"

I was in for it.  Directed to go in front, I was being marched to Bragg's headquarters.  I
could see the devil in the old fellow's eye.  I tried to beg off with good promises, but the
old fellow was deaf to all entreaty. I represented to him all of our hardships and suffering.
But the old fellow was inexorable.  I was being steadily carried toward Bragg's headquarters.
I was determined not to see General Bragg, even if the old citizen shot me in the back.  When
all at once a happy thought struck me. Says I, "Mister, Byron Richardson is in your field,
and if you will go back we can catch him and you can take both of us to General Bragg." The
old fellow's spunk was up.  He had captured me so easy, he no doubt thought he could whip a
dozen.  We went back a short distance, and there was Byron, who had just climbed over the fence
and had his arms full, when the old citizen, diverted from me, leveled his double-barrel at
Byron, when I made a grab for his gun, which was accidentally discharged in the air, and with
the assistance of Byron, we had the old fellow and his gun both.  The table was turned.  We
made the old fellow gather as much as he could carry, and made him carry it nearly to camp,
when we dismissed him, a wiser if not a better and richer man.  We took his gun and bent it
around a black jack tree.  He was at the soldiers' mercy.

CHAPTER V

KENTUCKY

WE GO INTO KENTUCKY

After being thoroughly reorganized at Tupelo, and the troops had recovered their health and
spirits, we made an advance into Kentucky. We took the cars at Tupelo and went to Mobile, from
thence across Mobile Bay to Montgomery, Alabama, then to Atlanta, from there to Chattanooga,
and then over the mountains afoot to the blue-grass regions of Kentucky-- the dark and bloody
ground.  Please remember, patient reader, that I write entirely from memory.  I have no data
or diary or anything to go by, and memory is a peculiar faculty.  I find that I cannot remember
towns and battles, and remember only the little things.  I remember how gladly the citizens
of Kentucky received us.  I thought they had the prettiest girls that God ever made.  They
could not do too much for us.  They had heaps and stacks of cooked rations along our route,
with wine and cider everywhere, and the glad shouts of "Hurrah for our Southern boys!" greeted
and welcomed us at every house.  Ah, the boys felt like soldiers again.  The bands played merrier
and livelier tunes.  It was the patient convalescing; the fever had left him, he was getting
fat and strong; the old fire was seen to illuminate his eyes; his step was buoyant and proud;
he felt ashamed that he had ever been "hacked"; he could fight now.  It was the same old proud
soldier of yore.  The bands played "Dixie" and the "Bonnie Blue Flag," the citizens cheered,
and the ladies waved their handkerchiefs and threw us bouquets.  Ah, those were halcyon days,
and your old soldier, kind reader, loves to recall that happy period. Mumfordsville had been
captured with five thousand prisoners.  New recruits were continually joining our ranks.

Camp Dick Robinson, that immense pile of army stores, had fallen into our hands.  We rode upon
the summit of the wave of success.  The boys had got clean clothes, and had their faces washed.
I saw then what I had long since forgotten--a "cockade."  The Kentucky girls made cockades
for us, and almost every soldier had one pinned on his hat.  But stirring events were hastening
on, the black cloud of battle and war had begun then to appear much larger than a man's hand,
in fact we could see the lightning flash and hear the thunder roar.

We were at Harrodsburg; the Yankees were approaching Perryville under General Buell.  The Yankees
had been dogging our rear, picking up our stragglers and capturing some of our wagon trains.

This good time that we were having was too good to last.  We were in an ecstasy akin to heaven.
We were happy; the troops were jubilant; our manhood blood pulsated more warmly; our patriotism
was awakened; our pride was renewed and stood ready for any emergency; we felt that one Southern
man could whip twenty Yankees.  All was lovely and the goose hung high.  We went to dances
and parties every night.

When General Chalmers marched to Perryville, in flanking and surrounding Mumfordsville, we
marched the whole night long.  We, the private soldiers, did not know what was going on among
the generals.  All that we had to do was march, march, march.  It mattered not how tired, hungry,
or thirsty we were.  All that we had to do was to march that whole night long, and every staff
officer who would pass, some fellow would say, "Hey, mister, how far is it to Mumfordsville?"
He would answer, "five miles." It seemed to me we traveled a hundred miles and were always
within five miles of Mumfordsville.  That night we heard a volley of musketry in our immediate
front, and did not know what it meant, but soon we came to where a few soldiers had lighted
some candles and were holding them over the body of a dead soldier.  It was Captain Allison,
if I remember rightly, of General Cheatham's staff.  He was very bloody, and had his clothes
riddled with balls.  I heard that he rode on in front of the advance guard of our army, and
had no doubt discovered the Yankee picket, and came galloping back at full speed in the dark,
when our advance guard fired on and killed him.

We laid down in a graveyard that night and slept, and when we awoke the sun was high in the
heavens, shining in our faces.  Mumfordsville had surrendered.  The next day Dr. C. T. Quintard
let me ride his horse nearly all day, while he walked with the webfeet.

THE BATTLE OF PERRYVILLE

In giving a description of this most memorable battle, I do not pretend to give you figures,
and describe how this general looked and how that one spoke, and the other one charged with
drawn sabre, etc.  I know nothing of these things--see the history for that.  I was simply
a soldier of the line, and I only write of the things I saw.  I was in every battle, skirmish
and march that was made by the First Tennessee Regiment during the war, and I do not remember
of a harder contest and more evenly fought battle than that of Perryville.  If it had been
two men wrestling, it would have been called a "dog fall."  Both sides claim the victory--both
whipped.

I stood picket in Perryville the night before the battle--a Yankee on one side of the street,
and I on the other.  We got very friendly during the night, and made a raid upon a citizen's
pantry, where we captured a bucket of honey, a pitcher of sweet milk, and three or four biscuit.
The old citizen was not at home--he and his whole household had gone visiting, I believe. 
In fact, I think all of the citizens of Perryville were taken with a sudden notion of promiscuous
visiting about this time; at least they were not at home to all callers.

At length the morning dawned.  Our line was drawn up on one side of Perryville, the Yankee
army on the other.  The two enemies that were soon to meet in deadly embrace seemed to be eyeing
each other.  The blue coats lined the hillside in plain view.  You could count the number of
their regiments by the number of their flags.  We could see the huge war dogs frowning at us,
ready at any moment to belch forth their fire and smoke, and hurl their thunderbolts of iron
and death in our very midst.

I wondered why the fighting did not begin.  Never on earth were our troops more eager for the
engagement to open.  The Yankees commenced to march toward their left, and we marched almost
parallel to our right-- both sides watching each other's maneuvers and movements.  It was but
the lull that precedes the storm.  Colonel Field was commanding our brigade, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Patterson our regiment.  About 12 o'clock, while we were marching through a corn field, in
which the corn had been shocked, they opened their war dogs upon us.  The beginning of the
end had come. Here is where Captain John F. Wheless was wounded, and three others, whose names
I have forgotten.  The battle now opened in earnest, and from one end of the line to the other
seemed to be a solid sheet of blazing smoke and fire.  Our regiment crossed a stream, being
preceded by Wharton's Texas Rangers, and we were ordered to attack at once with vigor.  Here
General Maney's horse was shot.  From this moment the battle was a mortal struggle.  Two lines
of battle confronted us.  We killed almost every one in the first line, and were soon charging
over the second, when right in our immediate front was their third and main line of battle
from which four Napoleon guns poured their deadly fire.

We did not recoil, but our line was fairly hurled back by the leaden hail that was poured into
our very faces.  Eight color-bearers were killed at one discharge of their cannon.  We were
right up among the very wheels of their Napoleon guns.  It was death to retreat now to either
side. Our Lieutenant-Colonel Patterson halloed to charge and take their guns, and we were soon
in a hand-to-hand fight--every man for himself--using the butts of our guns and bayonets. 
One side would waver and fall back a few yards, and would rally, when the other side would
fall back, leaving the four Napoleon guns; and yet the battle raged.  Such obstinate fighting
I never had seen before or since.  The guns were discharged so rapidly that it seemed the earth
itself was in a volcanic uproar. The iron storm passed through our ranks, mangling and tearing
men to pieces.  The very air seemed full of stifling smoke and fire which seemed the very pit
of hell, peopled by contending demons.

Our men were dead and dying right in the very midst of this grand havoc of battle.  It was
a life to life and death to death grapple.  The sun was poised above us, a great red ball sinking
slowly in the west, yet the scene of battle and carnage continued.  I cannot describe it. 
The mantle of night fell upon the scene.  I do not know which side whipped, but I know that
I helped bring off those four Napoleon guns that night though we were mighty easy about it.

They were given to Turner's Battery of our brigade and had the name of our Lieutenant-Colonel
Patterson and our color-bearer, Mitchell, both of whom were killed, inscribed on two of the
pieces.  I have forgotten the names inscribed on the other two pieces.  I saw these very four
guns surrendered at Missionary Ridge.  But of this another time.

The battle of Perryville presented a strange scene.  The dead, dying, and wounded of both armies,
Confederate and Federal, were blended in inextricable confusion.  Now and then a cluster of
dead Yankees and close by a cluster of dead Rebels.  It was like the Englishman's grog--'alf
and 'alf.  Now, if you wish, kind reader, to find out how many were killed and wounded, I refer
you to the histories.

I remember one little incident that I laughed at while in the very midst of battle.  We were
charging through an old citizen's yard, when a big yellow cur dog ran out and commenced snapping
at the soldiers' legs-- they kicking at him to keep him off.  The next morning he was lying
near the same place, but he was a dead dog.

I helped bring off our wounded that night.  We worked the whole night. The next morning about
daylight a wounded comrade, Sam Campbell, complained of being cold, and asked me to lie down
beside him.  I did so, and was soon asleep; when I awoke the poor fellow was stiff and cold
in death.  His spirit had flown to its home beyond the skies.

After the battle was over, John T. Tucker, Scott Stephens, A. S. Horsley and I were detailed
to bring off our wounded that night, and we helped to bring off many a poor dying comrade--Joe
Thompson, Billy Bond, Byron Richardson, the two Allen boys--brothers, killed side by side--and
Colonel Patterson, who was killed standing right by my side.  He was first shot through the
hand, and was wrapping his handkerchief around it, when another ball struck and killed him.
I saw W. J. Whittorne, then a strippling boy of fifteen years of age, fall, shot through the
neck and collar-bone.  He fell apparently dead, when I saw him all at once jump up, grab his
gun and commence loading and firing, and I heard him say, "D--n 'em, I'll fight 'em as long
as I live."  Whit thought he was killed, but he is living yet.  We helped bring off a man by
the name of Hodge, with his under jaw shot off, and his tongue lolling out.  We brought off
Captain Lute B. Irvine.  Lute was shot through the lungs and was vomiting blood all the while,
and begging us to lay him down and let him die. But Lute is living yet.  Also, Lieutenant Woldridge,
with both eyes shot out.  I found him rambling in a briar-patch.  About fifty members of the
Rock City Guards were killed and nearly one hundred wounded.  They were led by Captains W.
D. Kelley, Wheless, and Steele.  Lieutenant Thomas H. Maney was badly wounded.  I saw dead
on the battlefield a Federal General by the name of Jackson.  It was his brigade that fought
us so obstinately at this place, and I did hear that they were made up in Kentucky.  Colonel
Field, then commanding our brigade, and on his fine gray mare, rode up almost face to face
with General Jackson, before he was killed, and Colonel Field was shooting all the time with
his seven-shooting rifle.  I cannot tell the one-half, or even remember at this late date,
the scenes of blood and suffering that I witnessed on the battlefield of Perryville.  But its
history, like all the balance, has gone into the history of the war, and it has been twenty
years ago, and I write entirely from memory.  I remember Lieutenant Joe P. Lee and Captain
W. C. Flournoy standing right at the muzzle of the Napoleon guns, and the next moment seemed
to be enveloped in smoke and fire from the discharge of the cannon.  When the regiment recoiled
under the heavy firing and at the first charge, Billy Webster and I stopped behind a large
oak tree and continued to fire at the Yankees until the regiment was again charging upon the
four Napoleon guns, heavily supported by infantry.  We were not more than twenty paces from
them; and here I was shot through the hat and cartridge-box.  I remember this, because at that
time Billy and I were in advance of our line, and whenever we saw a Yankee rise to shoot, we
shot him; and I desire to mention here that a braver or more noble boy was never created on
earth than was Billy Webster.  Everybody liked him.  He was the flower and chivalry of our
regiment.  His record as a brave and noble boy will ever live in the hearts of his old comrades
that served with him in Company H.  He is up yonder now, and we shall meet again.  In these
memoirs I only tell what I saw myself, and in this way the world will know the truth.  Now,
citizen, let me tell you what you never heard before, and this is this--there were many men
with the rank and pay of general, who were not generals; there were many men with the rank
and pay of privates who would have honored and adorned the name of general.  Now, I will state
further that a private soldier was a private.

It mattered not how ignorant a corporal might be, he was always right; it mattered not how
intelligent the private might be (and so on up); the sergeant was right over the corporal,
the sergeant-major over the sergeant, the lieutenant over him, and the captain over him, and
the major over him, and the colonel over him, and the general over him, and so on up to Jeff
Davis.  You see, a private had no right to know anything, and that is why generals did all
the fighting, and that is today why generals and colonels and captains are great men.  They
fought the battles of our country.  The privates did not.  The generals risked their reputation,
the private soldier his life.  No one ever saw a private in battle.  His history would never
be written.  It was the generals that everybody saw charge such and such, with drawn sabre,
his eyes flashing fire, his nostrils dilated, and his clarion voice ringing above the din of
battle--"in a horn," over the left.

Bill Johns and Marsh Pinkard would have made Generals that would have distinguished themselves
and been an honor to the country.

I know today many a private who would have made a good General.  I know of many a General who
was better fitted to be excused from detail and fights, to hang around a camp and draw rations
for the company.  A private had no way to distinguish himself.  He had to keep in ranks, either
in a charge or a retreat.  But now, as the Generals and Colonels fill all the positions of
honor and emoluments, the least I say, the better.

THE RETREAT OUT OF KENTUCKY

From Perryville we went to Camp Dick Robinson and drew three days' rations, and then set fire
to and destroyed all those great deposits of army stores which would have supplied the South
for a year.  We ate those rations and commenced our retreat out of Kentucky with empty haversacks
and still emptier stomachs.

We supposed our general and commissaries knew what they were doing, and at night we would again
draw rations, but we didn't.

The Yankee cavalry are worrying our rear guards.  There is danger of an attack at any moment.
No soldier is allowed to break ranks.

We thought, well surely we will draw rations tonight.  But we didn't. We are marching for Cumberland
Gap; the country has long ago been made desolate by the alternate occupation of both armies.
There are no provisions in the country.  It has long since been laid waste.  We wanted rations,
but we did not get them.

Fourth day out--Cumberland Gap in the distance--a great indenture in the ranges of Cumberland
mountains.  The scene was grand.  But grand scenery had but little attraction for a hungry
soldier.  Surely we will get rations at Cumberland Gap.  Toil on up the hill, and when half
way up the hill, "Halt!"--march back down to the foot of the hill to defend the cavalry.  I
was hungry.  A cavalryman was passing our regiment with a pile of scorched dough on the pummel
of his saddle.  Says I, "Halt! I am going to have a pattock of that bread."  "Don't give it
to him! don't give it to him!" was yelled out from all sides.  I cocked my gun and was about
to raise it to my shoulder, when he handed me over a pattock of scorched dough, and every fellow
in Company H made a grab for it, and I only got about two or three mouthfuls.  About dark a
wild heifer ran by our regiment, and I pulled down on her.  We killed and skinned her, and
I cut off about five pounds of hindquarter.  In three minutes there was no sign of that beef
left to tell the tale.  We ate that beef raw and without salt.

Only eight miles now to Cumberland Gap, and we will get rations now. But we didn't.  We descended
the mountain on the southern side.  No rations yet.

Well, says I, this won't do me.  I am going to hunt something to eat, Bragg or no Bragg.  I
turned off the road and struck out through the country, but had gone but a short distance before
I came across a group of soldiers clambering over something.  It was Tom Tuck with a barrel
of sorghum that he had captured from a good Union man.  He was selling it out at five dollars
a quart.  I paid my five dollars, and by pushing and scrouging I finally got my quart.  I sat
down and drank it; it was bully; it was not so good; it was not worth a cent; I was sick, and
have never loved sorghum since.

Along the route it was nothing but tramp, tramp, tramp, and no sound or noise but the same
inevitable, monotonous tramp, tramp, tramp, up hill and down hill, through long and dusty lanes,
weary, wornout and hungry. No cheerful warble of a merry songster would ever greet our ears.
It was always tramp, tramp, tramp.  You might, every now and then, hear the occasional words,
"close up;" but outside of that, it was but the same tramp, tramp, tramp.  I have seen soldiers
fast asleep, and no doubt dreaming of home and loved ones there, as they staggered along in
their places in the ranks.  I know that on many a weary night's march I have slept, and slept
soundly, while marching along in my proper place in the ranks of the company, stepping to the
same step as the soldier in front of me did.  Sometimes, when weary, broken down and worn out,
some member of the regiment would start a tune, and every man would join in.  John Branch was
usually the leader of the choir.  He would commence a beautiful tune.  The words, as I remember
them now, were "Dear Paul, Just Twenty Years Ago."  After singing this piece he would commence
on a lively, spirit-stirring air to the tune of "Old Uncle Ned."  Now, reader, it has been
twenty years ago since I heard it, but I can remember a part of it now.  Here it is:

  "There was an ancient individual whose cognomen was Uncle Edward.
   He departed this life long since, long since.
   He had no capillary substance on the top of his cranium,
   The place where the capillary substance ought to vegetate.

   His digits were as long as the bamboo piscatorial implement of the
      Southern Mississippi.
   He had no oculars to observe the beauties of nature.
   He had no ossified formation to masticate his daily rations,
   So he had to let his daily rations pass by with impunity."

Walker Coleman raises the tune of "I'se a gwine to jine the rebel band, a fightin' for my home."

Now, reader, the above is all I can now remember of that very beautiful and soul-stirring air.
But the boys would wake up and step quicker and livelier for some time, and Arthur Fulghum
would holloa out, "All right; go ahead!" and then would toot! toot! as if the cars were starting--
puff! puff! puff and then he would say, "Tickets, gentlemen; tickets, gentlemen." like he was
conductor on a train of cars.  This little episode would be over, and then would commence the
same tramp, tramp, tramp, all night long.  Step by step, step by step, we continued to plod
and nod and stagger and march, tramp, tramp, tramp.  After a while we would see the morning
star rise in the east, and then after a while the dim gray twilight, and finally we could discover
the outlines of our file leader, and after a while could make out the outlines of trees and
other objects.  And as it would get lighter and lighter, and day would be about to break, cuckoo,
cuckoo, cuckoo, would come from Tom Tuck's rooster. [Tom carried a game rooster, that he called
"Fed" for Confederacy, all through the war in a haversack.]  And then the sun would begin to
shoot his slender rays athwart the eastern sky, and the boys would wake up and begin laughing
and talking as if they had just risen from a good feather bed, and were perfectly refreshed
and happy.  We would usually stop at some branch or other about breakfast time, and all wash
our hands and faces and eat breakfast, if we had any, and then commence our weary march again.
If we were halted for one minute, every soldier would drop down, and resting on his knapsack,
would go to sleep.  Sometimes the sleeping soldiers were made to get up to let some general
and his staff pass by.  But whenever that was the case, the general always got a worse cursing
than when Noah cursed his son Ham black and blue.  I heard Jessee Ely do this once.

We march on.  The scene of a few days ago comes unbidden to my mind. Tramp, tramp, tramp, the
soldiers are marching.  Where are many of my old friends and comrades, whose names were so
familiar at every roll call, and whose familiar "Here" is no more?  They lie yonder at Perryville,
unburied, on the field of battle.  They lie where they fell.  More than three hundred and fifty
members of my regiment, the First Tennessee, numbered among the killed and wounded--one hundred
and eighty-five slain on the field of battle.  Who are they?  Even then I had to try to think
up the names of all the slain of Company H alone.  Their spirits seemed to be with us on the
march, but we know that their souls are with their God.  Their bones, today, no doubt, bleach
upon the battlefield.  They left their homes, families, and loved ones a little more than one
short twelve months ago, dressed in their gray uniforms, amid the applause and cheering farewells
of those same friends.  They lie yonder; no friendly hands ever closed their eyes in death;
no kind, gentle, and loving mother was there to shed a tear over and say farewell to her darling
boy; no sister's gentle touch ever wiped the death damp from off their dying brows.  Noble
boys; brave boys!  They willingly gave their lives to their country's cause.  Their bodies
and bones are mangled and torn by the rude missiles of war.  They sleep the sleep of the brave.
They have given their all to their country.  We miss them from our ranks.  There are no more
hard marches and scant rations for them.  They have accomplished all that could be required
of them.  They are no more; their names are soon forgotten.  They are put down in the roll-book
as killed.  They are forgotten.  We will see them no more until the last reveille on the last
morning of the final resurrection.  Soldiers, comrades, friends, noble boys, farewell we will
meet no more on earth, but up yonder some day we will have a grand reunion.

KNOXVILLE

The first night after crossing Cumberland Gap--I have forgotten the date, but I know it was
very early in the fall of the year; we had had no frost or cold weather, and our marches all
through Kentucky had been characterized by very dry weather, it not having rained a drop on
us during the whole time--about four o'clock in the morning it began to snow, and the next
morning the ground was covered with a deep snow; the trees and grass and everything of the
vegetable kingdom still green.

When we got back to Knoxville we were the lousiest, dirtiest, raggedest looking Rebels you
ever saw.  I had been shot through the hat and cartridge-box at Perryville, and had both on,
and the clothing I then had on was all that I had in the world.  William A. Hughes and I were
walking up the street looking at the stores, etc., when we met two of the prettiest girls I
ever saw.  They ran forward with smiling faces, and seemed very glad to see us.  I thought
they were old acquaintances of Hughes, and Hughes thought they were old acquaintances of mine.
We were soon laughing and talking as if we had been old friends, when one of the young ladies
spoke up and said, "Gentlemen, there is a supper for the soldiers at the Ladies' Association
rooms, and we are sent out to bring in all the soldiers we can find."  We spoke up quickly
and said, "Thank you, thank you, young ladies," and I picked out the prettiest one and said,
"Please take my arm," which she did, and Hughes did the same with the other one, and we went
in that style down the street.  I imagine we were a funny looking sight.  I know one thing,
I felt good all over, and as proud as a boy with his first pants, and when we got to that supper
room those young ladies waited on us, and we felt as grand as kings.  To you, ladies, I say,
God bless you!

AH, "SNEAK"

Almost every soldier in the army--generals, colonels, captains, as well as privates--had a
nick-name; and I almost believe that had the war continued ten years, we would have forgotten
our proper names.  John T. Tucker was called "Sneak," A. S. Horsley was called "Don Von One
Horsley," W. A. Hughes was called "Apple Jack," Green Rieves was called "Devil Horse," the
surgeon of our regiment was called "Old Snake," Bob Brank was called "Count," the colonel of
the Fourth was called "Guide Post," E. L. Lansdown was called "Left Tenant," some were called
by the name of "Greasy," some "Buzzard," others "Hog," and "Brutus," and "Cassius," and "Caesar,"
"Left Center," and "Bolderdust," and "Old Hannah;" in fact, the nick-names were singular and
peculiar, and when a man got a nick-name it stuck to him like the Old Man of the Sea did to
the shoulders of Sinbad, the sailor.

On our retreat the soldiers got very thirsty for tobacco (they always used the word thirsty),
and they would sometimes come across an old field off which the tobacco had been cut and the
suckers had re-sprouted from the old stalk, and would cut off these suckers and dry them by
the fire and chew them.  "Sneak" had somehow or other got hold of a plug or two, and knowing
that he would be begged for a chew, had cut it up in little bits of pieces about one-fourth
of a chew.  Some fellow would say, "Sneak, please give me a chew of tobacco."  Sneak would
say, "I don't believe I have a piece left," and then he would begin to feel in his pockets.
He would pull that hand out and feel in another pocket, and then in his coat pockets, and hid
away down in an odd corner of his vest pocket he would accidentally find a little chew, just
big enough to make "spit come."  Sneak had his pockets full all the time.  The boys soon found
out his inuendoes and subterfuges, but John would all the time appear as innocent of having
tobacco as a pet lamb that has just torn down a nice vine that you were so careful in training
to run over the front porch. Ah, John, don't deny it now!

I JINE THE CAVALRY

When we got to Charleston, on the Hiwassee river, there we found the First Tennessee Cavalry
and Ninth Battalion, both of which had been made up principally in Maury county, and we knew
all the boys.  We had a good old-fashioned handshaking all around.  Then I wanted to "jine
the cavalry."  Captain Asa G. Freeman had an extra horse, and I got on him and joined the cavalry
for several days, but all the time some passing cavalryman would make some jocose remark about
"Here is a webfoot who wants to jine the cavalry, and has got a bayonet on his gun and a knapsack
on his back."  I felt like I had got into the wrong pen, but anyhow I got to ride all of three
days.  I remember that Mr. Willis B. Embry gave me a five-pound package of Kallickanick smoking
tobacco, for which I was very grateful.  I think he was quartermaster of the First Tennessee
Cavalry, and as good a man and as clever a person as I ever knew.  None knew him but to love
him.  I was told that he was killed by a lot of Yankee soldiers after he had surrendered to
them, all the time begging for his life, asking them please not kill him.  But He that noteth
the sparrow's fall doeth all things well.  Not one ever falls to the ground with His consent.

CHAPTER VI

MURFREESBORO

We came from Knoxville to Chattanooga, and seemed destined to make a permanent stay here. 
We remained several months, but soon we were on the tramp again.

From Chattanooga, Bragg's army went to Murfreesboro.

The Federal army was concentrating at Nashville.  There was no rest for the weary.  Marches
and battles were the order of the day.

Our army stopped at Murfreesboro.  Our advanced outpost was established at Lavergne.  From
time to time different regiments were sent forward to do picket duty.  I was on picket at the
time the advance was made by Rosecrans.  At the time mentioned, I was standing about two hundred
yards off the road, the main body of the pickets being on the Nashville and Murfreesboro turnpike,
and commanded by Lieutenant Hardy Murfree, of the Rutherford Rifles.

I had orders to allow no one to pass.  In fact, no one was expected to pass at this point,
but while standing at my post, a horseman rode up behind me.  I halted him, and told him to
go down to the main picket on the road and pass, but he seemed so smiling that I thought he
knew me, or had a good joke to tell me.  He advanced up, and pulling a piece of paper out of
his pocket, handed it to me to read.  It was an order from General Leonidas Polk to allow the
bearer to pass.  I read it, and looked up to hand it back to him, when I discovered that he
had a pistol cocked and leveled in my face, and says he, "Drop that gun; you are my prisoner."
I saw there was no use in fooling about it.  I knew if I resisted he would shoot me, and I
thought then that he was about to perform that detestable operation.  I dropped the gun.

I did not wish to spend my winter in a Northern prison, and what was worse, I would be called
a deserter from my post of duty.

The Yankee picket lines were not a half mile off.  I was perfectly willing to let the spy go
on his way rejoicing--for such he was--but he wanted to capture a Rebel.

And I had made up my mind to think likewise.  There I was, a prisoner sure, and no mistake
about it.

His pistol was leveled, and I was ordered to march.  I was afraid to halloo to the relief,
and you may be sure I was in a bad fix.

Finally says I, "Let's play quits.  I think you are a soldier; you look like a gentleman. 
I am a videt; you know the responsibility resting on me.  You go your way, and leave me here.
Is it a bargain?"

Says he, "I would not trust a Secesh on his word, oath, or bond.  March, I say."

I soon found out that he had caught sight of the relief on the road, and was afraid to shoot.
I quickly made up my mind.  My gun was at my feet, and one step would get it.  I made a quick
glance over my shoulder, and grabbed at my gun.  He divined my motive, and fired.  The ball
missed its aim.  He put spurs to his horse, but I pulled down on him, and almost tore the fore
shoulder of his horse entirely off, but I did not capture the spy, though I captured the horse,
bridle and saddle.  Major Allen, of the Twenty-seventh Tennessee Regiment, took the saddle
and bridle, and gave me the blanket.  I remember the blanket had the picture of a "big lion"
on it, and it was almost new.  When we fell back, as the Yankee sharpshooters advanced, we
left the poor old horse nipping the short, dry grass.  I saw a Yankee skirmisher run up and
grab the horse and give a whoop as if he had captured a Rebel horse.  But they continued to
advance upon us, we firing and retreating slowly.  We had several pretty sharp brushes with
them that day.  I remember that they had to cross an open field in our front, and we were lying
behind a fence, and as they advanced, we kept up firing, and would run them back every time,
until they brought up a regiment that whooped, and yelled, and charged our skirmish line, and
then we fell back again.  I think we must have killed a good many in the old field, because
we were firing all the time at the solid line as they advanced upon us.

BATTLE OF MURFREESBORO

The next day, the Yankees were found out to be advancing.  Soon they came in sight of our picket.
We kept falling back and firing all day, and were relieved by another regiment about dark.
We rejoined our regiment. Line of battle was formed on the north bank of Stone's River--on
the Yankee side.  Bad generalship, I thought.

It was Christmas.  John Barleycorn was general-in-chief.  Our generals, and colonels, and captains,
had kissed John a little too often.  They couldn't see straight.  It was said to be buckeye
whisky.  They couldn't tell our own men from Yankees.  The private could, but he was no general,
you see.  But here they were--the Yankees--a battle had to be fought. We were ordered forward.
I was on the skirmish line.  We marched plumb into the Yankee lines, with their flags flying.

I called Lieutenant-Colonel Frierson's attention to the Yankees, and he remarked, "Well, I
don't know whether they are Yankees or not, but if they are, they will come out of there mighty
quick."

The Yankees marched over the hill out of sight.

We were ordered forward to the attack.  We were right upon the Yankee line on the Wilkerson
turnpike.  The Yankees were shooting our men down by scores.  A universal cry was raised, "You
are firing on your own men." "Cease firing, cease firing," I hallooed; in fact, the whole skirmish
line hallooed, and kept on telling them that they were Yankees, and to shoot; but the order
was to cease firing, you are firing on your own men.

Captain James, of Cheatham's staff, was sent forward and killed in his own yard.  We were not
twenty yards off from the Yankees, and they were pouring the hot shot and shells right into
our ranks; and every man was yelling at the top of his voice, "Cease firing, you are firing
on your own men; cease firing, you are firing on your own men."

Oakley, color-bearer of the Fourth Tennessee Regiment, ran right up in the midst of the Yankee
line with his colors, begging his men to follow. I hallooed till I was hoarse, "They are Yankees,
they are Yankees; shoot, they are Yankees."

The crest occupied by the Yankees was belching loud with fire and smoke, and the Rebels were
falling like leaves of autumn in a hurricane. The leaden hail storm swept them off the field.
They fell back and re-formed.  General Cheatham came up and advanced.  I did not fall back,
but continued to load and shoot, until a fragment of a shell struck me on the arm, and then
a minnie ball passed through the same paralyzing my arm, and wounded and disabled me.  General
Cheatham, all the time, was calling on the men to go forward, saying, "Come on, boys, and follow
me."

The impression that General Frank Cheatham made upon my mind, leading the charge on the Wilkerson
turnpike, I will never forget.  I saw either victory or death written on his face.  When I
saw him leading our brigade, although I was wounded at the time, I felt sorry for him, he seemed
so earnest and concerned, and as he was passing me I said, "Well, General, if you are determined
to die, I'll die with you."  We were at that time at least a hundred yards in advance of the
brigade, Cheatham all the time calling upon the men to come on.  He was leading the charge
in person. Then it was that I saw the power of one man, born to command, over a multitude of
men then almost routed and demoralized.  I saw and felt that he was not fighting for glory,
but that he was fighting for his country because he loved that country, and he was willing
to give his life for his country and the success of our cause.  He deserves a wreath of immortality,
and a warm place in every Southron's heart, for his brave and glorious example on that bloody
battlefield of Murfreesboro.  Yes, his history will ever shine in beauty and grandeur as a
name among the brightest in all the galaxy of leaders in the history of our cause.

Now, another fact I will state, and that is, when the private soldier was ordered to charge
and capture the twelve pieces of artillery, heavily supported by infantry, Maney's brigade
raised a whoop and yell, and swooped down on those Yankees like a whirl-a-gust of woodpeckers
in a hail storm, paying the blue coated rascals back with compound interest; for when they
did come, every man's gun was loaded, and they marched upon the blazing crest in solid file,
and when they did fire, there was a sudden lull in the storm of battle, because the Yankees
were nearly all killed.  I cannot remember now of ever seeing more dead men and horses and
captured cannon, all jumbled together, than that scene of blood and carnage and battle on the
Wilkerson turnpike.  The ground was literally covered with blue coats dead; and, if I remember
correctly, there were eighty dead horses.

By this time our command had re-formed, and charged the blazing crest.

The spectacle was grand.  With cheers and shouts they charged up the hill, shooting down and
bayoneting the flying cannoneers, General Cheatham, Colonel Field and Joe Lee cutting and slashing
with their swords. The victory was complete.  The whole left wing of the Federal army was driven
back five miles from their original position.  Their dead and wounded were in our lines, and
we had captured many pieces of artillery, small arms, and prisoners.

When I was wounded, the shell and shot that struck me, knocked me winding.  I said, "O, O,
I'm wounded," and at the same time I grabbed my arm.  I thought it had been torn from my shoulder.
The brigade had fallen back about two hundred yards, when General Cheatham's presence reassured
them, and they soon were in line and ready to follow so brave and gallant a leader, and had
that order of "cease firing, you are firing on your own men," not been given, Maney's brigade
would have had the honor of capturing eighteen pieces of artillery, and ten thousand prisoners.
This I do know to be a fact.

As I went back to the field hospital, I overtook another man walking along.  I do not know
to what regiment he belonged, but I remember of first noticing that his left arm was entirely
gone.  His face was as white as a sheet.  The breast and sleeve of his coat had been torn away,
and I could see the frazzled end of his shirt sleeve, which appeared to be sucked into the
wound.  I looked at it pretty close, and I said "Great God!" for I could see his heart throb,
and the respiration of his lungs. I was filled with wonder and horror at the sight.  He was
walking along, when all at once he dropped down and died without a struggle or a groan. I could
tell of hundreds of such incidents of the battlefield, but tell only this one, because I remember
it so distinctly.

ROBBING A DEAD YANKEE

In passing over the battlefield, I came across a dead Yankee colonel. He had on the finest
clothes I ever saw, a red sash and fine sword. I particularly noticed his boots.  I needed
them, and had made up my mind to wear them out for him.  But I could not bear the thought of
wearing dead men's shoes.  I took hold of the foot and raised it up and made one trial at the
boot to get it off.  I happened to look up, and the colonel had his eyes wide open, and seemed
to be looking at me.  He was stone dead, but I dropped that foot quick.  It was my first and
last attempt to rob a dead Yankee.

After the battle was over at Murfreesboro, that night, John Tucker and myself thought that
we would investigate the contents of a fine brick mansion in our immediate front, but between
our lines and the Yankees', and even in advance of our videts.  Before we arrived at the house
we saw a body of Yankees approaching, and as we started to run back they fired upon us.  Our
pickets had run in and reported a night attack.  We ran forward, expecting that our men would
recognize us, but they opened fire upon us.  I never was as bad scared in all my whole life,
and if any poor devil ever prayed with fervency and true piety, I did it on that occasion.
I thought, "I am between two fires."  I do not think that a flounder or pancake was half as
flat as I was that night; yea, it might be called in music, low flat.

CHAPTER VII

SHELBYVILLE

It is a bad thing for an army to remain too long at one place.  The men soon become discontented
and unhappy, and we had no diversion or pastime except playing poker and chuck-a-luck.  All
the money of the regiment had long ago been spent, but grains of corn represented dollars,
and with these we would play as earnestly and as zealously as if they were so much money, sure
enough.

A FOOT RACE

One of those amusing episodes that frequently occur in the army, happened at this place.  A
big strapping fellow by the name of Tennessee Thompson, always carried bigger burdens than
any other five men in the army. For example, he carried two quilts, three blankets, one gum
oil cloth, one overcoat, one axe, one hatchet, one camp-kettle, one oven and lid, one coffee
pot, besides his knapsack, haversack, canteen, gun, cartridge- box, and three days' rations.
He was a rare bird, anyhow.  Tennessee usually had his hair cut short on one side and left
long on the other, so that he could give his head a bow and a toss and throw the long hairs
over on the other side, and it would naturally part itself without a comb.  Tennessee was the
wit and good nature of the company; always in a good humor, and ever ready to do any duty when
called upon.  In fact, I would sometimes get out of heart and low spirited, and would hunt
up Tennessee to have a little fun.  His bye-word was "Bully for Bragg; he's hell on retreat,
and will whip the Yankees yet."  He was a good and brave soldier, and followed the fortunes
of Company H from the beginning to the end.

Well, one day he and Billy Webster bet twenty-five dollars, put up in Bill Martin's hands,
as to which could run the faster.  John Tucker, Joe Lee, Alf. Horsley and myself were appointed
judges.  The distance was two hundred yards.  The ground was measured off, and the judges stationed.
Tennessee undressed himself, even down to his stocking feet, tied a red handkerchief around
his head, and another one around his waist, and walked deliberately down the track, eyeing
every little rock and stick and removing them off the track.  Comes back to the starting point
and then goes down the track in half canter; returns again, his eyes flashing, his nostrils
dilated, looking the impersonation of the champion courser of the world; makes two or three
apparently false starts; turns a somersault by placing his head on the ground and flopping
over on his back; gets up and whickers like a horse; goes half-hammered, hop, step, and jump--he
says, to loosen up his joints--scratches up the ground with his hands and feet, flops his arms
and crows like a rooster, and says, "Bully for Bragg; he's hell on a retreat," and announces
his readiness. The drum is tapped, and off they start.  Well, Billy Webster beat him one hundred
yards in the two hundred, and Tennessee came back and said, "Well, boys, I'm beat; Billy Martin,
hand over the stakes to Billy Webster. I'm beat, but hang me if I didn't outrun the whole Yankee
army coming out of Kentucky; got away from Lieutenant Lansdown and the whole detail at Chattanooga
with half a hog, a fifty pound sack of flour, a jug of Meneesee commissary whisky, and a camp-kettle
full of brown sugar. I'm beat.  Billy Martin, hand over the stakes.  Bully for Bragg; he's
hell on a retreat."  Tennessee was trying bluff.  He couldn't run worth a cent; but there was
no braver or truer man ever drew a ramrod or tore a cartridge than Tennessee.

EATING MUSSELS

Reader, did you ever eat a mussel?  Well, we did, at Shelbyville. We were camped right upon
the bank of Duck river, and one day Fred Dornin, Ed Voss, Andy Wilson and I went in the river
mussel hunting.  Every one of us had a meal sack.  We would feel down with our feet until we
felt a mussel and then dive for it.  We soon filled our sacks with mussels in their shells.
When we got to camp we cracked the shells and took out the mussels.  We tried frying them,
but the longer they fried the tougher they got.  They were a little too large to swallow whole.
Then we stewed them, and after a while we boiled them, and then we baked them, but every flank
movement we would make on those mussels the more invulnerable they would get.  We tried cutting
them up with a hatchet, but they were so slick and tough the hatchet would not cut them.  Well,
we cooked them, and buttered them, and salted them, and peppered them, and battered them. They
looked good, and smelt good, and tasted good; at least the fixings we put on them did, and
we ate the mussels.  I went to sleep that night. I dreamed that my stomach was four grindstones,
and that they turned in four directions, according to the four corners of the earth.  I awoke
to hear four men yell out, "O, save, O, save me from eating any more mussels!"

"POOR" BERRY MORGAN

One of those sad, unexpected affairs, that remind the living that even in life we are in the
midst of death, happened at Shelbyville.  Our regiment had been out to the front, on duty,
and was returning to camp.  It was nearly dark, and we saw a black wind cloud rising.  The
lightning's flash and the deep muttering thunders warned us to seek shelter as speedily as
possible.  Some of us ran in under the old depot shed, and soon the storm struck us.  It was
a tornado that made a track through the woods beyond Shelbyville, and right through the town,
and we could follow its course for miles where it had blown down the timber, twisting and piling
it in every shape.  Berry Morgan and I had ever been close friends, and we threw down our blankets
and were lying side by side, when I saw roofs of houses, sign boards, and brickbats flying
in every direction.  Nearly half of the town was blown away in the storm.  While looking at
the storm without, I felt the old shed suddenly jar and tremble, and suddenly become unroofed,
and it seemed to me that ten thousand brickbats had fallen in around us.  I could hear nothing
for the roaring of the storm, and could see nothing for the blinding rain and flying dirt and
bricks and other rubbish.  The storm lasted but a few minutes, but those minutes seemed ages.
When it had passed, I turned to look at "poor Berry." Poor fellow! his head was crushed in
by a brickbat, his breast crushed in by another, and I think his arm was broken, and he was
otherwise mutilated.  It was a sad sight.  Many others of our regiment were wounded.

Berry was a very handsome boy.  He was what everybody would call a "pretty man."  He had fair
skin, blue eyes, and fine curly hair, which made him look like an innocent child.  I loved
Berry.  He was my friend-- as true as the needle to the pole.  But God, who doeth all things
well, took his spirit in the midst of the storm to that beautiful home beyond the skies.  I
thank God I am no infidel.  We will meet again.

WRIGHT SHOT TO DEATH WITH MUSKETRY

I saw a young boy about seventeen or eighteen years old, by the name of Wright, and belonging
to General Marcus J. Wright's brigade, shot to death with musketry at this place.  The whole
of Cheatham's division had to march out and witness the horrid scene.  Now, I have no doubt
that many, if not all, would have gone without being forced to do so, but then you know that
was Bragg's style.  He wanted always to display his tyranny, and to intimidate his privates
as much as possible.  The young man was hauled in a wagon, sitting on his coffin, to the place
where the grave was to be dug, and a post was planted in the ground.  He had to sit there for
more than two hours, looking on at the preparations for his death. I went up to the wagon,
like many others, to have a look at the doomed man.  He had his hat pulled down over his eyes,
and was busily picking at the ends of his fingers.  The guard who then had him in charge told
me that one of the culprit's own brothers was one of the detail to shoot him.  I went up to
the wagon and called him, "Wright!"  He made no reply, and did not even look up.  Then I said,
"Wright, why don't you jump out of that wagon and run?"  He was callous to everything.  I was
sorry for him.  When the division was all assembled, and the grave dug, and the post set, he
was taken out of the wagon, and tied to the post.  He was first tied facing the post, and consequently
would have been shot in the back, but was afterwards tied with his back to the post.  The chaplain
of the regiment read a chapter in the Bible, sang a hymn, and then all knelt down and prayed.
General Wright went up to the pinioned man, shook hands with him, and told him good-bye, as
did many others, and then the shooting detail came up, and the officer in charge gave the command,
"Ready, aim, fire!"  The crash of musketry broke upon the morning air. I was looking at Wright.
I heard him almost shriek, "O, O, God!" His head dropped forward, the rope with which he was
pinioned keeping him from falling.  I turned away and thought how long, how long will I have
to witness these things?

DAVE SUBLETT PROMOTED

While at Shelbyville, a vacancy occurring in Captain Ledbetter's company, the Rutherford Rifles,
for fourth corporal, Dave Sublett became a candidate for the position.  Now, Dave was a genius.
He was a noble and brave fellow, and at one time had been a railroad director.  He had a distinguished
air always about him, but Dave had one fault, and that was, he was ever prone to get tight.
He had been a Union man, and even now he always had a good word for the Union.  He was sincere,
but eccentric. The election for fourth corporal was drawing nigh.  Dave sent off and got two
jugs of spirits vini frumenti, and treated the boys.  Of course, his vote would be solid. 
Every man in that company was going to cast his vote for him.  Dave got happy and wanted to
make a speech.  He went to the butcher's block which was used to cut up meat on--he called
it Butchers' Hall--got upon it amid loud cheering and hurrahs of the boys. He spoke substantially
as follows:

"Fellow Citizens--I confess that it is with feelings of diffidence and
great embarrassment on my part that I appear before you on this occasion.
But, gentlemen and fellow-citizens, I desire to serve you in an humble
capacity, as fourth corporal of Company I.  Should you see cause to elect
me, no heart will beat with more gratitude than my own.  Gentlemen,
you well know that I was ever a Union man:
          "'A union of lakes, and a union of lands,
              A union that no one can sever;
            A union of hearts, and a union of hands,
              A glorious union forever.'

[Cheers and applause.]

"Fellow-citizens, I can look through the dim telescope of the past and see Kansas, bleeding
Kansas, coming like a fair young bride, dressed in her bridal drapery, her cheek wet and moistened
with the tears of love. I can see her come and knock gently at the doors of the Union, asking
for admittance.  [Wild cheering.]  Looking further back, I can see our forefathers of the revolution
baring their bosoms to the famine of a seven years' war, making their own bosoms a breastwork
against the whole hosts of King George III.  But, gentlemen, as I before remarked, I desire
to ask at your hands the high, distinguished and lucrative office, my fellow-citizens, and
for which I will ever feel grateful--the office of fourth corporal in your company."  [Cheers.]

Now, Dave had a competitor who was a states' rights democrat.  If I mistake not, his name was
Frank Haliburton.  Now, Frank was an original secessionist.  He felt that each state was a
separate, sovereign government of itself, and that the South had the same rights in the territories
as they of the North.  He was fighting for secession and state rights upon principle.  When
Sublett had finished his speech, Frank took the stand and said:

"Gentlemen and Fellow-Citizens--I am a candidate for fourth corporal, and if you will elect
me I will be grateful, and will serve you to the best of my ability.  My competitor seems to
harp considerably upon his Union record, and Union love.  If I mistake not, my fellow-citizens,
it was old George McDuffie that stood up in the senate chamber of the United States and said,
'When I hear the shout of "glorious Union," methinks I hear the shout of a robber gang.'  McDuffie
saw through his prophetic vision the evils that would result, and has foretold them as if by
inspiration from above.

"Fellow-citizens, under the name of Union our country is invaded today.

"These cursed Yankees are invading our country, robbing our people, and desolating our land,
and all under the detestable and damning name of Union.  Our representatives in congress have
been fighting them for fifty years.  Compromise after compromise has been granted by the South.
We have used every effort to conciliate those at the North.  They have turned a deaf ear to
every plea.  They saw our country rich and prosperous, and have come indeed, like a gang of
robbers, to steal our property and murder our people.  But, fellow-citizens, I for one am ready
to meet them, and desire that you elect me fourth corporal of Company I, so that I can serve
you in a more efficient manner, while we meet as a band of brothers, the cursed horde of Northern
Hessians and hirelings. I thank you for your attention, gentlemen, and would thank you for
your votes."

Well, the election came off, and Dave was elected by an overwhelming majority.  But the high
eminence of military distinction enthralled him. He seemed to live in an atmosphere of greatness
and glory, and was looking eagerly forward to the time when he would command armies. He had
begun to climb the ladder of glory under most favorable and auspicious circumstances.  He felt
his consequence and keeping.  He was detailed once, and only once, to take command of the third
relief of camp guard.  Ah, this thing of office was a big thing.  He desired to hold a council
of war with Generals Bragg, Polk, Hardee, and Kirby Smith. He first visited General Polk. 
His war metal was up.  He wanted a fight just then and there, and a fight he must have, at
all hazards, and to the last extremity.  He became obstreperous, when General Polk called a
guard and had him marched off to the guard-house.  It was then ordered that he should do extra
fatigue duty for a week.

He would then go to another tree; but at no tree would he make more than two or three licks
before he would go to another.  He would hit a limb and then a log; would climb a tree and
cut at a limb or two, and keep on this way until he came to a hard old stump, which on striking
his ax would bound and spring back.  He had found his desire; the top of that stump became
fun and pleasure.  Well, his time of misdemeanor expired and he was relieved.  He went back
and reported to Colonel Field, who informed him that he had been reduced to the ranks.  He
drew himself up to his full height and said: "Colonel, I regret exceedingly to be so soon deprived
of my new fledged honors that I have won on so many a hard fought and bloody battlefield, but
if I am reduced to the ranks as a private soldier, I can but exclaim, like Moses of old, when
he crossed the Red sea in defiance of Pharaoh's hosts, 'O, how the mighty have fallen!'"  He
then marched off with the air of the born soldier.

DOWN DUCK RIVER IN A CANOE

"Ora pro nobis."

At this place, Duck river wended its way to Columbia.  On one occasion it was up--had on its
Sunday clothes--a-booming.  Andy Wilson and I thought that we would slip off and go down the
river in a canoe.  We got the canoe and started.  It was a leaky craft.  We had not gone far
before the thing capsized, and we swam ashore.  But we were outside of the lines now, and without
passes.  (We would have been arrested anyhow.)  So we put our sand paddles to work and landed
in Columbia that night.  I loved a maid, and so did Andy, and some poet has said that love
laughs at grates, bars, locksmiths, etc.  I do not know how true this is, but I do know that
when I went to see my sweetheart that night I asked her to pray for me, because I thought the
prayers of a pretty woman would go a great deal further "up yonder" than mine would.  I also
met Cousin Alice, another beautiful woman, at my father's front gate, and told her that she
must pray for me, because I knew I would be court-martialed as soon as I got back; that I had
no idea of deserting the army and only wanted to see the maid I loved.  It took me one day
to go to Columbia and one day to return, and I stayed at home only one day, and went back of
my own accord. When I got back to Shelbyville, I was arrested and carried to the guard-house,
and when court-martialed was sentenced to thirty days' fatigue duty and to forfeit four months'
pay at eleven dollars per month, making forty-four dollars.  Now, you see how dearly I paid
for that trip. But, fortunately for me, General Leonidas Polk has issued an order that very
day promising pardon to all soldiers absent without leave if they would return.  I got the
guard to march me up to his headquarters and told him of my predicament, and he ordered my
release, but said nothing of remitting the fine.  So when we were paid off at Chattanooga I
was left out.  The Confederate States of America were richer by forty-four dollars.

"SHENERAL OWLEYDOUSKY"

General Owleydousky, lately imported from Poland, was Bragg's inspector general.  I remember
of reading in the newspapers of where he tricked Bragg at last.  The papers said he stole all
of Bragg's clothes one day and left for parts unknown.  It is supposed he went back to Poland
to act as "Ugh!  Big Indian; fight heap mit Bragg."  But I suppose it must have left Bragg
in a bad fix--somewhat like Mr. Jones, who went to ask the old folks for Miss Willis.  On being
told that she was a very poor girl, and had no property for a start in life, he simply said,
"All right; all I want is the naked girl."

On one occasion, while inspecting the arms and accoutrements of our regiments, when he came
to inspect Company H he said, "Shentlemens, vatfor you make de pothook out of de sword and
de bayonet, and trow de cartridge-box in de mud?  I dust report you to Sheneral Bragg.  Mine
gracious!"  Approaching Orderly Sergeant John T. Tucker, and lifting the flap of his cartridge
box, which was empty, he said, "Bah, bah, mon Dieu; I dust know dot you ish been hunting de
squirrel and de rabbit.  Mon Dieu! you sharge yourself mit fifteen tollars for wasting sixty
cartridges at twenty-five cents apiece.  Bah, bah, mon Dieu; I dust report you to Sheneral
Bragg."  Approaching Sergeant A. S. Horsley, he said, "Vy ish you got nodings mit your knapsack?
Sir, you must have somedings mit your knapsack."  Alf ran into his tent and came back with
his knapsack in the right shape.  Well, old Owleydousky thought he would be smart and make
an example of Alf, and said, "I vish to inspect your clodings."  He took Alf's knapsack and
on opening it, what do you suppose was in it?  Well, if you are not a Yankee and good at guessing,
I will tell you, if you won't say anything about it, for Alf might get mad if he were to hear
it.  He found Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, Cruden's Concordance, Macauley's History of
England, Jean Valjean, Fantine, Cosset, Les Miserables, The Heart of Midlothian, Ivanhoe, Guy
Mannering, Rob Roy, Shakespeare, the History of Ancient Rome, and many others which I have
now forgotten.  He carried literature for the regiment.  He is in the same old business yet,
only now he furnishes literature by the car load.

CHAPTER VIII

CHATTANOOGA

BACK TO CHATTANOOGA

Rosecrans' army was in motion.  The Federals were advancing, but as yet they were afar off.
Chattanooga must be fortified.  Well do we remember the hard licks and picks that we spent
on these same forts, to be occupied afterwards by Grant and his whole army, and we on Lookout
Mountain and Missionary Ridge looking at them.

AM VISITED BY MY FATHER

About this time my father paid me a visit.  Rations were mighty scarce. I was mighty glad to
see him, but ashamed to let him know how poorly off for something to eat we were.  We were
living on parched corn.  I thought of a happy plan to get him a good dinner, so I asked him
to let us go up to the colonel's tent.  Says I, "Colonel Field, I desire to introduce you to
my father, and as rations are a little short in my mess, I thought you might have a little
better, and could give him a good dinner."  "Yes," says Colonel Field, "I am glad to make the
acquaintance of your father, and will be glad to divide my rations with him.  Also, I would
like you to stay and take dinner with me," which I assure you, O kind reader, I gladly accepted.
About this time a young African, Whit, came in with a frying-pan of parched corn and dumped
it on an old oil cloth, and said, "Master, dinner is ready."  That was all he had.  He was
living like ourselves--on parched corn.

We continued to fortify and build breastworks at Chattanooga.  It was the same drudge, drudge
day by day.  Occasionally a Sunday would come; but when it did come, there came inspection
of arms, knapsacks and cartridge-boxes.  Every soldier had to have his gun rubbed up as bright
as a new silver dollar.  W. A. Hughes had the brightest gun in the army, and always called
it "Florence Fleming."  The private soldier had to have on clean clothes, and if he had lost
any cartridges he was charged twenty-five cents each, and had to stand extra duty for every
cartridge lost.  We always dreaded Sunday.  The roll was called more frequently on this than
any other day.  Sometimes we would have preaching.  I remember one text that I thought the
bottom had been knocked out long before: "And Peter's wife's mother lay sick of fever."  That
text always did make a deep impression on me.  I always thought of a young divine who preached
it when first entering the ministry, and in about twenty years came back, and happening to
preach from the same text again, an old fellow in the congregation said, "Mr. Preacher, ain't
that old woman dead yet?" Well, that was the text that was preached to us soldiers one Sunday
at Chattanooga.  I could not help thinking all the time, "Ain't that old woman dead yet?" 
But he announced that he would preach again at 3 o'clock.  We went to hear him preach at 3
o'clock, as his sermon was so interesting about "Peter's wife's mother lay sick of a fever."
We thought, maybe it was a sort of sickly subject, and he would liven us up a little in the
afternoon service.

Well, he took his text, drawled out through his nose like "small sweetness long drawn out:"
"M-a-r-t-h-a, thou art w-e-a-r-i-e-d and troubled about many things, but M-a-r-y hath chosen
that good part that shall never be taken from her."  Well, you see, O gentle and fair reader,
that I remember the text these long gone twenty years.  I do not remember what he preached
about, but I remember thinking that he was a great ladies' man, at any rate, and whenever I
see a man who loves and respects the ladies, I think him a good man.

The next sermon was on the same sort of a text: "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall
on Adam and took out of"--he stopped here and said e meant out of, that e, being translated
from the Latin and Greek, meant out of, and took e, or rather out of a rib and formed woman.
I never did know why he expaciated so largely on e; don't understand it yet, but you see, reader
mine, that I remember but the little things that happened in that stormy epoch.  I remember
the e part of the sermon more distinctly than all of his profound eruditions of theology, dogmas,
creeds and evidences of Christianity, and I only write at this time from memory of things that
happened twenty years ago.

"OUT A LARKING"

At this place, we took Walter Hood out "a larking."  The way to go "a larking" is this: Get
an empty meal bag and about a dozen men and go to some dark forest or open field on some cold,
dark, frosty or rainy night, about five miles from camp.  Get someone who does not understand
the game to hold the bag in as stooping and cramped a position as is possible, to keep perfectly
still and quiet, and when he has got in the right fix, the others to go off to drive in the
larks.  As soon as they get out of sight, they break in a run and go back to camp, and go to
sleep, leaving the poor fellow all the time holding the bag.

Well, Walter was as good and as clever a fellow as you ever saw, was popular with everybody,
and as brave and noble a fellow as ever tore a cartridge, or drew a ramrod, or pulled a trigger,
but was the kind of a boy that was easily "roped in" to fun or fight or anything that would
come up.  We all loved him.  Poor fellow, he is up yonder--died on the field of glory and honor.
He gave his life, 'twas all he had, for his country.  Peace to his memory.  That night we went
"a larking," and Walter held the bag.  I did not see him till next morning.  While I was gulping
down my coffee, as well as laughter, Walter came around, looking sort of sheepish and shy like,
and I was trying to look as solemn as a judge.  Finally he came up to the fire and kept on
eyeing me out of one corner of his eye, and I was afraid to look at him for fear of breaking
out in a laugh.  When I could hold in no longer, I laughed out, and said, "Well, Walter, what
luck last night?"  He was very much disgusted, and said, "Humph! you all think that you are
smart.  I can't see anything to laugh at in such foolishness as that."  He said, "Here; I have
brought your bag back."  That conquered me.  After that kind of magnanimous act in forgiving
me and bringing my bag back so pleasantly and kindly, I was his friend, and would have fought
for him.  I felt sorry that we had taken him out "a larking."

HANGING TWO SPIES

I can now recall to memory but one circumstance that made a deep impression on my mind at the
time.  I heard that two spies were going to be hung on a certain day, and I went to the hanging.
The scaffold was erected, two coffins were placed on the platform, the ropes were dangling
from the cross beam above.  I had seen men shot, and whipped, and shaved, and branded at Corinth
and Tupelo, and one poor fellow named Wright shot at Shelbyville.  They had all been horrid
scenes to me, but they were Rebels, and like begets like.  I did not know when it would be
my time to be placed in the same position, you see, and "a fellow feeling makes us wondrous
kind."  I did not know what was in store in the future for me. Ah, there was the rub, don't
you see.  This shooting business wasn't a pleasant thing to think about.  But Yankees--that
was different.  I wanted to see a Yankee spy hung.  I wouldn't mind that.  I would like to
see him agonize.  A spy; O, yes, they had hung one of our regiment at Pulaski--Sam Davis. 
Yes, I would see the hanging.  After a while I saw a guard approach, and saw two little boys
in their midst, but did not see the Yankees that I had been looking for.  The two little boys
were rushed upon the platform.  I saw that they were handcuffed.  "Are they spies?" I was appalled;
I was horrified; nay, more, I was sick at heart.  One was about fourteen and the other about
sixteen years old, I should judge. The ropes were promptly adjusted around their necks by the
provost marshal.  The youngest one began to beg and cry and plead most piteously. It was horrid.
The older one kicked him, and told him to stand up and show the Rebels how a Union man could
die for his country.  Be a man! The charges and specifications were then read.  The props were
knocked out and the two boys were dangling in the air.  I turned off sick at heart.

EATING RATS

While stationed at this place, Chattanooga, rations were very scarce and hard to get, and it
was, perhaps, economy on the part of our generals and commissaries to issue rather scant rations.

About this time we learned that Pemberton's army, stationed at Vicksburg, were subsisting entirely
on rats.  Instead of the idea being horrid, we were glad to know that "necessity is the mother
of invention," and that the idea had originated in the mind of genius.  We at once acted upon
the information, and started out rat hunting; but we couldn't find any rats.  Presently we
came to an old outhouse that seemed to be a natural harbor for this kind of vermin.  The house
was quickly torn down and out jumped an old residenter, who was old and gray.  I suppose that
he had been chased before.  But we had jumped him and were determined to catch him, or "burst
a boiler."  After chasing him backwards and forwards, the rat finally got tired of this foolishness
and started for his hole. But a rat's tail is the last that goes in the hole, and as he went
in we made a grab for his tail.  Well, tail hold broke, and we held the skin of his tail in
our hands.  But we were determined to have that rat.  After hard work we caught him.  We skinned
him, washed and salted him, buttered and peppered him, and fried him.  He actually looked nice.
The delicate aroma of the frying rat came to our hungry nostrils.  We were keen to eat a piece
of rat; our teeth were on edge; yea, even our mouth watered to eat a piece of rat.  Well, after
a while, he was said to be done. I got a piece of cold corn dodger, laid my piece of the rat
on it, eat a little piece of bread, and raised the piece of rat to my mouth, when I happened
to think of how that rat's tail did slip.  I had lost my appetite for dead rat.  I did not
eat any rat.  It was my first and last effort to eat dead rats.

SWIMMING THE TENNESSEE WITH ROASTINGEARS

The Tennessee river is about a quarter of a mile wide at Chattanooga. Right across the river
was an immense corn-field.  The green corn was waving with every little breeze that passed;
the tassels were bowing and nodding their heads; the pollen was flying across the river like
little snowdrops, and everything seemed to say, "Come hither, Johnny Reb; come hither, Johnny;
come hither."  The river was wide, but we were hungry.  The roastingears looked tempting. 
We pulled off our clothes and launched into the turbid stream, and were soon on the other bank.
Here was the field, and here were the roastingears; but where was the raft or canoe?

We thought of old Abraham and Isaac and the sacrifice: "My son, gather the roastingears, there
will be a way provided."

We gathered the roastingears; we went back and gathered more roastingears, time and again.
The bank was lined with green roastingears.  Well, what was to be done?  We began to shuck
the corn.  We would pull up a few shucks on one ear, and tie it to the shucks of another--first
one and then another--until we had at least a hundred tied together.  We put the train of corn
into the river, and as it began to float off we jumped in, and taking the foremost ear in our
mouth, struck out for the other bank. Well, we made the landing all correct.

I merely mention the above incident to show to what extremity soldiers would resort.  Thousands
of such occurrences were performed by the private soldiers of the Rebel army.

AM DETAILED TO GO FORAGING

One day I was detailed to go with a wagon train way down in Georgia on a foraging expedition.
It was the first time since I had enlisted as a private that I had struck a good thing. It was
pleasant enough, certainly, planning all these things; but there would be some little trouble
in executing them. In the first place, Lord Kilcullen--though a very good son, on the whole,
as the father frequently remarked to himself--was a little fond of having a will of his own, and
may-be, might object to dispense with his dancing-girls. And though there was, unfortunately, but
little doubt that the money was indispensably necessary to him, it was just possible that
he might insist on having the cash without his cousin. However, the proposal must be made, and,
as the operations necessary to perfect the marriage would cause some delay, and the money
would certainly be wanted as soon as possible, no time was to be lost. Lord Kilcullen was,
accordingly, summoned to Grey Abbey; and, as he presumed his attendance
was required for the purpose of talking over some method of raising
the wind, he obeyed the summons.--I should rather have said of raising
a storm, for no gentle puff would serve to waft him through his present
necessities.

Down he came, to the great delight of his mother, who thought him by far the finest young man of
the day, though he usually slighted, snubbed, and ridiculed her--and of his sister, who always
hailed with dignified joy the return of the eldest scion of her proud
family to the ancestral roof.

The earl was also glad to find that no previous engagement detained
him; that is, that he so far sacrificed his own comfort as to leave
Tattersall's and the Figuranti of the Opera-House, to come all the
way to Grey Abbey, in the county of Kildare.

But, though the earl was glad to see his son, he was still a little consternated: the business
interview could not be postponed, as it was not to be supposed that Lord Kilcullen would stay
long at Grey Abbey during the London season; and the father had yet hardly sufficiently crammed
himself for the occasion. Besides, the pressure from without must have been very strong to have
produced so immediate a compliance with a behest not uttered in a very peremptory manner, or, generally
speaking, to a very obedient child.

On the morning after his arrival, the earl was a little uneasy in his chair during breakfast.
It was rather a sombre meal, for Fanny had by no means recovered her spirits, nor did she appear
to be in the way to do so. The countess tried to chat a little to her son, but he hardly answered
her; and Lady Selina, though she was often profound, was never amusing. Lord Cashel made sundry
attempts at general conversation, but as often failed. It was, at last, however, over; and the
father requested the son to come with him into the book-room.

When the fire was poked, and the chairs were drawn together over the rug, there were no further preliminaries
which could be decently introduced, and the earl was therefore forced to commence.

"Well, Kilcullen, I'm glad you're come to Grey Abbey. I'm afraid, however, we shan't induce
you to stay with us long, so it's as well perhaps to settle our business at once. You would, however,
greatly oblige your mother, and I'm sure I need not add, myself, if you could make your arrangements
so as to stay with us till after Easter. We could then return together."

"Till after Easter, my lord! I should be in the Hue and Cry before that time, if I was so long absent
from my accustomed haunts. Besides I should only put out your own arrangements, or rather, those
of Lady Cashel. There would probably be no room for me in the family coach.".

"The family coach won't go, Lord Kilcullen. I am sorry to say, that the state of my affairs
at present renders it advisable that the family should remain at Grey Abbey this season. I shall
attend my parliamentary duties alone."

This was intended as a hit the first at the prodigal son, but Kilcullen
was too crafty to allow it to tell.

He merely bowed his head, and opened his eyes, to betoken his surprise
at such a decision, and remained quiet.

"Indeed," continued Lord Cashel, "I did not even intend to have gone
myself, but the unexpected death of Harry Wyndham renders it necessary.

I must put Fanny's affairs in a right train.

Poor Harry!--did you see much of him during his illness?"

"Why, no--I can't say I did.

I'm not a very good hand at doctoring or nursing. I saw him once since he got his commission,
glittering with his gold lace like a new weather-cock on a Town Hall. He hadn't time to polish
the shine off."

"His death will make a great difference, as far as Fanny is concerned--eh?"

"Indeed it will: her fortune now is considerable;--a deuced pretty
thing, remembering that it's all ready money, and that she can touch
it the moment she's of age.

She's entirely off with Ballindine, isn't she?"

"Oh, entirely," said the earl, with considerable self-complacency;
"that affair is entirely over."

"I've stated so everywhere publicly; but I dare say, she'll give him her money, nevertheless.
She's not the girl to give over a man, if she's really fond of him."

"But, my dear Kilcullen, she has authorised me to give him a final answer, and I have done
so. After that, you know, it would be quite impossible for her to--to--"

"You'll see;--she'll marry Lord Ballindine. Had Harry lived, it might have been different; but
now she's got all her brother's money, she'll think it a point of
honour to marry her poor lover.

Besides, her staying this year in the country will be in his favour: she'll see no one here--and she'll
want something to think of.

I understand he has altogether thrown himself into Blake's hands--the
keenest fellow in Ireland, with as much mercy as a foxhound.

He's a positive fool, is Ballindine."

"I'm afraid he is--I'm afraid he is. And you may be sure I'm too fond of Fanny--that is, I
have too much regard for the trust reposed in me, to allow her to
throw herself away upon him."

"That's all very well; but what can you do?"

"Why, not allow him to see her; and I've another plan in my head for her."

"Ah!--but the thing is to put the plan into her head. I'd be sorry to hear of a fine girl like
Fanny Wyndham breaking her heart in a half-ruined barrack in Connaught, without money to pay
a schoolmaster to teach her children to spell.

But I've too many troubles of my own to think of just at present, to care much about hers;"
and the son and heir got up, and stood with his back to the fire, and put his arms under his
coat-laps. "Upon my soul, my lord, I never was so hard up in my life!"

Lord Cashel now prepared himself for action. The first shot was fired, and he must go on with
the battle.

"So I hear, Kilcullen; and yet, during the last four years, you've had nearly double your allowance;
and, before that, I paid every farthing you owed. Within the last five years, you've had nearly forty
thousand pounds! Supposing you'd had younger brothers, Lord Kilcullen--supposing that I had had
six or eight sons instead of only one; what would you have done? How then would you have paid your
debts?"

"Fate having exempted me and your lordship from so severe a curse, I have never turned my mind
to reflect what I might have done under such an infliction."

"Or, supposing I had chosen, myself, to indulge in those expensive habits, which would have absorbed
my income, and left me unable to do more for you, than many other noblemen in my position do
for their sons--do you ever reflect how impossible it would then have been for me to have helped
you out of your difficulties?"

"I feel as truly grateful for your self-denial in this respect, as I do in that of my non-begotten
brethren."

Lord Cashel saw that he was laughed at, and he looked angry; but he did not want to quarrel with
his son, so he continued:

"Jervis writes me word that it is absolutely necessary that thirty thousand pounds should be paid
for you at once; or, that your remaining in London--or, in fact, in the country at all, is quite
out of the question."

"Indeed, my lord, I'm afraid Jervis is right."

"Thirty thousand pounds! Are you aware what your income is?"

"Why, hardly. I know Jervis takes care that I never see much of it."

"Do you mean that you don't receive it?"

"Oh, I do not at all doubt its accurate payment.

I mean to say, that I don't often have the satisfaction of seeing much of it at the right side
of my banker's book."

"Thirty thousand pounds! And will that sum set you completely free in the world?"

"I am sorry to say it will not--nor nearly."

"Then, Lord Kilcullen," said the earl, with most severe, but still most courteous dignity, "may
I trouble you to be good enough to tell me what, at the present moment, you do owe?"

"I'm afraid I could not do so with any accuracy; but it is more than double the sum you have
named."

"Do you mean, that you have no schedule of your debts?--no means of
acquainting me with the amount?

How can you expect that I can assist you, when you think it too much trouble to make yourself
thoroughly acquainted with the state of your own affairs?"

"A list could certainly be made out, if I had any prospect of being able to settle the amount.
If your lordship can undertake to do so at once, I will undertake
to hand you a correct list of the sums due, before I leave Grey Abbey.

I presume you would not require to know exactly to whom all the items were owing."

This effrontery was too much, and Lord Cashel was very near to losing his temper.

"Upon my honour, Kilcullen, you're cool, very cool. You come upon me to pay, Heaven knows how
many thousands--more money, I know, than I'm able to raise; and you condescendingly tell me
that you will trouble yourself so far as to let me know how much money I am to give you--but that
I am not to know what is done with it! No; if I am to pay your debts again, I will do it through
Jervis."

"Pray remember," replied Lord Kilcullen, not at all disturbed from his equanimity, "that I have not
proposed that you should pay my debts without knowing where the money went; and also that I have
not yet asked you to pay them at all."

"Who, then, do you expect will pay them? I can assure you I should be glad to be relieved from
the honour."

"I merely said that I had not yet made any proposition respecting
them.

Of course, I expect your assistance. Failing you, I have no resource but the Jews. I should regret
to put the property into their hands; especially as, hitherto, I have not raised money on post
obits [24]."

[FOOTNOTE 24: post obit--a loan that need not be repaid until the death of a specified individual,
usually someone from whom the borrower expected to inherit enough to repay the loan]

"At any rate, I'm glad of that," said the father, willing to admit any excuse for returning to
his good humour. "That would be ruin; and I hope that anything short of that may be--may be--may
be done something with."

The expression was not dignified, and it pained the earl to make it; but it was expressive, and
he didn't wish at once to say that he had a proposal for paying off his son's debts. "But now,
Kilcullen, tell me fairly, in round figures, what do you think you owe?--as near as you can
guess, without going to pen and paper, you know?"

"Well, my lord, if you will allow me, I will make a proposition to you. If you will hand over to
Mr Jervis fifty thousand pounds, for him to pay such claims as have already been made upon him as
your agent, and such other debts as I may have sent in to him: and if you will give myself thirty
thousand, to pay such debts as I do not choose to have paid by an agent, I will undertake to have
everything settled."

"Eighty thousand pounds in four years! Why, Kilcullen, what have you done with it?--where has it
gone? You have five thousand a-year, no house to keep up, no property to support, no tenants
to satisfy, no rates to pay--five thousand a-year for your own personal expenses--and, in four
years, you have got eighty thousand in debt! The property never can stand that, you know. It never
can stand at that rate. Why, Kilcullen, what have you done with it?"

"Mr Crockford has a portion of it, and John Scott has some of it. A great deal of it is scattered rather
widely--so widely that it would be difficult now to trace it. But, my lord, it has gone. I
won't deny that the greater portion of it has been lost at play,
or on the turf.

I trust I may, in future, be more fortunate and more cautious."

"I trust so. I trust so, indeed. Eighty thousand pounds! And do you think I can raise such a sum as
that at a week's warning?"

"Indeed, I have no doubt as to your being able to do so: it may be another question whether you
are willing."

"I am not--I am not able," said the libelled father. "As you know well enough, the incumbrances
on the property take more than a quarter of my income."

"There can, nevertheless, be no doubt of your being able to have the money, and that at once,
if you chose to go into the market for it. I have no doubt but that Mr Jervis could get it
for you at once at five per cent."

"Four thousand a-year gone for ever from the property!--and what security
am I to have that the same sacrifice will not be again incurred, after
another lapse of four years?"

"You can have no security, my lord, against my being in debt. You can, however, have every
security that you will not again pay my debts, in your own resolution. I trust, however, that
I have some experience to prevent my again falling into so disagreeable
a predicament.

I think I have heard your Lordship say that you incurred some unnecessary expenses yourself
in London, before your marriage!"

"I wish, Kilcullen, that you had never exceeded your income more than I did mine. But it is no use
talking any further on this subject. I cannot, and I will not--I cannot in justice either to myself
or to you, borrow this money for you; nor, if I could, should I think it right to do so."

"Then
what the devil's the use of talking about it so long?" said the dutiful son, hastily jumping
up from the chair in which he had again sat down. "Did you bring me down to Grey Abbey merely
to tell me that you knew of my difficulties, and that you could do nothing to assist me?"

"Now,
don't put yourself into a passion--pray don't!" said the father, a little frightened by the
sudden ebullition. "If you'll sit down, and listen to me, I'll tell you what I propose. I did
not send for you here without intending to point out to you some method of extricating yourself
from your present pecuniary embarrassment; and, if you have any wish to give up your course,
of--I must say, reckless profusion, and commence that upright and distinguished career, which
I still hope to see you take, you will, I think, own that my plan is both a safer and a more
expedient one than that which you have proposed. It is quite time for you now to abandon the expensive
follies of youth; and,"--Lord Cashel was getting into a delightfully dignified tone, and felt
himself prepared for a good burst of common-place eloquence; but his son looked impatient, and
as he could not take such liberty with him as he could with Lord Ballindine, he came to the point
at once, and ended abruptly by saying, "and get married."

"For the purpose of allowing my wife to pay my debts?"

"Why, not exactly that; but as, of course, you could not marry any woman but a woman with a large
fortune, that would follow as a matter of consequence."

"Your lordship proposes the fortune not as the first object of my affection, but merely as a corollary.
But, perhaps, it will be as well that you should finish your proposition, before I make any remarks
on the subject." And Lord Kilcullen, sat down, with a well-feigned look of listless indifference.

"Well,
Kilcullen, I have latterly been thinking much about you, and so has your poor mother. She
is very uneasy that you should still--still be unmarried; and Jervis has written to me very strongly.
You see it is quite necessary that something should be done--or we shall both be ruined. Now, if I
did raise this sum--and I really could not do it--I don't think I could manage it, just at
present; but, even if I did, it would only be encouraging you to go on just in the same way again.
Now, if you were to marry, your whole course of life would be altered, and you would become,
at the same time, more respectable and more happy."

"That would depend a good deal upon circumstances, I should think."

"Oh! I am sure you would. You are just the same sort of fellow I was when at your age, and
I was much happier after I was married, so I know it. Now, you see, your cousin has a hundred
thousand pounds; in fact something more than that."

"What?--Fanny!
Poor Ballindine! So that's the way with him is it! When I was contradicting
the rumour of his marriage with Fanny, I little thought that I was
to be his rival! At any rate, I shall have to shoot him first."

"You
might, at any rate, confine yourself to sense, Lord Kilcullen, when
I am taking so much pains to talk sensibly to you, on a subject which,
I presume, cannot but interest you."

"Indeed, my lord, I'm all attention;
and I do intend to talk sensibly when I say that I think you are proposing
to treat Ballindine very ill. The world will think well of your turning
him adrift on the score of the match being an imprudent one; but it
won't speak so leniently of you if you expel him, as soon as your
ward becomes an heiress, to make way for your own son."

"You know
that I'm not thinking of doing so. I've long seen that Lord Ballindine
would not make a fitting husband for Fanny--long before Harry died."

"And
you think that I shall?"

"Indeed I do. I think she will be lucky
to get you."

"I'm flattered into silence: pray go on."

"You will
be an earl--a peer--and a man of property. What would she become if
she married Lord Ballindine?"

"Oh, you are quite right! Go on. I
wonder it never occurred to her before to set her cap at me."

"Now
do be serious. I wonder how you can joke on such a subject, with all
your debts. I'm sure I feel them heavy enough, if you don't. You see
Lord Ballindine was refused--I may say he was refused--before we heard
about that poor boy's unfortunate death. It was the very morning we
heard of it, three or four hours before the messenger came, that Fanny
had expressed her resolution to declare it off, and commissioned me
to tell him so. And, therefore, of course, the two things can't have
the remotest reference to each other."

"I see. There are, or have
been, two Fanny Wyndhams--separate persons, though both wards of your
lordship. Lord Ballindine was engaged to the girl who had a brother;
but he can have no possible concern with Fanny Wyndham, the heiress,
who has no brother."

"How can you be so unfeeling?--but you may pay
your debts in your own way. You won't ever listen to what I have to
say! I should have thought that, as your father, I might have considered
myself entitled to more respect from you."

"Indeed, my lord, I'm
all respect and attention, and I won't say one more word till you've
finished."

"Well--you must see, there can be no objection on the
score of Lord Ballindine?"

"Oh, none at all."

"And then, where could
Fanny wish for a better match than yourself? it would be a great thing
for her, and the match would be, in all things, so--so respectable,
and just what it ought to be; and your mother would be so delighted,
and so should I, and--"

"Her fortune would so nicely pay all my debts."

"Exactly.
Of course, I should take care to have your present income--five thousand
a year--settled on her, in the shape of jointure; and I'm sure that
would be treating her handsomely. The interest of her fortune would
not be more than that."

"And what should we live on?"

"Why, of course,
I should continue your present allowance."

"And you think that that
which I have found so insufficient for myself, would be enough for
both of us?"

"You must make it enough, Kilcullen--in order that there
may be something left to enable you to keep up your title when I am
gone."

By this time, Lord Kilcullen appeared to be as serious, and
nearly as solemn, as his father, and he sat, for a considerable time,
musing, till his father said, "Well, Kilcullen, will you take my advice?"

"It's
impracticable, my lord. In the first place, the money must be paid
immediately, and considerable delay must occur before I could even
offer to Miss Wyndham; and, in the next place, were I to do so, I
am sure she would refuse me."

"Why; there must be some delay, of
course. But I suppose, if I passed my word, through Jervis, for so
much of the debts as are immediate, that a settlement might be made
whereby they might stand over for twelve months, with interest, of
course. As to refusing you, it's not at all likely: where would she
look for a better offer?"

"I don't know much of my cousin; but I
don't think she's exactly the girl to take a man because he's a good
match for her."

"Perhaps not. But then, you know, you understand
women so well, and would have such opportunities; you would be sure
to make yourself agreeable to her, with very little effort on your
part."

"Yes, poor thing--she would be delivered over, ready bound,
into the lion's den." And then the young man sat silent again, for
some time, turning the matter over in his mind. At last, he said,--

"Well,
my lord; I am a considerate and a dutiful son, and I will agree to
your proposition: but I must saddle it with conditions. I have no
doubt that the sum which I suggested should be paid through your agent,
could be arranged to be paid in a year, or eighteen months, by your
making yourself responsible for it, and I would undertake to indemnify
you. But the thirty thousand pounds I must have at once. I must return
to London, with the power of raising it there, without delay. This,
also, I would repay you out of Fanny's fortune. I would then undertake
to use my best endeavours to effect a union with your ward. But I
most positively will not agree to this--nor have any hand in the matter,
unless I am put in immediate possession of the sum I have named, and
unless you will agree to double my income as soon as I am married."

To
both these propositions the earl, at first, refused to accede; but
his son was firm. Then, Lord Cashel agreed to put him in immediate
possession of the sum of money he required, but would not hear of
increasing his income. They argued, discussed, and quarrelled over
the matter, for a long time; till, at last, the anxious father, in
his passion, told his son that he might go his own way, and that he
would take no further trouble to help so unconscionable a child. The Confederate and Federal dead, wounded, and dying were everywhere
scattered over the battlefield.  Men were lying where they fell, shot in every conceivable
part of the body.  Some with their entrails torn out and still hanging to them and piled up
on the ground beside them, and they still alive.  Some with their under jaw torn off, and hanging
by a fragment of skin to their cheeks, with their tongues lolling from their mouth, and they
trying to talk.  Some with both eyes shot out, with one eye hanging down on their cheek.  In
fact, you might walk over the battlefield and find men shot from the crown of the head to the
tip end of the toe.  And then to see all those dead, wounded and dying horses, their heads
and tails drooping, and they seeming to be so intelligent as if they comprehended everything.
I felt like shedding a tear for those innocent dumb brutes.

Reader, a battlefield, after the battle, is a sad and sorrowful sight to look at.  The glory
of war is but the glory of battle, the shouts, and cheers, and victory.

A soldier's life is not a pleasant one.  It is always, at best, one of privations and hardships.
The emotions of patriotism and pleasure hardly counterbalance the toil and suffering that he
has to undergo in order to enjoy his patriotism and pleasure.  Dying on the field of battle
and glory is about the easiest duty a soldier has to undergo.  It is the living, marching,
fighting, shooting soldier that has the hardships of war to carry.  When a brave soldier is
killed he is at rest.  The living soldier knows not at what moment he, too, may be called on
to lay down his life on the altar of his country.  The dead are heroes, the living are but
men compelled to do the drudgery and suffer the privations incident to the thing called "glorious
war."

A NIGHT AMONG THE DEAD

We rested on our arms where the battle ceased.  All around us everywhere were the dead and
wounded, lying scattered over the ground, and in many places piled in heaps.  Many a sad and
heart-rending scene did I witness upon this battlefield of Chickamauga.  Our men died the death
of heroes. I sometimes think that surely our brave men have not died in vain. It is true, our
cause is lost, but a people who loved those brave and noble heroes should ever cherish their
memory as men who died for them. I shed a tear over their memory.  They gave their all to their
country. Abler pens than mine must write their epitaphs, and tell of their glories and heroism.
I am but a poor writer, at best, and only try to tell of the events that I saw.

One scene I now remember, that I can imperfectly relate.  While a detail of us were passing
over the field of death and blood, with a dim lantern, looking for our wounded soldiers to
carry to the hospital, we came across a group of ladies, looking among the killed and wounded
for their relatives, when I heard one of the ladies say, "There they come with their lanterns."
I approached the ladies and asked them for whom they were looking.  They told me the name,
but I have forgotten it.  We passed on, and coming to a pile of our slain, we had turned over
several of our dead, when one of the ladies screamed out, "O, there he is!  Poor fellow! Dead,
dead, dead!"  She ran to the pile of slain and raised the dead man's head and placed it on
her lap and began kissing him and saying, "O, O, they have killed my darling, my darling, my
darling!  O, mother, mother, what must I do!  My poor, poor darling!  O, they have killed him,
they have killed him!"  I could witness the scene no longer.  I turned and walked away, and
William A. Hughes was crying, and remarked, "O, law me; this war is a terrible thing."  We
left them and began again hunting for our wounded.  All through that long September night we
continued to carry off our wounded, and when the morning sun arose over the eastern hills,
the order came to march to Missionary Ridge.

CHAPTER X

MISSIONARY RIDGE

After retreating from Chickamauga, the Yankees attempted to re-form their broken lines on Missionary
Ridge.  We advanced to attack them, but they soon fell back to Chattanooga.  We knew they were
in an impregnable position.  We had built those breastworks and forts, and knew whereof we
spoke.  We stopped on Missionary Ridge, and gnashed our teeth at Chattanooga.  I do not know
what our generals thought; I do not know what the authorities at Richmond thought, but I can
tell you what the privates thought.  But here we were on Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain,
looking right down into Chattanooga.  We had but to watch and wait. We would starve them out.

The Federal army had accomplished their purpose.  They wanted Chattanooga.  They laughed at
our triumph, and mocked at our victory. They got Chattanooga.  "Now, where are you, Johnny
Reb?  What are you going to do about it?  You've got the dry grins, arn't you?  We've got the
key; when the proper time comes we'll unlock your doors and go in. You are going to starve
us out, eh?  We are not very hungry at present, and we don't want any more pie.  When we starve
out we'll call on you for rations, but at present we are not starving, by a jug full; but if
you want any whisky or tobacco, send over and we'll give you some.  We've got all we wanted,
and assure you we are satisfied."

The above remarks are the supposed colloquy that took place between the two armies.  Bragg,
in trying to starve the Yankees out, was starved out himself.  Ask any old Rebel as to our
bill of fare at Missionary Ridge.

In all the history of the war, I cannot remember of more privations and hardships than we went
through at Missionary Ridge.  And when in the very acme of our privations and hunger, when
the army was most dissatisfied and unhappy, we were ordered into line of battle to be reviewed
by Honorable Jefferson Davis.  When he passed by us, with his great retinue of staff officers
and play-outs at full gallop, cheers greeted them, with the words, "Send us something to eat,
Massa Jeff.  Give us something to eat, Massa Jeff.  I'm hungry!  I'm hungry!"

SERGEANT TUCKER AND GENERAL WILDER

At this place the Yankee outpost was on one side of the Tennessee river, and ours on the other.
I was on the detail one Sunday commanded by Sergeant John T. Tucker.  When we were approaching
we heard the old guard and the Yankee picket talking back and forth across the river.  The
new guard immediately resumed the conversation.  We had to halloo at the top of our voices,
the river being about three hundred yards wide at this point.  But there was a little island
about the middle of the river. A Yankee hallooed out, "O, Johnny, Johnny, meet me half way
in the river on the island."  "All right," said Sergeant Tucker, who immediately undressed
all but his hat, in which he carried the Chattanooga Rebel and some other Southern newspapers,
and swam across to the island.  When he got there the Yankee was there, but the Yankee had
waded.  I do not know what he and John talked about, but they got very friendly, and John invited
him to come clear across to our side, which invitation he accepted.  I noticed at the time
that while John swam, the Yankee waded, remarking that he couldn't swim.  The river was but
little over waist deep.  Well, they came across and we swapped a few lies, canteens and tobacco,
and then the Yankee went back, wading all the way across the stream.  That man was General
Wilder, commanding the Federal cavalry, and at the battle of Missionary Ridge he threw his
whole division of cavalry across the Tennessee river at that point, thus flanking Bragg's army,
and opening the battle.  He was examining the ford, and the swapping business was but a mere
by-play.  He played it sharp, and Bragg had to get further.

MOCCASIN POINT

Maney's brigade fortified on top of Lookout Mountain.  From this position we could see five
states.  The Yankees had built a fort across the river, on Moccasin Point, and were throwing
shells at us continually.  I have never seen such accurate shooting in my life.  It was upon
the principle of shooting a squirrel out of a tree, and they had become so perfect in their
aim, that I believe they could have killed a squirrel a mile off. We could have killed a great
many artillery men if we had been allowed to shoot, but no private soldier was ever allowed
to shoot a gun on his own hook.  If he shot at all, it must by the order of an officer, for
if just one cartridge was shot away or lost, the private was charged twenty-five cents for
it, and had to do extra duty, and I don't think our artillery was ever allowed to fire a single
shot under any circumstances.  Our rations were cooked up by a special detail ten miles in
the rear, and were sent to us every three days, and then those three days' rations were generally
eaten up at one meal, and the private soldier had to starve the other two days and a half.
Never in all my whole life do I remember of ever experiencing so much oppression and humiliation.
The soldiers were starved and almost naked, and covered all over with lice and camp itch and
filth and dirt.  The men looked sick, hollow-eyed, and heart-broken, living principally upon
parched corn, which had been picked out of the mud and dirt under the feet of officers' horses.
We thought of nothing but starvation.

The battle of Missionary Ridge was opened from Moccasin Point, while we were on Lookout Mountain,
but I knew nothing of the movements or maneuvers of either army, and only tell what part I
took in the battle.

BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE

One morning Theodore Sloan, Hog Johnson and I were standing picket at the little stream that
runs along at the foot of Lookout Mountain.  In fact, I would be pleased to name our captain,
Fulcher, and Lieutenant Lansdown, of the guard on this occasion, because we acted as picket
for the whole three days' engagement without being relieved, and haven't been relieved yet.
But that battle has gone into history.  We heard a Yankee call, "O, Johnny, Johnny Reb!"  I
started out to meet him as formerly, when he hallooed out, "Go back, Johnny, go back; we are
ordered to fire on you." "What is the matter?  Is your army going to advance on us?"  "I don't
know; we are ordered to fire."  I jumped back into the picket post, and a minnie ball ruined
the only hat I had; another and another followed in quick succession, and the dirt flew up
in our faces off our little breastworks.  Before night the picket line was engaged from one
end to the other.  If you had only heard it, dear reader.  It went like ten thousand wood-choppers,
and an occasional boom of a cannon would remind you of a tree falling.  We could hear colonels
giving commands to their regiments, and could see very plainly the commotion and hubbub, but
what was up, we were unable to tell.  The picket line kept moving to our right.  The second
night found us near the tunnel, and right where two railroads cross each other, or rather one
runs over the other high enough for the cars to pass under.  We could see all over Chattanooga,
and it looked like myriads of blue coats swarming.

Day's and Mannigault's brigades got into a night attack at the foot of Lookout Mountain.  I
could see the whole of it.  It looked like lightning bugs on a dark night.  But about midnight
everything quieted down. Theodore Sloan, Hog Johnson and myself occupied an old log cabin as
vidette.  We had not slept any for two nights, and were very drowsy, I assure you, but we knew
there was something up, and we had to keep awake.  The next morning, nearly day, I think I
had dropped off into a pleasant doze, and was dreaming of more pretty things than you ever
saw in your life, when Johnson touched me and whispered, "Look, look, there are three Yankees;
must I shoot?"  I whispered back "Yes."  A bang; "a waugh" went a shriek.  He had got one,
sure.  Everything got quiet again, and we heard nothing more for an hour.  Johnson touched
me again and whispered, "Yonder they come again; look, look!"  I could not see them; was too
sleepy for that.  Sloan could not see them, either. Johnson pulled down, and another unearthly
squall rended the night air. The streaks of day had begun to glimmer over Missionary Ridge,
and I could see in the dim twilight the Yankee guard not fifty yards off. Said I, "Boys, let's
fire into them and run."  We took deliberate aim and fired.  At that they raised, I thought,
a mighty sickly sort of yell and charged the house.  We ran out, but waited on the outside.
We took a second position where the railroads cross each other, but they began shelling us
from the river, when we got on the opposite side of the railroad and they ceased.

I know nothing about the battle; how Grant, with one wing, went up the river, and Hooker's
corps went down Wills valley, etc.  I heard fighting and commanding and musketry all day long,
but I was still on picket. Balls were passing over our heads, both coming and going.  I could
not tell whether I was standing picket for Yankees or Rebels.  I knew that the Yankee line
was between me and the Rebel line, for I could see the battle right over the tunnel.  We had
been placed on picket at the foot of Lookout Mountain, but we were five miles from that place
now.  If I had tried to run in I couldn't.  I had got separated from Sloan and Johnson somehow;
in fact, was waiting either for an advance of the Yankees, or to be called in by the captain
of the picket.  I could see the blue coats fairly lining Missionary Ridge in my head.  The
Yankees were swarming everywhere.  They were passing me all day with their dead and wounded,
going back to Chattanooga.  No one seemed to notice me; they were passing to and fro, cannon,
artillery, and everything.  I was willing to be taken prisoner, but no one seemed disposed
to do it. I was afraid to look at them, and I was afraid to hide, for fear some one's attention
would be attracted toward me.  I wished I could make myself invisible.  I think I was invisible.
I felt that way anyhow. I felt like the boy who wanted to go to the wedding, but had no shoes.
Cassabianca never had such feelings as I had that livelong day.

    Say, captain, say, if yet my task be done?
      And yet the sweeping waves rolled on,
    And answered neither yea nor nay.

About two or three o'clock, a column of Yankees advancing to the attack swept right over where
I was standing.  I was trying to stand aside to get out of their way, but the more I tried
to get out of their way, the more in their way I got.  I was carried forward, I knew not whither.
We soon arrived at the foot of the ridge, at our old breastworks. I recognized Robert Brank's
old corn stalk house, and Alf Horsley's fort, an old log house called Fort Horsley.  I was
in front of the enemy's line, and was afraid to run up the ridge, and afraid to surrender.
They were ordered to charge up the hill.  There was no firing from the Rebel lines in our immediate
front.  They kept climbing and pulling and scratching until I was in touching distance of the
old Rebel breastworks, right on the very apex of Missionary Ridge.  I made one jump, and I
heard Captain Turner, who had the very four Napoleon guns we had captured at Perryville, halloo
out, "Number four, solid!" and then a roar.  The next order was "Limber to the rear."  The
Yankees were cutting and slashing, and the cannoneers were running in every direction.  I saw
Day's brigade throw down their guns and break like quarter horses.  Bragg was trying to rally
them.  I heard him say, "Here is your commander," and the soldiers hallooed back, "here is
your mule."

The whole army was routed.  I ran on down the ridge, and there was our regiment, the First
Tennessee, with their guns stacked, and drawing rations as if nothing was going on.  Says I,
"Colonel Field, what's the matter?  The whole army is routed and running; hadn't you better
be getting away from here?  The Yankees are not a hundred yards from here. Turner's battery
has surrendered, Day's brigade has thrown down their arms; and look yonder, that is the Stars
and Stripes."  He remarked very coolly, "You seem to be demoralized.  We've whipped them here.
We've captured two thousand prisoners and five stands of colors."

Just at this time General Bragg and staff rode up.  Bragg had joined the church at Shelbyville,
but he had back-slid at Missionary Ridge.  He was cursing like a sailor.  Says he, "What's
this?  Ah, ha, have you stacked your arms for a surrender?"  "No, sir," says Field.  "Take
arms, shoulder arms, by the right flank, file right, march," just as cool and deliberate as
if on dress parade.  Bragg looked scared.  He had put spurs to his horse, and was running like
a scared dog before Colonel Field had a chance to answer him.  Every word of this is a fact.
We at once became the rear guard of the whole army.

[ Author's Note: I remember of General Maney meeting Gary.  I do not know who Gary was, but
Maney and Gary seemed to be very glad to see each other.  Every time I think of that retreat
I think of Gary. ]

I felt sorry for General Bragg.  The army was routed, and Bragg looked so scared.  Poor fellow,
he looked so hacked and whipped and mortified and chagrined at defeat, and all along the line,
when Bragg would pass, the soldiers would raise the yell, "Here is your mule;" "Bully for Bragg,
he's h--l on retreat."

Bragg was a good disciplinarian, and if he had cultivated the love and respect of his troops
by feeding and clothing them better than they were, the result would have been different. 
More depends on a good general than the lives of many privates.  The private loses his life,
the general his country.

GOOD-BYE, TOM WEBB

As soon as the order was given to march, we saw poor Tom Webb lying on the battlefield shot
through the head, his blood and brains smearing his face and clothes, and he still alive. 
He was as brave and noble a man as our Heavenly Father, in His infinite wisdom, ever made.
Everybody loved him.  He was a universal favorite of the company and regiment; was brave and
generous, and ever anxious to take some other man's place when there was any skirmishing or
fighting to be done.  We did not wish to leave the poor fellow in that condition, and A. S.
Horsley, John T. Tucker, Tennessee Thompson and myself got a litter and carried him on our
shoulders through that livelong night back to Chickamauga Station. The next morning Dr. J.
E. Dixon, of Deshler's brigade, passed by and told us that it would be useless for us to carry
him any further, and that it was utterly impossible for him ever to recover.  The Yankees were
then advancing and firing upon us.  What could we do?  We could not carry him any further,
and we could not bury him, for he was still alive. To leave him where he was we thought best.
We took hold of his hand, bent over him and pressed our lips to his--all four of us.  We kissed
him good-bye and left him to the tender mercies of the advancing foe, in whose hands he would
be in a few moments.  No doubt they laughed and jeered at the dying Rebel.  It mattered not
what they did, for poor Tom Webb's spirit, before the sun went down, was with God and the holy
angels.  He had given his all to his country.  O, how we missed him. It seemed that the very
spirit and life of Company H had died with the death of good, noble and brave Tom Webb.

I thank God that I am no infidel, and I feel and believe that I will again see Tom Webb.  Just
as sure and certain, reader, as you are now reading these lines, I will meet him up yonder--I
know I will.

THE REAR GUARD

When we had marched about a mile back in the rear of the battlefield, we were ordered to halt
so that all stragglers might pass us, as we were detailed as the rear guard.  While resting
on the road side we saw Day's brigade pass us.  They were gunless, cartridge-boxless, knapsackless,
canteenless, and all other military accoutermentsless, and swordless, and officerless, and
they all seemed to have the 'possum grins, like Bragg looked, and as they passed our regiment,
you never heard such fun made of a parcel of soldiers in your life.  Every fellow was yelling
at the top of his voice, "Yaller-hammer, Alabama, flicker, flicker, flicker, yaller-hammer,
Alabama, flicker, flicker, flicker."  I felt sorry for the yellow-hammer Alabamians, they looked
so hacked, and answered back never a word.  When they had passed, two pieces of artillery passed
us. They were the only two pieces not captured at Missionary Ridge, and they were ordered to
immediately precede us in bringing up the rear.  The whole rear guard was placed under the
command of the noble, generous, handsome and brave General Gist, of South Carolina.  I loved
General Gist, and when I mention his name tears gather in my eyes.  I think he was the handsomest
man I ever knew.

Our army was a long time crossing the railroad bridge across Chickamauga river.  Maney's brigade,
of Cheatham's division, and General L. E. Polk's brigade, of Cleburne's division, formed a
sort of line of battle, and had to wait until the stragglers had all passed.  I remember looking
at them, and as they passed I could read the character of every soldier.  Some were mad, others
cowed, and many were laughing.  Some were cursing Bragg, some the Yankees, and some were rejoicing
at the defeat.  I cannot describe it.  It was the first defeat our army had ever suffered,
but the prevailing sentiment was anathemas and denunciations hurled against Jeff Davis for
ordering Longstreet's corps to Knoxville, and sending off Generals Wheeler's and Forrest's
cavalry, while every private soldier in the whole army knew that the enemy was concentrating
at Chattanooga.

CHICKAMAUGA STATION

When we arrived at Chickamauga Station, our brigade and General Lucius E. Polk's brigade, of
Cleburne's division, were left to set fire to the town and to burn up and destroy all those
immense piles of army stores and provisions which had been accumulated there to starve the
Yankees out of Chattanooga.  Great piles of corn in sacks, and bacon, and crackers, and molasses,
and sugar, and coffee, and rice, and potatoes, and onions, and peas, and flour by the hundreds
of barrels, all now to be given to the flames, while for months the Rebel soldiers had been
stinted and starved for the want of these same provisions.  It was enough to make the bravest
and most patriotic soul that ever fired a gun in defense of any cause on earth, think of rebelling
against the authorities as they then were.  Every private soldier knew these stores were there,
and for the want of them we lost our cause.

Reader, I ask you who you think was to blame?  Most of our army had already passed through
hungry and disheartened, and here were all these stores that had to be destroyed.  Before setting
fire to the town, every soldier in Maney's and Polk's brigades loaded himself down with rations.
It was a laughable looking rear guard of a routed and retreating army.  Every one of us had
cut open the end of a corn sack, emptied out the corn, and filled it with hard-tack, and, besides,
every one of us had a side of bacon hung to our bayonets on our guns.  Our canteens, and clothes,
and faces, and hair were all gummed up with molasses.  Such is the picture of our rear guard.
Now, reader, if you were ever on the rear guard of a routed and retreating army, you know how
tedious it is.  You don't move more than ten feet at furthest before you have to halt, and
then ten feet again a few minutes afterwards, and so on all day long.  You haven't time to
sit down a moment before you are ordered to move on again.  And the Yankees dash up every now
and then, and fire a volley into your rear.  Now that is the way we were marched that livelong
day, until nearly dark, and then the Yankees began to crowd us.  We can see their line forming,
and know we have to fight.

THE BATTLE OF CAT CREEK

About dark a small body of cavalry dashed in ahead of us and captured and carried off one piece
of artillery and Colonel John F. House, General Maney's assistant adjutant-general.  We will
have to form line of battle and drive them back.  Well, we quickly form line of battle, and
the Yankees are seen to emerge from the woods about two hundred yards from us.  We promptly
shell off those sides of bacon and sacks of hard-tack that we had worried and tugged with all
day long.  Bang, bang, siz, siz. We are ordered to load and fire promptly and to hold our position.
Yonder they come, a whole division.  Our regiment is the only regiment in the action.  They
are crowding us; our poor little handful of men are being killed and wounded by scores.  There
is General George Maney badly wounded and being carried to the rear, and there is Moon, of
Fulcher's battalion, killed dead in his tracks.  We can't much longer hold our position.  A
minnie ball passes through my Bible in my side pocket. All at once we are ordered to open ranks.
Here comes one piece of artillery from a Mississippi battery, bouncing ten feet high, over
brush and logs and bending down little trees and saplings, under whip and spur, the horses
are champing the bits, and are muddied from head to foot. Now, quick, quick; look, the Yankees
have discovered the battery and are preparing to charge it.  Unlimber, horses and caisson to
the rear. No. 1 shrapnel, load, fire--boom, boom; load, ablouyat--boom, boom. I saw Sam Seay
fall badly wounded and carried to the rear.  I stopped firing to look at Sergeant Doyle how
he handled his gun.  At every discharge it would bounce, and turn its muzzle completely to
the rear, when those old artillery soldiers would return it to its place--and it seemed they
fired a shot almost every ten seconds.  Fire, men.  Our muskets roll and rattle, making music
like the kettle and bass drum combined.  They are checked; we see them fall back to the woods,
and night throws her mantle over the scene.  We fell back now, and had to strip and wade Chickamauga
river.  It was up to our armpits, and was as cold as charity.  We had to carry our clothes
across on the points of our bayonets.  Fires had been kindled every few yards on the other
side, and we soon got warmed up again.

RINGGOLD GAP

I had got as far as Ringgold Gap, when I had unconsciously fallen asleep by a fire, it being
the fourth night that I had not slept a wink. Before I got to this fire, however, a gentleman
whom I never saw in my life--because it was totally dark at the time--handed me a letter from
the old folks at home, and a good suit of clothes.  He belonged to Colonel Breckinridge's cavalry,
and if he ever sees these lines, I wish to say to him, "God bless you, old boy."  I had lost
every blanket and vestige of clothing, except those I had on, at Missionary Ridge.  I laid
down by the fire and went to sleep, but how long I had slept I knew not, when I felt a rough
hand grab me and give me a shake, and the fellow said, "Are you going to sleep here, and let
the Yankees cut your throat?" I opened my eyes, and asked, "Who are you?"  He politely and
pleasantly, yet profanely, told me that he was General Walker (the poor fellow was killed the
22nd of July, at Atlanta), and that I had better get further. He passed on and waked others.
Just then, General Cleburne and staff rode by me, and I heard one of his staff remark, "General,
here is a ditch, or gully, that will make a natural breastwork."  All I heard General Cleburne
say was, "Er, eh, eh!"  I saw General Lucius E. Polk's brigade form on the crest of the hill.

I went a little further and laid down again and went to sleep.  How long I had lain there,
and what was passing over me, I know nothing about, but when I awoke, here is what I saw: I
saw a long line of blue coats marching down the railroad track.  The first thought I had was,
well, I'm gone up now, sure; but on second sight, I discovered that they were prisoners.  Cleburne
had had the doggondest fight of the war.  The ground was piled with dead Yankees; they were
piled in heaps.  The scene looked unlike any battlefield I ever saw.  From the foot to the
top of the hill was covered with their slain, all lying on their faces.  It had the appearance
of the roof of a house shingled with dead Yankees.  They were flushed with victory and success,
and had determined to push forward and capture the whole of the Rebel army, and set up their
triumphant standard at Atlanta--then exit Southern Confederacy.  But their dead were so piled
in their path at Ringgold Gap that they could not pass them.  The Spartans gained a name at
Thermopylae, in which Leonidas and the whole Spartan army were slain while defending the pass.
Cleburne's division gained a name at Ringgold Gap, in which they not only slew the victorious
army, but captured five thousand prisoners besides.  That brilliant victory of Cleburne's made
him not only the best general of the army of Tennessee, and covered his men with glory and
honor of heroes, but checked the advance of Grant's whole army.

We did not budge an inch further for many a long day, but we went into winter quarters right
here at Ringgold Gap, Tunnel Hill and Dalton.

CHAPTER XI

DALTON

GENERAL JOSEPH E. JOHNSTON

General Joseph E. Johnston now took command of the army.  General Bragg was relieved, and had
become Jeff Davis' war adviser at Richmond, Virginia.  We had followed General Bragg all through
this long war. We had got sorter used to his ways, but he was never popular with his troops.
I felt sorry for him.  Bragg's troops would have loved him, if he had allowed them to do so,
for many a word was spoken in his behalf, after he had been relieved of the command.  As a
general I have spoken of him in these memoirs, not personally.  I try to state facts, so that
you may see, reader, why our cause was lost.  I have no doubt that Bragg ever did what he thought
was best.  He was but a man, under the authority of another.

But now, allow me to introduce you to old Joe.  Fancy, if you please, a man about fifty years
old, rather small of stature, but firmly and compactly built, an open and honest countenance,
and a keen but restless black eye, that seemed to read your very inmost thoughts.  In his dress
he was a perfect dandy.  He ever wore the very finest clothes that could be obtained, carrying
out in every point the dress and paraphernalia of the soldier, as adopted by the war department
at Richmond, never omitting anything, even to the trappings of his horse, bridle and saddle.
His hat was decorated with a star and feather, his coat with every star and embellishment,
and he wore a bright new sash, big gauntlets, and silver spurs.  He was the very picture of
a general.

But he found the army depleted by battles; and worse, yea, much worse, by desertion.  The men
were deserting by tens and hundreds, and I might say by thousands.  The morale of the army
was gone.  The spirit of the soldiers was crushed, their hope gone.  The future was dark and
gloomy. They would not answer at roll call.  Discipline had gone.  A feeling of mistrust pervaded
the whole army.

A train load of provisions came into Dalton.  The soldiers stopped it before it rolled into
the station, burst open every car, and carried off all the bacon, meal and flour that was on
board.  Wild riot was the order of the day; everything was confusion, worse confounded.  When
the news came, like pouring oil upon the troubled waters, that General Joe E. Johnston, of
Virginia, had taken command of the Army of Tennessee, men returned to their companies, order
was restored, and "Richard was himself again."  General Johnston issued a universal amnesty
to all soldiers absent without leave.  Instead of a scrimp pattern of one day's rations, he
ordered two days' rations to be issued, being extra for one day.  He ordered tobacco and whisky
to be issued twice a week.  He ordered sugar and coffee and flour to be issued instead of meal.
He ordered old bacon and ham to be issued instead of blue beef.  He ordered new tents and marquees.
He ordered his soldiers new suits of clothes, shoes and hats.  In fact, there had been a revolution,
sure enough. He allowed us what General Bragg had never allowed mortal man--a furlough.  He
gave furloughs to one-third of his army at a time, until the whole had been furloughed.  A
new era had dawned; a new epoch had been dated.  He passed through the ranks of the common
soldiers, shaking hands with every one he met.  He restored the soldier's pride; he brought
the manhood back to the private's bosom; he changed the order of roll-call, standing guard,
drill, and such nonsense as that.  The revolution was complete.  He was loved, respected, admired;
yea, almost worshipped by his troops.  I do not believe there was a soldier in his army but
would gladly have died for him.  With him everything was his soldiers, and the newspapers,
criticising him at the time, said, "He would feed his soldiers if the country starved."

We soon got proud; the blood of the old Cavaliers tingled in our veins. We did not feel that
we were serfs and vagabonds.  We felt that we had a home and a country worth fighting for,
and, if need be, worth dying for. One regiment could whip an army, and did do it, in every
instance, before the command was taken from him at Atlanta.  But of this another time.

Chaplains were brought back to their regiments.  Dr. C. T. Quintard and Rev. C. D. Elliott,
and other chaplains, held divine services every Sabbath, prayer was offered every evening at
retreat, and the morale of the army was better in every respect.  The private soldier once
more regarded himself a gentleman and a man of honor.  We were willing to do and die and dare
anything for our loved South, and the Stars and Bars of the Confederacy.  In addition to this,
General Johnston ordered his soldiers to be paid up every cent that was due them, and a bounty
of fifty dollars besides.  He issued an order to his troops offering promotion and a furlough
for acts of gallantry and bravery on the field of battle.

The cloven foot of tyranny and oppression was not discernible in the acts of officers, from
general down to corporal, as formerly.  Notwithstanding all this grand transformation in our
affairs, old Joe was a strict disciplinarian.  Everything moved like clockwork.  Men had to
keep their arms and clothing in good order.  The artillery was rubbed up and put in good condition.
The wagons were greased, and the harness and hamestrings oiled.  Extra rations were issued
to negroes who were acting as servants, a thing unprecedented before in the history of the war.

Well, old Joe was a yerker.  He took all the tricks.  He was a commander. He kept everything
up and well in hand.  His lines of battle were invulnerable.  The larger his command, the easier
he could handle it. When his army moved, it was a picture of battle, everything in its place,
as laid down by scientific military rules.  When a man was to be shot, he was shot for the
crimes he had done, and not to intimidate and cow the living, and he had ten times as many
shot as Bragg had.  He had seventeen shot at Tunnel Hill, and a whole company at Rockyface
Ridge, and two spies hung at Ringgold Gap, but they were executed for their crimes. No one
knew of it except those who had to take part as executioners of the law.  Instead of the whipping
post, he instituted the pillory and barrel shirt.  Get Brutus to whistle the barrel shirt for
you.  The pillory was a new-fangled concern.  If you went to the guard-house of almost any
regiment, you would see some poor fellow with his head and hands sticking through a board.
It had the appearance of a fellow taking a running start, at an angle of forty-five degrees,
with a view of bursting a board over his head, but when the board burst his head and both his
hands were clamped in the bursted places.  The barrel shirt brigade used to be marched on drill
and parade.  You could see a fellow's head and feet, and whenever one of the barrels would
pass, you would hear the universal cry, "Come out of that barrel, I see your head and feet
sticking out."  There might have been a mortification and a disgrace in the pillory and barrel
shirt business to those that had to use them, but they did not bruise and mutilate the physical
man.  When one of them had served out his time he was as good as new.  Old Joe had greater
military insight than any general of the South, not excepting even Lee. He was the born soldier;
seemed born to command.  When his army moved it moved solid.  Cavalry, artillery, wagon train,
and infantry stepped the same tread to the music of the march.  His men were not allowed to
be butchered for glory, and to have his name and a battle fought, with the number of killed
and wounded, go back to Richmond for his own glory. When he fought, he fought for victory,
not for glory.  He could fall back right in the face of the foe as quietly and orderly as if
on dress parade; and when his enemies crowded him a little too closely, he would about face
and give them a terrible chastisement.  He could not be taken by surprise by any flank movement
of the enemy.  His soldiers were to him his children.  He loved them.  They were never needlessly
sacrificed. He was always ready to meet the attack of the enemy.  When his line of battle was
formed it was like a wall of granite.  His adversaries knew him, and dreaded the certain death
that awaited them.  His troops were brave; they laughed in the face of battle.  He had no rear
guard to shoot down any one who ran.  They couldn't run; the army was solid.  The veriest coward
that was ever born became a brave man and a hero under his manipulation.  His troops had the
utmost confidence in him, and feared no evil.  They became an army of veterans, whose lines
could not be broken by the armies of the world.  Battle became a pastime and a pleasure, and
the rattle of musketry and roar of cannon were but the music of victory and success.

COMMISSARIES

Before General Joseph E. Johnston took command of the Army of Tennessee, the soldiers were
very poorly fed, it is true, but the blame was not entirely attributable to General Bragg.
He issued enough and more than enough to have bountifully fed his army, but there was a lot
of men in the army, generally denominated commissaries, and their "gizzards," as well as fingers,
had to be greased.  There was commissary-general, then corps commissary, then division commissary,
then brigade commissary, then regimental commissary, then company commissary.  Now, you know
were you to start a nice hindquarter of beef, which had to pass through all these hands, and
every commissary take a choice steak and roast off it, there would be but little ever reach
the company, and the poor man among the Johnnies had to feast like bears in winter--they had
to suck their paws--but the rich Johnnies who had money could go to almost any of the gentlemen
denominated commissaries (they ought to have been called cormorants) and buy of them much nice
fat beef and meal and flour and sugar and coffee and nice canvassed hams, etc.  I have done
it many times.  They were keeping back the rations that had been issued to the army, and lining
their own pockets.  But when General Johnston took command, this manipulating business played
out.  Rations would "spile" on their hands.  Othello's occupation was gone.  They received
only one hundred and forty dollars a month then, and the high private got plenty to eat, and
Mr. Cormorant quit making as much money as he had heretofore done.  Were you to go to them
and make complaint, they would say, "I have issued regular army rations to your company, and
what is left over is mine," and they were mighty exact about it.

DALTON

We went into winter quarters at Dalton, and remained there during the cold, bad winter of 1863-64,
about four months.  The usual routine of army life was carried on day by day, with not many
incidents to vary the monotony of camp life.  But occasionally the soldiers would engage in
a snow ball battle, in which generals, colonels, captains and privates all took part.  They
would usually divide off into two grand divisions, one line naturally becoming the attacking
party, and the other the defensive.  The snow balls would begin to fly hither and thither,
with an occasional knock down, and sometimes an ugly wound, where some mean fellow had enclosed
a rock in his snow ball.  It was fun while it lasted, but after it was over the soldiers were
wet, cold and uncomfortable. I have seen charges and attacks and routes and stampedes, etc.,
but before the thing was over, one side did not know one from the other. It was a general knock
down and drag out affair.

SHOOTING A DESERTER

One morning I went over to Deshler's brigade of Cleburne's division to see my brother-in-law,
Dr. J. E. Dixon.  The snow was on the ground, and the boys were hard at it, "snow balling."
While I was standing looking on, a file of soldiers marched by me with a poor fellow on his
way to be shot.  He was blindfolded and set upon a stump, and the detail formed.  The command,
"Ready, aim, fire!" was given, the volley discharged, and the prisoner fell off the stump.
He had not been killed. It was the sergeant's duty to give the coup d'etat, should not the
prisoner be slain.  The sergeant ran up and placed the muzzle of his gun at the head of the
poor, pleading, and entreating wretch, his gun was discharged, and the wretched man only powder-burned,
the gun being one that had been loaded with powder only.  The whole affair had to be gone over
again.  The soldiers had to reload and form and fire.  The culprit was killed stone dead this
time.  He had no sooner been taken up and carried off to be buried, than the soldiers were
throwing snow balls as hard as ever, as if nothing had happened.

TEN MEN KILLED AT THE MOURNERS' BENCH

At this place (Dalton) a revival of religion sprang up, and there was divine service every
day and night.  Soldiers became serious on the subject of their souls' salvation.  In sweeping
the streets and cleaning up, an old tree had been set on fire, and had been smoking and burning
for several days, and nobody seemed to notice it.  That night there was service as usual, and
the singing and sermon were excellent.  The sermon was preached by Rev. J. G. Bolton, chaplain
of the Fiftieth Tennessee Regiment, assisted by Rev. C. D. Elliott, the services being held
in the Fourth Tennessee Regiment.  As it was the custom to "call up mourners," a long bench
had been placed in proper position for them to kneel down at.  Ten of them were kneeling at
this mourners' bench, pouring out their souls in prayer to God, asking Him for the forgiveness
of their sins, and for the salvation of their souls, for Jesus Christ their Redeemer's sake,
when the burning tree, without any warning, fell with a crash right across the ten mourners,
crushing and killing them instantly.  God had heard their prayers.  Their souls had been carried
to heaven.  Hereafter, henceforth, and forevermore, there was no more marching, battling, or
camp duty for them.  They had joined the army of the hosts of heaven.

By order of the general, they were buried with great pomp and splendor, that is, for those
times.  Every one of them was buried in a coffin. Brass bands followed, playing the "Dead March,"
and platoons fired over their graves.  It was a soldier's funeral.  The beautiful burial service
of the Episcopal church was read by Rev. Allen Tribble.  A hymn was sung, and prayer offered,
and then their graves were filled as we marched sadly back to camp.

DR. C. T. QUINTARD

Dr. C. T. Quintard was our chaplain for the First Tennessee Regiment during the whole war,
and he stuck to us from the beginning even unto the end.  During week days he ministered to
us physically, and on Sundays spiritually.  He was one of the purest and best men I ever knew.
He would march and carry his knapsack every day the same as any soldier. He had one text he
preached from which I remember now.  It was "the flying scroll."  He said there was a flying
scroll continually passing over our heads, which was like the reflections in a looking-glass,
and all of our deeds, both good and bad, were written upon it.  He was a good doctor of medicine,
as well as a good doctor of divinity, and above either of these, he was a good man per se.
Every old soldier of the First Tennessee Regiment will remember Dr. C. T. Quintard with the
kindest and most sincere emotions of love and respect.  He would go off into the country and
get up for our regiment clothing and provisions, and wrote a little prayer and song book, which
he had published, and gave it to the soldiers.  I learned that little prayer and song book
off by heart, and have a copy of it in my possession yet, which I would not part with for any
consideration.  Dr. Quintard's nature was one of love. He loved the soldiers, and the soldiers
loved him, and deep down in his heart of hearts was a deep and lasting love for Jesus Christ,
the Redeemer of the world, implanted there by God the Father Himself.

Y'S YOU GOT MY HOG?

One day, a party of "us privates" concluded we would go across the Conasauga river on a raid.
We crossed over in a canoe.  After traveling for some time, we saw a neat looking farm house,
and sent one of the party forward to reconnoiter.  He returned in a few minutes and announced
that he had found a fine fat sow in a pen near the house.  Now, the plan we formed was for
two of us to go into the house and keep the inmates interested and the other was to toll and
drive off the hog.  I was one of the party which went into the house.  There was no one there
but an old lady and her sick and widowed daughter.  They invited us in very pleasantly and
kindly, and soon prepared us a very nice and good dinner. The old lady told us of all her troubles
and trials.  Her husband had died before the war, and she had three sons in the army, two of
whom had been killed, and the youngest, who had been conscripted, was taken with the camp fever
and died in the hospital at Atlanta, and she had nothing to subsist upon, after eating up what
they then had.  I was much interested, and remained a little while after my comrade had left.
I soon went out, having made up my mind to have nothing to do with the hog affair.  I did not
know how to act.  I was in a bad fix.  I had heard the gun fire and knew its portent.  I knew
the hog was dead, and went on up the road, and soon overtook my two comrades with the hog,
which had been skinned and cut up, and was being carried on a pole between them. I did not
know what to do.  On looking back I saw the old lady coming and screaming at the top of her
voice, "You got my hog!  You got my hog!" It was too late to back out now.  We had the hog,
and had to make the most of it, even if we did ruin a needy and destitute family.  We went
on until we came to the Conasauga river, when lo and behold! the canoe was on the other side
of the river.  It was dark then, and getting darker, and what was to be done we did not know.
The weather was as cold as blue blazes, and spitting snow from the northwest.  That river had
to be crossed that night.  I undressed and determined to swim it, and went in, but the little
thin ice at the bank cut my feet.  I waded in a little further, but soon found I would cramp
if I tried to swim it.  I came out and put my clothes on, and thought of a gate about a mile
back.  We went back and took the gate off its hinges and carried it to the river and put it
in the water, but soon found out that all three of us could not ride on it; so one of the party
got on it and started across.  He did very well until he came to the other bank, which was
a high bluff, and if he got off the center of the gate it would capsize and he would get a
ducking.  He could not get off the gate.  I told him to pole the gate up to the bank, so that
one side would rest on the bank, and then make a quick run for the bank.  He thought he had
got the gate about the right place, and then made a run, and the gate went under and so did
he, in water ten feet deep.  My comrade, Fount C., who was with me on the bank, laughed, I
thought, until he had hurt himself; but with me, I assure you, it was a mighty sickly grin,
and with the other one, Barkley J., it was anything but a laughing matter.  To me he seemed
a hero. Barkley did about to liberate me from a very unpleasant position. He soon returned
with the canoe, and we crossed the river with the hog. We worried and tugged with it, and got
it to camp just before daylight.

I had a guilty conscience, I assure you.  The hog was cooked, but I did not eat a piece of
it.  I felt that I had rather starve, and I believe that it would have choked me to death if
I had attempted it.

A short time afterward an old citizen from Maury county visited me. My father sent me, by him,
a silver watch--which I am wearing today-- and eight hundred dollars in old issue Confederate
money.  I took two hundred dollars of the money, and had it funded for new issue, 33 1/3 cents
discount.  The other six hundred I sent to Vance Thompson, then on duty at Montgomery, with
instructions to send it to my brother, Dave Watkins, Uncle Asa Freeman, and J. E. Dixon, all
of whom were in Wheeler's cavalry, at some other point--I knew not where.  After getting my
money, I found that I had $133.33 1/3.  I could not rest.  I took one hundred dollars, new
issue, and going by my lone self back to the old lady's house, I said, "Madam, some soldiers
were here a short time ago, and took your hog.  I was one of that party, and I wish to pay
you for it.  What was it worth?"  "Well, sir," says she, "money is of no value to me; I cannot
get any article that I wish; I would much rather have the hog."  Says I, "Madam, that is an
impossibility; your hog is dead and eat up, and I have come to pay you for it."  The old lady's
eyes filled with tears.  She said that she was perfectly willing to give the soldiers everything
she had, and if she thought it had done us any good, she would not charge anything for it.

"Well," says I, "Madam, here is a hundred dollar, new issue, Confederate bill.  Will this pay
you for your hog?"  "Well, sir," she says, drawing herself up to her full height, her cheeks
flushed and her eyes flashing, "I do not want your money.  I would feel that it was blood money."
I saw that there was no further use to offer it to her.  I sat down by the fire and the conversation
turned upon other subjects.

I helped the old lady catch a chicken (an old hen--about the last she had) for dinner, went
with her in the garden and pulled a bunch of eschalots, brought two buckets of water, and cut
and brought enough wood to last several days.

After awhile, she invited me to dinner, and after dinner I sat down by her side, took her old
hand in mine, and told her the whole affair of the hog, from beginning to end; how sorry I
was, and how I did not eat any of that hog; and asked her as a special act of kindness and
favor to me, to take the hundred dollars; that I felt bad about it, and if she would take it,
it would ease my conscience.  I laid the money on the table and left.  I have never in my life
made a raid upon anybody else.

TARGET SHOOTING

By some hook, or crook, or blockade running, or smuggling, or Mason and Slidell, or Raphael
Semmes, or something of the sort, the Confederate States government had come in possession
of a small number of Whitworth guns, the finest long range guns in the world, and a monopoly
by the English government.  They were to be given to the best shots in the army. One day Captain
Joe P. Lee and Company H went out to shoot at a target for the gun.  We all wanted the gun,
because if we got it we would be sharpshooters, and be relieved from camp duty, etc.

All the generals and officers came out to see us shoot.  The mark was put up about five hundred
yards on a hill, and each of us had three shots. Every shot that was fired hit the board, but
there was one man who came a little closer to the spot than any other one, and the Whitworth
was awarded him; and as we just turned round to go back to camp, a buck rabbit jumped up, and
was streaking it as fast as he could make tracks, all the boys whooping and yelling as hard
as they could, when Jimmy Webster raised his gun and pulled down on him, and cut the rabbit's
head entirely off with a minnie ball right back of his ears.  He was about two hundred and
fifty yards off.  It might have been an accidental shot, but General Leonidas Polk laughed
very heartily at the incident, and I heard him ask one of his staff if the Whitworth gun had
been awarded. The staff officer responded that it had, and that a certain man in Colonel Farquharson's
regiment--the Fourth Tennessee--was the successful contestant, and I heard General Polk remark,
"I wish I had another gun to give, I would give it to the young man that shot the rabbit's
head off."

None of our regiment got a Whitworth, but it has been subsequently developed that our regiment
had some of the finest shots in it the world ever produced.  For instance, George and Mack
Campbell, of Maury county; Billy Watkins, of Nashville, and Colonel H. R. Field, and many others,
who I cannot now recall to mind in this rapid sketch.

UNCLE ZACK AND AUNT DAPHNE

While at this place, I went out one day to hunt someone to wash my clothes for me.  I never
was a good washerwoman.  I could cook, bring water and cut wood, but never was much on the
wash.  In fact, it was an uphill business for me to wash up "the things" after "grub time"
in our mess.

I took my clothes and started out, and soon came to a little old negro hut.  I went in and
says to an old negress, "Aunty, I would like for you to do a little washing for me."  The old
creature was glad to get it, as I agreed to pay her what it was worth.  Her name was Aunt Daphne,
and if she had been a politician, she would have been a success.  I do not remember of a more
fluent "conversationalist" in my life.  Her tongue seemed to be on a balance, and both ends
were trying to out-talk the other--but she was a good woman.  Her husband was named Uncle Zack,
and was the exact counterpart of Aunt Daphne.  He always sat in the chimney corner, his feet
in the ashes, and generally fast asleep. I am certain I never saw an uglier or more baboonish
face in my life, but Uncle Zack was a good Christian, and I would sometimes wake him up to
hear him talk Christian.

He said that when he "fessed 'ligin, de debil come dare one nite, and say, 'Zack, come go wid
me,' and den de debil tek me to hell, and jes stretch a wire across hell, and hang me up jes
same like a side of bacon, through the tongue.  Well, dar I hang like de bacon, and de grease
kept droppin' down, and would blaze up all 'round me.  I jes stay dar and burn; and after while
de debil come 'round wid his gun, and say, 'Zack, I gwine to shoot you,' and jes as he raise
de gun, I jes jerk loose from dat wire, and I jes fly to heben."

"Fly! did you have wings?"

"O, yes, sir, I had wings."

"Well, after you got to heaven, what did you do then?"

"Well, I jes went to eatin' grass like all de balance of de lams."

"What! were they eating grass?"

"O, yes, sir."

"Well, what color were the lambs, Uncle Zack?"

"Well, sir, some of dem was white, and some black, and some spotted."

"Were there no old rams or ewes among them?"

"No, sir; dey was all lams."

"Well, Uncle Zack, what sort of a looking lamb were you?"

"Well, sir, I was sort of specklish and brown like."

Old Zack begins to get sleepy.

"Did you have horns, Uncle Zack?"

"Well, some of dem had little horns dat look like dey was jes sorter sproutin' like."

Zack begins to nod and doze a little.

"Well, how often did they shear the lambs, Uncle Zack?"

"Well, w-e-l-l, w--e--l--l--," and Uncle Zack was fast asleep and snoring, and dreaming no
doubt of the beautiful pastures glimmering above the clouds of heaven.

RED TAPE

While here I applied for a furlough.  Now, reader, here commenced a series of red tapeism that
always had characterized the officers under Braggism.  It had to go through every officer's
hands, from corporal up, before it was forwarded to the next officer of higher grade, and so
it passed through every officer's hands.  He felt it his sworn and bound duty to find some
informality in it, and it was brought back for correction according to his notions, you see.
Well, after getting the corporal's consent and approval, it goes up to the sergeant.  It ain't
right!  Some informality, perhaps, in the wording and spelling.  Then the lieutenants had to
have a say in it, and when it got to the captain, it had to be read and re-read, to see that
every "i" was dotted and "t" crossed, but returned because there was one word that he couldn't
make out.  Then it was forwarded to the colonel.  He would snatch it out of your hand, grit
his teeth, and say, "D--n it;" feel in his vest pocket and take out a lead pencil, and simply
write "app." for approved. This would also be returned, with instructions that the colonel
must write "approved" in a plain hand, and with pen and ink.  Then it went to the brigadier-general.
He would be engaged in a game of poker, and would tell you to call again, as he didn't have
time to bother with those small affairs at present.  "I'll see your five and raise you ten."
"I have a straight flush."  "Take the pot."  After setting him out, and when it wasn't his
deal, I get up and walk around, always keeping the furlough in sight.  After reading carefully
the furlough, he says, "Well, sir, you have failed to get the adjutant's name to it.  You ought
to have the colonel and adjutant, and you must go back and get their signatures." After this,
you go to the major-general.  He is an old aristocratic fellow, who never smiles, and tries
to look as sour as vinegar.  He looks at the furlough, and looks down at the ground, holding
the furlough in his hand in a kind of dreamy way, and then says, "Well, sir, this is all informal."
You say, "Well, General, what is the matter with it?" He looks at you as if he hadn't heard
you, and repeats very slowly, "Well, sir, this is informal," and hands it back to you.  You
take it, feeling all the while that you wished you had not applied for a furlough, and by summoning
all the fortitude that you possess, you say in a husky and choking voice, "Well, general (you
say the "general" in a sort of gulp and dry swallow), what's the matter with the furlough?"
You look askance, and he very languidly re-takes the furlough and glances over it, orders his
negro boy to go and feed his horse, asks his cook how long it will be before dinner, hallooes
at some fellow away down the hill that he would like for him to call at 4 o'clock this evening,
and tells his adjutant to sign the furlough.  The adjutant tries to be smart and polite, smiles
a smole both child-like and bland, rolls up his shirt-sleeves, and winks one eye at you, gets
astraddle of a camp-stool, whistles a little stanza of schottische, and with a big flourish
of his pen, writes the major- general's name in small letters, and his own--the adjutant's--in
very large letters, bringing the pen under it with tremendous flourishes, and writes approved
and forwarded.  You feel relieved.  You feel that the anaconda's coil had been suddenly relaxed.
Then you start out to the lieutenant-general; you find him.  He is in a very learned and dignified
conversation about the war in Chili.  Well, you get very anxious for the war in Chili to get
to an end.  The general pulls his side-whiskers, looks wise, and tells his adjutant to look
over it, and, if correct, sign it.  The adjutant does not deign to condescend to notice you.
He seems to be full of gumbo or calf-tail soup, and does not wish his equanimity disturbed.
He takes hold of the document, and writes the lieutenant-general's name, and finishes his own
name while looking in another direction--approved and forwarded.  Then you take it up to the
general; the guard stops you in a very formal way, and asks, "What do you want?"  You tell
him.  He calls for the orderly; the orderly gives it to the adjutant, and you are informed
that it will be sent to your colonel tonight, and given to you at roll-call in the morning.
Now, reader, the above is a pretty true picture of how I got my furlough.

I GET A FURLOUGH

After going through all the formality of red-tapeism, and being snubbed with tweedle-dum and
tweedle-dee, I got my furlough.  When it started out, it was on the cleanest piece of paper
that could be found in Buck Lanier's sutler's store.  After it came back, it was pretty well
used up, and looked as if it had gone through a very dark place, and been beat with a soot-bag.
But, anyhow, I know that I did not appreciate my furlough half as much as I thought I would.
I felt like returning it to the gentlemen with my compliments, declining their kind favors.
I felt that it was unwillingly given, and, as like begets like, it was very unwillingly received.
Honestly, I felt as if I had made a bad bargain, and was keen to rue the trade.  I did not
know what to do with it; but, anyhow, I thought I would make the best of a bad bargain.  I
got on the cars at Dalton--now, here is a thing that I had long since forgotten about--it was
the first first-class passenger car that I had been in since I had been a soldier.  The conductor
passed around, and handed me a ticket with these words on it:

    "If you wish to travel with ease,
     Keep this ticket in sight, if you please;
     And if you wish to take a nap,
     Just stick this in your hat or cap."

This was the poetry, reader, that was upon the ticket.  The conductor called around every now
and then, especially if you were asleep, to look at your ticket, and every now and then a captain
and a detail of three soldiers would want to look at your furlough.  I thought before I got
to Selma, Alabama, that I wished the ticket and furlough both were in the bottom of the ocean,
and myself back in camp.  Everywhere I went someone wanted to see my furlough.  Before I got
my furlough, I thought it sounded big.  Furlough was a war word, and I did not comprehend its
meaning until I got one.  The very word "furlough" made me sick then. I feel fainty now whenever
I think of furlough.  It has a sickening sound in the ring of it--"furlough!"  "Furloch," it
ought to have been called. Every man I met had a furlough; in fact, it seemed to have the very
double-extract of romance about it--"fur too, eh?"  Men who I knew had never been in the army
in their lives, all had furloughs.  Where so many men ever got furloughs from I never knew;
but I know now.  They were like the old bachelor who married the widow with ten children--he
married a "ready-made" family.  They had ready-made furloughs.  But I have said enough on the
furlough question; it enthralled me--let it pass; don't want any more furloughs.  But while
on my furlough, I got with Captain G. M. V. Kinzer, a fine-dressed and handsome cavalry captain,
whom all the ladies (as they do at the present day), fell in love with.  The captain and myself
were great friends.  The captain gave me his old coat to act captain in, but the old thing
wouldn't act.  I would keep the collar turned down.  One night we went to call on a couple
of beautiful and interesting ladies near Selma.  We chatted the girls until the "wee sma' hours"
of morning, and when the young ladies retired, remarked that they would send a servant to show
us to our room.  We waited; no servant came.  The captain and myself snoozed it out as best
we could.  About daylight the next morning the captain and myself thought that we would appear
as if we had risen very early, and began to move about, and opening the door, there lay a big
black negro on his knees and face. Now, reader, what do you suppose that negro was doing? 
You could not guess in a week.  The black rascal! hideous! terrible to contemplate! vile! outrageous!
Well, words cannot express it.  What do you suppose he was doing?  He was fast asleep.  He
had come thus far, and could go no further, and fell asleep.  There is where the captain and
myself found him at daylight the next morning.  We left for Selma immediately after breakfast,
leaving the family in ignorance of the occurrence.  The captain and myself had several other
adventures, but the captain always had the advantage of me; he had the good clothes, and the
good looks, and got all the good presents from the pretty young ladies--well, you might say,
"cut me out" on all occasions.  "That's what makes me 'spise a furlough."  But then furlough
sounds big, you know.  Now, for old Joe's generalship.  We have seen him in camp, now we will
see him in action.  We are marched to meet the enemy; we occupy Turner's Gap at Tunnel Hill.
Now, come on, Mr. Yank--we are keen for an engagement.  It is like a picnic; the soldiers are
ruddy and fat, and strong; whoop! whoop! hurrah! come on, Mr. Yank.  We form line of battle
on top of Rocky Face Ridge, and here we are face to face with the enemy.  Why don't you unbottle
your thunderbolts and dash us to pieces?  Ha! here it comes; the boom of cannon and the bursting
of a shell in our midst.  Ha! ha! give us another blizzard!  Boom! boom! That's all right,
you ain't hurting nothing.

"Hold on, boys," says a sharpshooter, armed with a Whitworth gun, "I'll stop that racket. 
Wait until I see her smoke again."  Boom, boom! the keen crack of the Whitworth rings upon
the frosty morning air; the cannoneers are seen to lie down; something is going on.  "Yes,
yonder is a fellow being carried off on a litter."  Bang! bang! goes the Whitworth, and the
battery is seen to limber to the rear.  What next? a yell! What does this yell mean?  A charge
right up the hill, and a little sharp skirmish for a few moments.  We can see the Yankee line.
They are resting on their arms.  The valley below is full of blue coats, but a little too far
off to do any execution.

Old Joe walks along the line.  He happens to see the blue coats in the valley, in plain view.
Company H is ordered to fire on them.  We take deliberate aim and fire a solid volley of minnie
balls into their midst. We see a terrible consplutterment among them, and know that we have
killed and wounded several of Sherman's incendiaries.  They seem to get mad at our audacity,
and ten pieces of cannon are brought up, and pointed right toward us.  We see the smoke boil
up, and a moment afterwards the shell is roaring and bursting right among us.  Ha! ha! ha!
that's funny-- we love the noise of battle.  Captain Joe P. Lee orders us to load and fire
at will upon these batteries.  Our Enfields crack, keen and sharp; and ha, ha, ha, look yonder!
The Yankees are running away from their cannon, leaving two pieces to take care of themselves.
Yonder goes a dash of our cavalry.  They are charging right up in the midst of the Yankee line.
Three men are far in advance.  Look out, boys!  What does that mean?  Our cavalry are falling
back, and the three men are cut off. They will be captured, sure.  They turn to get back to
our lines. We can see the smoke boil up, and hear the discharge of musketry from the Yankee
lines.  One man's horse is seen to blunder and fall, one man reels in his saddle, and falls
a corpse, and the other is seen to surrender. But, look yonder! the man's horse that blundered
and fell is up again; he mounts his horse in fifty yards of the whole Yankee line, is seen
to lie down on his neck, and is spurring him right on toward the solid line of blue coats.
Look how he rides, and the ranks of the blue coats open. Hurrah for the brave rebel boy!  He
has passed and is seen to regain his regiment.  I afterwards learned that that brave Rebel
boy was my own brother, Dave, who at that time was not more than sixteen years old. The one
who was killed was named Grimes, and the one captured was named Houser, and the regiment was
the First Tennessee Cavalry, then commanded by Colonel J. H. Lewis.  You could have heard the
cheers from both sides, it seemed, for miles.

John Branch raised the tune, in which the whole First and Twenty-seventh Regiments joined in:

    "Cheer, boys, cheer, we are marching on to battle!
     Cheer, boys, cheer, for our sweethearts and our wives!
     Cheer, boys, cheer, we'll nobly do our duty,
     And give to the South our hearts, our arms, our lives.
       Old Lincoln, with his hireling hosts,
       Will never whip the South,
           Shouting the battle cry of freedom."

All this is taking place while the Yankees are fully one thousand yards off.  We can see every
movement that is made, and we know that Sherman's incendiaries are already hacked.  Sherman
himself is a coward, and dares not try his strength with old Joe.  Sherman never fights; all
that he is after is marching to the sea, while the world looks on and wonders: "What a flank
movement!"  Yes, Sherman is afraid of minnie balls, and tries the flank movement.  We are ordered
to march somewhere.

"FALLING BACK"

Old Joe knows what he is up to.  Every night we change our position. The morrow's sun finds
us face to face with the Yankee lines.  The troops are in excellent spirits.  Yonder are our
"big guns," our cavalry-- Forrest and Wheeler--our sharpshooters, and here is our wagon and
supply train, right in our midst.  The private's tread is light--his soul is happy.

Another flank movement.  Tomorrow finds us face to face.  Well, you have come here to fight
us; why don't you come on?  We are ready; always ready.  Everything is working like clockwork;
machinery is all in order. Come, give us a tilt, and let us try our metal.  You say old Joe
has got the brains and you have got the men; you are going to flank us out of the Southern
Confederacy.  That's your plan, is it?  Well, look out; we are going to pick off and decimate
your men every day.  You will be a picked chicken before you do that.

What?  The Yankees are at Resacca, and have captured the bridge across the Oostanaula river.
Well, now, that's business; that has the old ring in it.  Tell it to us again; we're fond of
hearing such things.

The Yankees are tearing up the railroad track between the tank and Resacca.  Let's hear it
again.  The Yankees have opened the attack; we are going to have a battle; we are ordered to
strip for the fight. (That is, to take off our knapsacks and blankets, and to detail Bev. White
to guard them.)  Keep closed up, men.  The skirmish line is firing like popping fire-crackers
on a Christmas morning.  Every now and then the boom of a cannon and the screaming of a shell.
Ha, ha, ha! that has the right ring.  We will make Sherman's incendiaries tell another tale
in a few moments, when--"Halt! about face."  Well, what's the matter now? Simply a flank movement.
All right; we march back, retake our knapsacks and blankets, and commence to march toward Resacca.
Tom Tucker's rooster crows, and John Branch raises the tune, "Just Twenty Years Ago," and after
we sing that out, he winds up with, "There Was an Ancient Individual Whose Cognomen Was Uncle
Edward," and

    "The old woman who kept a peanut stand,
     And a big policeman stood by with a big stick in his hand,"

And Arthur Fulghum halloes out, "All right; go ahead! toot, toot, toot! puff, puff, puff! 
Tickets, gentlemen, tickets!" and the Maury Grays raise the yell, "All aboard for Culleoka,"
while Walker Coleman commences the song, "I'se gwine to jine the rebel band, fightin' for my
home." Thus we go, marching back to Resacca.

BATTLE OF RESACCA

Well, you want to hear about shooting and banging, now, gentle reader, don't you?  I am sorry
I cannot interest you on this subject--see history.

The Yankees had got breeches hold on us.  They were ten miles in our rear; had cut off our
possibility of a retreat.  The wire bridge was in their hands, and they were on the railroad
in our rear; but we were moving, there was no mistake in that.  Our column was firm and strong.
There was no excitement, but we were moving along as if on review.  We passed old Joe and his
staff.  He has on a light or mole colored hat, with a black feather in it.  He is listening
to the firing going on at the front. One little cheer, and the very ground seems to shake with
cheers. Old Joe smiles as blandly as a modest maid, raises his hat in acknowledgement, makes
a polite bow, and rides toward the firing. Soon we are thrown into line of battle, in support
of Polk's corps. We belong to Hardee's corps.  Now Polk's corps advances to the attack, and
Hardee's corps fifty or seventy-five yards in the rear.  A thug, thug, thug; the balls are
decimating our men; we can't fire; Polk's corps is in front of us; should it give way, then
it will be our time.  The air is full of deadly missiles.  We can see the two lines meet, and
hear the deadly crash of battle; can see the blaze of smoke and fire.  The earth trembles.
Our little corps rush in to carry off our men as they are shot down, killed and wounded.  Lie
down! thug, thug!  General Hardee passes along the line.  "Steady, boys!"  (The old general
had on a white cravat; he had been married to a young wife not more than three weeks).  "Go
back, general, go back, go back, go back," is cried all along the line. He passes through the
missiles of death unscathed; stood all through that storm of bullets indifferent to their proximity
(we were lying down, you know).  The enemy is checked; yonder they fly, whipped and driven
from the field.  "Attention!  By the right flank, file left, march! Double quick!" and we were
double quicking, we knew not whither, but that always meant fight.  We pass over the hill,
and through the valley, and there is old Joe pointing toward the tank with his sword.  (He
looked like the pictures you see hung upon the walls).  We cross the railroad. Halloo! here
comes a cavalry charge from the Yankee line.  Now for it; we will see how Yankee cavalry fight.
We are not supported; what is the matter?  Are we going to be captured?  They thunder down
upon us. Their flat-footed dragoons shake and jar the earth.  They are all around us--we are
surrounded.  "Form square!  Platoons, right and left wheel! Kneel and fire!"  There we were
in a hollow square.  The Yankees had never seen anything like that before.  It was something
new.  They charged right upon us.  Colonel Field, sitting on his gray mare, right in the center
of the hollow square, gives the command, "Front rank, kneel and present bayonet against cavalry."
The front rank knelt down, placing the butts of their guns against their knees.  "Rear rank,
fire at will; commence firing."  Now, all this happened in less time than it has taken me to
write it.  They charged right upon us, no doubt expecting to ride right over us, and trample
us to death with the hoofs of their horses. They tried to spur and whip their horses over us,
but the horses had more sense than that.  We were pouring a deadly fire right into their faces,
and soon men and horses were writhing in the death agonies; officers were yelling at the top
of their voices, "Surrender! surrender!" but we were having too good a thing of it.  We were
killing them by scores, and they could not fire at us; if they did they either overshot or
missed their aim.  Their ranks soon began to break and get confused, and finally they were
routed, and broke and ran in all directions, as fast as their horses could carry them.

When we re-formed our regiment and marched back, we found that General Johnston's army had
all passed over the bridge at Resacca.  Now, reader, this was one of our tight places.  The
First Tennessee Regiment was always ordered to hold tight places, which we always did.  We
were about the last troops that passed over.

Now, gentle reader, that is all I know of the battle of Resacca.  We had repulsed every charge,
had crossed the bridge with every wagon, and cannon, and everything, and had nothing lost or
captured.  It beat anything that has ever been recorded in history.  I wondered why old Joe
did not attack in their rear.  The explanation was that Hood's line was being enfiladed, his
men decimated, and he could not hold his position.

We are still fighting; battles innumerable.  The Yankees had thrown pontoons across the river
below Resacca, in hopes to intercept us on the other side.  We were marching on the road; they
seemed to be marching parallel with us.  It was fighting, fighting, every day.  When we awoke
in the morning, the firing of guns was our reveille, and when the sun went down it was our
"retreat and our lights out."  Fighting, fighting, fighting, all day and all night long.  Battles
were fought every day, and in one respect we always had the advantage; they were the attacking
party, and we always had good breastworks thrown up during the night.

Johnston's army was still intact.  The soldiers drew their regular rations of biscuit and bacon,
sugar and coffee, whisky and tobacco. When we went to sleep we felt that old Joe, the faithful
old watch dog, had his eye on the enemy.  No one was disposed to straggle and go back to Company
Q. (Company Q was the name for play-outs).  They even felt safer in the regular line than in
the rear with Company Q.

Well as stated previously, it was battle, battle, battle, every day, for one hundred days.
The boom of cannon, and the rattle of musketry was our reveille and retreat, and Sherman knew
that it was no child's play.

Today, April 14, 1882, I say, and honestly say, that I sincerely believe the combined forces
of the whole Yankee nation could never have broken General Joseph E. Johnston's line of battle,
beginning at Rocky Face Ridge, and ending on the banks of the Chattahoochee.

ADAIRSVILLE--OCTAGON HOUSE--THE FIRST TENNESSEE ALWAYS OCCUPIES TIGHT PLACES

We had stacked our arms and gone into camp, and had started to build fires to cook supper.
I saw our cavalry falling back, I thought, rather hurriedly.  I ran to the road and asked them
what was the matter? They answered, "Matter enough; yonder are the Yankees, are you infantry
fellows going to make a stand here?"  I told Colonel Field what had been told to me, and he
hooted at the idea; but balls that had shucks tied to their tails were passing over, and our
regiment was in the rear of the whole army.  I could hardly draw anyone's attention to the
fact that the cavalry had passed us, and that we were on the outpost of the whole army, when
an order came for our regiment to go forward as rapidly as possible and occupy an octagon house
in our immediate front.  The Yankees were about a hundred yards from the house on one side
and we about a hundred yards on the other.  The race commenced as to which side would get to
the house first. We reached it, and had barely gotten in, when they were bursting down the
paling of the yard on the opposite side.  The house was a fine brick, octagon in shape, and
as perfect a fort as could be desired.  We ran to the windows, upstairs, downstairs and in
the cellar. The Yankees cheered and charged, and our boys got happy.  Colonel Field told us
he had orders to hold it until every man was killed, and never to surrender the house.  It
was a forlorn hope.  We felt we were "gone fawn skins," sure enough.  At every discharge of
our guns, we would hear a Yankee squall.  The boys raised a tune--

    "I'se gwine to jine the Rebel band,
     A fighting for my home"--

as they loaded and shot their guns.

Our cartridges were almost gone, and Lieutenant Joe Carney, Joe Sewell, and Billy Carr volunteered
to go and bring a box of one thousand cartridges.  They got out of the back window, and through
that hail of iron and lead, made their way back with the box of cartridges.  Our ammunition
being renewed, the fight raged on.  Captain Joe P. Lee touched me on the shoulder and said,
"Sam, please let me have your gun for one shot."  He raised it to his shoulder and pulled down
on a fine-dressed cavalry officer, and I saw that Yankee tumble.  He handed it back to me to
reload.  About twelve o'clock, midnight, the Hundred and Fifty-fourth Tennessee, commanded
by Colonel McGevney, came to our relief.

The firing had ceased, and we abandoned the octagon house.  Our dead and wounded--there were
thirty of them--were in strange contrast with the furniture of the house.  Fine chairs, sofas,
settees, pianos and Brussels carpeting being made the death-bed of brave and noble boys, all
saturated with blood.  Fine lace and damask curtains, all blackened by the smoke of battle.
Fine bureaus and looking-glasses and furniture being riddled by the rude missiles of war. 
Beautiful pictures in gilt frames, and a library of valuable books, all shot and torn by musket
and cannon balls. Such is war.

KENNESAW LINE

The battles of the Kennesaw line were fought for weeks.  Cannonading and musketry firing was
one continual thing.  It seemed that shooting was the order of the day, and pickets on both
sides kept up a continual firing, that sounded like ten thousand wood-choppers.  Sometimes
the wood- choppers would get lazy or tired and there was a lull.  But you could always tell
when the old guard had been relieved, by the accelerated chops of the wood-choppers.

AM DETAILED TO GO INTO THE ENEMY'S LINES

One day our orderly sergeant informed me that it was my regular time to go on duty, and to
report to Captain Beasley, of the Twenty-seventh. I reported to the proper place, and we were
taken to the headquarters of General Leonidas Polk.  We had to go over into the enemy's lines,
and make such observations as we could, and report back by daylight in the morning.  Our instructions
were to leave everything in camp except our guns and cartridge-boxes.  These were to be carried,
but, under no circumstances, to be used, except in case of death itself.  We were instructed
to fall in in the rear of our relief guard, which would go out about sunset; not to attract
their attention, but to drop out one or two at a time; to pass the Yankee picket as best we
could, even if we had to crawl on our bellies to do so; to go over in the Yankee lines, and
to find out all we could, without attracting attention, if possible. These were our instructions.
You may be sure my heart beat like a muffled drum when I heard our orders.

I felt like making my will.  But, like the boy who was passing the graveyard, I tried to whistle
to keep my spirits up.  We followed the relief guard, and one by one stepped off from the rear.
I was with two others, Arnold Zellner and T. C. Dornin.  We found ourselves between the picket
lines of the two armies.  Fortune seemed to favor us.  It was just getting dusky twilight,
and we saw the relief guard of the Yankees just putting on their picket.  They seemed to be
very mild, inoffensive fellows.  They kept a looking over toward the Rebel lines, and would
dodge if a twig cracked under their feet.  I walked on as if I was just relieved, and had passed
their lines, when I turned back, and says I, "Captain, what guard is this?"  He answered, "Nien
bocht, you bet," is what I understood him to say.  "What regiment are you from?"  "Ben bicht
mir ein riefel fab bien."  "What regiment is your detail from?" "Iet du mein got Donnermetter
stefel switzer."  I had to give it up-- I had run across the detail of a Dutch regiment.  I
passed on, and came to the regular line of breastworks, and there was an old Irishman sitting
on a stump grinding coffee.  "General McCook's brigade, be jabbers," he answered to my inquiry
as to what regiment it was.  Right in front of me the line was full of Irish soldiers, and
they were cooking supper. I finally got over their breastworks, and was fearful I would run
into some camp or headquarter guard, and the countersign would be demanded of me.  I did not
know what to do in that case--but I thought of the way that I had gotten in hundreds of times
before in our army, when I wanted to slip the guard, and that was to get a gun, go to some
cross street or conspicuous place, halt the officer, and get the countersign.  And while standing
near General Sherman's headquarters, I saw a courier come out of his tent, get on his horse,
and ride toward where I stood.  As he approached, says I, "Halt! who goes there?"  "A friend
with the countersign."  He advanced, and whispered in my ear the word "United." He rode on.
I had gotten their countersign, and felt I was no longer a prisoner.  I went all over their
camp, and saw no demonstration of any kind.  Night had thrown her mantle over the encampment.
I could plainly see the sentinels on their weary vigils along the lines, but there was none
in their rear.  I met and talked with a great many soldiers, but could get no information from
them.

About 2 o'clock at night, I saw a body of men approaching where I was. Something told me that
I had better get out of their way, but I did not. The person in command said, "Say, there!
you, sir; say, you, sir!" Says I, "Are you speaking to me?"  "Yes," very curtly and abruptly.
"What regiment do you belong to?"  Says I, "One hundred and twenty- seventh Illinois."  "Well,
sir, fall in here; I am ordered to take up all stragglers.  Fall in, fall in promptly!"  Says
I, "I am instructed by General McCook to remain here and direct a courier to General Williams'
headquarters."  He says, "It's a strange place for a courier to come to." His command marched
on.  About an hour afterwards--about 3 o'clock-- I heard the assembly sound.  I knew then that
it was about time for me to be getting out of the way.  Soon their companies were forming,
and they were calling the roll everywhere.  Everything had begun to stir. Artillery men were
hitching up their horses.  Men were dashing about in every direction.  I saw their army form
and move off.  I got back into our lines, and reported to General Polk.

He was killed that very day on the Kennesaw line.  General Stephens was killed the very next day.

Every now and then a dead picket was brought in.  Times had begun to look bilious, indeed.
Their cannon seemed to be getting the best of ours in every fight.  The cannons of both armies
were belching and bellowing at each other, and the pickets were going it like wood choppers,
in earnest. We were entrenched behind strong fortifications.  Our rations were cooked and brought
to us regularly, and the spirits of the army were in good condition.

We continued to change position, and build new breastworks every night. One-third of the army
had to keep awake in the trenches, while the other two-thirds slept.  But everything was so
systematized, that we did not feel the fatigue.

PINE MOUNTAIN--DEATH OF GENERAL LEONIDAS POLK

General Leonidas Polk, our old leader, whom we had followed all through that long war, had
gone forward with some of his staff to the top of Pine Mountain, to reconnoiter, as far as
was practicable, the position of the enemy in our front.  While looking at them with his field
glass, a solid shot from the Federal guns struck him on his left breast, passing through his
body and through his heart.  I saw him while the infirmary corps were bringing him off the
field.  He was as white as a piece of marble, and a most remarkable thing about him was, that
not a drop of blood was ever seen to come out of the place through which the cannon ball had
passed.  My pen and ability is inadequate to the task of doing his memory justice.  Every private
soldier loved him.  Second to Stonewall Jackson, his loss was the greatest the South ever sustained.
When I saw him there dead, I felt that I had lost a friend whom I had ever loved and respected,
and that the South had lost one of her best and greatest generals.

His soldiers always loved and honored him.  They called him "Bishop Polk." "Bishop Polk" was
ever a favorite with the army, and when any position was to be held, and it was known that
"Bishop Polk" was there, we knew and felt that "all was well."

GOLGOTHA CHURCH--GENERAL LUCIUS E. POLK WOUNDED

On this Kennesaw line, near Golgotha Church, one evening about 4 o'clock, our Confederate line
of battle and the Yankee line came in close proximity.  If I mistake not, it was a dark, drizzly,
rainy evening. The cannon balls were ripping and tearing through the bushes.  The two lines
were in plain view of each other.  General Pat Cleburne was at this time commanding Hardee's
corps, and General Lucius E. Polk was in command of Cleburne's division.  General John C. Brown's
division was supporting Cleburne's division, or, rather, "in echelon."  Every few moments,
a raking fire from the Yankee lines would be poured into our lines, tearing limbs off the trees,
and throwing rocks and dirt in every direction; but I never saw a soldier quail, or even dodge.
We had confidence in old Joe, and were ready to march right into the midst of battle at a moment's
notice.  While in this position, a bomb, loaded with shrapnel and grapeshot, came ripping and
tearing through our ranks, wounding General Lucius E. Polk, and killing some of his staff.
And, right here, I deem it not inappropriate to make a few remarks as to the character and
appearance of so brave and gallant an officer.  At this time he was about twenty-five years
old, with long black hair, that curled, a gentle and attractive black eye that seemed to sparkle
with love rather than chivalry, and were it not for a young moustache and goatee that he usually
wore, he would have passed for a beautiful girl. In his manner he was as simple and guileless
as a child, and generous almost to a fault.  Enlisting in the First Arkansas Regiment as a
private soldier, and serving for twelve months as orderly sergeant; at the reorganization he
was elected colonel of the regiment, and afterwards, on account of merit and ability, was commissioned
brigadier-general; distinguishing himself for conspicuous bravery and gallantry on every battlefield,
and being "scalped" by a minnie ball at Richmond, Kentucky-- which scar marks its furrow on
top of his head today.  In every battle he was engaged in, he led his men to victory, or held
the enemy at bay, while the surge of battle seemed against us; he always seemed the successful
general, who would snatch victory out of the very jaws of defeat.  In every battle, Polk's
brigade, of Cleburne's division, distinguished itself, almost making the name of Cleburne as
the Stonewall of the West.  Polk was to Cleburne what Murat or the old guard was to Napoleon.
And, at the battle of Chickamauga, when it seemed that the Southern army had nearly lost the
battle, General Lucius E. Polk's brigade made the most gallant charge of the war, turning the
tide of affairs, and routing the Yankee army.  General Polk himself led the charge in person,
and was the first man on top of the Yankee breastworks (vide General D. H. Hill's report of
the battle of Chickamauga), and in every attack he had the advance guard, and in every retreat,
the rear guard of the army.  Why?  Because General Lucius E. Polk and his brave soldiers never
faltered, and with him as leader, the general commanding the army knew that "all was well."

Well, this evening of which I now write, the litter corps ran up and placed him on a litter,
and were bringing him back through Company H, of our regiment, when one of the men was wounded,
and I am not sure but another one was killed, and they let him fall to the ground.  At that
time, the Yankees seemed to know that they had killed or wounded a general, and tore loose
their batteries upon this point.  The dirt and rocks were flying in every direction, when Captain
Joe P. Lee, Jim Brandon and myself, ran forward, grabbed up the litter, brought General Polk
off the crest of the hill, and assisted in carrying him to the headquarters of General Cleburne.
When we got to General Cleburne, he came forward and asked General Polk if he was badly wounded,
and General Polk remarked, laughingly: "Well, I think I will be able to get a furlough now."
This is a fact.  General Polk's leg had been shot almost entirely off.  I remember the foot
part being twisted clear around, and lying by his side, while the blood was running through
the litter in a perfect stream.  I remember, also, that General Cleburne dashed a tear from
his eye with his hand, and saying, "Poor fellow," at once galloped to the front, and ordered
an immediate advance of our lines.  Cleburne's division was soon engaged.  Night coming on,
prevented a general engagement, but we drove the Yankee line two miles.

"DEAD ANGLE"

The First and Twenty-seventh Tennessee Regiments will ever remember the battle of "Dead Angle,"
which was fought June 27th, on the Kennesaw line, near Marietta, Georgia.  It was one of the
hottest and longest days of the year, and one of the most desperate and determinedly resisted
battles fought during the whole war.  Our regiment was stationed on an angle, a little spur
of the mountain, or rather promontory of a range of hills, extending far out beyond the main
line of battle, and was subject to the enfilading fire of forty pieces of artillery of the
Federal batteries. It seemed fun for the guns of the whole Yankee army to play upon this point.
We would work hard every night to strengthen our breastworks, and the very next day they would
be torn down smooth with the ground by solid shots and shells from the guns of the enemy. 
Even the little trees and bushes which had been left for shade, were cut down as so much stubble.
For more than a week this constant firing had been kept up against this salient point.  In
the meantime, the skirmishing in the valley below resembled the sounds made by ten thousand
wood-choppers.

Well, on the fatal morning of June 27th, the sun rose clear and cloudless, the heavens seemed
made of brass, and the earth of iron, and as the sun began to mount toward the zenith, everything
became quiet, and no sound was heard save a peckerwood on a neighboring tree, tapping on its
old trunk, trying to find a worm for his dinner.  We all knew it was but the dead calm that
precedes the storm.  On the distant hills we could plainly see officers dashing about hither
and thither, and the Stars and Stripes moving to and fro, and we knew the Federals were making
preparations for the mighty contest.  We could hear but the rumbling sound of heavy guns, and
the distant tread of a marching army, as a faint roar of the coming storm, which was soon to
break the ominous silence with the sound of conflict, such as was scarcely ever before heard
on this earth.  It seemed that the archangel of Death stood and looked on with outstretched
wings, while all the earth was silent, when all at once a hundred guns from the Federal line
opened upon us, and for more than an hour they poured their solid and chain shot, grape and
shrapnel right upon this salient point, defended by our regiment alone, when, all of a sudden,
our pickets jumped into our works and reported the Yankees advancing, and almost at the same
time a solid line of blue coats came up the hill. I discharged my gun, and happening to look
up, there was the beautiful flag of the Stars and Stripes flaunting right in my face, and I
heard John Branch, of the Rock City Guards, commanded by Captain W. D. Kelly, who were next
Company H, say, "Look at that Yankee flag; shoot that fellow; snatch that flag out of his hand!"
My pen is unable to describe the scene of carnage and death that ensued in the next two hours.
Column after column of Federal soldiers were crowded upon that line, and by referring to the
history of the war you will find they were massed in column forty columns deep; in fact, the
whole force of the Yankee army was hurled against this point, but no sooner would a regiment
mount our works than they were shot down or surrendered, and soon we had every "gopher hole"
full of Yankee prisoners.  Yet still the Yankees came. It seemed impossible to check the onslaught,
but every man was true to his trust, and seemed to think that at that moment the whole responsibility
of the Confederate government was rested upon his shoulders.  Talk about other battles, victories,
shouts, cheers, and triumphs, but in comparison with this day's fight, all others dwarf into
insignificance.  The sun beaming down on our uncovered heads, the thermometer being one hundred
and ten degrees in the shade, and a solid line of blazing fire right from the muzzles of the
Yankee guns being poured right into our very faces, singeing our hair and clothes, the hot
blood of our dead and wounded spurting on us, the blinding smoke and stifling atmosphere filling
our eyes and mouths, and the awful concussion causing the blood to gush out of our noses and
ears, and above all, the roar of battle, made it a perfect pandemonium.  Afterward I heard
a soldier express himself by saying that he thought "Hell had broke loose in Georgia, sure enough."

I have heard men say that if they ever killed a Yankee during the war they were not aware of
it.  I am satisfied that on this memorable day, every man in our regiment killed from one score
to four score, yea, five score men.  I mean from twenty to one hundred each.  All that was
necessary was to load and shoot.  In fact, I will ever think that the reason they did not capture
our works was the impossibility of their living men passing over the bodies of their dead.
The ground was piled up with one solid mass of dead and wounded Yankees.  I learned afterwards
from the burying squad that in some places they were piled up like cord wood, twelve deep.

After they were time and time again beaten back, they at last were enabled to fortify a line
under the crest of the hill, only thirty yards from us, and they immediately commenced to excavate
the earth with the purpose of blowing up our line.

We remained here three days after the battle.  In the meantime the woods had taken fire, and
during the nights and days of all that time continued to burn, and at all times, every hour
of day and night, you could hear the shrieks and screams of the poor fellows who were left
on the field, and a stench, so sickening as to nauseate the whole of both armies, arose from
the decaying bodies of the dead left lying on the field.

On the third morning the Yankees raised a white flag, asked an armistice to bury their dead,
not for any respect either army had for the dead, but to get rid of the sickening stench. 
I get sick now when I happen to think about it.  Long and deep trenches were dug, and hooks
made from bayonets crooked for the purpose, and all the dead were dragged and thrown pell mell
into these trenches.  Nothing was allowed to be taken off the dead, and finely dressed officers,
with gold watch chains dangling over their vests, were thrown into the ditches.  During the
whole day both armies were hard at work, burying the Federal dead.

Every member of the First and Twenty-seventh Tennessee Regiments deserves a wreath of imperishable
fame, and a warm place in the hearts of their countrymen, for their gallant and heroic valor
at the battle of Dead Angle.  No man distinguished himself above another.  All did their duty,
and the glory of one is but the glory and just tribute of the others.

After we had abandoned the line, and on coming to a little stream of water, I undressed for
the purpose of bathing, and after undressing found my arm all battered and bruised and bloodshot
from my wrist to my shoulder, and as sore as a blister.  I had shot one hundred and twenty
times that day.  My gun became so hot that frequently the powder would flash before I could
ram home the ball, and I had frequently to exchange my gun for that of a dead comrade.

Colonel H. R. Field was loading and shooting the same as any private in the ranks when he fell
off the skid from which he was shooting right over my shoulder, shot through the head.  I laid
him down in the trench, and he said, "Well, they have got me at last, but I have killed fifteen
of them; time about is fair play, I reckon."  But Colonel Field was not killed--only wounded,
and one side paralyzed.  Captain Joe P. Lee, Captain Mack Campbell, Lieutenant T. H. Maney,
and other officers of the regiment, threw rocks and beat them in their faces with sticks. 
The Yankees did the same.  The rocks came in upon us like a perfect hail storm, and the Yankees
seemed very obstinate, and in no hurry to get away from our front, and we had to keep up the
firing and shooting them down in self-defense.  They seemed to walk up and take death as coolly
as if they were automatic or wooden men, and our boys did not shoot for the fun of the thing.
It was, verily, a life and death grapple, and the least flicker on our part, would have been
sure death to all.  We could not be reinforced on account of our position, and we had to stand
up to the rack, fodder or no fodder.  When the Yankees fell back, and the firing ceased, I
never saw so many broken down and exhausted men in my life.  I was as sick as a horse, and
as wet with blood and sweat as I could be, and many of our men were vomiting with excessive
fatigue, over-exhaustion, and sunstroke; our tongues were parched and cracked for water, and
our faces blackened with powder and smoke, and our dead and wounded were piled indiscriminately
in the trenches.  There was not a single man in the company who was not wounded, or had holes
shot through his hat and clothing.  Captain Beasley was killed, and nearly all his company
killed and wounded.  The Rock City Guards were almost piled in heaps and so was our company.
Captain Joe P. Lee was badly wounded.  Poor Walter Hood and Jim Brandon were lying there among
us, while their spirits were in heaven; also, William A. Hughes, my old mess-mate and friend,
who had clerked with me for S. F. & J. M. Mayes, and who had slept with me for lo! these many
years, and a boy who loved me more than any other person on earth has ever done.  I had just
discharged the contents of my gun into the bosoms of two men, one right behind the other, killing
them both, and was re-loading, when a Yankee rushed upon me, having me at a disadvantage, and
said, "You have killed my two brothers, and now I've got you." Everything I had ever done rushed
through my mind.  I heard the roar, and felt the flash of fire, and saw my more than friend,
William A. Hughes, grab the muzzle of the gun, receiving the whole contents in his hand and
arm, and mortally wounding him.  Reader, he died for me. In saving my life, he lost his own.
When the infirmary corps carried him off, all mutilated and bleeding he told them to give me
"Florence Fleming" (that was the name of his gun, which he had put on it in silver letters),
and to give me his blanket and clothing.  He gave his life for me, and everything that he had.
It was the last time that I ever saw him, but I know that away up yonder, beyond the clouds,
blackness, tempest and night, and away above the blue vault of heaven, where the stars keep
their ceaseless vigils, away up yonder in the golden city of the New Jerusalem, where God and
Jesus Christ, our Savior, ever reign, we will sometime meet at the marriage supper of the Son
of God, who gave His life for the redemption of the whole world.

For several nights they made attacks upon our lines, but in every attempt, they were driven
back with great slaughter.  They would ignite the tape of bomb shells, and throw them over
in our lines, but, if the shell did not immediately explode, they were thrown back.  They had
a little shell called hand grenade, but they would either stop short of us, or go over our
heads, and were harmless.  General Joseph E. Johnston sent us a couple of chevaux-de-frise.
When they came, a detail of three men had to roll them over the works.  Those three men were
heroes.  Their names were Edmund Brandon, T. C. Dornin, and Arnold Zellner.  Although it was
a solemn occasion, every one of us was convulsed with laughter at the ridiculous appearance
and actions of the detail.  Every one of them made their wills and said their prayers truthfully
and honestly, before they undertook the task.  I laugh now every time I think of the ridiculous
appearance of the detail, but to them it was no laughing matter.  I will say that they were
men who feared not, nor faltered in their duty. They were men, and today deserve the thanks
of the people of the South. That night about midnight, an alarm was given that the Yankees
were advancing.  They would only have to run about twenty yards before they would be in our
works.  We were ordered to "shoot."  Every man was hallooing at the top of his voice, "Shoot,
shoot, tee, shoot, shootee." On the alarm, both the Confederate and Federal lines opened, with
both small arms and artillery, and it seemed that the very heavens and earth were in a grand
conflagration, as they will be at the final judgment, after the resurrection.  I have since
learned that this was a false alarm, and that no attack had been meditated.

Previous to the day of attack, the soldiers had cut down all the trees in our immediate front,
throwing the tops down hill and sharpening the limbs of the same, thus making, as we thought,
an impenetrable abattis of vines and limbs locked together; but nothing stopped or could stop
the advance of the Yankee line, but the hot shot and cold steel that we poured into their faces
from under our head-logs.

One of the most shameful and cowardly acts of Yankee treachery was committed there that I ever
remember to have seen.  A wounded Yankee was lying right outside of our works, and begging
most piteously for water, when a member of the railroad company (his name was Hog Johnson,
and the very man who stood videt with Theodore Sloan and I at the battle of Missionary Ridge,
and who killed the three Yankees, one night, from Fort Horsley), got a canteen of water, and
gave the dying Yankee a drink, and as he started back, he was killed dead in his tracks by
a treacherous Yankee hid behind a tree.  It matters not, for somewhere in God's Holy Word,
which cannot lie, He says that "He that giveth a cup of cold water in my name, shall not lose
his reward."  And I have no doubt, reader, in my own mind, that the poor fellow is reaping
his reward in Emanuel's land with the good and just.  In every instance where we tried to assist
their wounded, our men were killed or wounded.  A poor wounded and dying boy, not more than
sixteen years of age, asked permission to crawl over our works, and when he had crawled to
the top, and just as Blair Webster and I reached up to help the poor fellow, he, the Yankee,
was killed by his own men.  In fact, I have ever thought that is why the slaughter was so great
in our front, that nearly, if not as many, Yankees were killed by their own men as by us. 
The brave ones, who tried to storm and carry our works, were simply between two fires.  It
is a singular fanaticism, and curious fact, that enters the mind of a soldier, that it is a
grand and glorious death to die on a victorious battlefield.  One morning the Sixth and Ninth
Regiments came to our assistance--not to relieve us-- but only to assist us, and every member
of our regiment--First and Twenty-seventh--got as mad as a "wet hen."  They felt almost insulted,
and I believe we would soon have been in a free fight, had they not been ordered back.  As
soon as they came up every one of us began to say, "Go back! go back! we can hold this place,
and by the eternal God we are not going to leave it."  General Johnston came there to look
at the position, and told us that a transverse line was about one hundred yards in our rear,
and should they come on us too heavy to fall back to that line, when almost every one of us
said, "You go back and look at other lines, this place is safe, and can never be taken."  And
then when they had dug a tunnel under us to blow us up, we laughed, yea, even rejoiced, at
the fact of soon being blown sky high.  Yet, not a single man was willing to leave his post.
When old Joe sent us the two chevaux-de- frise, and kept on sending us water, and rations,
and whisky, and tobacco, and word to hold our line, we would invariably send word back to rest
easy, and that all is well at Dead Angle.  I have ever thought that is one reason why General
Johnston fell back from this Kennesaw line, and I will say today, in 1882, that while we appreciated
his sympathies and kindness toward us, yet we did not think hard of old Joe for having so little
confidence in us at that time.  A perfect hail of minnie balls was being continually poured
into our head-logs the whole time we remained here.  The Yankees would hold up small looking-glasses,
so that our strength and breastworks could be seen in the reflection in the glass; and they
also had small mirrors on the butts of their guns, so arranged that they could hight up the
barrels of their guns by looking through these glasses, while they themselves would not be
exposed to our fire, and they kept up this continual firing day and night, whether they could
see us or not.  Sometimes a glancing shot from our head-logs would wound some one.

But I cannot describe it as I would wish.  I would be pleased to mention the name of every
soldier, not only of Company H alone, but every man in the First and Twenty-seventh Tennessee
Consolidated Regiments on this occasion, but I cannot now remember their names, and will not
mention any one in particular, fearing to do injustice to some whom I might inadvertently omit.
Every man and every company did their duty.  Company G, commanded by Captain Mack Campbell,
stood side by side with us on this occasion, as they ever had during the whole war.  But soldiers
of the First and Twenty-seventh Regiments, it is with a feeling of pride and satisfaction to
me, today, that I was associated with so many noble and brave men, and who were subsequently
complimented by Jeff Davis, then President of the Confederate States of America, in person,
who said, "That every member of our regiment was fit to be a captain"--his very words.  I mention
Captain W. C. Flournoy, of Company K, the Martin Guards; Captain Ledbetter, of the Rutherford
Rifles; Captains Kelly and Steele, of the Rock City Guards, and Captain Adkisson, of the Williamson
Grays, and Captain Fulcher, and other names of brave and heroic men, some of whom live today,
but many have crossed the dark river and are "resting under the shade of the trees" on the
other shore, waiting and watching for us, who are left to do justice to their memory and our
cause, and when we old Rebels have accomplished God's purpose on earth, we, too, will be called
to give an account of our battles, struggles, and triumphs.

Reader mine, I fear that I have wearied you with too long a description of the battle of "Dead
Angle," if so, please pardon me, as this is but a sample of the others which will now follow
each other in rapid succession.  And, furthermore, in stating the above facts, the half has
not been told, but it will give you a faint idea of the hard battles and privations and hardships
of the soldiers in that stormy epoch--who died, grandly, gloriously, nobly; dyeing the soil
of old mother earth, and enriching the same with their crimson life's blood, while doing what?
Only trying to protect their homes and families, their property, their constitution and their
laws, that had been guaranteed to them as a heritage forever by their forefathers.  They died
for the faith that each state was a separate sovereign government, as laid down by the Declaration
of Independence and the Constitution of our fathers.

BATTLE OF NEW HOPE CHURCH

We were on a forced march along a dusty road.  I never in my whole life saw more dust.  The
dust fairly popped under our feet, like tramping in a snow-drift, and our eyes, and noses,
and mouths, were filled with the dust that arose from our footsteps, and to make matters worse,
the boys all tried to kick up a "bigger dust."  Cavalry and artillery could not be seen at
ten paces, being perfectly enveloped in dust.  It was a perfect fog of dust.  We were marching
along, it then being nearly dark, when we heard the hoarse boom of a cannon in our rear.  It
sounded as if it had a bad attack of croup.  It went, "Croup, croup, croup."  The order was
given to "about face, double quick, march."  We double quicked back to the old church on the
road side, when the First Tennessee Cavalry, commanded by Colonel Lewis, and the Ninth Battalion,
commanded by Major James H. Akin, passed us, and charged the advance of the Federal forces.
We were supporting the cavalry.  We heard them open.  Deadly missiles were flying in every
direction.  The peculiar thud of spent balls and balls with shucks tied to their tails were
passing over our heads. We were expecting that the cavalry would soon break, and that we would
be ordered into action.  But the news came from the front, that the cavalry were not only holding
their position, but were driving the enemy. The earth jarred and trembled; the fire fiend seemed
unchained; wounded men were coming from the front.  I asked the litter corps, "Who have you
there?"  And one answered, "Captain Asa G. Freeman."  I asked if he was dangerously wounded,
and he simply said, "Shot through both thighs," and passed on.  About this time we heard the
whoops and cheers of the cavalry, and knew that the Yankees were whipped and falling back.
We marched forward and occupied the place held by the cavalry.  The trees looked as if they
had been cut down for new ground, being mutilated and shivered by musket and cannon balls.
Horses were writhing in their death agony, and the sickening odor of battle filled the air.
Well, well, those who go to battle may expect to die.  An halo ever surrounds the soldier's
life, because he is ever willing to die for his country.

BATTLE OF DALLAS--BRECKINRIDGE CHARGES THE HEIGHTS

We are ordered to march to Dallas.

Reader, somehow the name and character of General John C. Breckinridge charms me.  That morning
he looked grand and glorious.  His infantry, artillery, and cavalry were drawn up in line of
battle in our immediate front.  He passed along the line, and stopping about the center of
the column, said, "Soldiers, we have been selected to go forward and capture yon heights. 
Do you think we can take them?  I will lead the attack." The men whooped, and the cry, "We
can, we can," was heard from one end of the line to the other.  Then, "Forward, guide center,
march!" were words re-repeated by colonels and captains.  They debouched through the woods,
and passed out of sight in a little ravine, when we saw them emerge in an open field and advance
right upon the Federal breastworks.  It was the grandest spectacle I ever witnessed.  We could
see the smoke and dust of battle, and hear the shout of the charge, and the roar and rattle
of cannon and musketry.  But Breckinridge's division continued to press forward, without wavering
or hesitating.  We can see the line of dead and wounded along the track over which he passed,
and finally we see our battle flag planted upon the Federal breastworks.  I cannot describe
the scene.  If you, reader, are an old soldier, you can appreciate my failure to give a pen
picture of battle.  But Breckinridge could not long hold his position.  Why we were not ordered
forward to follow up his success, I do not know; but remember, reader, I am not writing history.
I try only to describe events as I witnessed them.

We marched back to the old church on the roadside, called New Hope church, and fortified, occupying
the battlefield of the day before.  The stench and sickening odor of dead men and horses were
terrible.  We had to breathe the putrid atmosphere.

The next day, Colonel W. M. Voorhies' Forty-eighth Tennessee Regiment took position on our
right.  Now, here were all the Maury county boys got together at New Hope church.  I ate dinner
with Captain Joe Love, and Frank Frierson filled my haversack with hardtack and bacon.

BATTLE OF ZION CHURCH, JULY 4TH, 1864

The 4th day of July, twelve months before, Pemberton had surrendered twenty-five thousand soldiers,
two hundred pieces of artillery, and other munitions of war in proportion, at Vicksburg.  The
Yankees wanted to celebrate the day.  They thought it was their lucky day; but old Joe thought
he had as much right to celebrate the Sabbath day of American Independence as the Yankees had,
and we celebrated it.  About dawn, continued boom of cannon reverberated over the hills as
if firing a Fourth of July salute.  I was standing on top of our works, leveling them off with
a spade.  A sharpshooter fired at me, but the ball missed me and shot William A. Graham through
the heart.  He was as noble and brave a soldier as ever drew the breath of life, and lacked
but a few votes of being elected captain of Company H, at the reorganization.  He was smoking
his pipe when he was shot.  We started to carry him to the rear, but he remarked, "Boys, it
is useless; please lay me down and let me die." I have never in my life seen any one meet death
more philosophically. He was dead in a moment.  General A. J. Vaughan, commanding General Preston
Smith's brigade, had his foot shot off by a cannon ball a few minutes afterwards.

It seemed that both Confederate and Federal armies were celebrating the Fourth of July.  I
cannot now remember a more severe artillery duel. Two hundred cannon were roaring and belching
like blue blazes.  It was but a battle of cannonade all day long.  It seemed as though the
Confederate and Federal cannons were talking to each other.  Sometimes a ball passing over
would seem to be mad, then again some would seem to be laughing, some would be mild, some sad,
some gay, some sorrowful, some rollicking and jolly; and then again some would scream like
the ghosts of the dead.  In fact, they gave forth every kind of sound that you could imagine.
It reminded one of when two storms meet in mid-ocean--the mountain billows of waters coming
from two directions, lash against the vessel's side, while the elements are filled with roaring,
thundering and lightning.  You could almost feel the earth roll and rock like a drunken man,
or a ship, when she rides the billows in an awful storm.  It seemed that the earth was frequently
moved from its foundations, and you could hear it grate as it moved.  But all through that
storm of battle, every soldier stood firm, for we knew that old Joe was at the helm.

KINGSTON

Here General Johnston issued his first battle order, that thus far he had gone and intended
to go no further.  His line of battle was formed; his skirmish line was engaged; the artillery
was booming from the Rebel lines.  Both sides were now face to face.  There were no earthworks
on either side.  It was to be an open field and a fair fight, when--"Fall back!"  What's the
matter?  I do not know how we got the news, but here is what is told us--and so it was, every
position we ever took.  When we fell back the news would be, "Hood's line is being enfiladed,
and they are decimating his men, and he can't hold his position."  But we fell back and took
a position at

CASSVILLE

Our line of battle was formed at Cassville.  I never saw our troops happier or more certain
of success.  A sort of grand halo illumined every soldier's face.  You could see self-confidence
in the features of every private soldier.  We were confident of victory and success.  It was
like going to a frolic or a wedding.  Joy was welling up in every heart. We were going to whip
and rout the Yankees.  It seemed to be anything else than a fight.  The soldiers were jubilant.
Gladness was depicted on every countenance.  I honestly believe that had a battle been fought
at this place, every soldier would have distinguished himself.  I believe a sort of fanaticism
had entered their souls, that whoever was killed would at once be carried to the seventh heaven.
I am sure of one thing, that every soldier had faith enough in old Joe to have charged Sherman's
whole army.  When "Halt!"  "Retreat!"  What is the matter?  General Hood says they are enfilading
his line, and are decimating his men, and he can't hold his position.

The same old story repeats itself.  Old Joe's army is ever face to face with Sherman's incendiaries.
We have faith in old Joe's ability to meet Sherman whenever he dares to attack.  The soldiers
draw their regular rations.  Every time a blue coat comes in sight, there is a dead Yankee
to bury.  Sherman is getting cautious, his army hacked.  Thus we continue to fall back for
four months, day by day, for one hundred and ten days, fighting every day and night.

ON THE BANKS OF THE CHATTAHOOCHEE

Our army had crossed the Chattahoochee.  The Federal army was on the other side; our pickets
on the south side, the Yankees on the north side. By a tacit agreement, as had ever been the
custom, there was no firing across the stream.  That was considered the boundary.  It mattered
not how large or small the stream, pickets rarely fired at each other. We would stand on each
bank, and laugh and talk and brag across the stream.

One day, while standing on the banks of the Chattahoochee, a Yankee called out:

"Johnny, O, Johnny, O, Johnny Reb."

Johnny answered, "What do you want?"

"You are whipped, aren't you?"

"No. The man who says that is a liar, a scoundrel, and a coward."

"Well, anyhow, Joe Johnston is relieved of the command."

"What?"

"General Joseph E. Johnston is relieved."

"What is that you say?"

"General Joseph E. Johnston is relieved, and Hood appointed in his place."

"You are a liar, and if you will come out and show yourself I will shoot you down in your tracks,
you lying Yankee galloot."

"That's more than I will stand.  If the others will hands off, I will fight a duel with you.
Now, show your manhood."

Well, reader, every word of this is true, as is everything in this book. Both men loaded their
guns and stepped out to their plates.  They were both to load and fire at will, until one or
both were killed.  They took their positions without either trying to get the advantage of
the other. Then some one gave the command to "Fire at will; commence firing." They fired seven
shots each; at the seventh shot, poor Johnny Reb fell a corpse, pierced through the heart.

REMOVAL OF GENERAL JOSEPH E. JOHNSTON

Such was the fact.  General Joseph E. Johnston had been removed and General J. B. Hood appointed
to take command.  Generals Hardee and Kirby Smith, two old veterans, who had been identified
with the Army of Tennessee from the beginning, resigned.  We had received the intelligence
from the Yankees.

The relief guard confirmed the report.

All the way from Rocky Face Ridge to Atlanta was a battle of a hundred days, yet Hood's line
was all the time enfiladed and his men decimated, and he could not hold his position.  Old
Joe Johnston had taken command of the Army of Tennessee when it was crushed and broken, at
a time when no other man on earth could have united it.  He found it in rags and tatters, hungry
and heart-broken, the morale of the men gone, their manhood vanished to the winds, their pride
a thing of the past.  Through his instrumentality and skillful manipulation, all these had
been restored.  We had been under his command nearly twelve months.  He was more popular with
his troops day by day.  We had made a long and arduous campaign, lasting four months; there
was not a single day in that four months that did not find us engaged in battle with the enemy.
History does not record a single instance of where one of his lines was ever broken--not a
single rout.  He had not lost a single piece of artillery; he had dealt the enemy heavy blows;
he was whipping them day by day, yet keeping his own men intact; his men were in as good spirits
and as sure of victory at the end of four months as they were at the beginning; instead of
the army being depleted, it had grown in strength.  'Tis true, he had fallen back, but it was
to give his enemy the heavier blows. He brought all the powers of his army into play; ever
on the defensive, 'tis true, yet ever striking his enemy in his most vulnerable part. His face
was always to the foe.  They could make no movement in which they were not anticipated.  Such
a man was Joseph E. Johnston, and such his record.  Farewell, old fellow!  We privates loved
you because you made us love ourselves.  Hardee, our old corps commander, whom we had followed
for nearly four years, and whom we had loved and respected from the beginning, has left us.
Kirby Smith has resigned and gone home. The spirit of our good and honored Leonidas Polk is
in heaven, and his body lies yonder on the Kennesaw line.  General Breckinridge and other generals
resigned.  I lay down my pen; I can write no more; my heart is too full.  Reader, this is the
saddest chapter I ever wrote.

But now, after twenty years, I can see where General Joseph E. Johnston made many blunders
in not attacking Sherman's line at some point. He was better on the defensive than the aggressive,
and hence, bis peccare in bello non licet.

GENERAL HOOD TAKES COMMAND

It came like a flash of lightning, staggering and blinding every one. It was like applying
a lighted match to an immense magazine.  It was like the successful gambler, flushed with continual
winnings, who staked his all and lost.  It was like the end of the Southern Confederacy.  Things
that were, were not.  It was the end.  The soldier of the relief guard who brought us the news
while picketing on the banks of the Chattahoochee, remarked, by way of imparting gently the
information--

"Boys, we've fought all the war for nothing.  There is nothing for us in store now."

"What's the matter now?"

"General Joe Johnston is relieved, Generals Hardee and Kirby Smith has resigned, and General
Hood is appointed to take command of the Army of Tennessee."

"My God! is that so?"

"It is certainly a fact."

"Then I'll never fire another gun.  Any news or letters that you wish carried home?  I've quit,
and am going home.  Please tender my resignation to Jeff Davis as a private soldier in the
C. S. Army."

Five men of that picket--there were just five--as rapidly as they could, took off their cartridge-boxes,
after throwing down their guns, and then their canteens and haversacks, taking out of their
pockets their gun-wipers, wrench and gun-stoppers, and saying they would have no more use for
"them things."  They marched off, and it was the last we ever saw of them.  In ten minutes
they were across the river, and no doubt had taken the oath of allegiance to the United States
government.  Such was the sentiment of the Army of Tennessee at that time.

CHAPTER XIII

ATLANTA

HOOD STRIKES

General John B. Hood had the reputation of being a fighting man, and wishing to show Jeff Davis
what a "bully" fighter he was, lights in on the Yankees on Peachtree creek.  But that was "I
give a dare" affair. General William B. Bate's division gained their works, but did not long
hold them.

Our division, now commanded by General John C. Brown, was supporting Bate's division; our regiment
supporting the Hundred and Fifty-fourth Tennessee, which was pretty badly cut to pieces, and
I remember how mad they seemed to be, because they had to fall back.

Hood thought he would strike while the iron was hot, and while it could be hammered into shape,
and make the Yankees believe that it was the powerful arm of old Joe that was wielding the sledge.

But he was like the fellow who took a piece of iron to the shop, intending to make him an ax.
After working for some time and failing, he concluded he would make him a wedge, and, failing
in this, said, "I'll make a skeow."  So he heats the iron red-hot and drops it into the slack-tub,
and it went s-k-e-o-w, bubble, bubble, s-k-e-o-w, bust.

KILLING A YANKEE SCOUT

On the night of the 20th, the Yankees were on Peachtree creek, advancing toward Atlanta.  I
was a videt that night, on the outpost of the army. I could plainly hear the moving of their
army, even the talking and laughing of the Federal soldiers.  I was standing in an old sedge
field. About midnight everything quieted down.  I was alone in the darkness, left to watch
while the army slept.  The pale moon was on the wane, a little yellow arc, emitting but a dim
light, and the clouds were lazily passing over it, while the stars seemed trying to wink and
sparkle and make night beautiful.  I thought of God, of heaven, of home, and I thought of Jennie--her
whom I had ever loved, and who had given me her troth in all of her maiden purity, to be my
darling bride so soon as the war was over.  I thought of the scenes of my childhood, my school-boy
days.  I thought of the time when I left peace and home, for war and privations.  I had Jennie's
picture in my pocket Bible, alongside of a braid of her beautiful hair.  And I thought of how
good, how pure, and how beautiful was the woman, who, if I lived, would share my hopes and
struggles, my happiness as well as troubles, and who would be my darling bride, and happiness
would ever be mine.  An owl had lit on an old tree near me and began to "hoo, hoo, hoo are
you," and his mate would answer back from the lugubrious depths of the Chattahoochee swamps.
A shivering owl also sat on the limb of a tree and kept up its dismal wailings.  And ever now
and then I could hear the tingle, tingle, tingle of a cow bell in the distance, and the shrill
cry of the whip-poor-will. The shivering owl and whip-poor-will seemed to be in a sort of talk,
and the jack-o'-lanterns seemed to be playing spirits--when, hush! what is that? listen!  It
might have been two o'clock, and I saw, or thought I saw, the dim outlines of a Yankee soldier,
lying on the ground not more than ten steps from where I stood.  I tried to imagine it was
a stump or hallucination of the imagination.  I looked at it again.  The more I looked the
more it assumed the outlines of a man.  Something glistens in his eyes.  Am I mistaken?  Tut,
tut, it's nothing but a stump; you are getting demoralized.  What! it seems to be getting closer.
There are two tiny specks that shine like the eyes of a cat in the dark.  Look here, thought
I, you are getting nervous.  Well, I can stand this doubt and agony no longer; I am going to
fire at that object anyhow, let come what will.  I raised my gun, placed it to my shoulder,
took deliberate aim, and fired, and waugh-weouw, the most unearthly scream I ever heard, greeted
my ears.  I broke and run to a tree nearby, and had just squatted behind it, when zip, zip,
two balls from our picket post struck the tree in two inches of my head.  I hallooed to our
picket not to fire that it was "me," the videt.  I went back, and says I, "Who fired those
two shots?"  Two fellows spoke up and said that they did it.  No sooner was it spoken, than
I was on them like a duck on a june-bug, pugnis et calcibus.  We "fout and fit, and gouged
and bit," right there in that picket post.  I have the marks on my face and forehead where
one of them struck me with a Yankee zinc canteen, filled with water.  I do not know which whipped.
My friends told me that I whipped both of them, and I suppose their friends told them that
they had whipped me.  All I know is, they both run, and I was bloody from head to foot, from
where I had been cut in the forehead and face by the canteens.  This all happened one dark
night in the month of July, 1864, in the rifle pit in front of Atlanta. When day broke the
next morning, I went forward to where I had shot at the "boogaboo" of the night before, and
right there I found a dead Yankee soldier, fully accoutered for any emergency, his eyes wide
open.  I looked at him, and I said, "Old fellow, I am sorry for you; didn't know it was you,
or I would have been worse scared than I was.  You are dressed mighty fine, old fellow, but
I don't want anything you have got, but your haversack."  It was a nice haversack, made of
chamois skin. I kept it until the end of the war, and when we surrendered at Greensboro, N.
C., I had it on.  But the other soldiers who were with me, went through him and found twelve
dollars in greenback, a piece of tobacco, a gun-wiper and gun-stopper and wrench, a looking-glass
and pocket-comb, and various and sundry other articles.  I came across that dead Yankee two
days afterwards, and he was as naked as the day he came into the world, and was as black as
a negro, and was as big as a skinned horse. He had mortified.  I recollect of saying, "Ugh,
ugh," and of my hat being lifted off my head, by my hair, which stood up like the quills of
the fretful porcupine.  He scared me worse when dead than when living.

AN OLD CITIZEN

But after the little unpleasant episode in the rifle pit, I went back and took my stand.  When
nearly day, I saw the bright and beautiful star in the east rise above the tree tops, and the
gray fog from off the river begun to rise, and every now and then could hear a far off chicken
crow.

While I was looking toward the Yankee line, I saw a man riding leisurely along on horseback,
and singing a sort of humdrum tune.  I took him to be some old citizen.  He rode on down the
road toward me, and when he had approached, "Who goes there?"  He immediately answered, "A
friend." I thought that I recognized the voice in the darkness--and said I, "Who are you?"
He spoke up, and gave me his name.  Then, said I, "Advance, friend, but you are my prisoner."
He rode on toward me, and I soon saw that it was Mr. Mumford Smith, the old sheriff of Maury
county.  I was very glad to see him, and as soon as the relief guard came, I went back to camp
with him.  I do not remember of ever in my life being more glad to see any person.  He had
brought a letter from home, from my father, and some Confederate old issue bonds, which I was
mighty glad to get, and also a letter from "the gal I left behind me," enclosing a rosebud
and two apple blossoms, resting on an arbor vita leaf, and this on a little piece of white
paper, and on this was written a motto (which I will have to tell for the young folks), "Receive
me, such as I am; would that I were of more use for your sake.  Jennie."  Now, that was the
bouquet part.  I would not like to tell you what was in that letter, but I read that letter
over five hundred times, and remember it today. I think I can repeat the poetry verbatim et
literatim, and will do so, gentle reader, if you don't laugh at me.  I'm married now, and only
write from memory, and never in my life have I read it in book or paper, and only in that letter--

    "I love you, O, how dearly,
       Words too faintly but express;
     This heart beats too sincerely,
       E'er in life to love you less;
     No, my fancy never ranges,
       Hopes like mine, can never soar;
     If the love I cherish, changes,
       'Twill only be to love you more."

Now, fair and gentle reader, this was the poetry, and you see for yourself that there was no
"shenanigan" in that letter; and if a fellow "went back" on that sort of a letter, he would
strike his "mammy." And then the letter wound up with "May God shield and protect you, and
prepare you for whatever is in store for you, is the sincere prayer of Jennie."  You may be
sure that I felt good and happy, indeed.

MY FRIENDS

Reader mine, in writing these rapid and imperfect recollections, I find that should I attempt
to write up all the details that I would not only weary you, but that these memoirs would soon
become monotonous and uninteresting.  I have written only of what I saw.  Many little acts
of kindness shown me by ladies and old citizens, I have omitted.  I remember going to an old
citizen's house, and he and the old lady were making clay pipes.  I recollect how they would
mold the pipes and put them in a red-hot stove to burn hard.  Their kindness to me will never
be forgotten.  The first time that I went there they seemed very glad to see me, and told me
that I looked exactly like their son who was in the army. I asked them what regiment he belonged
to.  After a moment's silence the old lady, her voice trembling as she spoke, said the Fourteenth
Georgia, and then she began to cry.  Then the old man said, "Yes, we have a son in the army.
He went to Virginia the first year of the war, and we have never heard of him since.  These
wars are terrible, sir.  The last time that we heard of him, he went with Stonewall Jackson
away up in the mountains of West Virginia, toward Romney, and I did hear that while standing
picket at a little place called Hampshire Crossing, on a little stream called St. John's Run,
he and eleven others froze to death. We have never heard of him since."  He got up and began
walking up and down the room, his hands crossed behind his back.  I buckled on my knapsack
to go back to camp, and I shook hands with the two good old people, and they told me good-bye,
and both said, "God bless you, God bless you."  I said the same to them, and said, "I pray
God to reward you, and bring your son safe home again."  When I got back to camp I found cannon
and caissons moving, and I knew and felt that General Hood was going to strike the enemy again.
Preparations were going on, but everything seemed to be out of order and system.  Men were
cursing, and seemed to be dissatisfied and unhappy, but the army was moving.

A BODY WITHOUT LIMBS--AN ARMY WITHOUT CAVALRY

Forrest's cavalry had been sent to Mississippi; Wheeler's cavalry had been sent to North Carolina
and East Tennessee.  Hood had sent off both of his "arms"--for cavalry was always called the
most powerful "arm" of the service.  The infantry were the feet, and the artillery the body.
Now, Hood himself had no legs, and but one arm, and that one in a sling. The most terrible
and disastrous blow that the South ever received was when Hon. Jefferson Davis placed General
Hood in command of the Army of Tennessee.  I saw, I will say, thousands of men cry like babies--regular,
old-fashioned boohoo, boohoo, boohoo.

Now, Hood sent off all his cavalry right in the face of a powerful army, by order and at the
suggestion of Jeff Davis, and was using his cannon as "feelers."  O, God!  Ye gods!  I get
sick at heart even at this late day when I think of it.

I remember the morning that General Wheeler's cavalry filed by our brigade, and of their telling
us, "Good-bye, boys, good-bye, boys." The First Tennessee Cavalry and Ninth Battalion were
both made up in Maury county.  I saw John J. Stephenson, my friend and step-brother, and David
F. Watkins my own dear brother, and Arch Lipscomb, Joe Fussell, Captain Kinzer, Jack Gordon,
George Martin, Major Dobbins, Colonel Lewis, Captain Galloway, Aaron and Sims Latta, Major
J. H. Akin, S. H. Armstrong, Albert Dobbins, Alex Dobbins, Jim Cochran, Rafe Grisham, Captain
Jim Polk, and many others with whom I was acquainted.  They all said, "Good-bye, Sam, good-bye,
Sam."  I cried.  I remember stopping the whole command and begging them to please not leave
us; that if they did, Atlanta, and perhaps Hood's whole army, would surrender in a few days;
but they told me, as near as I can now remember, "We regret to leave you, but we have to obey
orders."  The most ignorant private in the whole army saw everything that we had been fighting
for for four years just scattered like chaff to the winds.  All the Generals resigned, and
those who did not resign were promoted; colonels were made brigadier-generals, captains were
made colonels, and the private soldier, well, he deserted, don't you see?  The private soldiers
of the Army of Tennessee looked upon Hood as an over-rated general, but Jeff Davis did not.

BATTLE OF JULY 22, 1864

Cannon balls, at long range, were falling into the city of Atlanta. Details of citizens put
out the fires as they would occur from the burning shells.  We could see the smoke rise and
hear the shells pass away over our heads as they went on toward the doomed city.

One morning Cheatham's corps marched out and through the city, we knew not whither, but we
soon learned that we were going to make a flank movement.  After marching four or five miles,
we "about faced" and marched back again to within two hundred yards of the place from whence
we started.  It was a "flank movement," you see, and had to be counted that way anyhow.  Well,
now as we had made the flank movement, we had to storm and take the Federal lines, because
we had made a flank movement, you see.  When one army makes a flank movement it is courtesy
on the part of the other army to recognize the flank movement, and to change his base.  Why,
sir, if you don't recognize a flank movement, you ain't a graduate of West Point.  Hood was
a graduate of West Point, and so was Sherman.  But unfortunately there was Mynheer Dutchman
commanding (McPherson had gone to dinner) the corps that had been flanked, and he couldn't
speak English worth a cent.  He, no doubt, had on board mein lager beer, so goot as vat never
vas.  I sweitzer, mein Got, you bet. Bang, bang, bang, goes our skirmish line advancing to
the attack. Hans, vat fer ish dot shooting mit mein left wing?  Ish dot der Repels, Hans?

THE ATTACK

The plan of battle, as conceived and put into action by General Cleburne, was one of the boldest
conceptions, and, at the same time, one of the most hazardous that ever occurred in our army
during the war, but it only required nerve and pluck to carry it out, and General Cleburne
was equal to the occasion.  The Yankees had fortified on two ranges of hills, leaving a gap
in their breastworks in the valley entirely unfortified and unprotected.  They felt that they
could enfilade the valley between the two lines so that no troop would or could attack at this
weak point. This valley was covered with a dense undergrowth of trees and bushes. General Walker,
of Georgia, was ordered to attack on the extreme right, which he did nobly and gallantly, giving
his life for his country while leading his men, charging their breastworks.  He was killed
on the very top of their works.  In the meantime General Cleburne's division was marching by
the right flank in solid column, the same as if they were marching along the road, right up
this valley, and thus passing between the Yankee lines and cutting them in two, when the command
by the left flank was given, which would throw them into line of battle.  By this maneuver,
Cleburne's men were right upon their flank, and enfilading their lines, while they were expecting
an attack in their front.  It was the finest piece of generalship and the most successful of
the war.

Shineral Mynheer Dutchman says, "Hans, mein Got! mein Got! vare ish Shineral Mackferson, eh?
Mein Got, mein Got!  I shust pelieve dot der Repel ish cooming.  Hans, go cotch der filly colt.
Now, Hans, I vants to see vedder der filly colt mid stand fire.  You get on der filly colt,
und I vill get pehind der house, und ven you shust coome galloping py, I vill say 'B-o-o-h,'
und if der filly colt don't shump, den I vill know dot der filly colt mid stand fire."  Hans
says, "Pap, being as you have to ride her in the battle, you get on her, and let me say booh."
Well, Shineral Mynheer gets on the colt, and Hans gets behind the house, and as the general
comes galloping by, Hans had got an umbrella, and on seeing his father approach, suddenly opens
the umbrella, and hallowing at the top of his voice b-o-o-h! b-o-o-h! B-O-O-H!  The filly makes
a sudden jump and ker-flop comes down Mynheer.  He jumps up and says, "Hans, I alvays knowed
dot you vas a vool.  You make too pig a booh; vy, you said booh loud enuff to scare der ole
horse.  Hans, go pring out der ole horse.  Der tam Repel vill be here pefore Mackferson gits
pack from der dinner time.  I shust peleve dot der Repel ish flanking, und dem tam fool curnells
of mein ish not got sense enuff to know ven Sheneral Hood is flanking.  Hans, bring out der
old horse, I vant to find out vedder Mackferson ish got pack from der dinner time or not."

We were supporting General Cleburne's division.  Our division (Cheatham's) was commanded by
General John C. Brown.  Cleburne's division advanced to the attack.  I was marching by the
side of a soldier by the name of James Galbreath, and a conscript from the Mt. Pleasant country.
I never heard a man pray and "go on" so before in my life.  It actually made me feel sorry
for the poor fellow.  Every time that our line would stop for a few minutes, he would get down
on his knees and clasp his hands and commence praying.  He kept saying, "O, my poor wife and
children!  God have mercy on my poor wife and children!  God pity me and have mercy on my soul!"
Says I, "Galbreath, what are you making a fool of yourself that way for? If you are going to
be killed, why you are as ready now as you ever will be, and you are making everybody feel
bad; quit that nonsense."  He quit, but kept mumbling to himself, "God have mercy!  God have
mercy!" Cleburne had reached the Yankee breastworks; the firing had been and was then terrific.
The earth jarred, and shook, and trembled, at the shock of battle as the two armies met.  Charge
men!  And I saw the Confederate flag side by side with the Federal flag.  A courier dashed
up and said, "General Cleburne has captured their works--advance and attack upon his immediate
left.  Attention, forward!"  A discharge of cannon, and a ball tore through our ranks.  I heard
Galbreath yell out, "O, God, have mercy on my poor soul."  The ball had cut his body nearly
in two.  Poor fellow, he had gone to his reward.

We advanced to the attack on Cleburne's immediate left.  Cleburne himself was leading us in
person, so that we would not fire upon his men, who were then inside the Yankee line.  His
sword was drawn.  I heard him say, "Follow me, boys."  He ran forward, and amid the blazing
fires of the Yankee guns was soon on top of the enemy's works.  He had on a bob-tail Confederate
coat, which looked as if it had been cut out of a scrimp pattern.  (You see I remember the
little things).  We were but a few paces behind, following close upon him, and soon had captured
their line of works.  We were firing at the flying foe--astraddle of their lines of battle.
This would naturally throw us in front, and Cleburne's corps supporting us.  The Yankee lines
seemed routed.  We followed in hot pursuit; but from their main line of entrenchment--which
was diagonal to those that we had just captured, and also on which they had built forts and
erected batteries--was their artillery, raking us fore and aft. We passed over a hill and down
into a valley being under the muzzles of this rampart of death.  We had been charging and running,
and had stopped to catch our breath right under their reserve and main line of battle. When
General George Maney said, "Soldiers, you are ordered to go forward and charge that battery.
When you start upon the charge I want you to go, as it were, upon the wings of the wind.  Shoot
down and bayonet the cannoneers, and take their guns at all hazards."  Old Pat Cleburne thought
he had better put in a word to his soldiers.  He says, "You hear what General Maney says, boys.
If they don't take it, by the eternal God, you have got to take it!"  I heard an Irishman of
the "bloody Tinth," and a "darn good regiment, be jabbers," speak up, and say, "Faith, gineral,
we'll take up a collection and buy you a batthery, be Jasus." About this time our regiment
had re-formed, and had got their breath, and the order was given to charge, and take their
guns even at the point of the bayonet.  We rushed forward up the steep hill sides, the seething
fires from ten thousand muskets and small arms, and forty pieces of cannon hurled right into
our very faces, scorching and burning our clothes, and hands, and faces from their rapid discharges,
and piling the ground with our dead and wounded almost in heaps.  It seemed that the hot flames
of hell were turned loose in all their fury, while the demons of damnation were laughing in
the flames, like seething serpents hissing out their rage.  We gave one long, loud cheer, and
commenced the charge. As we approached their lines, like a mighty inundation of the river Acheron
in the infernal regions, Confederate and Federal meet.  Officers with drawn swords meet officers
with drawn swords, and man to man meets man to man with bayonets and loaded guns.  The continued
roar of battle sounded like unbottled thunder.  Blood covered the ground, and the dense smoke
filled our eyes, and ears, and faces.  The groans of the wounded and dying rose above the thunder
of battle.  But being heavily supported by Cleburne's division, and by General L. E. Polk's
brigade, headed and led by General Cleburne in person, and followed by the First and Twenty-seventh
up the blazing crest, the Federal lines waver, and break and fly, leaving us in possession
of their breastworks, and the battlefield, and I do not know how many pieces of artillery,
prisoners and small arms.

Here is where Major Allen, Lieutenant Joe Carney, Captain Joe Carthell, and many other good
and brave spirits gave their lives for the cause of their country.  They lie today, weltering
in their own life's blood. It was one of the bloody battles that characterized that stormy
epoch, and it was the 22nd of July, and one of the hottest days I ever felt.

General George Maney led us in the heat of battle, and no general of the war acted with more
gallantry and bravery during the whole war than did General George Maney on this occasion.

The victory was complete.  Large quantities of provisions and army stores were captured.  The
Federals had abandoned their entire line of breastworks, and had changed their base.  They
were fortifying upon our left, about five miles off from their original position.  The battlefield
was covered with their dead and wounded soldiers.  I have never seen so many battle-flags left
indiscriminately upon any battlefield.  I ran over twenty in the charge, and could have picked
them up everywhere; did pick up one, and was promoted to fourth corporal for gallantry in picking
up a flag on the battlefield.

On the final charge that was made, I was shot in the ankle and heel of my foot.  I crawled
into their abandoned ditch, which then seemed full and running over with our wounded soldiers.
I dodged behind the embankment to get out of the raking fire that was ripping through the bushes,
and tearing up the ground.  Here I felt safe.  The firing raged in front; we could hear the
shout of the charge and the clash of battle.  While I was sitting here, a cannon ball came
tearing down the works, cutting a soldier's head off, spattering his brains all over my face
and bosom, and mangling and tearing four or five others to shreds.  As a wounded horse was
being led off, a cannon ball struck him, and he was literally ripped open, falling in the very
place I had just moved from.

I saw an ambulance coming from toward the Yankee line, at full gallop, saw them stop at a certain
place, hastily put a dead man in the ambulance, and gallop back toward the Yankee lines.  I
did not know the meaning of this maneuver until after the battle, when I learned that it was
General McPherson's dead body.

We had lost many a good and noble soldier.  The casualties on our side were frightful.  Generals,
colonels, captains, lieutenants, sergeants, corporals and privates were piled indiscriminately
everywhere.  Cannon, caissons, and dead horses were piled pell-mell.  It was the picture of
a real battlefield.  Blood had gathered in pools, and in some instances had made streams of
blood.  'Twas a picture of carnage and death.

AM PROMOTED

"Why, hello, corporal, where did you get those two yellow stripes from on your arm?"

"Why, sir, I have been promoted for gallantry on the battlefield, by picking up an orphan flag,
that had been run over by a thousand fellows, and when I picked it up I did so because I thought
it was pretty, and I wanted to have me a shirt made out of it." 

[A fragmentary essay in up-to-date criticism of any modern Exhibition--the
R. A. excluded.]

In the Central Hall the Reduplicated Præteritists,
the Tangentialists and the Paraphrasts are all well represented.

Mr. Orguly Bolp's large painting, entitled "Embrocation," is an interesting
experiment in the handling of aplanatic surfaces, in which the toxic
determinants are harmonized by a sort of plastic meiosis with syncopated
rhythms.

His other large picture, "Interior of a Dumbbell by Night," has the same basic idea without the appearance
of it, and gives a very vital sense of the elimination of noumenal perceptivity. M. Paparrigopoulo,
the Greek Paraphrast, calls one of his pictures "The Antecedent," another "The Relative," and a
third "The Correlative," but though they are thus united syntactically each follows its own reticulation
to a logical conclusion, and carries with it a spiritual sanction, not always coherent perhaps,
but none the less satisfying. Miss Felicity Quackenboss's portrait of Saint Vitus is perhaps
the most arresting contribution to the exhibition, and portrays the Saint intoxicated with the
exuberance of his own agility. It is a very carnival of contortion. Mr. Widgery Pimble transcribes
very searchingly the post-prandial lethargy of a boa-constrictor, the process of deglutition
being indicated with great dignity and delicacy, as might be expected from so austere a realist.
  But our troops continued fortifying Atlanta.  No other battles
were ever fought at this place.

I VISIT MONTGOMERY

Our wounded were being sent back to Montgomery.  My name was put on the wounded list.  We were
placed in a box-car, and whirling down to West Point, where we changed cars for Montgomery.
The cars drew up at the depot at Montgomery, and we were directed to go to the hospital.  When
we got off the cars, little huckster stands were everywhere--apples, oranges, peaches, watermelons,
everything.  I know that I never saw a greater display of eatables in my whole life.  I was
particularly attracted toward an old lady's stand; she had bread, fish, and hard boiled eggs.
The eggs were what I was hungry for.  Says I:

"Madam, how do you sell your eggs?"

"Two for a dollar," she said.

"How much is your fish worth?"

"A piece of bread and a piece of fish for a dollar."

"Well, madam, put out your fish and eggs."  The fish were hot and done to a crisp--actually
frying in my mouth, crackling and singing as I bit off a bite.  It was good, I tell you.  The
eggs were a little over half done. I soon demolished both, and it was only an appetizer.  I
invested a couple of dollars more, and thought that maybe I could make out till supper time.
As I turned around, a smiling, one-legged man asked me if I wouldn't like to have a drink.
Now, if there was anything that I wanted at that time, it was a drink.

"How do you sell it?" says I.

"A dollar a drink," said he.

"Pour me out a drink."

It was a tin cap-box.  I thought that I knew the old fellow, and he kept looking at me as if
he knew me.  Finally, he said to me:

"It seems that I ought to know you."

I told him that I reckon he did, as I had been there.

"Ain't your name Sam?" said he.

"That is what my mother called me."

Well, after shaking hands, it suddenly flashed upon me who the old fellow was.  I knew him
well.  He told me that he belonged to Captain Ed. O'Neil's company, Second Tennessee Regiment,
General William B. Bate's corps, and that his leg had been shot off at the first battle of
Manassas, and at that time he was selling cheap whisky and tobacco for a living at Montgomery,
Alabama.  I tossed off a cap-box full and paid him a dollar.  It staggered me, and I said:

"That is raw whisky."

"Yes," said he, "all my cooked whisky is out."

"If this is not quite cooked, it is as hot as fire anyhow, and burns like red-hot lava, and
the whole dose seems to have got lodged in my windpipe."

I might have tasted it, but don't think that I did.  All I can remember now, is a dim recollection
of a nasty, greasy, burning something going down my throat and chest, and smelling, as I remember
at this day, like a decoction of red-pepper tea, flavored with coal oil, turpentine and tobacco
juice.

THE HOSPITAL

I went to the hospital that evening, saw it, and was satisfied with hospital life.  I did not
wish to be called a hospital rat.  I had no idea of taking stock and making my headquarters
at this place. Everything seemed clean and nice enough, but the smell!  Ye gods! I stayed there
for supper.  The bill of fare was a thin slice of light bread and a plate of soup, already
dished out and placed at every plate. I ate it, but it only made me hungry.  At nine o'clock
I had to go to bed, and all the lights were put out.  Every man had a little bunk to himself.
I do not know whether I slept or not, but I have a dim recollection of "sawing gourds," and
jumping up several times to keep some poor wretch from strangling.  He was only snoring.  I
heard rats filing away at night, and thought that burglars were trying to get in; my dreams
were not pleasant, if I went to sleep at all.  I had not slept off of the ground or in a house
in three years.  It was something new to me, and I could not sleep, for the room was so dark
that had I got up I could not have found my way out.  I laid there, I do not know how long,
but I heard a rooster crow, and a dim twilight began to glimmer in the room, and even footsteps
were audible in the rooms below.  I got sleepy then, and went off in a doze.  I had a beautiful
dream--dreamed that I was in heaven, or rather, that a pair of stairs with richly carved balusters
and wings, and golden steps overlaid with silk and golden-colored carpeting came down from
heaven to my room; and two beautiful damsels kept peeping, and laughing, and making faces at
me from the first platform of these steps; and every now and then they would bring out their
golden harps, and sing me a sweet and happy song.  Others were constantly passing, but always
going the same way.  They looked like so many schoolgirls, all dressed in shining garments.
Two or three times the two beautiful girls would go up the stairs and return, bringing fruits
and vegetables that shined like pure gold.  I knew that I never had seen two more beautiful
beings on earth.  The steps began to lengthen out, and seemed to be all around me; they seemed
to shine a halo of glory all about. The two ladies came closer, and closer, passing around,
having a beautiful wreath of flowers in each hand, and gracefully throwing them backward and
forward as they laughed and danced around me.  Finally one stopped and knelt down over me and
whispered something in my ear. I threw up my arms to clasp the beautiful vision to my bosom,
when I felt my arm grabbed, and "D--n ye, I wish you would keep your d--n arm off my wound,
ye hurt me," came from the soldier in the next bunk.  The sun was shining full in my face.
I got up and went down to breakfast.  The bill of fare was much better for breakfast than it
had been for supper; in fact it was what is called a "jarvis" breakfast.  After breakfast,
I took a ramble around the city.  It was a nice place, and merchandise and other business was
being carried on as if there was no war.  Hotels were doing a thriving business; steamboats
were at the wharf, whistling and playing their calliopes.  I remember the one I heard was playing
"Away Down on the Sewanee River."  To me it seemed that everybody was smiling, and happy, and
prosperous.

THE CAPITOL

I went to the capitol, and it is a fine building, overlooking the city. When I got there, I
acted just like everybody that ever visited a fine building--they wanted to go on top and look
at the landscape.  That is what they all say.  Now, I always wanted to go on top, but I never
yet thought of landscape.  What I always wanted to see, was how far I could look, and that
is about all that any of them wants.  It's mighty nice to go up on a high place with your sweetheart,
and hear her say, "La! ain't it b-e-a-u-t-i-f-u-l," "Now, now, please don't go there," and
how you walk up pretty close to the edge and spit over, to show what a brave man you are. 
It's "bully," I tell you.  Well, I wanted to go to the top of the capitol--I went; wanted to
go up in the cupola.  Now, there was an iron ladder running up across an empty space, and you
could see two hundred feet below from this cupola or dome on top.  The ladder was about ten
feet long, spanning the dome.  It was very easy to go up, because I was looking up all the
time, and I was soon on top of the building. I saw how far I could see, and saw the Alabama
river, winding and turning until it seemed no larger than a silver thread.  Well, I am very
poor at describing and going into ecstacies over fancies. But what a new and terrible commotion
was raised in her mind, in that of Madame d'Auch, and in mine, upon receiving a pencil billet from
M. de Lally, brought by a confidential servant, to announce that Bonaparte was within a few
hours' march of Paris! He begged her to hasten off, and said he would follow in his cabriolet
when he had made certain arrangements, and could gain some information as to the motions of the king.

She
now instantly ordered horses to her berlin,(264) which had long been loaded, and calling up
all her people and dependants, was giving her orders with the utmost vivacity, when intelligence
was brought her that no horses could now be had, the government having put them all in requisition.
I was struck with horror.
 After getting that foot firmly placed, I ventured to risk the other
foot. It was thus for several backward steps, until I come to see down--away down, down, down
below me--and my head got giddy.  The world seemed to be turning round and round.  A fellow
at the bottom hallooed, "Look up! look up, mister! look up!"  I was not a foot from the upper
floor.  As soon as I looked at the floor, everything got steady.  I kept my eyes fixed on the
top of the building, and soon made the landing on terra firma.

I have never liked high places since.  I never could bear to go upstairs in a house.  I went
to the capitol at Nashville, last winter, and McAndrews wanted me to go up in the cupola with
him.  He went, and paid a quarter for the privilege.  I stayed, and--well, if I could estimate
its value by dollars--I would say two hundred and fifty million dollars is what I made by staying
down.

AM ARRESTED

The next day, while the ferryboat was crossing the river, I asked the ferryman to let me ride
over.  I was halted by a soldier who "knowed" his business.

"Your pass, sir!"

"Well, I have no pass!"

"Well, sir, I will have to arrest you, and take you before the provost marshal."

"Very well, sir; I will go with you to the provost or anywhere else."

I appear before the provost marshal.

"What command do you belong to, sir?"

"Well, sir, I belong to Company H, First Tennessee Regiment.  I am a wounded man sent to the
hospital."

"Well, sir, that's too thin; why did you not get a pass?"

"I did not think one was required."

"Give me your name, sir."

I gave my name.

"Sergeant, take this name to the hospital and ask if such name is registered on their books."

I told him that I knew it was not.  The sergeant returns and reports no such name, when he remarks:

"You have to go to the guard-house."

Says I, "Colonel (I knew his rank was that of captain), if you send me to the guard-house,
you will do me a great wrong.  Here is where I was wounded."  I pulled off my shoe and began
to unbandage.

"Well, sir, I don't want to look at your foot, and I have no patience with you.  Take him to
the guard-house."

Turning back I said, "Sir, aye, aye, you are clothed with a little brief authority, and appear
to be presuming pretty heavy on that authority; but, sir"--well I have forgotten what I did
say.  The sergeant took me by the arm, and said, "Come, come, sir, I have my orders."

As I was going up the street, I met Captain Dave Buckner, and told him all the circumstances
of my arrest as briefly as I could.  He said, "Sergeant, bring him back with me to the provost
marshal's office." They were as mad as wet hens.  Their faces were burning, and I could see
their jugular veins go thump, thump, thump.  I do not know what Captain Buckner said to them,
all I heard were the words "otherwise insulted me." But I was liberated, and was glad of it.

THOSE GIRLS

I then went back to the river, and gave a fellow two dollars to "row me over the ferry."  I
was in no particular hurry, and limped along at my leisure until about nightfall, when I came
to a nice, cosy-looking farm house, and asked to stay all night.  I was made very welcome,
indeed. There were two very pretty girls here, and I could have "loved either were 'tother
dear charmer away."  But I fell in love with both of them, and thereby overdid the thing. 
This was by a dim fire-light.  The next day was Sunday, and we all went to church in the country.
We went in an old rockaway carriage.  I remember that the preacher used the words, "O, God,"
nineteen times in his prayer.  I had made up my mind which one of the girls I would marry.
Now, don't get mad, fair reader mine.  I was all gallantry and smiles, and when we arrived
at home, I jumped out and took hold the hand of my fair charmer to help her out.  She put her
foot out, and--well, I came very near telling--she tramped on a cat.  The cat squalled.

THE TALISMAN

But then, you know, reader, that I was engaged to Jennie and I had a talisman in my pocket
Bible, in the way of a love letter, against the charms of other beautiful and interesting young
ladies.  Uncle Jimmie Rieves had been to Maury county, and, on returning to Atlanta, found
out that I was wounded and in the hospital at Montgomery, and brought the letter to me; and,
as I am married now, I don't mind telling you what was in the letter, if you won't laugh at
me.  You see, Jennie was my sweetheart, and here is my sweetheart's letter:

My Dear Sam.:--I write to tell you that I love you yet, and you alone; and day by day I love
you more, and pray, every night and morning for your safe return home again.  My greatest grief
is that we heard you were wounded and in the hospital, and I cannot be with you to nurse you.

We heard of the death of many noble and brave men at Atlanta; and the death of Captain Carthell,
Cousin Mary's husband.  It was sent by Captain January; he belonged to the Twelfth Tennessee,
of which Colonel Watkins was lieutenant-colonel.

The weather is very beautiful here, and the flowers in the garden are in full bloom, and the
apples are getting ripe.  I have gathered a small bouquet, which I will put in the letter;
I also send by Uncle Jimmie a tobacco bag, and a watch-guard, made out of horse hair, and a
woolen hood, knit with my own hands, with love and best respects.

We heard that you had captured a flag at Atlanta, and was promoted for it
to corporal.  Is that some high office?  I know you will be a general yet,
because I always hear of your being in every battle, and always the
foremost man in the attack.  Sam, please take care of yourself for my
sake, and don't let the Yankees kill you.  Well, good-bye, darling,
I will ever pray for God's richest and choicest blessings upon you.
Be sure and write a long, long letter--I don't care how long, to your
loving and sincere
                                                 JENNIE.

THE BRAVE CAPTAIN

When I got back to the Alabama river, opposite Montgomery, the ferryboat was on the other shore.
A steamboat had just pulled out of its moorings and crossed over to where I was, and began
to take on wood.  I went on board, and told the captain, who was a clever and good man, that
I would like to take a trip with him to Mobile and back, and that I was a wounded soldier from
the hospital.  He told me, "All right, come along, and I will foot expenses."

It was about sunset, but along the line of the distant horizon we could see the dark and heavy
clouds begin to boil up in thick and ominous columns.  The lightning was darting to and fro
like lurid sheets of fire, and the storm seemed to be gathering; we could hear the storm king
in his chariot in the clouds, rumbling as he came, but a dead lull was seen and felt in the
air and in nature; everything was in a holy hush, except the hoarse belchings of the engines,
the sizzing and frying of the boilers, and the work of the machinery on the lower deck.  At
last the storm burst upon us in all its fury; it was a tornado and the women and children began
to scream and pray--the mate to curse and swear.  I was standing by the captain on the main
upper deck, as he was trying to direct the pilot how to steer the boat through that awful storm,
when we heard the alarm bell ring out, and the hoarse cry of "Fire! fire! fire!"  Men were
running toward the fire with buckets, and the hose began throwing water on the flames.  Men,
women, and children were jumping in the water, and the captain used every effort to quiet the
panic, and to land his boat with its passengers, but the storm and fire were too much, and
down the vessel sank to rise no more.  Many had been saved in the lifeboat, and many were drowned.
I jumped overboard, and the last thing I saw was the noble and brave captain still ringing
the bell, as the vessel went down.  He went down amid the flames to fill a watery grave.  The
water was full of struggling and dying people for miles.  I did not go to Mobile.

HOW I GET BACK TO ATLANTA

When I got to Montgomery, the cars said toot, toot, and I raised the hue and cry and followed
in pursuit.  Kind friends, I fear that I have wearied you with my visit to Montgomery, but
I am going back to camp now, and will not leave it again until our banner is furled never to
be again unfurled.

I, you remember, was without a pass, and did not wish to be carried a second time before that
good, brave, and just provost marshal; and something told me not to go to the hospital.  I
found out when the cars would leave, and thought that I would get on them and go back without
any trouble.  I got on the cars, but was hustled off mighty quick, because I had no pass. 
A train of box-cars was about leaving for West Point, and I took a seat on top of one of them,
and was again hustled off; but I had determined to go, and as the engine began to puff, and
tug, and pull, I slipped in between two box-cars, sitting on one part of one and putting my
feet on the other, and rode this way until I got to West Point.  The conductor discovered me,
and had put me off several times before I got to West Point, but I would jump on again as soon
as the cars started.  When I got to West Point, a train of cars started off, and I ran, trying
to get on, when Captain Peebles reached out his hand and pulled me in, and I arrived safe and
sound at Atlanta.

On my way back to Atlanta, I got with Dow Akin and Billy March.  Billy March had been shot
through the under jaw by a minnie ball at the octagon house, but by proper attention and nursing,
he had recovered.  Conner Akin was killed at the octagon house, and Dow wounded.  When we got
back to the regiment, then stationed near a fine concrete house (where Shepard and I would
sleep every night), nearly right on our works, we found two thirty-two-pound parrot guns stationed
in our immediate front, and throwing shells away over our heads into the city of Atlanta. 
We had just begun to tell all the boys howdy, when I saw Dow Akin fall.  A fragment of shell
had struck him on his backbone, and he was carried back wounded and bleeding.  We could see
the smoke boil up, and it would be nearly a minute before we would hear the report of the cannon,
and then a few moments after we would hear the scream of the shell as it went on to Atlanta.
We used to count from the time we would see the smoke boil up until we would hear the noise,
and some fellow would call out, "Look out boys, the United States is sending iron over into
the Southern Confederacy; let's send a little lead back to the United States." And we would
blaze away with our Enfield and Whitworth guns, and every time we would fire, we would silence
those parrot guns.  This kind of fun was carried on for forty-six days.

DEATH OF TOM TUCK'S ROOSTER

Atlanta was a great place to fight chickens.  I had heard much said about cock pits and cock
fights, but had never seen such a thing.  Away over the hill, outside of the range of Thomas'
thirty-pound parrot guns, with which he was trying to burn up Atlanta, the boys had fixed up
a cock pit.  It was fixed exactly like a circus ring, and seats and benches were arranged for
the spectators.  Well, I went to the cock fight one day. A great many roosters were to be pitted
that day, and each one was trimmed and gaffed.  A gaff is a long keen piece of steel, as sharp
as a needle, that is fitted over the spurs.  Well, I looked on at the fun. Tom Tuck's rooster
was named Southern Confederacy; but this was abbreviated to Confed., and as a pet name, they
called him Fed.  Well, Fed was a trained rooster, and would "clean up" a big-foot rooster as
soon as he was put in the pit.  But Tom always gave Fed every advantage. One day a green-looking
country hunk came in with a rooster that he wanted to pit against Fed.  He looked like a common
rail-splitter. The money was soon made up, and the stakes placed in proper hands. The gaffs
were fitted, the roosters were placed in the pit and held until both were sufficiently mad
to fight, when they were turned loose, and each struck at the same time.  I looked and poor
Fed was dead.  The other rooster had popped both gaffs through his head.  He was a dead rooster;
yea, a dead cock in the pit.  Tom went and picked up his rooster, and said, "Poor Fed, I loved
you; you used to crow every morning at daylight to wake me up.  I have carried you a long time,
but, alas! alas! poor Fed, your days are numbered, and those who fight will sometimes be slain.
Now, friends, conscripts, countrymen, if you have any tears to shed, prepare to shed them now.
I will not bury Fed.  The evil that roosters do live after them, but the good is oft interred
with their bones. So let it not be with Confed.  Confed left no will, but I will pick him,
and fry him, and dip my biscuit in his gravy.  Poor Fed, Confed, Confederacy, I place one hand
on my heart and one on my head, regretting that I have not another to place on my stomach,
and whisper, softly whisper, in the most doleful accents, Good-bye, farewell, a long farewell."

    "Not a laugh was heard--not even a joke--
      As the dead rooster in the camp-kettle they hurried;
     For Tom had lost ten dollars, and was broke,
       In the cock-pit where Confed was buried.

    "They cooked him slowly in the middle of the day,
       As the frying-pan they were solemnly turning;
     The hungry fellows looking at him as he lay,
       With one side raw, the other burning.

    "Some surplus feathers covered his breast,
       Not in a shroud, but in a tiara they soused him;
     He lay like a 'picked chicken' taking his rest,
       While the Rebel boys danced and cursed around him.

    "Not a few or short were the cuss words they said,
       Yet, they spoke many words of sorrow;
     As they steadfastly gazed on the face of the dead,
       And thought 'what'll we do for chicken tomorrow?'

    "Lightly they'll talk of the Southern Confed. that's gone,
       And o'er his empty carcass upbraid him;
     But nothing he'll reck, if they let him sleep on,
       In the place where they have laid him.

    "Sadly and slowly they laid him down,
       From the field of fame fresh and gory;
     They ate off his flesh, and threw away his bones,
       And then left them alone in their glory."

When, cut, slash, bang, debang, and here comes a dash of Yankee cavalry, right in the midst
of the camp, under whip and spur, yelling like a band of wild Comanches, and bearing right
down on the few mourners around the dead body of Confed.  After making this bold dash, they
about faced, and were soon out of sight.  There was no harm done, but, alas! that cooked chicken
was gone.  Poor Confed!  To what a sad end you have come. Just to think, that but a few short
hours ago, you was a proud rooster-- was "cock of the walk," and was considered invincible.
But, alas! you have sunk so low as to become food for Federals!  Requiescat in pace you can
crow no more.

OLD JOE BROWN'S PETS

By way of grim jest, and a fitting burlesque to tragic scenes, or, rather, to the thing called
"glorious war," old Joe Brown, then Governor of Georgia, sent in his militia.  It was the richest
picture of an army I ever saw.  It beat Forepaugh's double-ringed circus.  Every one was dressed
in citizen's clothes, and the very best they had at that time. A few had double-barreled shotguns,
but the majority had umbrellas and walking-sticks, and nearly every one had on a duster, a
flat-bosomed "biled" shirt, and a plug hat; and, to make the thing more ridiculous, the dwarf
and the giant were marching side by side; the knock-kneed by the side of the bow-legged; the
driven-in by the side of the drawn-out; the pale and sallow dyspeptic, who looked like Alex.
Stephens, and who seemed to have just been taken out of a chimney that smoked very badly, and
whose diet was goobers and sweet potatoes, was placed beside the three hundred-pounder, who
was dressed up to kill, and whose looks seemed to say, "I've got a substitute in the army,
and twenty negroes at home besides--h-a-a-m, h-a-a-m."  Now, that is the sort of army that
old Joe Brown had when he seceded from the Southern Confederacy, declaring that each state
was a separate sovereign government of itself; and, as old Joe Brown was an original secessionist,
he wanted to exemplify the grand principles of secession, that had been advocated by Patrick
Henry, John Randolph, of Roanoke, and John C. Calhoun, in all of whom he was a firm believer.
I will say, however, in all due deference to the Georgia militia and old Joe Brown's pets,
that there was many a gallant and noble fellow among them.  I remember on one occasion that
I was detailed to report to a captain of the Fourth Tennessee Regiment (Colonel Farquharson,
called "Guidepost"); I have forgotten that captain's name.  He was a small-sized man, with
a large, long set of black whiskers.  He was the captain, and I the corporal of the detail.
We were ordered to take a company of the Georgia militia on a scout.  We went away around to
our extreme right wing, passing through Terry's mill pond, and over the old battlefield of
the 22nd, and past the place where General Walker fell, when we came across two ladies.  One
of them kept going from one tree to another, and saying: "This pine tree, that pine tree; this
pine tree, that pine tree."  In answer to our inquiry, they informed us that the young woman's
husband was killed on the 22nd, and had been buried under a pine tree, and she was nearly crazy
because she could not find his dead body.  We passed on, and as soon as we came in sight of
the old line of Yankee breastworks, an unexpected volley of minnie balls was fired into our
ranks, killing this captain of the Fourth Tennessee Regiment and killing and wounding seven
or eight of the Georgia militia.  I hallooed to lay down, as soon as possible, and a perfect
whizz of minnie balls passed over, when I immediately gave the command of attention, forward,
charge and capture that squad.  That Georgia militia, every man of them, charged forward, and
in a few moments we ran into a small squad of Yankees, and captured the whole "lay out."  We
then carried back to camp the dead captain and the killed and wounded militia.  I had seen
a great many men killed and wounded, but some how or other these dead and wounded men, of that
day, made a more serious impression on my mind than in any previous or subsequent battles.
They were buried with all the honors of war and I never will forget the incidents and scenes
of this day as long as I live.

WE GO AFTER STONEMAN

One morning our regiment was ordered to march, double-quick, to the depot to take the cars
for somewhere.  The engine was under steam, and ready to start for that mysterious somewhere.
The whistle blew long and loud, and away we went at break-neck speed for an hour, and drew
up at a little place by the name of Jonesboro.  The Yankees had captured the town, and were
tearing up the railroad track.  A regiment of Rebel infantry and a brigade of cavalry were
already in line of battle in their rear. We jumped out of the cars and advanced to attack them
in front.  Our line had just begun to open a pretty brisk fire on the Yankee cavalry, when
they broke, running right through and over the lines of the regiment of infantry and brigade
of cavalry in their rear, the men opening ranks to get out of the way of the hoofs of their
horses.  It was Stoneman's cavalry, upon its celebrated raid toward Macon and Andersonville
to liberate the Federal prisoners.  We went to work like beavers, and in a few hours the railroad
track had been repaired so that we could pass. Every few miles we would find the track torn
up, but we would get out of the cars, fix up the track, and light out again.  We were charging
a brigade of cavalry with a train of cars, as it were.  They would try to stop our progress
by tearing up the track, but we were crowding them a little too strong.  At last they thought
it was time to quit that foolishness, and then commenced a race between cavalry and cars for
Macon, Georgia.  The cars had to run exceedingly slow and careful, fearing a tear up or ambuscade,
but at last Macon came in sight.  Twenty-five or thirty thousand Federal prisoners were confined
at this place, and it was poorly guarded and protected.  We feared that Stoneman would only
march in, overpower the guards, and liberate the prisoners, and we would have some tall fighting
to do, but on arriving at Macon, we found that Stoneman and all of his command had just surrendered
to a brigade of cavalry and the Georgia militia, and we helped march the gentlemen inside the
prison walls at Macon.  They had furnished their own transportation, paying their own way and
bearing their own expenses, and instead of liberating any prisoners, were themselves imprisoned.
An extra detail was made as guard from our regiment to take them on to Andersonville, but I
was not on this detail, so I remained until the detail returned.

Macon is a beautiful place.  Business was flourishing like a green bay tree.  The people were
good, kind, and clever to us.  Everywhere the hospitality of their homes was proffered us.
We were regarded as their liberators.  They gave us all the good things they had--eating, drinking,
etc.  We felt our consequence, I assure you, reader.  We felt we were heroes, indeed; but the
benzine and other fluids became a little promiscuous and the libations of the boys a little
too heavy.  They began to get boisterous--I might say, riotous.  Some of the boys got to behaving
badly, and would go into stores and places, and did many things they ought not to have done.
In fact, the whole caboodle of them ought to have been carried to the guard-house.  They were
whooping, and yelling, and firing off their guns, just for the fun of the thing.  I remember
of going into a very nice family's house, and the old lady told the dog to go out, go out,
sir! and remarked rather to herself, "Go out, go out! I wish you were killed, anyhow."  John
says, "Madam, do you want that dog killed, sure enough?"  She says, "Yes, I do.  I do wish
that he was dead." Before I could even think or catch my breath, bang went John's gun, and
the dog was weltering in his blood right on the good lady's floor, the top of his head entirely
torn off.  I confess, reader, that I came very near jumping out of my skin, as it were, at
the unexpected discharge of the gun.  And other such scenes, I reckon, were being enacted elsewhere,
but at last a detail was sent around to arrest all stragglers, and we were soon rolling back
to Atlanta.

"BELLUM LETHALE"

Well, after "jugging" Stoneman, we go back to Atlanta and occupy our same old place near the
concrete house.  We found everything exactly as we had left it, with the exception of the increased
number of graybacks, which seemed to have propagated a thousand-fold since we left, and they
were crawling about like ants, making little paths and tracks in the dirt as they wiggled and
waddled about, hunting for ye old Rebel soldier. Sherman's two thirty-pound parrot guns were
in the same position, and every now and then a lazy-looking shell would pass over, speeding
its way on to Atlanta.

The old citizens had dug little cellars, which the soldiers called "gopher holes," and the
women and children were crowded together in these cellars, while Sherman was trying to burn
the city over their heads. But, as I am not writing history, I refer you to any history of
the war for Sherman's war record in and around Atlanta.

As John and I started to go back, we thought we would visit the hospital. Great God!  I get
sick today when I think of the agony, and suffering, and sickening stench and odor of dead
and dying; of wounds and sloughing sores, caused by the deadly gangrene; of the groaning and
wailing. I cannot describe it.  I remember, I went in the rear of the building, and there I
saw a pile of arms and legs, rotting and decomposing; and, although I saw thousands of horrifying
scenes during the war, yet today I have no recollection in my whole life, of ever seeing anything
that I remember with more horror than that pile of legs and arms that had been cut off our
soldiers.  As John and I went through the hospital, and were looking at the poor suffering
fellows, I heard a weak voice calling, "Sam, O, Sam."  I went to the poor fellow, but did not
recognize him at first, but soon found out that it was James Galbreath, the poor fellow who
had been shot nearly in two on the 22nd of July.  I tried to be cheerful, and said, "Hello,
Galbreath, old fellow, I thought you were in heaven long before this."  He laughed a sort of
dry, cracking laugh, and asked me to hand him a drink of water.  I handed it to him.  He then
began to mumble and tell me something in a rambling and incoherent way, but all I could catch
was for me to write to his family, who were living near Mt. Pleasant.  I asked him if he was
badly wounded.  He only pulled down the blanket, that was all.  I get sick when I think of
it.  The lower part of his body was hanging to the upper part by a shred, and all of his entrails
were lying on the cot with him, the bile and other excrements exuding from them, and they full
of maggots.  I replaced the blanket as tenderly as I could, and then said, "Galbreath, good-bye."
I then kissed him on his lips and forehead, and left.  As I passed on, he kept trying to tell
me something, but I could not make out what he said, and fearing I would cause him to exert
himself too much, I left.

It was the only field hospital that I saw during the whole war, and I have no desire to see
another. Another injustice to Ireland.

* * * * *

TRUTHFUL JAMES

ON DOCTORS.

"You're not looking well," said the staff of The Muddleton Weekly Gazette sympathetically.

"No,
Sir. Can't sleep, Sir. Haven't done for days till last night. I went off beautiful quite early,
and then the new nurse come and woke me to give me my sleeping draught. That finished it for
the night. Strange thing, sleep. There's no sense about it. Take Bill Hawkins now, a pal of mine
in B Company. He was hit and took to hospital. Not serious at all. 'Me for a rest cure,' he says. But
he was in that hospital for weeks and weeks, getting worse and worse; he couldn't sleep a wink.
The more they drugged him, and the more sheep he counted, the more wide-awake he was. The doctors
got angry and called him an obstinate case. He said it wasn't poisons but noise he needed,
so they fetched an orderly and set him banging one of them frying-pan baths with a ram-rod. In five
minutes Bill falls asleep as peaceful as a lamb, and the orderly, being tired, stops. Up leaps
Bill, wide awake as ever, asking what's wrong. Naturally they couldn't bang a bath for him
all night every night, and the house surgeon was just thinking about getting ready a slab in
the mortuary, when Bill's brother, an engine-driver, comes along. He took Bill to his box
just outside Charing Cross station and made up a bed for him there. Bill slept for three days
solid and was about again in a week."

"Very fortunate," murmured the Gazette.

"So that time, you see, the doctors was done. But that don't often happen. There was a doctor
I knew out there, name of Gordon. Young fellow he was, too, and very keen; seemed to think
the War was started specially to give him surgical practice, and he loved his lancets more than
his mother. He used to welcome cases with open arms, so to speak, do his very best to heal
'em quick, and weep when he succeeded. Well, he happened to be in our trench one day, showing
our Sub a new case of knives, when Charlie Black was carried in on a stretcher in an awful
mess.

"'I must operate at once to save your life,' he says.

"Charlie smiled as best he could and said he was agreeable.

"'But there's no anæsthetic here,' he says, 'and I can't do it without. Couldn't you do a faint
for me?'

"Charlie says he's sorry, but he's never practised fetching a faint
at will, like a woman can.

"'Well, then,' he says, 'you'll have to
be stunned.' And he fetches a small sandbag and gives it to the stretcher-bearer.

"'Chap
here,' he explains to Charlie, 'will count up slowly, and when he
gets to fifty he'll hit you on the head with the sandbag and knock
you out.'

"Charlie grins, and the stretcher-bearer begins to count.
When he gets to ten he rolls up his sleeves; when he gets to twenty
he takes a good grip of the sandbag; at thirty he rolls his eyes and
sticks out his jaw; at forty, he lifts the bag over his shoulder and
draws one foot back, Charlie watching him all the time. 'For-ty-six,'
he says slowly, 'for-ty seven, for-ty-eight, for-ty-nine,' and then----"

"You're
not going to tell me that he really----"

"No, he didn't," said Truthful
James. "Charlie fainted."

"That was their intention, I presume?"

"Your
presumption is correct, Sir. The doctor finished the job before Charlie
come to again. Smart, wasn't it?"

"Very smart indeed."

"But that's
nothing. Nothing at all to what he could do. He once cut a fellow
open, took out his liver, extracted twenty-three shrapnel bullets
from it, bounced it on the floor to see it was all right, and put
it back, all inside of three minutes. And the fellow what owns the
liver hasn't had a to-morrow morning head-ache once since."

"He must
be a very clever doctor," suggested the other, to fill in a pause.  I dropped to the ground, and at the same
moment heard the report, and my hat was knocked off in the bushes. I remained perfectly still,
and in a few minutes I saw a young Yankee lieutenant peering through the bushes.  I would rather
not have killed him, but I was afraid to fire and afraid to run, and yet I did not wish to
kill him.  He was as pretty as a woman, and somehow I thought I had met him before.  Our eyes
met.  He stood like a statue.  He gazed at me with a kind of scared expression.  I still did
not want to kill him, and am sorry today that I did, for I believe I could have captured him,
but I fired, and saw the blood spurt all over his face.  He was the prettiest youth I ever
saw.  When I fired, the Yankees broke and run, and I went up to the boy I had killed, and the
blood was gushing out of his mouth.  I was sorry.

ATLANTA FORSAKEN

One morning about the break of day our artillery opened along our breastworks, scaring us almost
to death, for it was the first guns that had been fired for more than a month.  We sprang to
our feet and grabbed our muskets, and ran out and asked some one what did that mean.  We were
informed that they were "feeling" for the Yankees.  The comment that was made by the private
soldier was simply two words, and those two words were "O, shucks."  The Yankees had gone--no
one knew whither--and our batteries were shelling the woods, feeling for them.  "O, shucks."

"Hello," says Hood, "Whar in the Dickens and Tom Walker are them Yanks, hey?  Feel for them
with long-range 'feelers'."  A boom, boom.  "Can anybody tell me whar them Yanks are?  Send
out a few more 'feelers.' The feelers in the shape of cannon balls will bring them to taw."
Boom, boom, boom.

    "For the want of a nail, the shoe was lost,
     For the want of a shoe the horse was lost,
     For the want of a horse the general was lost,
     For the want of a general the battle was lost."

Forrest's cavalry had been sent off somewhere.  Wheeler's cavalry had been sent away yonder
in the rear of the enemy to tear up the railroad and cut off their supplies, etc., and we had
to find out the movements of the enemy by "feeling for them" by shelling the vacant woods.
The Yankees were at that time twenty-five miles in our rear, "a hundred thousand strong," at
a place called Jonesboro.  I do not know how it was found out that they were at Jonesboro,
but anyhow, the news had come and Cheatham's corps had to go and see about it.

Stewart's corps must hold Atlanta, and Stephen D. Lee's corps must be stretched at proper distance,
so that the word could be passed backward and forward as to how they were getting along.  As
yet it is impossible to tell of the movements of the enemy, because our cannon balls had not
come back and reported any movements to us.  We had always heard that cannon balls were blind,
and we did not suppose they could see to find their way back.  Well, our corps made a forced
march for a day and a night, and passed the word back that we had seen some signs of the Yankees
being in that vicinity, and thought perhaps, a small portion-- about a hundred thousand--were
nigh about there somewhere.  Says he, "It's a strange thing you don't know; send out your feelers."
We sent out a few feelers and they report back very promptly that the Yankees are here sure
enough, or that is what our feelers say.  Pass the word up the line.  The word is passed from
mouth to mouth of Lee's skirmish line twenty-five miles back to Atlanta.  Well, if that be
the case, we will set fire to all of our army stores, spike all our cannon, and play "smash"
generally, and forsake Atlanta.

In the meantime, just hold on where you are till Stewart gets through his job of blowing up
arsenals, burning up the army stores, and spiking the cannon, and we will send our negro boy
Caesar down to the horse lot to see if he can't catch old Nance, but she is such a fool with
that young suckling colt of hers, that it takes him almost all day to catch her, and if the
draw-bars happen to be down, she'll get in the clover patch, and I don't think he will catch
her today.  But if he don't catch her, I'll ride Balaam anyhow.  He's got a mighty sore back,
and needs a shoe put on his left hind foot, and he cut his ankle with a broken shoe on his
fore foot, and has not been fed today.  However, I will be along by-and-by.  Stewart, do you
think you will be able to get through with your job of blowing up by day after tomorrow, or
by Saturday at twelve o'clock?  Lee, pass the word down to Cheatham, and ask him what he thinks
the Yankees are doing.  Now, Kinlock, get my duster and umbrella, and bring out Balaam.

Now, reader, that was the impression made on the private's mind at that time.

CHAPTER XIV

JONESBORO

THE BATTLE OF JONESBORO

Stewart's corps was at Atlanta, Lee's corps was between Atlanta and Jonesboro, and Cheatham's
corps, then numbering not more than five thousand men--because the woods and roads were full
of straggling soldiers, who were not in the fight--was face to face with the whole Yankee army,
and he was compelled to flee, fight, or surrender.  This was the position and condition of
the grand Army of Tennessee on this memorable occasion.

If I am not mistaken, General Cleburne was commanding Cheatham's corps at that time.  We expected
to be ordered into action every moment, and kept see-sawing backward and forward, until I did
not know which way the Yankees were, or which way the Rebels.  We would form line of battle,
charge bayonets, and would raise a whoop and yell, expecting to be dashed right against the
Yankee lines, and then the order would be given to retreat.  Then we would immediately re-form
and be ordered to charge again a mile off at another place.  Then we would march and counter
march backward and forward over the same ground, passing through Jonesboro away over the hill,
and then back through the town, first four forward and back; your right hand to your left hand
lady, swing half round and balance all.  This sort of a movement is called a "feint."  A feint
is what is called in poker a "bluff," or what is called in a bully a "brag." A feint means
anything but a fight.  If a lady faints she is either scared or in love, and wants to fall
in her lover's arms.  If an army makes a feint movement, it is trying to hide some other movement.

"Hello, Lee, what does Cleburne say the Yankees are doing at Jonesboro?"

"They are fanning themselves."

"Well keep up that feint movement until all the boys faint from sheer exhaustion."

"Hello, Stewart, do you think you will be able to burn up those ten locomotives, and destroy
those hundred car loads of provisions by day after tomorrow?"

"Lee, ask Cleburne if he feels feinty?  Ask him how a fellow feels when he feints?"

Cleburne says: "I have feinted, feinted, and feinted, until I can't feint any longer."

"Well," says Hood, "if you can't feint any longer, you had better flee, fight, or faint; Balaam
gets along mighty slow, but I'll be thar after awhile."

At one o'clock we were ordered to the attack.  We had to pass through an osage orange hedge
that was worse than the enemy's fire.  Their breastworks were before us.  We yelled, and charged,
and hurrahed, and said booh! booh! we're coming, coming, look out, don't you see us coming?
Why don't you let us hear the cannon's opening roar?  Why don't you rattle a few old muskets
over there at us?  Booh! booh! we are coming.  Tag.  We have done got to your breastworks.
Now, we tagged first, why don't you tag back?  A Yankee seems to be lying on the other side
of the breastworks sunning himself, and raising himself on his elbow, says, "Fool who with
your fatty bread?  W-e are too o-l-d a-birds to be caught with that kind of chaff.  We don't
want any of that kind of pie. What you got there wouldn't make a mouthful.  Bring on your pudding
and pound-cake, and then we will talk to ye."

General Granberry, who, poor fellow, was killed in the butchery at Franklin afterwards, goes
up to the breastworks, and says, "Look here, Yank, we're fighting, sure enough."

Meynheer Dutchman comes out; and says, "Ish dot so?  Vel I ish peen von leetle pit hungry dish
morning, und I yust gobble you up for mein lunch pefore tinner dime.  Dot ish der kind of mans
vot I bees!"

Now, reader, that is a fine description of this memorable battle. That's it--no more, no less.
I was in it all, and saw General Granberry captured.  We did our level best to get up a fight,
but it was no go, any way we could fix it up.  I mean no disrespect to General Hood. He was
a noble, brave, and good man, and we loved him for his many virtues and goodness of heart.
I do not propose to criticize his generalship or ability as a commander.  I only write of the
impression and sentiment that were made upon the private's mind at the time, and as I remember
them now.  But Atlanta had fallen into the hands of the Yankees, and they were satisfied for
the time.

DEATH OF LIEUTENANT JOHN WHITTAKER

At this place we built small breastworks, but for what purpose I never knew.  The Yankees seemed
determined not to fight, no way we could fix it.  Every now and then they would send over a
"feeler," to see how we were getting along.  Sometimes these "feelers" would do some damage.
I remember one morning we were away over a hill, and every now and then here would come one
of those lazy-looking "feelers," just bouncing along as if he were in no hurry, called in military
"ricochet."  They were very easy to dodge, if you could see them in time.  Well, one morning
as before remarked, Lieutenant John Whittaker, then in command of Company H, and myself were
sitting down eating breakfast out of the same tin plate. We were sopping gravy out with some
cold corn bread, when Captain W. C. Flournoy, of the Martin Guards, hallooed out, "Look out,
Sam; look! look!"  I just turned my head, and in turning, the cannon ball knocked my hat off,
and striking Lieutenant Whittaker full in the side of the head, carried away the whole of the
skull part, leaving only the face.  His brains fell in the plate from which we were sopping,
and his head fell in my lap, deluging my face and clothes with his blood. Poor fellow, he never
knew what hurt him.  His spirit went to its God that morning.  Green Rieves carried the poor
boy off on his shoulder, and, after wrapping him up in a blanket, buried him.  His bones are
at Jonesboro today.  The cannon ball did not go twenty yards after accomplishing its work of
death.  Captain Flournoy laughed at me, and said, "Sam, that came very near getting you.  One-tenth
of an inch more would have cooked your goose."  I saw another man try to stop one of those
balls that was just rolling along on the ground.  He put his foot out to stop the ball but
the ball did not stop, but, instead, carried the man's leg off with it.  He no doubt today
walks on a cork-leg, and is tax collector of the county in which he lives.  I saw a thoughtless
boy trying to catch one in his hands as it bounced along.  He caught it, but the next moment
his spirit had gone to meet its God.  But, poor John, we all loved him.  He died for his country.
His soul is with his God. He gave his all for the country he loved, and may he rest in peace
under the shade of the tree where he is buried, and may the birds sing their sweetest songs,
the flowers put forth their most beautiful blooms, while the gentle breezes play about the
brave boy's grave.  Green Rieves was the only person at the funeral; no tears of a loving mother
or gentle sister were there.  Green interred his body, and there it will remain till the resurrection.
John Whittaker deserves more than a passing notice.  He was noble and brave, and when he was
killed, Company H was without an officer then commanding.  Every single officer had been killed,
wounded, or captured.  John served as a private soldier the first year of the war, and at the
reorganization at Corinth, Mississippi, he, W. J. Whitthorne and myself all ran for orderly
sergeant of Company H, and John was elected, and the first vacancy occurring after the death
of Captain Webster, he was commissioned brevet second lieutenant.  When the war broke out,
John was clerking for John L. & T. S. Brandon, in Columbia.  He had been in every march, skirmish,
and battle that had been fought during the war.  Along the dusty road, on the march, in the
bivouac and on the battlefield, he was the same noble, generous boy; always, kind, ever gentle,
a smile ever lighting up his countenance. He was one of the most even tempered men I ever knew.
I never knew him to speak an unkind word to anyone, or use a profane or vulgar word in my life.

One of those ricochet cannon balls struck my old friend, N. B. Shepard. Shep was one of the
bravest and best soldiers who ever shouldered a musket.  It is true, he was but a private soldier,
but he was the best friend I had during the whole war.  In intellect he was far ahead of most
of the generals, and would have honored and adorned the name of general in the C. S. A.  He
was ever brave and true.  He followed our cause to the end, yet all the time an invalid.  Today
he is languishing on a bed of pain and sickness, caused by that ball at Jonesboro.  The ball
struck him on his knapsack, knocking him twenty feet, and breaking one or two ribs and dislocating
his shoulder.  He was one of God's noblemen, indeed-- none braver, none more generous.  God
alone controls our destinies, and surely He who watched over us and took care of us in those
dark and bloody days, will not forsake us now.  God alone fits and prepares for us the things
that are in store for us.  There is none so wise as to foresee the future or foretell the end.
God sometimes seems afar off, but He will never leave or forsake anyone who puts his trust
in Him.  The day will come when the good as well as evil will all meet on one broad platform,
to be rewarded for the deeds done in the body, when time shall end, with the gates of eternity
closed, and the key fastened to the girdle of God forever.  Pardon me, reader, I have wandered.
But when my mind reverts to those scenes and times, I seem to live in another age and time
and I sometime think that "after us comes the end of the universe."

I am not trying to moralize, I am only trying to write a few scenes and incidents that came
under the observation of a poor old Rebel webfoot private soldier in those stormy days and
times.  Histories tell the great facts, while I only tell of the minor incidents.

But on this day of which I now write, we can see in plain view more than a thousand Yankee
battle-flags waving on top the red earthworks, not more than four hundred yards off.  Every
private soldier there knew that General Hood's army was scattered all the way from Jonesboro
to Atlanta, a distance of twenty-five miles, without any order, discipline, or spirit to do
anything.  We could hear General Stewart, away back yonder in Atlanta, still blowing up arsenals,
and smashing things generally, while Stephen D. Lee was somewhere between Lovejoy Station and
Macon, scattering.  And here was but a demoralized remnant of Cheatham's corps facing the whole
Yankee army.  I have ever thought that Sherman was a poor general, not to have captured Hood
and his whole army at that time. But it matters not what I thought, as I am not trying to tell
the ifs and ands, but only of what I saw.  In a word, we had everything against us. The soldiers
distrusted everything.  They were broken down with their long days' hard marching--were almost
dead with hunger and fatigue. Every one was taking his own course, and wishing and praying
to be captured.  Hard and senseless marching, with little sleep, half rations, and lice, had
made their lives a misery.  Each one prayed that all this foolishness might end one way or
the other.  It was too much for human endurance.  Every private soldier knew that such things
as this could not last.  They were willing to ring down the curtain, put out the footlights
and go home.  There was no hope in the future for them.

THEN COMES THE FARCE

From this time forward until the close of the war, everything was a farce as to generalship.
The tragedy had been played, the glory of war had departed.  We all loved Hood; he was such
a clever fellow, and a good man.

Well, Yank, why don't you come on and take us?  We are ready to play quits now.  We have not
anything to let you have, you know; but you can parole us, you know; and we'll go home and
be good boys, you know;-- good Union boys, you know; and we'll be sorry for the war, you know;
and we wouldn't have the negroes in any way, shape, form, or fashion, you know; and the American
continent has no north, no south, no east, no west--boohoo, boohoo, boohoo.

Tut, tut, Johnny; all that sounds tolerable nice, but then you might want some favor from Uncle
Sam, and the teat is too full of milk at the present time for us to turn loose.  It's a sugar
teat, Johnny, and just begins to taste sweet; and, besides, Johnny, once or twice you have
put us to a little trouble; we haven't forgot that; and we've got you down now--our foot is
on your neck, and you must feel our boot heel.  We want to stamp you a little--"that's what's
the matter with Hannah."  And, Johnny, you've fought us hard.  You are a brave boy; you are
proud and aristocratic, Johnny, and we are going to crush your cursed pride and spirit.  And
now, Johnny, come here; I've something to whisper in your ear.  Hold your ear close down here,
so that no one can hear: "We want big fat offices when the war is over.  Some of us want to
be presidents, some governors, some go to congress, and be big ministers to 'Urup,' and all
those kind of things, Johnny, you know.  Just go back to your camp, Johnny, chase round, put
on a bold front, flourish your trumpets, blow your horns.  And, Johnny, we don't want to be
hard on you, and we'll tell you what we'll do for you.  Away back in your territory, between
Columbia and Nashville, is the most beautiful country, and the most fertile, and we have lots
of rations up there, too.  Now, you just go up there, Johnny, and stay until we want you. 
We ain't done with you yet, my boy-- O, no, Johnny.  And, another thing, Johnny; you will find
there between Mt. Pleasant and Columbia, the most beautiful country that the sun of heaven
ever shone upon; and half way between the two places is St. John's Church.  Its tower is all
covered over with a beautiful vine of ivy; and, Johnny, you know that in olden times it was
the custom to entwine a wreath of ivy around the brows of victorious generals.  We have no
doubt that many of your brave generals will express a wish, when they pass by, to be buried
beneath the ivy vine that shades so gracefully and beautifully the wall of this grand old church.
And, Johnny, you will find a land of beauty and plenty, and when you get there, just put on
as much style as you like; just pretend, for our sake, you know, that you are a bully boy with
a glass eye, and that you are the victorious army that has returned to free an oppressed people.
We will allow you this, Johnny, so that we will be the greater when we want you, Johnny.  And
now, Johnny, we did not want to tell you what we are going to say to you now, but will, so
that you'll feel bad.  Sherman wants to 'march to the sea, while the world looks on and wonders.'
He wants to desolate the land and burn up your towns, to show what a coward he is, and how
dastardly, and one of our boys wants to write a piece of poetry about it.  But that ain't all,
Johnny.  You know that you fellows have got a great deal of cotton at Augusta, Savannah, Charleston,
Mobile, and other places, and cotton is worth two dollars a pound in gold, and as Christmas
is coming, we want to go down there for some of that cotton to make a Christmas gift to old
Abe and old Clo, don't you see?  O, no, Johnny, we don't want to end the war just yet awhile.
The sugar is mighty sweet in the teat, and we want to suck a while longer.  Why, sir, we want
to rob and then burn every house in Georgia and South Carolina.  We will get millions of dollars
by robbery alone, don't you see?"

PALMETTO

    "Hark from the tomb that doleful sound,
     My ears attend the cry."

General J. B. Hood established his headquarters at Palmetto, Georgia, and here is where we
were visited by his honor, the Honorable Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederate States
of America, and the Right Honorable Robert Toombs, secretary of state under the said Davis.
Now, kind reader, don't ask me to write history.  I know nothing of history.  See the histories
for grand movements and military maneuvers. I can only tell of what I saw and how I felt. 
I can remember now General Robert Toombs' and Hon. Jeff Davis' speeches.  I remember how funny
Toombs' speech was.  He kept us all laughing, by telling us how quick we were going to whip
the Yankees, and how they would skedaddle back across the Ohio river like a dog with a tin
oyster can tied to his tail. Captain Joe P. Lee and I laughed until our sides hurt us.  I can
remember today how I felt.  I felt that Davis and Toombs had come there to bring us glad tidings
of great joy, and to proclaim to us that the ratification of a treaty of peace had been declared
between the Confederate States of America and the United States.  I remember how good and happy
I felt when these two leading statesmen told of when grim visaged war would smooth her wrinkled
front, and when the dark clouds that had so long lowered o'er our own loved South would be
in the deep bosom of the ocean buried. I do not know how others felt, but I can say never before
or since did I feel so grand.  (I came very near saying gloomy and peculiar).  I felt that
I and every other soldier who had stood the storms of battle for nearly four long years, were
now about to be discharged from hard marches, and scant rations, and ragged clothes, and standing
guard, etc.  In fact, the black cloud of war had indeed drifted away, and the beautiful stars
that gemmed the blue ether above, smiling, said, "Peace, peace, peace." I felt bully, I tell
you.  I remember what I thought--that the emblem of our cause was the Palmetto and the Texas
Star, and the town of Palmetto, were symbolical of our ultimate triumph, and that we had unconsciously,
nay, I should say, prophetically, fallen upon Palmetto as the most appropriate place to declare
peace between the two sections.  I was sure Jeff Davis and Bob Toombs had come there for the
purpose of receiving the capitulation of and to make terms with our conquered foes.  I knew
that in every battle we had fought, except Missionary Ridge, we had whipped the Yankees, and
I knew that we had no cavalry, and but little artillery, and only two corps of infantry at
Missionary Ridge, and from the way Jeff and Bob talked, it was enough to make us old private
soldiers feel that swelling of the heart we ne'er should feel again.  I remember that other
high dignitaries and big bugs, then the controlling spirits of the government at Richmond,
visited us, and most all of these high dignitaries shook hands with the boys.  It was all hands
round, swing the corner, and balance your partner.  I shook hands with Hon. Jeff Davis, and
he said howdy, captain; I shook hands with Toombs, and he said howdy, major; and every big
bug that I shook hands with put another star on my collar and chicken guts on my sleeve.  My
pen is inadequate to describe the ecstasy and patriotic feeling that permeated every vein and
fiber of my animated being.  It was Paradise regained.  All the long struggles we had followed
the Palmetto flag through victory and defeat, through storms and rains, and snows and tempest,
along the dusty roads, and on the weary marches, we had been true to our country, our cause,
and our people; and there was a conscious pride within us that when we would return to our
homes, we would go back as conquerors, and that we would receive the plaudits of our people--well
done, good and faithful servants; you have been true and faithful even to the end.

JEFF DAVIS MAKES A SPEECH

    "Sinner come view the ground
     Where you shall shortly lie."

I remember that Hon. Jeff Davis visited the army at this place, and our regiment, the First
Tennessee, serenaded him.  After playing several airs, he came out of General Hood's marquee,
and spoke substantially as follows, as near as I can remember:

"SOLDIERS OF THE FIRST TENNESSEE REGIMENT:--I should have said captains, for every man among
you is fit to be a captain.  I have heard of your acts of bravery on every battlefield during
the whole war, and 'captains,' so far as my wishes are concerned, I today make every man of
you a captain, and I say honestly today, were I a private soldier, I would have no higher ambition
on earth than to belong to the First Tennessee Regiment.  You have been loyal and brave; your
ranks have never yet, in the whole history of the war, been broken, even though the army was
routed; yet, my brave soldiers, Tennesseans all, you have ever remained in your places in the
ranks of the regiment, ever subject to the command of your gallant Colonel Field in every battle,
march, skirmish, in an advance or a retreat.  There are on the books of the war department
at Richmond, the names of a quarter of a million deserters, yet, you, my brave soldiers, captains
all, have remained true and steadfast. I have heard that some have been dissatisfied with the
removal of General Joe E. Johnston and the appointment of General Hood; but, my brave and gallant
heroes, I say, I have done what I thought best for your good. Soon we commence our march to
Kentucky and Tennessee.  Be of good cheer, for within a short while your faces will be turned
homeward, and your feet will press Tennessee soil, and you will tread your native heath, amid
the blue-grass regions and pastures green of your native homes. We will flank General Sherman
out of Atlanta, tear up the railroad and cut off his supplies, and make Atlanta a perfect Moscow
of defeat to the Federal army.  Situated as he is in an enemy's country, with his communications
all cut off, and our army in the rear, he will be powerless, and being fully posted and cognizant
of our position, and of the Federal army, this movement will be the ultima thule, the grand
crowning stroke for our independence, and the conclusion of the war."

ARMISTICE IN NAME ONLY

About this time the Yankees sent us a flag of truce, asking an armistice to move every citizen
of Atlanta south of their lines.  It was granted. They wanted to live in fine houses awhile,
and then rob and burn them, and issued orders for all the citizens of Atlanta to immediately
abandon the city.  They wanted Atlanta for themselves, you see.

For weeks and months the roads were filled with loaded wagons of old and decrepit people, who
had been hunted and hounded from their homes with a relentless cruelty worse, yea, much worse,
than ever blackened the pages of barbaric or savage history. She introduced him, and when he had
quitted the room, told us he was adjutant-general to M. Lafayette, marchal de camp, and in
short the first in military rank of those who had accompanied that general when he so unfortunately
fell into the hands of the Prussians; but, not having been one of the Assemble Constituante, he
was allowed, with four others, to proceed into Holland, and there M. de Narbonne wrote to him.
"Et comme il l'aime infiniment," said Madame de la Chàtre, "il l'a pri de venir vivre avec
lui."(31

He had arrived only two days before. He is tall, and a good figure, with an open and manly countenance;
about forty, I imagine.

It was past twelve.

However, Madame de la Chàtre owned

Page 30

she had not breakfasted--ces messieurs were not yet ready. A little man, who looked very triste
indeed, in an old- fashioned suit of clothes, with long flaps to a waistcoat embroidered in
silks no longer very brilliant, sat in a corner of the room.

I could not imagine who he was, but when he spoke was immediately
convinced he was no Frenchman.

I afterwards heard he had been engaged by M. de Narbonne for a year,
to teach him and all the party English.

He had had a place in some college in France at the beginning of the Revolution, but was now
driven out and destitute. His name is Clarke. He speaks English with an accent tant soit Peu
Scotch.

Madame de la Chàtre, with great franchise entered into details of her situation and embarrassment,
whether she might venture, like Madame de Broglie, to go over to
France, in which case she was dans le cas oû elle pouvoit toucher
sa fortune(32) immediately.

She said she could then settle in England, and settle comfortably. M. de la Chàtre, it seems,
previous to his joining the king's brothers, had settled upon her her whole fortune. She and
all her family were great favourers of the original Revolution and even at this moment she declares
herself unable to wish the restoration of the old rgime, with its tyranny and corruptions--persecuted
and ruined as she and thousands more have been by the unhappy consequences of the Revolution,

M.
de Narbonne now came in. He seems forty, rather fat, but would be handsome were it not for a slight
cast of one eye. He was this morning in great spirits. Poor man! It was the only time I have ever
seen him so. He came up very courteously to me, and begged leave de me faire Sa Cour(33) at Mickleham,
to which I graciously assented.

Then came M. de jaucourt, whom I instantly knew by Mr. Locke's description. He is far from
handsome, but has a very intelligent countenance, fine teeth, and expressive eyes. I scarce
heard a word from him, but liked his appearance exceedingly, and not the less for perceiving
his respectful and affectionate manner of attending to Mr. Locke but when Mr. Locke reminded us that
Madame de la Chàtre had not breakfasted, we took leave, after spending an hour in a manners so
pleasant and so interesting that it scarcely appeared ten minutes.

Page 31 MONSIEUR D'ARBLAY.

NOV. 7.- --Phillips was at work in the parlour, and I had just stepped
into the next room for some papers I wanted, when I heard a man's
voice, and presently distinguished these words: "Je ne parle pas trop
bien l'Anglois, monsieur."(34) I came forth immediately to relieve
Phillips, and then found it was M. d'Arblay.

I received him de bien bon coeur, as courteously as I could. The adjutant of M. Lafayette, and
one of those who proved faithful to that excellent general, could not but be interesting to me.
I was extremely pleased at ]its coming, and more and more pleased with himself every moment
that passed. He seems to me a true militaire, franc et loyal--open
as the day; warmly affectionate to his friends; intelligent, ready,
and amusing in conversation, with a great share of gait de coeur,
and, at the same time, of navet and bonne foi. He was no less flattering
to little Fanny than M. de Narbonne had been.

We went up into the
drawing-room with him, and met Willy on the stairs, and Norbury capered
before us. "Ah, madame," cried M. d'Arblay, "la jolie petite maison
que vous avez, et les jolis petits hôtes!"(35) looking at the children,
the drawings, etc. He took Norbury on his lap and played with -him.  I don't know why I didn't run.  I ought to have done so, but didn't.  I stayed
there until this body of infantry came up.  They had come to relieve the cavalry.  It was a
detail of negro soldiers, headed by the meanest looking white man as their captain, I ever saw.

In very abrupt words he told the cavalry that he had come to take their place, and they were
ordered to report back to their command.  Happening to catch sight of me, he asked, "What is
this Rebel doing here?"  One of the men spoke up and tried to say something in my favor, but
the more he said the more the captain of the blacks would get mad.  He started toward me two
or three times.  He was starting, I could see by the flush of his face, to take hold of me,
anyhow.  The cavalrymen tried to protest, and said a few cuss words.  The captain of the blacks
looks back very mad at the cavalry.  Here was my opportunity, now or never.  Uncle negro looked
on, not seeming to care for the cavalry, captain, or for me. I took up my gun very gently and
cocked it.  I had the gentleman. I had made up my mind if he advanced one step further, that
he was a dead man.  When he turned to look again, it was a look of surprise.  His face was
as red as a scalded beet, but in a moment was as white as a sheet. He was afraid to turn his
head to give a command.  The cavalry motioned their hands at me, as much as to say, "Run, Johnny,
run."  The captain of the blacks fell upon his face, and I broke and ran like a quarter-horse.
I never saw or heard any more of the captain of the blacks or his guard afterward.

"LOOK OUT, BOYS."

One night, five of us scouts, I thought all strangers to me, put up at an old gentleman's house.
I took him for a Catholic priest.  His head was shaved and he had on a loose gown like a lady's
dress, and a large cord and tassel tied around his waist, from which dangled a large bunch
of keys.  He treated us very kindly and hospitably, so far as words and politeness went, but
we had to eat our own rations and sleep on our own blankets.

At bedtime, he invited us to sleep in a shed in front of his double log cabin.  We all went
in, lay down, and slept.  A little while before day, the old priest came in and woke us up,
and said he thought he saw in the moonlight a detachment of cavalry coming down the road from
toward the Rebel lines.  One of our party jumped up and said there was a company of cavalry
coming that way, and then all four broke toward the old priest's room.  I jumped up, put on
one boot, and holding the other in my hand, I stepped out in the yard, with my hat and coat
off--both being left in the room.  A Yankee captain stepped up to me and said, "Are you No.
200?" I answered very huskily, "No, sir, I am not."  He then went on in the house, and on looking
at the fence, I saw there was at least two hundred Yankee cavalry right at me.  I did not know
what to do.  My hat, coat, gun, cartridge-box, and knapsack were all in the room.  I was afraid
to stay there, and I was afraid to give the alarm.  I soon saw almost every one of the Yankees
dismount, and then I determined to give the alarm and run.  I hallooed out as loud as I could,
"Look out, boys," and broke and run.  I had to jump over a garden picket fence, and as I lit
on the other side, bang! bang! bang! was fired right after me.  They stayed there but a short
time, and I went back and got my gun and other accouterments.

AM CAPTURED

When I left the old priest's house, it was then good day--nearly sun up-- and I had started
back toward our lines, and had walked on about half a mile, not thinking of danger, when four
Yankees jumped out in the middle of the road and said, "Halt, there!  O, yes, we've got you
at last." I was in for it.  What could I do?  Their guns were cocked and leveled at me, and
if I started to run, I would be shot, so I surrendered.  In a very short time the regiment
of Yankee cavalry came up, and the first greeting I had was, "Hello, you ain't No. 200, are
you?"  I was taken prisoner.  They, I thought, seemed to be very gleeful about it, and I had
to march right back by the old priest's house, and they carried me to the headquarters of General
Stephen Williams.  As soon as he saw me, he said, "Who have you there--a prisoner, or a deserter?"
They said a prisoner. From what command?  No one answered.  Finally he asked me what command
I belonged to.  I told him the Confederate States army.  Then, said he, "What is your name?"
Said I, "General, if that would be any information, I would have no hesitancy in giving it.
But I claim your protection as a prisoner of war.  I am a private soldier in the Confederate
States army, and I don't feel authorized to answer any question you may ask."  He looked at
me with a kind of quizical look, and said, "That is the way with you Rebels.  I have never
yet seen one of you, but thought what little information he might possess to be of value to
the Union forces." Then one of the men spoke up and said, "I think he is a spy or a scout,
and does not belong to the regular army."  He then gave me a close look, and said, "Ah, ah,
a guerrilla," and ordered me to be taken to the provost marshal's office.  They carried me
to a large, fine house, upstairs, and I was politely requested to take a seat.  I sat there
some moments, when a dandy-looking clerk of a fellow came up with a book in his hand, and said,
"The name."  I appeared not to understand, and he said, "The name."  I still looked at him,
and he said, "The name." I did not know what he meant by "The name."  Finally, he closed the
book with a slam and started off, and said I, "Did you want to find out my name?"  He said,
"I asked you three times."  I said, "When?  If you ever asked me my name, I have never heard
it."  But he was too mad to listen to anything else.  I was carried to another room in the
same building, and locked up.  I remained there until about dark, when a man brought me a tolerably
good supper, and then left me alone to my own meditations. I could hear the sentinels at all
times of the night calling out the hours.  I did not sleep a wink, nor even lay down.  I had
made up my mind to escape, if there was any possible chance.  About three o'clock everything
got perfectly still.  I went to the window, and it had a heavy bolt across it, and I could
not open it.  I thought I would try the door, but I knew that a guard was stationed in the
hall, for I could see a dim light glimmer through the key-hole.  I took my knife and unscrewed
the catch in which the lock was fastened, and soon found out that I could open the door; but
then there was the guard, standing at the main entrance down stairs.  I peeped down, and he
was quietly walking to and fro on his beat, every time looking to the hall.  I made up my mind
by his measured tread as to how often he would pass the door, and one time, after he had just
passed, I came out in the hall, and started to run down the steps.  About midway down the steps,
one of them cracked very loud, but I ran on down in the lower hall and ran into a room, the
door of which was open.  The sentinel came back to the entrance of the hall, and listened a
few minutes, and then moved on again.  I went to the window and raised the sash, but the blind
was fastened with a kind of patent catch.  I gave one or two hard pushes, and felt it move.
After that I made one big lunge, and it flew wide open, but it made a noise that woke up every
sentinel.  I jumped out in the yard, and gained the street, and, on looking back, I heard the
alarm given, and lights began to glimmer everywhere, but, seeing no one directly after me,
I made tracks toward Peachtree creek, and went on until I came to the old battlefield of July
22nd, and made my way back to our lines.

CHAPTER XV

ADVANCE INTO TENNESSEE

GENERAL HOOD MAKES A FLANK MOVEMENT

After remaining a good long time at Jonesboro, the news came that we were going to flank Atlanta.
We flanked it.  A flank means "a go around."

Yank says, "What you doing, Johnny?"

Johnny says, "We are flanking."

Yank says, "Bully for you!"

We passed around Atlanta, crossed the Chattahoochee, and traveled back over the same route
on which we had made the arduous campaign under Joe Johnston.  It took us four months in the
first instance, and but little longer than as many days in the second, to get back to Dalton,
our starting point.  On our way up there, the Yankee cavalry followed us to see how we were
getting along with the flanking business.  We had pontoons made for the purpose of crossing
streams.  When we would get to a stream, the pontoons would be thrown across, and Hood's army
would cross.  Yank would halloo over and say, "Well, Johnny, have you got everything across?"
"Yes," would be the answer.  "Well, we want these old pontoons, as you will not need them again."
And they would take them.

We passed all those glorious battlefields, that have been made classic in history, frequently
coming across the skull of some poor fellow sitting on top of a stump, grinning a ghastly smile;
also the bones of horses along the road, and fences burned and destroyed, and occasionally
the charred remains of a once fine dwelling house.  Outside of these occasional reminders we
could see no evidence of the desolation of the track of an invading army.  The country looked
like it did at first. Citizens came out, and seemed glad to see us, and would divide their
onions, garlic, and leek with us.  The soldiers were in good spirits, but it was the spirit
of innocence and peace, not war and victory.

Where the railroads would cross a river, a block-house had been erected, and the bridge was
guarded by a company of Federals.  But we always flanked these little affairs.  We wanted bigger
and better meat.

WE CAPTURE DALTON

When we arrived at Dalton, we had a desire to see how the old place looked; not that we cared
anything about it, but we just wanted to take a last farewell look at the old place.  We saw
the United States flag flying from the ramparts, and thought that Yank would probably be asleep
or catching lice, or maybe engaged in a game of seven-up.  So we sent forward a physician with
some white bandages tied to the end of a long pole.  He walked up and says, "Hello, boys!"
"What is it, boss?" "Well, boys, we've come for you."  "Hyah, ha; hyah, ha; hyah, ha; a hee,
he, he, he; if it ain't old master, sho."  The place was guarded by negro troops.  We marched
the black rascals out.  They were mighty glad to see us, and we were kindly disposed to them.
We said, "Now, boys, we don't want the Yankees to get mad at you, and to blame you; so, just
let's get out here on the railroad track, and tear it up, and pile up the crossties, and then
pile the iron on top of them, and we'll set the thing a-fire, and when the Yankees come back
they will say, 'What a bully fight them nagers did make.'"  (A Yankee always says "nager").
Reader, you should have seen how that old railroad did flop over, and how the darkies did sweat,
and how the perfume did fill the atmosphere.

But there were some Yankee soldiers in a block-house at Ringgold Gap, who thought they would
act big.  They said that Sherman had told them not to come out of that block-house, any how.
But General William B. Bate begun to persuade the gentlemen, by sending a few four-pound parrot
"feelers."  Ah! those feelers!

They persuaded eloquently.  They persuaded effectually--those feelers did.  The Yanks soon
surrendered.  The old place looked natural like, only it seemed to have a sort of graveyard
loneliness about it.

A MAN IN THE WELL

On leaving Dalton, after a day's march, we had stopped for the night. Our guns were stacked,
and I started off with a comrade to get some wood to cook supper with.  We were walking along,
he a little in the rear, when he suddenly disappeared.  I could not imagine what had become
of him.  I looked everywhere.  The earth seemed to have opened and swallowed him.  I called,
and called, but could get no answer.  Presently I heard a groan that seemed to come out of
the bowels of the earth; but, as yet, I could not make out where he was.  Going back to camp,
I procured a light, and after whooping and hallooing for a long time, I heard another groan,
this time much louder than before.  The voice appeared to be overhead.  There was no tree or
house to be seen; and then again the voice seemed to answer from under the ground, in a hollow,
sepulchral tone, but I could not tell where he was.  But I was determined to find him, so I
kept on hallooing and he answering.  I went to the place where the voice appeared to come out
of the earth.  I was walking along rather thoughtlessly and carelessly, when one inch more
and I would have disappeared also.  Right before me I saw the long dry grass all bending toward
a common center, and I knew that it was an old well, and that my comrade had fallen in it.
But how to get him out was the unsolved problem.  I ran back to camp to get assistance, and
everybody had a great curiosity to see "the man in the well."  They would get chunks of fire
and shake over the well, and, peeping down, would say, "Well, he's in there," and go off, and
others would come and talk about his "being in there."  The poor fellow stayed in that well
all night.  The next morning we got a long rope from a battery and let it down in the well,
and soon had him on terra firma.  He was worse scared than hurt.

TUSCUMBIA

We arrived and remained at Tuscumbia several days, awaiting the laying of the pontoons across
the Tennessee river at Florence, Alabama, and then we all crossed over.  While at Tuscumbia,
John Branch and I saw a nice sweet potato patch, that looked very tempting to a hungry Rebel.
We looked all around, and thought that the coast was clear.  We jumped over the fence, and
commenced grabbling for the sweet potatoes.  I had got my haversack full, and had started off,
when we heard, "Halt, there."  I looked around, and there was a soldier guard.  We broke and
run like quarter-horses, and the guard pulled down on us just as we jumped the fence.  I don't
think his gun was loaded, though, because we did not hear the ball whistle.

We marched from Decatur to Florence.  Here the pontoon bridges were nicely and beautifully
stretched across the river.  We walked over this floating bridge, and soon found ourselves
on the Tennessee side of Tennessee river.

In driving a great herd of cattle across the pontoon, the front one got stubborn, and the others,
crowding up all in one bulk, broke the line that held the pontoon, and drowned many of the
drove.  We had beef for supper that night.

How every pulse did beat and leap, and how every heart did throb with emotions of joy, which
seemed nearly akin to heaven, when we received the glad intelligence of our onward march toward
the land of promise, and of our loved ones.  The cold November winds coming off the mountains
of the northwest were blowing right in our faces, and nearly cutting us in two.

We were inured to privations and hardships; had been upon every march, in every battle, in
every skirmish, in every advance, in every retreat, in every victory, in every defeat.  We
had laid under the burning heat of a tropical sun; had made the cold, frozen earth our bed,
with no covering save the blue canopy of heaven; had braved dangers, had breasted floods; had
seen our comrades slain upon our right and our left hand; had heard guns that carried death
in their missiles; had heard the shouts of the charge; had seen the enemy in full retreat and
flying in every direction; had heard the shrieks and groans of the wounded and dying; had seen
the blood of our countrymen dyeing the earth and enriching the soil; had been hungry when there
was nothing to eat; had been in rags and tatters. We had marked the frozen earth with bloody
and unshod feet; had been elated with victory and crushed by defeat; had seen and felt the
pleasure of the life of a soldier, and had drank the cup to its dregs.  Yes, we had seen it
all, and had shared in its hopes and its fears; its love and its hate; its good and its bad;
its virtue and its vice; its glories and its shame.  We had followed the successes and reverses
of the flag of the Lost Cause through all these years of blood and strife.

I was simply one of hundreds of thousands in the same fix.  The tale is the same that every
soldier would tell, except Jim Whitler.  Jim had dodged about, and had escaped being conscripted
until "Hood's raid," he called it.  Hood's army was taking up every able-bodied man and conscripting
him into the army.  Jim Whitler had got a position as over-seer on a large plantation, and
had about a hundred negroes under his surveillance.  The army had been passing a given point,
and Jim was sitting quietly on the fence looking at the soldiers.  The conscripting squad nabbed
him.  Jim tried to beg off, but all entreaty was in vain. He wanted to go by home and tell
his wife and children good-bye, and to get his clothes.  It was no go.  But, after awhile,
Jim says, "Gentlemen, ay, Ganny, the law!"  You see, Jim "knowed" the law.  He didn't know
B from a bull's foot in the spelling-book.  But he said, the law. Now, when anyone says anything
about the "law," every one stops to listen.  Jim says, "Ah, Ganny, the law" (laying great stress
upon the law)--"allows every man who has twenty negroes to stay at home.  Ah, Ganny!"  Those
old soldiers had long, long ago, forgotten about that old "law" of the long gone past; but
Jim had treasured it up in his memory, lo! these many years, and he thought it would serve
him now, as it had, no doubt, frequently done in the past.  The conscript officer said, "Law
or no law--you fall into line, take this gun and cartridge-box, and march!"  Jim's spirits
sank; his hopes vanished into air.  Jim was soon in line, and was tramping to the music of
the march.  He stayed with the company two days.  The third day it was reported that the Yankees
had taken position on the Murfreesboro pike.  A regiment was sent to the attack.  It was Jim's
regiment.  He advanced bravely into battle. The minnie balls began to whistle around his ears.
The regiment was ordered to fire.  He hadn't seen anything to shoot at, but he blazed away.
He loaded and fired the second time, when they were ordered to retreat.  He didn't see anything
to run from, but the other soldiers began to run, and Jim run, too.  Jim had not learned the
word "halt!" and just kept on running.  He run, and he run, and he run, and he kept on running
until he got home, when he jumped in his door and shouted, "Whoopee, Rhoda!  Aye, Ganny, I've
served four years in the Rebel army."

CHAPTER XVI

BATTLES IN TENNESSEE

COLUMBIA

    "This is my own, my native land."

Once more the Maury Grays are permitted to put their feet upon their native heath, and to revisit
their homes and friends, after having followed their tattered, and torn, and battle-riddled
flag, which they had borne aloft for four long years, on every march, and in every battle that
had been fought by the Army of Tennessee.  We were a mere handful of devoted braves, who had
stood by our colors when sometimes it seemed that God himself had forsaken us.  But, parents,
here are your noble and brave sons; and, ladies, four years ago you gave us this flag, and
we promised you "That we would come back with the flag as victors, or we would come not at
all."  We have been true to our promise and our trust.  On every battlefield the flag that
you entrusted to our hands has been borne aloft by brave and heroic men, amid shot and shell,
bloody battle, and death. We have never forsaken our colors.  Are we worthy to be called the
sons of old Maury county?  Or have we fought in vain?  Have our efforts been appreciated, or
have four years of our lives been wasted, while we were battling for constitutional government,
the supremacy of our laws over centralization, and our rights, as guaranteed to us by the blood
of our forefathers on the battlefields of the Revolution?  It is for you to make up your verdict.
If our lives as soldiers have been a failure, we can but bow our heads on our bosoms, and say,
"Surely, four years of our lives have been given for naught, and our efforts to please you
have been in vain."

Yet, the invader's foot is still on our soil, but there beats in our bosoms the blood of brave
and patriotic men, and we will continue to follow our old and war-worn and battle-riddled flag
until it goes down forever.

The Maury Grays, commanded by Captain A. M. Looney, left Columbia, four years ago, with 120
men.  How many of those 120 original members are with the company today?  Just twelve.  Company
H has twenty members, but some of this number had subsequently enlisted.  But we twelve will
stick to our colors till she goes down forever, and until five more of this number fall dead
and bleeding on the battlefield.

A FIASCO

When we arrived in sight of Columbia, we found the Yankees still in possession of the town,
fortified and determined to resist our advance. We send forward a "feeler," and the "feeler"
reports back very promptly, "Yes, the Yankees are there."  Well, if that be the case, we'll
just make a flank movement.  We turn off the main turnpike at J. E. R. Carpenter's, and march
through the cedars, and cross Duck river at Davis' ferry, on pontoon bridges, near Lowell's
mill.  We pass on, and cross Rutherford creek, near Burick's mill, about three o'clock in the
afternoon.  We had marched through fields in the heavy mud, and the men, weary and worn out,
were just dragging themselves along, passing by the old Union Seminary, and then by Mr. Fred
Thompson's, until we came to the Rally Hill turnpike-- it being then nearly dark--we heard
some skirmishing, but, exhausted as we were, we went into bivouac.  The Yankees, it seems to
me, might have captured the whole of us.  But that is a matter of history.  But I desire to
state that no blunder was made by either Generals Cheatham or Stewart, neither of whom ever
failed to come to time.  Jeff Davis is alone responsible for the blunder.  About two hours
after sun up the next morning we received the order to "Fall in, fall in, quick, make haste,
hurrah, promptly, men; each rank count two; by the right flank, quick time, march; keep promptly
closed up."  Everything indicated an immediate attack.  When we got to the turnpike near Spring
Hill, lo! and behold; wonder of wonders! the whole Yankee army had passed during the night.
The bird had flown.  We made a quick and rapid march down the turnpike, finding Yankee guns
and knapsacks, and now and then a broken down straggler, also two pieces of howitzer cannon,
and at least twenty broken wagons along the road.  Everything betokened a rout and a stampede
of the Yankee army.  Double quick!  Forrest is in the rear.  Now for fun. All that we want
to do now is to catch the blue-coated rascals, ha! ha! We all want to see the surrender, ha!
ha!  Double quick!  A rip, rip, rip; wheuf; pant, pant, pant.  First one man drops out, and
then another. The Yankees are routed and running, and Forrest has crossed Harpeth river in
the rear of Franklin.  Hurrah, men! keep closed up; we are going to capture Schofield.  Forrest
is in the rear; never mind the straggler and cannon.  Kerflop we come against the breastworks
at Franklin.

FRANKLIN

    "The death-angel gathers its last harvest."

Kind reader, right here my pen, and courage, and ability fail me. I shrink from butchery. 
Would to God I could tear the page from these memoirs and from my own memory.  It is the blackest
page in the history of the war of the Lost Cause.  It was the bloodiest battle of modern times
in any war.  It was the finishing stroke to the independence of the Southern Confederacy. 
I was there.  I saw it.  My flesh trembles, and creeps, and crawls when I think of it today.
My heart almost ceases to beat at the horrid recollection.  Would to God that I had never witnessed
such a scene!

I cannot describe it.  It beggars description.  I will not attempt to describe it.  I could
not.  The death-angel was there to gather its last harvest.  It was the grand coronation of
death.  Would that I could turn the page.  But I feel, though I did so, that page would still
be there, teeming with its scenes of horror and blood.  I can only tell of what I saw.

Our regiment was resting in the gap of a range of hills in plain view of the city of Franklin.
We could see the battle-flags of the enemy waving in the breeze.  Our army had been depleted
of its strength by a forced march from Spring Hill, and stragglers lined the road.  Our artillery
had not yet come up, and could not be brought into action.  Our cavalry was across Harpeth
river, and our army was but in poor condition to make an assault.  While resting on this hillside,
I saw a courier dash up to our commanding general, B. F. Cheatham, and the word, "Attention!"
was given. I knew then that we would soon be in action.  Forward, march.  We passed over the
hill and through a little skirt of woods.

The enemy were fortified right across the Franklin pike, in the suburbs of the town.  Right
here in these woods a detail of skirmishers was called for.  Our regiment was detailed.  We
deployed as skirmishers, firing as we advanced on the left of the turnpike road.  If I had
not been a skirmisher on that day, I would not have been writing this today, in the year of
our Lord 1882.

It was four o'clock on that dark and dismal December day when the line of battle was formed,
and those devoted heroes were ordered forward, to

    "Strike for their altars and their fires,
     For the green graves of their sires,
     For God and their native land."

As they marched on down through an open field toward the rampart of blood and death, the Federal
batteries began to open and mow down and gather into the garner of death, as brave, and good,
and pure spirits as the world ever saw.  The twilight of evening had begun to gather as a precursor
of the coming blackness of midnight darkness that was to envelop a scene so sickening and horrible
that it is impossible for me to describe it.  "Forward, men," is repeated all along the line.
A sheet of fire was poured into our very faces, and for a moment we halted as if in despair,
as the terrible avalanche of shot and shell laid low those brave and gallant heroes, whose
bleeding wounds attested that the struggle would be desperate.  Forward, men!  The air loaded
with death-dealing missiles.  Never on this earth did men fight against such terrible odds.
It seemed that the very elements of heaven and earth were in one mighty uproar.  Forward, men!
And the blood spurts in a perfect jet from the dead and wounded.  The earth is red with blood.
It runs in streams, making little rivulets as it flows.  Occasionally there was a little lull
in the storm of battle, as the men were loading their guns, and for a few moments it seemed
as if night tried to cover the scene with her mantle. The death-angel shrieks and laughs and
old Father Time is busy with his sickle, as he gathers in the last harvest of death, crying,
More, more, more! while his rapacious maw is glutted with the slain.

