I felt so sorry for the man in his misfortune that I prayed to the Great Spirit to restore
him. But though I pitied him at a distance, I was still afraid of him when he appeared near
our wigwam.

Thus, when my mother left me by myself that afternoon I sat in a fearful mood within our tepee.
I recalled all I had ever heard about Wiyaka-Napbina; and I tried to assure myself that though
he might pass near by, he would not come to our wigwam because there was no little girl around
our grounds.

Just then, from without a hand lifted the canvas covering of the entrance; the shadow of a
man fell within the wigwam, and a large roughly moccasined foot was planted inside.

For a moment I did not dare to breathe or stir, for I thought that could be no other than Wiyaka-Napbina.
The next instant I sighed aloud in relief. It was an old grandfather who had often told me
Iktomi legends.

"Where is your mother, my little grandchild?" were his first words.

"My mother is soon coming back from my aunt's tepee," I replied.

"Then I shall wait awhile for her return," he said, crossing his feet and seating himself upon
a mat.

At once I began to play the part of a generous hostess. I turned to my mother's coffeepot.

Lifting the lid, I found nothing but coffee grounds in the bottom. I set the pot on a heap
of cold ashes in the centre, and filled it half full of warm Missouri River water. During this
performance I felt conscious of being watched. Then breaking off a small piece of our unleavened
bread, I placed it in a bowl. Turning soon to the coffeepot, which would never have boiled
on a dead fire had I waited forever, I poured out a cup of worse than muddy warm water. Carrying
the bowl in one hand and cup in the other, I handed the light luncheon to the old warrior.
I offered them to him with the air of bestowing generous hospitality.

"How! how!" he said, and placed the dishes on the ground in front of his crossed feet. He nibbled
at the bread and sipped from the cup. I sat back against a pole watching him. I was proud to
have succeeded so well in serving refreshments to a guest all by myself. Before the old warrior
had finished eating, my mother entered. Immediately she wondered where I had found coffee,
for she knew I had never made any, and that she had left the coffeepot empty. Answering the
question in my mother's eyes, the warrior remarked, "My granddaughter made coffee on a heap
of dead ashes, and served me the moment I came."

They both laughed, and mother said, "Wait a little longer, and I shall build a fire." She meant
to make some real coffee. But neither she nor the warrior, whom the law of our custom had compelled
to partake of my insipid hospitality, said anything to embarrass me. They treated my best judgment,
poor as it was, with the utmost respect. It was not till long years afterward that I learned
how ridiculous a thing I had done.

V.

THE DEAD MAN'S PLUM BUSH.

One autumn afternoon many people came streaming toward the dwelling of our near neighbor. With
painted faces, and wearing broad white bosoms of elk's teeth, they hurried down the narrow
footpath to Haraka Wambdi's wigwam. Young mothers held their children by the hand, and half
pulled them along in their haste. They overtook and passed by the bent old grandmothers who
were trudging along with crooked canes toward the centre of excitement. Most of the young braves
galloped hither on their ponies. Toothless warriors, like the old women, came more slowly,
though mounted on lively ponies. They sat proudly erect on their horses. They wore their eagle
plumes, and waved their various trophies of former wars.

