“I,” said a voice—“I am Desire. In Greece I am revered, and there I am Aphrodite. In Italy
I am Venus; in Egypt, Hathor; in Armenia, Anaitis; in Persia, Anâhita; Tanit in Carthage; Baaltis
in Byblus; Derceto in Ascalon; Atargatis in Hierapolis; Bilet in Babylon; Ashtaroth to the
Sidonians; and Aschera in the glades of Judæa. And everywhere I am worshipped, and everywhere
I am Love. I bring joy and torture, delight and pain. I appease and appal. It is I that create
and undo. It is I that make heaven and people hell. I am the mistress of the world. Without
me time would cease to be. I am the germ of stars, the essence of things. I am all that is,
will be, and has been, and my robe no mortal has raised. I breathe, and nations are; in my
parturitions are planets; my home is space. My lips are blissfuller than any bloom of bliss;
my arms the opening gates of life. The Infinite is mine. Mary, come with me, and you shall
measure it.”

When Mary ventured to look again the vision had gone. They had all gone now. She had made no
effort to detain them. De Vallance and Eustace were both obnoxious to the ruling powers by having
borne arms for the King; and he insisted on their continuing concealed in his Welsh cottage,
while himself went to consult Dr. Beaumont upon their future measures.
 “Come unto me, all ye that sorrow and are heavy-laden,”
she heard him say; and, as with a great sob of joy she rose to that gracious summons, night
seized her. When she awoke, a newer dawn had come.

                               CHAPTER IV.

                                   IV.

In the gardens of the palace the tetrarch mused. The green parasols of the palms formed an
avenue, and down that avenue now and then he looked. Near him a Syrian bear, quite tame, with
a sweet face and tufted silver fur, gambolled prodigiously. Up and down a neighboring tree
two lemurs chased with that grace and diabolic vivacity which those enchanting animals alone
possess. Ringed-horned antelopes, the ankles slender as the stylus, the eyes timid and trustful,
pastured just beyond; and there too a black-faced ape, irritated perhaps by the lemurs, turned
indignant somersaults, the tender coloring of his body glistening in the sun.

“It is odd that Pahul does not return,” the tetrarch reflected; and then, it may be for consolation’s
sake, he plunged his face in a jar of wine that had been drained, in accordance with a recipe
of Vitellius, through cinnamon and calamus, and drank abundantly.

Long since he had deserted Machærus. The legends that peopled its corridors had beset him with
a sense of reality which before they had never possessed. The leaves of the baaras glittered
frenetically in the basalt, and in their spectral light a phantom with eyes that cursed came
and went. At night he had drunk, and in the clear forenoons he paced the terrace fancying always
that there, beyond in the desert, Aretas prowled like a wolf. Machærus was unhealthy; men had
gone mad there, others had disappeared entirely. It was a haunt of echoes, of memories, of
ghosts also, perhaps too of reproach. And so, with his court, he returned to his brand-new
Tiberias, where the air was serener, and nature laughed.

