When he was at work his indulgence seemed for the moment to leave him. He was a surgeon of
the first order and loved his profession. He was a man now of fifty, but had never married,
preferring a long succession of mistresses--women who had loved him, at whom he had always
laughed, to whom he had been kind in a careless fashion.... He always declared that no woman
had ever touched his heart.

He had come to the war voluntarily, forsaking a very lucrative practice. This was always a
puzzle to me. He had no romantic notions about the war, no altruistic compulsions, no high
conceptions of his duty ... no one had worked more magnificently in the war than he. He could
not be said to be popular amongst us; we were all of us perhaps a little afraid of him. He
cared, so obviously, for none of us. But we admired his vitality, his courage, his independence.
I myself was assured that he allowed us to see him only with the most casual superficiality.

As he rode up to me I wondered how he and Nikitin would fare. These were two personalities
worthy of attention. Also, what would he think of Trenchard? His opinion of any one had great
weight amongst us.

I had not seen him last night and he leant over his horse now and shook hands with me with
a warm friendliness that surprised me. He laughed, joked, was evidently in excellent spirits.
He rode on a little, then came back to us.

"I like your new Sister," he said. "She's charming."

"She's engaged," I answered, "to the new Englishman."

"Ah! the new Englishman!" He laughed. "Apologies, Ivan Andreievitch (myself), to your country
... but really ... what's he going to do with us?"

"He'll work," I said, surprised at the heat that I felt in Trenchard's defence. "He's a splendid
fellow."

"I have no doubt"--again Semyonov laughed. "We all know your enthusiasms, Ivan Andreievitch,
... but an Englishman! Ye Bogu!..."

"Engaged to that girl!" I heard him repeat to himself as again he rode forward. Trenchard,
little Andrey Vassilievitch, Semyonov, Nikitin ... yes, there was promise of much development here.

We had dropped down into the valley and, at a sudden turn, saw the school-house in front of
us. It is before me now as I write with its long low whitewashed two-storied front, its dormer-windows,
its roof faintly pink with a dark red bell-tower perched on the top. Behind it is a long green
field stretching to where hills, faintly blue in the morning light, rose, with very gradual
slopes against the sky. To the right I could see there was a garden hidden now by trees, on
the left a fine old barn, its thatched roof deep brown, the props supporting it black with
age. In front of the pillared porch there was a little square of white cobble-stones and in
the middle of these an old grey sundial. The whole place was bathed in the absolute peace of
the spring morning.

As we drove up a little old lady with two tiny children clinging to her skirts came to the
porch. I could see, as we came up to her, that she was trembling with terror; she put up her
hand to her white hair, clutched again desperately the two children, found at last her voice
and hoped that we would be "indulgent."

Molozov assured her that she would suffer in no kind of way, that we must use her school for
a week or so and that any loss or damage that she incurred would of course be made up to her.
She was then, of a sudden, immensely fluent, explaining that her husband--"a most excellent
husband to me in every way one might say"--had been dead fifteen years now, that her two sons
were both fighting for the Austrians, that she looked after the school assisted by her daughter.
These were her grandchildren.... Such a terrible year she, in all her long life, had never
remembered. She....

The arrival of the rest of the Oboz silenced her. She remained, with wide-open staring eyes,
her hand at her breast, watching, saying absent-mindedly to the children: "Now Katya.... Now
Anna.... See what you're about!"

The school was spotlessly clean. In the schoolroom the rough benches were marked with names
and crosses. On the whitewashed walls were coloured maps of Galicia and tables of the Austrian
kings and queens; on the blackboard still an unfinished arithmetical sum and on the master's
desk a pile of exercise books.

In a moment everything was changed; the sanitars had turned the schoolroom into a dormitory,
another room was to be our dining-room, another a bedroom for the Sisters. In the high raftered
kitchen our midday meal was already cooking; the little cobbled court was piled high with luggage.
In the field beyond the house the sanitars had pitched their tents.

I walked out into the little garden--a charming place with yew hedges, a lichen-covered well
and old thick apple-trees, and here I found an old man in a broad-brimmed straw hat tending
the bees. The hives were open and he was working with a knife whilst the bees hung in a trembling
hovering cloud about him. I spoke to him but he paid no attention to me at all. I watched him
then spoke again; he straightened himself then looked at me for a moment with eyes full of
scorn. Words of fury, of abuse perhaps, seemed to tremble on his lips, then shaking his head
he turned his back upon me and continued his work. Behind us I could hear the soldiers breaking
the garden-fence to make stakes for their tents.

Here we were for a fortnight and it was strange to me, in the days of stress and excitement
that followed, to look back to that fortnight and remember that we had, so many of us, been
restless and discontented at the quiet of it. Oddly enough, of all the many backgrounds that
were, during the next months, to follow in procession behind me, there only remain to me with
enduring vitality: this school-house at O----, the banks of the River Nestor which I had indeed
good reason to remember, and finally the forest of S----. How strange a contrast, that school-house
with its little garden and white cobbles and that forest which will, to the end of my life,
ever haunt my dreams.

And yet, by its very contrast, how fitting a background to our Prologue this school-house made!
I wonder whether Nikitin sees it still in his visions? Trenchard and Semyonov ... does it mean
anything to them, where they now are? First of them all, Marie Ivanovna.... I see her still,
bending over the well looking down, then suddenly flinging her head back, laughing as we stood
behind her, the sunlight through the apple-trees flashing in her eyes.... That fortnight must
be to many of us of how ironic, of how tragic a tranquillity!

So we settled down and did our best to become happily accustomed to one another. Our own immediate
company numbered twenty or so--Molozov, two doctors, myself, Trenchard and Andrey Vassilievitch,
the two new Sisters and the three former ones, five or six young Russians, gentlemen of ease
and leisure who had had some "bandaging" practice at the Petrograd hospitals, and three very
young medical students, directly attached to our two doctors. In addition to these there were
the doctors, Sisters and students belonging to the army itself--the Sixty-Fifth Division of
the Ninth Army. These sometimes lived with us and sometimes by themselves; they had at their
head Colonel Oblonsky, a military doctor of much experience and wide knowledge. There were
also the regular sanitars, some thirty or forty, men who were often by profession schoolmasters
or small merchants, of a better class for the most part than the ordinary soldier.

It is not, of course, my intention to describe with any detail the individuals of this company.
I have chosen already those of us who are especially concerned with my present history, but
these others made a continually fluctuating and variable background, at first confusing and,
to a stranger, almost terrifying. When the army doctors and Sisters dined with us we numbered
from thirty to forty persons: sometimes also the officers of the Staff of the Sixty-Fifth came
to our table. There were other occasions when every one was engaged on one business or another
and only three or four of us were left at the central station or "Punkt," as it was called.

And, of all these persons, who now stands out? I can remember a Sister, short, plain, with
red hair, who felt that she was treated with insufficient dignity, whose voice rising in complaint
is with me now; I can see her small red-rimmed eyes watching for some insult and then the curl
of her lip as she snatched her opportunity.... Or there was the jolly, fat Sister who had travelled
with us, an admirable worker, but a woman, apparently, with no personal life at all, no excitements,
dreads, angers, dejections. Upon her the war made no impression at all. She spoke sometimes
to us of her husband and her children. She was not greedy, nor patriotic, neither vain nor
humble, neither egoistic nor unselfish. She was simply reliable.

Or there was the tall gaunt Sister, intensely religious and serious. She was regarded by all
of us as an excellent woman, but of course we did not like her.

One would say to another: "Sister K----, what an excellent worker!"

"Yes. How she works!"

"Splendid! Splendid!"

When owing to the illness of her old mother she was compelled to return to Petrograd what relief
we all felt! How gay was our supper the night of her departure! There was something very childish
at the heart of all of us.

Of the young gentlemen from Petrograd I remember only three. The family name of one was Ivanoff,
but he was always known to the Otriad as Goga, a pet diminutive of George. He was perhaps the
youngest person whom I have ever known. He must have been eighteen years of age; he looked
about eleven, with a round red face and wide-open eyes that expressed eternal astonishment.
Like Mr. Toots', his mind was continually occupied with his tailor and he told me on several
occasions that he hoped I should visit him in Petrograd because there in the house of his mother
he had many splendid suits, shirts, ties, that it would give him pleasure to show me. In spite
of this little weakness, he showed a most energetic character, willing to do anything for anybody,
eager to please the whole world. I can hear his voice now:

"Yeh Bogu! Ivan Andreievitch!... Imagine my position! There was General Polinoff and the whole
Staff.... What to do? Only three versts from the position too and already six o'clock...."

Or there was another serious gentleman, whose mind was continually occupied with Russia: "It
may be difficult for you, Ivan Andreievitch, to see with our eyes, but for those of us who
have Russia in our hearts ... what rest or peace can there be? I can assure you...."

He wore pince-nez and with his long pear-shaped head, shaven to the skin, his white cheeks,
protruding chin and long heavy white hands he resembled nothing so much as a large fish hanging
on a nail at a fishmonger's. He worked always in a kind of cold desperate despair, his pince-nez
slipping off his shiny nose, his mouth set grimly. "What is the use?" he seemed to say, "of
helping these poor wounded soldiers when Russia is in such a desperate condition? Tell me that!"

Or there was a wild rough fellow from some town in Little Russia, a boy of the most primitive
character, no manners at all and a heart of shining gold. Of life he had the very wildest notions.
He loved women and would sing Southern Russian songs about them. He had a strain of fantasy
that continually surprised one. He liked fairy tales. He would say to me: "There's a tale?
Ivan Andreievitch, about a princess who lived on a lake of glass. There was a forest, you know,
round the lake and all the trees were of gold. The pond was guarded by three dwarfs. I myself,
Ivan Andreievitch, have seen a dwarf in Kiev no higher than your leg, and in our town they
say there was once a whole family of dwarfs who lived in a house in the chief street in our
town and sold potatoes.... I don't know.... People tell one such things. But for the rest of
that tale, do you remember how it goes?"

He could ride any horse, carry any man, was never tired nor out of heart. He had the vaguest
ideas about the war. "I knew a German once in our town," he told me. "I always hated him....
He was going to Petrograd to make his fortune. I hope he's dead." This fellow was called Petrov.

My chief interest during this fortnight was to watch the fortunes of Marie Ivanovna and Trenchard
with their new companions. It was instantly apparent that Marie Ivanovna was a success. On
the second day after our arrival at the school-house there were continual exclamations: "But
how charming the new Sister! How sympathetic!... Have you talked to the new Sister?"

Even Sister K----, so serious and religious, approved. It was evident at once that Marie Ivanovna
was, on her side, delighted with every one. I could see that at present she was assured that
what she wanted from life would be granted to her. She gave herself, with complete confidence,
to any one and every one, and, with that triumphing vitality that one felt in her from the
first moment of meeting her, she carried all before her. In the hospital at Petrograd they
had been, I gathered, "all serious and old," had treated her I fancy with some sternness. Here,
at any rate, "serious and old" she would not find us. We welcomed, with joy, her youth, her
enthusiasm, her happiness.

Semyonov, who never disguised nor restrained his feelings, was, from the first instant, strangely
attracted to her. She, I could see, liked him very much, felt in him his strength and capacity
and scorn of others. Molozov also yielded her his instant admiration. He always avoided any
close personal relationship with any of us but I could see that he was delighted with her vitality
and energy. She pleased the older Sisters by her frank and quite honest desire to be told things
and the younger Sisters by her equally honest admiration of their gifts and qualities. She
was honest and sincere, I do believe, in every word and thought and action. She had, in many
ways, the naive purity, the unconsidered faith and confidence of a child still in the nursery.
She amazed me sometimes by her ignorance; she delighted me frequently by her refreshing truth
and straightforwardness. She felt a little, I think, that I did not yield her quite the extravagant
admiration of the others. I was Trenchard's friend....

Yes, I was now Trenchard's friend. What had occurred since that night in the train, when I
had felt, during the greater part of the time, nothing but irritation? Frankly, I do not know.
It may be, partly, that he was given to me by the rest of the Otriad. He was spoken of now
as "my" Englishman. And then, poor Trenchard!... How, during this fortnight, he was unhappy!
It had begun with him as I had foreseen. In the first place he had been dismayed and silenced
by the garrulity of his new companions. It had seemed to him that he had understood nothing
of their conversation, that he was in the way, that finally he was more lonely than he had
ever been in his life before. Then, however strongly he might to himself deny it, he had arrived
in Russia with what Nikitin called "his romantic notions." He had read his Dostoevski and Turgenev;
he had looked at those books of Russian impressions that deal in nothing but snow, ikons, and
the sublime simplicity of the Russian peasant. He was a man whose circumstances had led him
to believe profoundly in his own incapacity, unpopularity, ignorance. For a moment his love
had given him a new confidence but now how was that same love deserting him? He had foreseen
a glorious campaign, his lady and himself side by side, death and terror flying before him.
He found himself leading a country life of perfect quiet and comfort, even as he might have
led it in England, with a crowd of people, strangely unfamiliar to him, driving him, as he
had been driven in the old days, into a host of awkwardnesses, confusions and foolishnesses.
I could not forgive Marie Ivanovna for her disappointment in him, and yet I could understand
how different he must have appeared to her during those last days in Petrograd, when alone
with her and on fire with love, he had shown his true and bravest self to her. She was impatient,
she had hoped that the others would see him as she had seen him. She watched them as they expressed
their surprise that he was not the practical, fearless and unimaginative Englishman who was
their typical figure. Whilst he found them far from the Karamazovs, the Raskolnikoffs, of his
imagination, they in their turn could not create the "sportsman" and "man of affairs" whom
they had expected.

To all of this Semyonov added, beyond question, his personal weight. He had from the first
declared Trenchard "a ridiculous figure." Whilst the others were unfailingly kind, hospitable
and even indulgent to Trenchard, Semyonov was openly satirical, making no attempt to hide his
sarcastic irony. I do not know how much Trenchard's engagement to Marie Ivanovna had to do
with this, but I know that "my Englishman" could not to his misfortune have had a more practical,
more efficient figure against whom to be contrasted than Semyonov.

During these weeks I think that I hated Semyonov. There was, however, one silent observer of
all this business upon whose personal interference I had not reckoned. This was Nikitin, who,
at the end of our first week at the school-house, broke his silence in a conversation with me.

Nikitin, although he spoke as little as possible to any one, had already had his effect upon
the Otriad. They felt behind his silence a personality that might indeed be equal to Semyonov's
own. By little Andrey Vassilievitch they were always being assured: "Nikitin! A most remarkable
man! You may believe me. I have known him for many years. A great friend of my poor wife's
and mine...."

They did not appear to be great friends. Nikitin quite obviously avoided the little man whenever
it was possible. But then he avoided us all.

Upon a lovely afternoon Nikitin and I were alone in the wild little garden, he lying full length
on the grass, I reading a very ancient English newspaper, with my back against a tree.

He looked up at me with a swift penetrating glance, as though he were seeing me for the first
time and would wish at once to weigh my character and abilities.

"Your Englishman," he said. "He's not happy, I'm afraid."

"No," I said, feeling the surprise of his question--it had become almost a tradition with me
that he never spoke unless he were first spoken to. "He feels strange and a little lonely,
perhaps ... it's natural enough!"

"Yes," repeated Nikitin, "it's natural enough. What did he come for?"

"Oh, he'll be all right," I said hastily, "in a day or two."

Nikitin lay on his back looking at the green, layer upon layer, light and dark, with golden
fragments of broken light leaping in the breeze from branch to branch. "Why did he come? What
did he expect to see? I know what he expected to see--romantic Russia, romantic war. He expected
to find us, our hearts exploding with love, God's smile on our simple faces, God's simple faith
in our souls.... He has been told by his cleverest writers that Russia is the last stronghold
of God. And war? He thought that he would be plunged into a scene of smoke and flame, shrapnel,
horror upon horror, danger upon danger. He finds instead a country house, meals long and large,
no sounds of cannon, not even an aeroplane. Are we kind to him? Not at all.... We are not unkind
but we simply have other things to think about, and because we are primitive people we do what
we want to do, feel what we want to feel, and show quite frankly our feelings. He is not what
we expected, so that we prefer to fill our minds with things that do not give us trouble. Later,
like all Englishmen, he will dismiss us as savages, or, if he is of the intellectual kind,
he will talk about our confusing subtleties and contradictions. But we are neither savages
nor confusing. We have simply a skin less than you.... We are a very young people, a real and
genuine Democracy, and we care for quite simple things, women, food, sleep, money, quite simply
and without restraint. We show our eagerness, our disgust, our disappointment, our amusement
simply as the mood moves us. In Moscow they eat all day and are not ashamed. Why should they
be? In Kiev they think always about women and do not pretend otherwise ... and so on. We have,
of course, no sense of time, nor method, nor system. If we were to think of these things we
would be compelled to use restraint and that would bother us. We may lose the most important
treasure in the world by not keeping an appointment ... on the other hand we have kept our
freedom. We care for ideas for which you care nothing in England but we have a sure suspicion
of all conclusions. We are pessimists, one and all. Life cannot be good. We ironically survey
those who think that it can.... We give way always to life but when things are at their worst
then we are relieved and even happy. Here at any rate we are on safe ground. We have much sentiment,
but it may, at any moment, give way to some other emotion. We are therefore never to be relied
upon, as friends, as enemies, as anything you please. Except this--that in the heart of every
Russian there is a passionate love of goodness. We are tolerant to all evil, to all weakness
because we ourselves are weak. We confess our weakness to any one because that permits us to
indulge in it--but when we see in another goodness, strength, virtue, we worship it. You may
bind us to you with bands of iron by your virtues--never, as all foreigners think, by your
vices. In this, too, we are sentimentalists. We may not believe in God but we have an intense
curiosity about Him--a curiosity that with many of us never leaves us alone, compels us to
fill our lives, to fill our lives.... We love Russia.... But that is another thing.... Never
forget too that behind every Russian's simplicity there is always his Ideal--his secret Ideal,
perhaps, that he keeps like an ikon sacred in his heart. Yes, of every Russian, even of the
worst of us, that is true. And it complicates our lives, delivers us to our enemies, defeats
all our worldly aims, renders us helpless at the moment when we should be most strong. But
it is good, before God, that it should be so...."

He suddenly sprang up and stood before me. "To-morrow I shall think otherwise--and yet this
is part of the truth that I have told you.... And your Englishman? I like him ... I like him.
That girl will treat him badly, of course. How can she do otherwise? He sees her like Turgenev's
Liza. Well, she is not that. No girl in Russia to-day is like Turgenev's Liza. And it's a good
thing." He smiled--that strange, happy, confident mysterious smile that I had seen first on
the Petrograd platform. Then he turned and walked slowly towards the house.

What Nikitin had said about Trenchard's expectation of "romantic war" was perhaps true, in
different degrees, of all of us. Even I, in spite of my earlier experience, felt some irritation
at this delay, and to those of us who had arrived flaming with energy, bravery, resolution
to make their name before Europe, this feasting in a country garden seemed a deliberate insult.
Was this "romantic war?" These long meals under the trees, deep sleeps in the afternoon when
the pigeons cooed round the little red bell-tower and the pump creaked in the cobbled courtyard
and the bees hummed in the garden? Bees, cold water shining deep in the well, and the samovar
chuckling behind the flower-beds, and fifteen versts away the Austrians challenging the Russian
nation!... "You know," Andrey Vassilievitch said to me, "it's very disheartening."

Marie Ivanovna at the end of the first week spoke her mind. I found her one evening before
supper leaning over the fence, gazing across the long flat field, pale gold in the dusk with
the hills like grey clouds beyond it.

"They tell me," she said, turning to me, "that we may be another fortnight like this."

"Yes," I said, "it's quite possible, or even longer. We can't provide wounded and battles for
you if there aren't any."

"But there are!" she cried. "Isn't the whole of Europe fighting and isn't it simply disgusting
of us to be sitting down here, eating and sleeping, just as though we were in a dacha in the
country? At least in the hospital in Petrograd I was working ... here...."

"We've got to stick to our Division," I answered. "They can't have it in reserve very long.
When it goes, we'll go. The whole secret of leading this life out here is taking exactly what
comes as completely as you can take it. If it's a time for sleeping and eating, sleep and eat--there'll
be days enough when you'll get nothing of either."

She laughed then, swinging round to me, with the dusk round her white nurse's cap and her eyes
dark with her desires and hopes and disappointments.

"Oh, I've no right to be discontented.... Every one is so good to me. I love them all--even
you, Mr. Durward. But I want to begin, to begin, to begin! I want to see what it's like, to
find what there is there that frightens them, or makes them happy. We had a young officer in
our hospital who died. He was too ill ... he could tell us nothing, but he was so excited by
something ... something he was in the middle of.... Who was it? What was it? I must be there,
hunt it out, find that I'm strong enough not to be afraid of anything." She suddenly dropped
her voice, changing with sharp abruptness. "And John? He's not happy here, is he?"

"You should know," I answered, "better than any of us."

"Why should I know?" she replied, flaming out at me. "You always blame me about him, but you
are unfair. I want him to be happy--I would make him so if I could. But he's so strange, so
different from his time at the hospital. He will scarcely speak to me or to any one. Why can't
he be agreeable to every one? I want them to like him but how can they when he won't talk to
them and runs away if they come near him? He's disappointed perhaps at its being so quiet here.
It isn't what he expected to find it, but then isn't that the same for all of us? And we don't
sulk all day. He's disappointed with me perhaps but he won't tell me what he wants. If I ask
him he only says 'Oh, it's all r-right--it's all r-right'--I hate that 'all r-right' of your
language--so stupid! What a purpose not to say if he wants something?"

I said nothing. My silence urged her to a warmer defence.

"And then he makes such mistakes--always everything wrong that he's asked to do. Doctor Semyonov
laughs at him--but of course! He's like a little boy, a man as old as he is. And Englishmen
are always so practical, capable. Oh! speak to him, Mr. Durward; you can, please. If I say
anything he's at once so miserable.... I don't understand, I don't understand!" she cried,
raising her hands with a little despairing gesture. "How can he have been like that in Petrograd,
and now like this!"

"Give him time, Marie Ivanovna," I answered her. "This is all new to him, confusing, alarming.
He's led a very quiet life. He's very sensitive. He cares for you so deeply that the slightest
thing wounds him. He would hide that if he could--it's his tragedy that he can't."

She would have answered had not supper arrived and with it our whole company. Shall I ever
know a more beautiful night? As we sat there the moon came up, red-gold and full; the stars
were clustered so thickly between the trees that their light lay heavy like smoke upon the
air. The little garden seemed to be never still as our candlelight blew in the breeze; so it
hovered and trembled about us, the trees bending beneath their precious load of stars, shuddering
in their happiness at so good an evening.

We sat there as though we had known that it was to be our last night of peace.... Many times
the glasses of tea were filled, many times the little blue tin boxes of sweets were pushed
up and down the table, many times the china teapot on the top of the samovar was fed with fresh
tea, many times spoons were dipped into the strawberry jam and then plunged into the glasses
of tea, such being the Russian pleasure.

There occurred then an unfortunate incident. Some one had said something about England: there
had been a joke then about "sportsmen," some allusion was made to some old story connected
with myself, and I had laughingly taken up the challenge. Suddenly Semyonov leaned across the
table and spoke to Trenchard. Trenchard, who had been silent throughout the meal, misunderstood
the Russian, thought that Semyonov was trying to insult him, and sat there colouring, flaming
at last, silent. We all of us felt the awkwardness of it. There was a general pause--Semyonov
himself drew back with a little laugh.

Suddenly Marie Ivanovna, across the table, in English said softly but with a strange eager
hostility:

"How absurd!... To let them all see ... to let them know...." Perhaps I, who was sitting next
to her, alone heard her words.

The colour left Trenchard's face; he looked at her once, then got up and left the table. I
could see then that she was distressed, but she talked, laughed more eagerly, more enthusiastically
than before. Sometimes I saw her look towards the school-house.

When there came an opportunity I rose and went to find him. He was standing near his bed, his
back to the door, his hands clenched.

"I say, come out again--just as though nothing had happened. No one noticed anything, only I...."

He turned to me, his face working and with a passionate gesture, in a voice that choked over
the words, he cried: "She should not have said it. She should not ... every one there.... She
knew how it would wound me.... Semyonov...."

He positively was silent over that name. The mild expression of his eyes, the clumsy kindness
of his mouth gave a ludicrous expression to his rage.

"Wait! Wait!" I cried. "Be patient!"

As I spoke I could hear him in the railway carriage:

"I am mad with happiness.... God forgive me, my heart will break."

Breaking from me, despair in his voice, he whispered to the empty room, the desolate row of
white beds watching him: "I always knew that I was hopeless ... hopeless ... hopeless."

"Look here," I said. "You mustn't take things so hard. You go up and down.... Your emotions...."

But he only shook his head:

"She shouldn't have said it--like that--before every one," he repeated.

I left him. Afterwards as I stood in the passage, white and ghostly in the moonlight, something
suddenly told me that this night the prologue of our drama was concluded.

I waited on the steps of the house, heard the laughing voices in the distance, while over the
rest of the world there was absolute silence; then abruptly, quite sharply, across the long
low fields there came the rumble of cannon. Three times it sounded. Then hearing no more I
returned into the house.

CHAPTER III

THE INVISIBLE BATTLE

On the evening of the following day Trenchard, Andrey Vassilievitch and I were sent with sanitars
and wagons to the little hamlet of M----, five versts only from the Position. It was night
when we arrived there; no sound of cannon, only on the high hills (the first lines of the Carpathians)
that faced us the scattered watchfires of our own Sixty-Fifth Division, and in the little village
street a line of cavalry moving silently, without a spoken word, on to the high-road beyond.
After much difficulty (the village was filled with the officers of the Sixty-Fifth) we found
a kitchen in which we might sleep. Upon the rough earth floor our mattresses were spread, my
feet under the huge black oven, my head beneath a gilt picture of the Virgin and Child that
in the candlelight bowed and smiled, in company with eight other pictures of Virgins and Children,
to give us confidence and encouragement.

It was a terrible night. On a high pillared bed set into the farther wall, an old Galician
woman, her head bound up in a red handkerchief, knelt all night and prayed aloud. Her daughter
crouched against the wall, sleeping, perhaps, but nevertheless rocking ceaselessly a wooden
cradle that hung from a black bar in the ceiling. In this cradle lay her son, aged one or two,
and once and again he cried for half an hour or so, protesting, I suppose, against our invasion.
There was a smell in the kitchen of sour bread, mice, and bad water. The heat was terrible
but the old lady told us that the grandchild was ill and would certainly die were the window
opened. The candle we blew out but there remained a little burning lamp under the picture of
the Virgin immediately over the old lady's bed. I slept, but for how long I do not know. I
was only aware that suddenly I was awake, staring through the tiny diamond-paned window, at
the faint white light now breaking in the sky. I could see from my mattress only a thin strip
of this light above the heavy mass of dark forest on the mountain-side.

I must have been still only half-awake because I could not clearly divide, before my eyes,
the true from the false. I could see quite plainly in the dim white shadow the face of Trenchard;
he was not asleep, but was leaning on his elbow staring in front of him. I could see the old
woman with her red handkerchief kneeling in front of her lamp and her prayer came like the
turning of a wheel, harsh and incessant. The cradle creaked, in the air was the heavy smell,
and suddenly, beyond the window, a cock crowed. These things were real. But also I seemed to
be in some place much vaster than the stuffy kitchen of the night before. Under the light that
was with every minute growing stronger, I could fancy that many figures were moving in the
shadows; it seemed to me as though I were in some place where great preparations were being
made. I fancied then that I could discern Marie Ivanovna's figure, then Nikitin, then Semyonov,
then Molozov.... There was a great silence but I felt that every one was busily occupied in
making ready for some affair. This was with half my consciousness--with the other half I was
perfectly aware of the actual room, of Trenchard, the creaking cradle and the rest.

Then the forest that had been on the hills seemed to draw closer to the house. I felt that
it had invaded the garden and that its very branches were rubbing against the windows. With
all of this I was aware that I was imagining some occurrence that I had already seen, that
was not, in any way, new to me, I was assured of the next event. When we, all of us, Marie
Ivanovna, Semyonov, Nikitin and the rest, were ready we should move out into the forest, would
stand, a vast company, with our dogs and horses....

Why, it was Trenchard's dream that I was seeing! I was merely repeating to myself his own imaginations--and
with that I had suddenly, as though some one had hypnotised me, fallen back into a heavy dreamless
sleep. It was already midday when I was wakened by little Andrey Vassilievitch, who, sitting
on my bed and evidently in a state of the very greatest excitement, informed me that Dr. Semyonov
and the Sisters Marie Ivanovna and Anna Petrovna had arrived from ----, and that we might be
off at any moment. I was aware, as he spoke, of a great stir beyond the window and saw, passing
up through the valley, a flood of soldiers, infantry, cavalry, kitchens with clumsy black funnels
bobbing on their unsteady wheels, cannon, hundreds of carts; the soldiers came up through our
own garden treading down the cabbages, stopping at the well near our door and filling their
tin kettles, tramping up the road, spreading, like smoke, in the far distance, up the high
road that led into the furthest forest.

"They say--to-night--for certain," said Andrey Vassilievitch, his fat hand trembling on my
bed. He began to talk, his voice shaking with excitement. "Do you know, Ivan Andreievitch,
I am continually surprised at myself: 'Here you are, Andrey Vassilievitch, here, at the war.
What do you make of it?? I say to myself. Just consider.... No, but seriously, Ivan Andreievitch,
of course I must seem to all of you something of a comic figure. When my wife was alive--how
I wish that you could have known her! Such a remarkable woman; every one who met her was struck
by her fine character--when my wife was alive I had my position to support. That I should have
been a comic figure would have distressed her. But now, who cares? Nobody, you may very truly
say.... Well, well. But the point is that this evening we shall really be in the thick of it.
And--may I tell you something, Ivan Andreievitch? Only for yourself, because you are an Englishman
and can be trusted: to speak quite truthfully I'm frightened. I say to myself that one is at
the war and that one must be frightened at nothing, and still I remain frightened.... Frightened
of what?... I really cannot tell you. Death, perhaps? But no, I should not be sorry to die--there
are reasons....

"And yet although I should not be sorry to die, I remain frightened--all night I was awake--I
do my utmost to control it, but there is something stronger than I--something. I feel as though
if I once discovered what that something was I should not be frightened any longer. Something
definite that you could meet and say to yourself: 'There, Andrey Vassilievitch, you're not
frightened of that, are you? What is there to be frightened of?... Why then, you know, I don't
believe I should be frightened any more!'"

I remember that he then explained to me that he wished Nikitin had been sent instead of Semyonov.
Nikitin was much more sympathetic.

"You seem very fond of Nikitin," I said.

"We are friends ... we have been friends for many years. My wife was very fond of him. I am
a lonely man, Ivan Andreievitch, since the death of my wife, and to be with any one who knew
her is a great happiness ... yes, a great happiness."

"And Semyonov?" I asked.

"I have nothing to say against Alexei Petrovitch," he answered stiffly.

When later I joined the others at the cottage higher up the road taken by the doctors of the
Division, I discovered Trenchard in an ecstasy of happiness. He did not speak to me but his
shining eyes, the eagerness with which standing back from the group he watched us all, told
me everything. Marie Ivanovna had been kind to him, and when I found her in the centre of them,
her whole body alert with excitement, I forgot my anger at her earlier unkindness or, if I
remembered it, laid it to the charge of my own imagination or Trenchard's sensitiveness.

Indeed we were all excited. How could we fail to be! There was some big business toward, and
in it we were to have our share. We were, perhaps this very day, to penetrate into the reality
of the thing that for nine months now we had been watching. All of us, with our little private
histories like bundles on our backs, are venturing out to try our fortune.... What are we going
to find?

I remember indeed that early on that afternoon I felt the drama of the whole affair so heavily
that I saw in every soldier who passed me a messenger of fate. They called me to a meal. Eat!
Now! How absurd it seemed! Semyonov watched me cynically:

"Eat and then sleep," he said, "or you'll be no use to any one."

Afterwards I went back to the kitchen and slept. That sleep was the end of my melodrama. I
was awakened by a rough hand on my shoulder to find it dark beyond the windows and Semyonov
watching me impatiently:

"Come, get up! It's time for us to start," and then moved out. I was conscious that I was cold
and irritable. I looked back with surprised contempt to my earlier dramatic emotions. I was
hungry; I put on my overcoat, shivered, came out into the evening, saw the line of wagons silhouetted
against the sky, listened to the perfect quiet on every side of me, yawned and was vexed to
find Trenchard at my side.

"Why this is actually dull!" I thought to myself. "It is as though I were going to some dinner
that I know beforehand will be exceedingly tiresome--only then I should get some food."

I was disappointed at the lack of drama in the affair. I looked at my watch--it was ten o'clock.
Semyonov was arranging everything with a masterly disregard of personal feelings. He swore
fine Russian oaths, abused the sanitars, always in his cold rather satirical voice, his heavy
figure moving up and down the road with a practical vivid alertness that stirred my envy and
also my annoyance. I felt utterly useless. He ordered me on to my wagon in a manner that, in
my present half-sleepy, half-surly mood seemed to me abominably abrupt. Trenchard climbed up,
very clumsily, after me.

I leaned back on the straw, let my arms fall and lay there, flat on my back, staring straight
into the sky.... With that my mood suddenly changed. I was at peace with the whole world. To-night
was again thick with a heavy burden of stars that seemed to weigh like the silver lid of some
mighty box heavily down, down upon us, until trees and hills and the dim Carpathians were bent
flat beneath the pressure. I lying upon my back, seeing only that sheet of stars, in my nostrils
the smell of the straw, rocked by the slow dreamy motion of the wagon, was filled with an exquisite
ease and lethargy. I was going into battle, was I? I was to have to-night the supreme experience
of my life? It might be that to-night I should die--only last week two members of the Red Cross--a
nurse and a doctor--had been killed. It might be that these stars, this straw, this quiet night
were round me for the last time. It did not matter to me--nothing could touch me. My soul was
somewhere far away, upon some business of its own, and how happy was my body without the soul,
how contented, how undisturbed! I could fancy that I should go, thus rocking, into battle and
there die before my soul had time to return to me. What would my soul do then? Find some other
body, or go wandering, searching for me? A star, a flash of light like a cry of happiness or
of glad surprise, fell through heaven and the other stars trembled at the sight.

My wagon stopped with a jerk. Some voice asked: what the devil were we doing filling the road
with our carts at the exact moment that such-and-such a Division wished to move.

I heard Semyonov's voice, very cold, official and polite. Then again: "Well, in God's name,
hurry then! ... taking up the road! ... hurry, I tell you!"

On we jogged again. Trenchard's voice came to me: he had been, it might be, talking for some time.

"And so I'm not surprised, Durward, that you thought me a terrible fool to show my feelings
as I've done this last fortnight. But you don't know what it is to me--to have something at
last in your hands that you've dreamed of all your life and never dared to hope for: to have
it and feel that at any moment it may slip away and leave you in a worse state than you were
before. I'd been wishing, these last weeks, that I'd never met her, that I'd simply come to
the war by myself. But now--to-day--when she spoke to me as she did, asked me to forgive her
for what happened last night, my God, Durward! I to forgive her!... But I'll show her this
very night what I can do--this very night! They'll give me a chance, won't they? It would be
terrible if they didn't. Semyonov won't give me a chance if he can help it. What have I done
to Semyonov that he should hate me? What have...."

But I didn't answer Trenchard. That part of me that had any concern with him and his affairs
was far away. But his voice had stirred some more active life in me. I thought to myself now:
Will there be some concrete definite moment in this affair when I shall say to myself: "Ah,
there it is! There's the heart of this whole business! There's the enemy! Slay him and you
have settled the matter!" or, perhaps, "Ah, now I've seen the secret. Now I've hunted the animal
to his lair. This is war, this thing here. Now all my days I remain quiet. There is nothing
more to fear"--or would it be perhaps that I should face something and be filled, then, with
ungovernable terror so that I should run for my life, run, hide me in the hills, cover up my
days so that no one shall ever find me again?...

I raised myself on my elbow and looked at the country. We jolted over a little brook, brushed
through a thicket of trees, came on to a path running at the forest's foot, and saw on our
left a little wooden house, a high wood fire burning in front of it. I looked at my watch.
It was one o'clock. Already a very faint glow throbbed in the sky. Out of the forest, at long
intervals, came a dull booming sound like the shutting of a heavy iron door.

The wagons drew up. We had arrived at our destination.

"We shall be here," I heard Semyonov say, "some five hours or so. You'd better sleep if you can."

A group of soldiers round the wood fire were motionless, their faces glowing, their bodies
dark. Our wagons, drawn up together, resembled in the twilight strange beasts; the two Sisters
lay down on one wagon, Semyonov, Andrey Vassilievitch, Trenchard and I on another. My irritated
mood had returned. I had been the last to climb on to the straw and the others had so settled
themselves that I had no room to lie flat. Semyonov's big body occupied half the wagon, Andrey
Vassilievitch's boots touched my head and at intervals his whole body gave nervous jerks. It
was also quite bitterly cold, which was curious enough after the warmth of the earlier nights.
And always, at what seemed to be regular intervals, there came, from the forest, the banging
of the iron door.

I felt a passionate irritation against Andrey Vassilievitch. Why could he not keep quiet? What,
after all, was he doing here? I could hear that he was dreaming. He muttered some woman's name:

"Sasha ... Sasha ... Sasha...."

"Can't you keep still?" I whispered to him, but in the cold I myself was trembling. The dawn
came at last with reluctance, flushing the air with colour, then withdrawing into cold grey
clouds, then stealing out once more behind the forest in scattered strips of pale green gold,
then suddenly sending up into the heaven a flock of pink clouds like a flight of birds, that
spread in extending lines to the horizon, covering at last a sky now faintly blue, with rosy
bars. The flame of the soldiers' fire grew faint, white mists rose in the fields, the cannon
in the forest ceased and the birds began.

I sat up on the cart, looked at my sleeping companions, and thought how unpleasant they looked.
Semyonov like a dead man, Andrey Vassilievitch like a happy pig, Trenchard like a child who
slept after a scolding. I felt intense loneliness. I wanted some one to comfort me, to reassure
me against life which seemed to me suddenly now perilous and remorseless; moreover some one
seemed to be reviewing my life for me and displaying it to me, laying bare all its uselessness
and insignificance.

"But I'm in no way a fine fellow," I could fancy myself crying. "I'm sleepy and cold and hungry.
If you'll remove Andrey Vassilievitch's boots for me I'll lie flat on this wagon and you can
let loose every shrapnel in the world over my head and I'll never stir. I thought I was interested
in your war, and I'm not.... I thought no discomfort mattered to me, but I find that I dislike
so much being cold and hungry that it outweighs all heroism, all sense of danger ... let me alone!"

Then something occurred. Looking down over the side of the cart I saw, to my great surprise,
Marie Ivanovna.

"You!" I whispered.

"Hush!" she answered. "Come down."

I let myself down and at once she put her hand into mine.

"Walk with me just a little way," she whispered, "to those trees and back." I had noticed at
once that her voice trembled; now I perceived that her whole body was shaking; her hand gave
little startled quivers under mine.

"You're cold," I said.

"No, I'm not cold," she answered still in a whisper, although we were now some way from the
wagons. "I'm frightened, Mr. Durward, that's what's the matter--desperately frightened."

"Nonsense," I answered her. "You! Frightened! Never!"

"But I am. I've been terribly fr-frightened all night; and that Sister Anna Petrovna, he (she
sometimes confused her pronouns) sleeps like a log. How can he? I've never slept, not for a
moment, and I've been so cold and every time the cannon sounded I wanted to run away.... Oh,
Mr. Durward, I'm so ashamed!"

Then, suddenly, desperately clutching my hand:

"Mr. Durward, you'll never tell any one, any one never.... Promise!"

"Never a soul," I answered. "It's only because you're cold and hungry and sleepy that you think
you're frightened. You're not frightened really. But wouldn't you like me to wake Trenchard
and get him to come to you.... He'd be so happy?..."

She started fiercely from me. "Never! Never! Why, what can you think! You must never tell,
most of all you must never tell him.... He must never know--nothing--"

The cannon began again. She caught my arm and stood with her body trembling, pressed against
mine. I could feel her draw a deep breath. As I looked at her, her face white in the dawn,
her large eyes staring like a child's, her body so young and slender, she seemed another creature,
utterly, absolutely apart from the woman of this last fortnight.

"Look here!" I said to her sternly. "You mustn't go on like this. You've got work to do to-day.
You've simply got to hold yourself in, to tell yourself that nothing can touch you. Why to-night
you'll laugh at me if I remind you of this. You'll...."

But there was better tonic than my words, Semyonov's voice came to us--"Hullo, you there! It's
five o'clock--we're moving."

She drew herself sharply away from me. She raised her head, smiled at me, then said:

"Thank you, Mr. Durward. It's all well now. There's Dr. Semyonov--let us go back."

She greeted him with a voice that had in it not the slightest tremor.

There comes now a difficult matter. During the later months when I was to reflect on the whole
affair I saw quite clearly that that hour between our leaving the wooden house and arriving
in the trenches bridged quite clearly for me the division in this business between imagination
and reality: that is, I was never after this to speak of war as I would have spoken of it an
hour before. I was never again to regard the paraphernalia of it with the curiosity of a stranger--I
had become part of it. This hour then may be regarded as in some ways the most important of
all my experiences. It is certainly the occasion to which if I were using my invention I should
make the most. Here then is my difficulty.

I have nothing to say about it. There's nothing at all to be made of it....

I may say at once that there was no atom of drama in it. At one moment I was standing with
Marie Ivanovna under the sunrise, at another I was standing behind a trench in the heart of
the forest with a battery to my left and a battery to my right, a cuckoo somewhere not very
far away, and a dead man with his feet sticking out from under the cloth that covered him peacefully
beneath a tree at my side. There had, of course, been that drive in the wagons, bumping over
the uneven road whilst the sun rose gallantly in the heavens and the clanging of the iron door
grew, with every roll of our wheels, louder and louder. But it was rather as though I had been
lifted in a sheet from one life--a life of speculation, of viewing war from a superior and
safe distance, of viewing indeed all catastrophe and reality from that same distance--into
the other. I had been caught up, had hung for a moment in midair, had been "planted" in this
new experience. For us all there must have been at this moment something of this passing from
an old life into a new one, and yet I dare swear that not for any one of us was there any drama,
any thrill, any excitement. We stood, a rather lonely little group, in the forest clearing
whilst the soldiers in the trench flung us a careless glance, then turned back to their business
of the day with an indifference that showed how ordinary and drab a thing custom had made it.

Yes, we made a desolate little group. Semyonov had gone to a house on the farther side of the
road up which we had come, a house that flew the Red Cross flag. We had only the right to care
for the wounded of certain Divisions and our presence had to be reported. We were left then,
Marie Ivanovna, Anna Petrovna, Andrey Vassilievitch, Trenchard and I, all rather close together,
uncomfortable, desolate and shy, as boys feel on their first day at school. The battery on
our left was very near to us and we could see the sharp flash of its flame behind the trees.
The noise that it made was terrific, a sharp, angry, clumsy noise, as though some huge giant
clad in mail armour was flinging his body, in a violent rage, against an iron door that echoed
through an empty house--my same iron door that I had heard all night. The rage of the giant
spread beyond his immediate little circle of trees and one wondered at the men in the trenches
because they were indifferent to his temper.

The noise of the more distant batteries was still, as it had been before, like the clanging
of many iron doors very mild and gentle against the clamour of our own enraged fury. The Austrian
reply seemed like the sleepy echo of this confusion, so sleepy and pleasant that one felt almost
friendly to the enemy.

Our own battery was inconsistent in his raging. Had he only chosen to fling himself at his
door every three minutes, say, or even every minute, we could have prepared ourselves, but
he was moved by nothing, apparently, but his own irrational impulse. There would be a pause
of two minutes, then three furious explosions, then a pause of five minutes, then another explosion....
I mastered quickly my impulse to leap into the air at every report, by a kind of prolonged
extension in my mind of one report into another. Little Andrey Vassilievitch was not so successful.
At each explosion his body jerked as though it had been worked by wires; then he glanced round
to see whether any one had noticed his agitation, then drew himself up, brushed off imaginary
dust from his uniform, coughed and frowned. Trenchard stood close to Marie Ivanovna and looked
at her anxiously once or twice as though he would like to speak to her, but she, holding herself
very stiffly, watched with sternness the whole world as though she personally had arranged
the spectacle and was responsible for its success.

Soon Semyonov came back and said that he must go on to some further trenches to discover the
best position for us. To my intense surprise Andrey Vassilievitch asked whether he might accompany
him. I fancy that he felt that he would venture anything to escape our adjacency to the battery.

So they departed, leaving us more forlorn than before We sat down on the stretchers: Anna Petrovna,
fat, heavy, phlegmatic, silent; Marie Ivanovna silent too but with a look now of expectation
in her eyes as though she knew that something was coming for her very shortly; Trenchard near
her, trying to be cheerful, but conscious of the dead soldier under the tree from whom he seemed
unable to remove his eyes. There was, in the open space near us, a kipiatilnik, that is, a
large boiler on wheels in which tea is made. To this the soldiers were crowding with their
tin cans; the cuckoo, far away now, continued his cry....

At long intervals, out of the forest, a wounded soldier would appear. He seemed to be always
the same figure, sometimes wounded in the head, sometimes in the leg, sometimes in the stomach,
sometimes in the hand--but always the same, with a look in his eyes of mild protest because
this had happened to him, also a look of dumb confidence that some one somewhere would make
things right for him. He came either to us or to the Red Cross building across the road, according
to his company. One soldier with a torn thumb cried bitterly, looking at his thumb and shaking
his head at it, but he alone showed any emotion. The others suffered the sting of the iodine
without a word, walking off when they were bandaged, or carried by our sanitars on the stretchers,
still with that look of wonder and trust in their eyes.

And how glad we were when there was any work to do! The sun rose high in the sky, the morning
advanced, Semyonov and Andrey Vassilievitch did not return. For the greater part of the time
we did not speak, nor move. I was conscious of an increasing rage against the battery. I felt
that if it was to cease I might observe, be interested, feel excitement--as it was, it kept
everything from me. It kept everything from me because it insistently demanded my attention,
like a vulgar garrulous neighbour who persists in his tiresome story. Its perpetual hammering
had soon its physical effect. A sick headache crept upon me, seized me, held me. I might look
at the soldiers, sleeping now like dead men in the trench, I might look at the Red Cross flag
lazily flapping in the breeze across the road, I might look at the corpse with the soiled marble
feet under the tree, I might look at Trenchard and Marie Ivanovna silent and unhappy on the
stretchers, on Anna Petrovna comfortably slumbering with an open mouth, I might listen to the
distant batteries, to the sudden quick impatient chatter of the machine guns, to the rattling
give-and-take of the musketry somewhere far away where the river was, I might watch the cool
green hollows of the forest glades, the dark sleepy shadows, the bright patches of burning
sky between the branches, I might say to myself that all these things together made the impression
of my first battle ... and then would know, in my heart, that there was no impression at all,
no thrill, no drama, no personality--only a sick throb in my head and a cold hand upon my chest
and a desire to fling myself into any horror, any danger, if I could but escape this indigestible
monotony....

Once Trenchard, treading very softly as though every one around him were asleep, came across
and talked to me.

"You know," he said in a whisper, "this isn't at all what I expected."

"You needn't whisper," I answered irritably, "that battery's making such a noise that I can't
hear anything you say."

"Yes, isn't it!" he said with a little sigh. "It's very unpleasant indeed. Do you think Semyonov's
forgotten us? We've been here a good many hours and we aren't doing very much."

"No," I answered. "We're doing nothing except get sick headaches."

There was a pause, then he said:

"Where is everything?"

"Everything?--What?"

"Well, the battle, for instance!"

"Oh, that's down the hill, I suppose. We're trying to cross the river and they're trying to
prevent us."

"Yes," he answered. "But that isn't exactly what I mean.... It's hard to explain, but even
if we were to see our soldiers trying to cross the river and the Austrians trying to prevent
them that wouldn't be--well, wouldn't be exactly the real thing, would it? It would only be
a kind of side-show, rather unimportant like that dead man there!"

But my headache prevented my interest in his speculations. I said nothing.

He added as though to himself:

"Perhaps each individual soldier sees the real thing for himself but can't express what he
sees...."

As I still made no answer, with another little sigh he got up and walked back, on tip-toe,
to the side of Marie Ivanovna.

Then suddenly, in the early hours of the afternoon, to our intense relief, Semyonov and Andrey
Vassilievitch appeared. Semyonov was, as ever, short, practical, and unemotional.

"Been a long time, I'm afraid. We found it difficult to see exactly where would be the best
place. And, after all, we've got to separate.... One Sister's wanted at the Red Cross over
there. They've asked for our help. The other will come with me on to the Position until this
evening. You three gentlemen, if you'll be so good, will wait here until a wagon comes. Then
it will take you down to the trenches at the bottom of the hill. Then, if you don't mind, I
would like you to wait until dusk when we shall go out to fetch the wounded.... Is that clear?"

We answered yes.

"Now which Sister will come with me? Marie Ivanovna, I think it would interest you. No danger,
except a stray shrapnel or two. Will you come?"

There leapt upon us then, with an agitation that seemed to silence the very battery itself,
Trenchard's voice:

"No.... No ... Marie. No, it's dangerous. Semyonov says so. Your first day...."

He spoke in English, his voice trembling. I turned to see his face white, his eyes wide open
and at the same time blind; he passionately addressed himself to Marie Ivanovna and to her alone.

But she turned impatiently.

"Why, of course, Doctor. I'm ready at once."

Trenchard put his hand on her arm.

"You are not to go--Marie, do you hear? I have a right ... I tell you, you are not to go!"

"Don't be so stupid, John," she shook off his arm. "Please, Doctor, I'm ready."

Semyonov turned to Trenchard with a smile: "Mr. (they all called him Mr. now), it will be quite
well ... I will look after her."

"You ... you" (Trenchard could not control his voice), "you can't prevent shrapnel--bullets.
You don't care, you...."

Semyonov's voice was sharp: "I think it better that Sister Marie Ivanovna should come with
me. You understand, the rest of you.... We shall meet at dusk."

Trenchard only said "Marie ..." then turned away from us. Anna Petrovna, who had said nothing
during this scene and had, indeed, seemed to be oblivious of it, plunged with her heavy clumsy
walk across the road to the Red Cross house. The Doctor and Marie Ivanovna disappeared behind
the trench. I was, as was always my case with Trenchard, both sympathetic and irritated. It
was difficult for him, of course, but what did he expect the girl to do? Could he have supposed
for a single moment that she would remain? Could it be possible that he knew her so little
as that? And why make a scene now before Semyonov when he obviously could do nothing? I knew,
moreover, with a certainty that was almost ironic in its clarity, that Marie Ivanovna did not
love, did not, perhaps, even care for him. By what moment in Petrograd, a moment flaming with
their high purposes and the purple shadows of a Russian "white night," had she been entranced
into some glorious vision of him? On the very day that followed, she had known, I was convinced,
her mistake. At the station she had known it, and instead of the fine Sir Galahad "without
reproach" of the previous night she saw some figure that, had she been English born, would
have appeared to her as Alice's White Knight perchance, or at best the warm-hearted Uncle Toby,
or that most Christian of English heroes--Parson Adams. I could imagine that life had been
so impulsive, so straightforward, so simple a thing to her that this sudden implication in
an affair complicated and even dishonest caused her bitter disquiet. Looking back now I could
trace again and again the sudden flashes, through her happiness, of this distress.

He perhaps should have perceived it, but I could understand that he could not believe that
his treasure had at last after all these years been given to him for so brief a moment. He
could not, he would not, believe it. Well, I knew that his eyes must very soon be opened to
the truth....

As I turned to see him sitting on the stretcher with his back to me, his head hanging a little
as though it were too heavy for his neck, his back bent, his long arms fallen loose at his
sides, I thought that Alice's White Knight he, in solemn truth, presented.

He had a talent for doing things to his uniform. His cap, instead of being raised in front,
was flat, his jacket bulged out above his belt, and the straps on his boot had broken from
their holdings. He filled the pockets of his trousers, in moments of absent-minded absorption,
with articles that he fancied that he would need--sometimes food, black bread and sausage,
sometimes a large pocket-knife, a folding drinking glass, a ball of string, a notebook. These
things protruded, or gave his clothes a strange bulky look, fat in some places, thin in others.
As I saw him his shoulder-blades seemed to pierce his coat: I could fancy with what agitation
his hands were clenched.

We sat down, the three of us together, and again the battery leapt upon us. Now the sun was
hot above the trees and the effect of the noise behind us was that we ourselves, every two
or three minutes, were caught up, flung to the ground, recovered, breathless, exhausted, only
to be hurled again!

How miserable we were, how lost, how desolate, Trenchard hearing in every sound the death of
his lady, Andrey Vassilievitch dreaming, I fancy, that he had been caught in some cage out
of which he would never again escape. I, sick, almost blind with headache, and yet exasperated,
irritated by the emptiness of it all. If only we might run down that hill! There surely we
should find....

At the very moment when the battery had finished as it seemed to me its work of smashing my
head into pulp the wagon arrived.

"Now," I thought to myself as I climbed on to the straw, "I shall begin to be excited!" We,
all three of us, kneeling on the cart, peered forward into the dim blue afternoon. We were
very silent--only once Trenchard said to me, "Perhaps we shall find her down here: where we're
going. What do you think, Durward?"

"I'm afraid not!" I answered. "But still she'll be all right. Semyonov will look after her!"

"Oh! Semyonov!" he answered.

How joyful we were to leave our battery behind us. As the trees closed around it we could fancy
its baffled rage. Other batteries now seemed to draw nearer to us and the whole forest was
filled with childish quarrelling giants; but as we began to bump down the hill out of the forest
stranger sounds attacked us. On either side of us were cornfields and out of the heart of those
from under our very feet as it seemed there were explosions of a strange stinging metallic
kind--not angry and human as the battery had been, but rather like some huge bottle cracking
in the sun. These huge bottles--one could fancy them green and shining somewhere in the corn--cracked
one after another; positively the sound intensified the heat of the sun upon one's head. There
were too now, for the first time in our experience, shrapnel. They were not over us, but ran
somewhere on our right across the valley. Their sound was "fireworks" and nothing more--so
that alarm at their gentle holiday temper was impossible. Brock's Fireworks on a Thursday evening
at the Crystal Palace, oneself a small boy sitting with both hands between one's knees, one's
mouth open, a damp box of chocolates on one's lap, the murmured "Ah ..." of the happy crowd
as the little gentle "Pop!" showed green and red against the blue night sky. Ah! there was
the little "Pop!" and after it a tiny curling cloud of smoke in the air, the whole affair so
gentle, so kind even. There! sighing overhead they go! Five, six little curls of smoke, and
then beneath our very horses' feet again a huge green bottle cracking in the sun!

And with all this noise not a living soul to be seen! We had before us as we slowly bumped
down the hill a fair view. The river was hidden from us, but there was a little hamlet guarded
happily by a green wood; there was a line of fair hills, fields of corn, and the long dusty
white road. Not a soul to be seen, only our bumping cart and, now and then, against the burning
sky those little curling circles of smoke. The world slumbered....

Suddenly from the ditch at the side of the road a soldier appeared, spoke to our driver and
disappeared again.

"What did he say?" I asked.

"He says, your Honour, that we must hasten. We may be hit."

"Hit here--on this road?"

"Tak totchno."

"Well, hurry then."

I caught a little frightened sigh behind me from Andrey Vassilievitch, whom the events of the
day had frozen into horror-stricken silence. We hurried, bumping along; at the bottom of the
hill there was a farmhouse. From behind it an officer appeared.

"What are you doing there? You're under fire.... Red Cross? Ah yes, we had a message about
you. Dr. Semyonov?... Yes. Please come this way. Hurry, please!"

We were led across the farmyard and almost tumbled into a trench at the farther end of it.

It wasn't until I felt some one touch my shoulder that I realised my position. We were sitting,
the three of us, in a slanting fashion with our backs to the earthworks of the trench. To our
right, under an improvised round roof, a little dried-up man like a bee, with his tunic open
at the neck and a beard of some days on his chin, was calling down a telephone.

Next to me on the left a smart young officer, of a perfect neatness and even dandiness, was
eating his supper, which his servant, crouching in front of him, ladled with a spoon out of
a tin can. Beyond him again the soldiers in a long line under the farm wall were sewing their
clothes, eating, talking in whispers, and one of them reading a newspaper aloud to himself.

A barn opposite us in ruins showed between its bare posts the green fields beyond. Now and
then a soldier would move across the yard to the door of the farm, and he seemed to slide with
something between walking and running, his shoulders bent, his head down. The sun, low now,
showed just above the end of the farm roof and the lines of light were orange between the shadows
of the barn. All the batteries seemed now very far away; the only sound in the world was the
occasional sigh of the shrapnel. The farmyard was bathed in the peace of the summer evening.

The Colonel, when he had finished his conversation with some humorous sally that gave him great
pleasure, greeted us.

"Very glad to see you, gentlemen.... Two Englishmen! Well, that's the Alliance in very truth
... yes.... How's London, gentlemen? Yes, golubchik, that small tin--the grey one. No, durak,
the small one. Dr. Semyonov sent a message. Pray make yourselves comfortable, but don't raise
your heads. They may turn their minds in this direction at any moment again. We've had them
once already this afternoon. Eh, Piotr Ivanovitch (this to the smart young officer), that would
have made your Ekaterina Petrovna jump in her sleep--ha, ha, ha--oh, yes, but I can see her
jumping.... Hullo, telephone--Give it here! That you, Ivan Leontievitch? No ... very well for
the moment.... Two Englishmen here sitting in my trench--truth itself! Well, what about the
Second 'Rota'? Are they coming down?... Yeh Bogu, I don't know! What do you say?..."

The young officer, in a very gentle and melodious voice, offered Trenchard, who was sitting
next to him, some supper.

"One of these cutlets?"

Trenchard, blushing and stammering, refused.

"A cigarette, then?"

Trenchard again refused and Piotr Ivanovitch, having done his duty, relapsed into his muffled
elegance. We sat very quietly there; Trenchard staring with distressed eyes in front of him.
Andrey Vassilievitch, very uncomfortable, his fat body sliding forward on the slant, pulling
itself up, then sliding again--always he maintained his air of importance, giving his cough,
twisting the ends of his moustache, staring, fiercely, at some one suddenly that he might disconcert
him, patting, with his plump little hands, his clothes.

The shadows lengthened and a great green oak that hung over the barn seemed, as the evening
advanced, to grow larger and larger and to absorb into its heart all the flaming colours of
the day, to press them into its dark shadow and to hide them, safe and contented, until another
morning.

I sat there and gradually, caught, as it seemed to me, into a world of whispers and half-lights,
I slipped forward a little down into the dark walls of the trench and half-slumbered, half
clung still to the buzzing voice of the Colonel, the languid replies of the young officer.
I felt then that some one was whispering to me that my real adventure was about to begin. I
could see quite plainly, like a road up which I had gone, the events of the day behind me.
I saw the ride under the stars, the cold red dawn. Marie Ivanovna standing beneath my cart,
the sudden battery and the desolate hours of waiting, the wounded men stumbling out of the
forest, the ride down the hill and the green bottles bursting in the sun, the sudden silences
and the sudden sounds, my own weariness and discomfort and loneliness and now Something--was
it the dark green oak that bent down and hid the world for me?--whispered, "You're drawing
near--you're close--you're almost there.... In a moment you will see ... you will see ... you
will see...."

Somewhere the soldiers were singing, and then all sounds ceased. We were standing, many of
us, in the dark, the great oak and many other giant trees were about us and the utter silence
was like a sudden plunge into deep water on a hot day. We were waiting, ready for the Creature,
breathless with suspense.

"Now!" some one cried, and instantly there was such a roar that I seemed to be lifted by it
far into the sky, held, rocked, then dropped gently. I woke to find myself standing up in the
trench, my hands to my ears. I was aware first that the sky had changed from blue into a muddy
grey, then that dust and an ugly smell were in my eyes, my mouth, my nose. I remembered that
I repeated stupidly, again and again: "What? what? what?" Then the grey sky slowly fell away
as though it were pushed by some hand and I saw the faint evening blue, with (so strange and
unreal they seemed) silver-pointed stars. I caught my breath and realised that now the whole
right corner of the barn was gone. The field stretched, a dark shadow, to the edge of the yard.
In the ground where the stakes of the barn had been there was a deep pit; scattered helter-skelter
were bricks, pieces of wood, and over it all a cloud of thin fine dust that hovered and swung
a little like grey silk. The line of soldiers was crouched back into the trench as though it
had been driven by some force. From, as it appeared, a great distance, I heard the Colonel's
voice: "Slava Bogu, another step to the right and we'd not have had time to say 'good-bye.'...
Get in there, you ... with your head out like that, do you want another?" I was conscious then
of Andrey Vassilievitch sitting huddled on the ground of the trench, his head tucked into his
chest.

"You're not hurt, are you?" I said, bending down to him,

He got up and to my surprise seemed quite composed. He was rubbing his eyes as though he had
waked from sleep.

"Not at all," he answered in his shrill little voice. "No.... What a noise! Did you hear it,
Ivan Andreievitch?"

Did I hear it? A ridiculous question!

"But I assure you I was not alarmed," he said eagerly, turning round to the young officer,
who was rather red in the face but otherwise unruffled. "The first time that one has been so
close to me. What a noise!"

Trenchard searched in his pockets for something.

"What is it?" I asked.

"My handkerchief!" he answered. "So dusty after that. It's in my eyes!"

He tumbled on to the ground a large clasp pocket-knife, a hunk of black bread, a cigarette-case
and some old letters. "I had one," he muttered anxiously. "Somewhere, I know...."

I heard the Colonel's voice again. "No one touched! There's some more of their precious ammunition
wasted.... What about your Ekaterina, Piotr Ivanovitch--Ho, ho, ho!... Here, golubchik, the
telephone!... Hullo! Hullo!"

For myself I had the irritation that one might feel had a boy thrown a stone over the wall,
broken a window and run away. Moreover, I felt that again I had missed--IT. Always round the
corner, always just out of sight, always mocking one's clumsy pursuit. And still, even now,
I felt no excitement, no curiosity. My feet had not yet touched the enchanted ground....

The trench had at once slipped back into its earlier composure. The dusk was now creeping down
the hill; with every stir of the breeze more stars were blown into the sky; the oak was all
black now like a friendly shadow protecting me.

"There'll be no more for a while," said the Colonel. He was right. There was stillness; no
battery, however distant, no pitter-patter of rifle fire, no chattering report of the machine guns.

Men began to cross the yard, slowly, without caution. The dusk caught us so that I could not
see the Colonel's face; a stream that cut the field, hidden in the day, was now suddenly revealed
by a grinning careless moon.

Then a soldier crossed the yard to us, told us that Dr. Semyonov wished us to start and had
sent us a guide; the wagons were ready.

At that instant, whence I know not, for the first time that day, excitement leapt upon me.

Events had hitherto passed before me like the shadowed film of a cinematograph; it had been
as though some one had given me glimpses of a life, an adventure, a country with which I should
later have some concern but whose boundaries I was not yet to cross. Now, suddenly, whether
it was because of the dark and the silence I cannot say, I had become, myself, an actor in
the affair. It was not simply that we were given something definite to do--we had had wounded
during the morning--it was rather that, as in the children's game we were "hot," we had drawn
in a moment close to some one or something of whose presence we were quite distinctly aware.
As we walked across the yard into the long low field, speaking in whispers, watching a shaft
of light, perhaps some distant projector that trembled in pale white shadows on the horizon,
we seemed to me to be, in actual truth, the hunters of Trenchard's dream.

Never, surely, before, had I known the world so silent. Under the hedges that lined the field
there were soldiers like ghosts; our own wagons, with the sanitars walking beside them, moved
across the ground without even the creak of a wheel. Semyonov was to meet us in an hour's time
at a certain crossroad. I was given the command of the party. I was now, in literal truth,
breathlessly excited. My heart was beating in my breast like some creature who makes running
leaps at escape. My tongue was dry and my brain hot. But I was happy ... happy with a strange
exaltation that was unlike any emotion that I had known before. It was in part the happiness
that I had known sometimes in Rugby football or in tennis when the players were evenly matched
and the game hard, but it was more than that. It had in it something of the happiness that
I have known, after many days at sea, on the first view of land--but it was more than that.
Something of the happiness of possessing, at last, some object which one has many days desired
and never hoped to attain--but more, too, than that. Something of the happiness of danger or
pain that one has dreaded and finds, in actual truth, give way before one's resolution--but
more, again, than that. This happiness, this exultation that I felt now but dimly, and was
to know more fully afterwards (but never, alas, as my companions were to know it) is the subject
of this book. The scent of it, the full revelation of it, has not, until now, been my reward;
I can only, as a spectator, watch that revelation as it came afterwards to others more fortunate
than I. But what I write is the truth as far as I, from the outside, have seen it. If it is
not true, this book has no value whatever.

We were warned by the soldier who guarded us not to walk in a group and we stole now, beneath
a garden-wall, white under the moon, in a long line. I could hear Trenchard behind me stumbling
over the stones and ruts, walking as he always did with little jerks, as though his legs were
beyond his control. We came then on to the high road, which was so white and clear in the moonlight
that it seemed as though the whole Austrian army must instantly whisper to themselves: "Ah,
there they are!" and fire. The ditch to our right, as far as I could see, was lined with soldiers,
hidden by the hedge behind them, their rifles just pointing on to the white surface of the
land. Our guide asked them their division and was answered in a whisper. The soldiers were
ghosts: there was no one, save ourselves, alive in the whole world....

Then a little incident occurred. I was walking in the rear of our wagons that I might see that
all were there. I felt a touch on my arm and found Andrey Vassilievitch standing in the middle
of the road. His face, staring at me as though I were a stranger, expressed desperate determination.

"Come on," I said. "We've no time to waste."

"I'm not coming," he whispered back. His voice was breathless as though he had been running.

"Nonsense," I answered roughly, and I put my hand on his arm. His body trembled in jerks and
starts.

"It's madness ... this road ... the moon.... Of course they'll fire.... We'll all be killed.
But it isn't ... it isn't ... I can't move...."

"You must move.... Come, Andrey Vassilievitch, you've been brave enough all day. There's no
danger, I tell you. See how quiet everything is. You must...."

"I can't.... It's nothing ... nothing to do with me.... It's awful all day--and now this!"

I thought of Marie Ivanovna early in the morning. I looked down the road and saw that the wagons
were slowly moving into the distant shadows.

"You must come," I repeated. "We can't leave you here. Don't think of yourself. And nothing
can touch you--nothing, I tell you."

"I'll go back, I must. I can't go on."

"Go back? How can you? Where to? You can't go back to the trench. We shan't know where to find
you." A furious anger seized me; I caught his arm. "I'll leave you, if you like. There are
other things more important."

I move away from him. He looked down the long road, looked back.

"Oh, I can't ... I can't," he repeated.

"What did you come for?" I whispered furiously. "What did you think war was?... Well, good-bye,
do as you please!"

As I drew away I saw a look of desperate determination in his eyes. He looked at me like a
dog who expects to be beaten. Then what must have been one of the supreme moments of his life
came to him. I saw him struggle to command, with the effort of his whole soul, his terror.
For a moment he wavered. He made a hopeless gesture with his hand, took two little steps as
though he would run into the hedge amongst the soldiers and hide there, then suddenly walked
past me, quickly, towards the wagons, with his own absurd little strut, with his head up, giving
his cough, looking, after that, neither to the right, nor to the left.

In silence we caught up the wagons. Soon, at some cross-roads, they came to a pause. The guide
was waiting for me. "It would be better, your Honour," he whispered, "for the wagons to stay
here. We shall go now simply with the stretchers...."

We left the wagons and, some fifteen of us, turned off down a lane to the left. Sometimes there
were soldiers in the hedges, sometimes they met us, slipping from shadow to shadow. Always
we asked whether they knew of any wounded. We found a wounded soldier groaning under the hedge.
One leg was soaked in blood and he gave little shrill desperate cries as we lifted him on to
the stretcher. Another soldier, lying on the road in the moonlight, murmured incessantly: "Bojé
moi! Bojé moi! Bojé moi!" But they were all ghosts. We alone, in that familiar and yet so unreal
world, were alive. When a stretcher was filled, four sanitars turned back with it to the wagons,
and we were soon a very small party. We arrived at a church--a large fantastic white church
with a green turret that I had seen from the opposite hill in the morning. Then it had seemed
small and very remote. I had been told that much firing had been centring round it, and it
seemed now for me very strange that we should be standing under its very shadow, its outline
so quiet and grave under the moon, with its churchyard, a little orchard behind it, and a garden,
scenting the night air, close at hand. Here in the graveyard there was a group of wounded soldiers,
in their eyes that look of faithful expectation of certain relief. Our stretchers were soon full.

We were about to turn back when suddenly the road behind us was filled with shadows. As we
came out of the churchyard an officer stepped forward to meet us. We saluted and shook hands.
He seemed a boy, but stood in front of his men with an air as though he commanded the whole
of this world of ghosts.

"What are you doing here?" he asked.

We explained.

"Well, if you'll excuse me, you'd better make haste. An attack very shortly ... yes. I should
advise you to be out of this. Petrogradsky Otriad? Yes ... very glad to have the pleasure...."

We left him, his men a grey cloud behind him, and when we had taken a few steps he seemed,
with his young air of importance, his happy serious courtesy, to have been called out of the
ground, then, with all his shadows behind him, to have been caught up into the air. These were
not figures that had anything to do with the little curling wreaths of smoke, the bottles cracking
in the sun, our furious giants of the morning.

"Ah, Bojé moi, Bojé moi!" sighed the wounded.... It was impossible, in such a world of dim
shadow, that there should ever be any other sound again.

My excitement had never left me; I had had no doubt, during this last half-hour, that I was
on the Enchanted Ground of the Enemy, so stray and figurative had been my impressions all day.
Now they were all gathered into this half-hour and the whole affair received its climax. "Ah,"
I thought to myself, "if I might only stay here now I should draw closer and closer--I should
make my discovery, hunt him down. But just when I am on the verge I must leave it all. Ah,
if I could but stay!"

Nevertheless we hastened. The world, in spite of the ghosts, was real enough for us to be conscious
of that attack looming behind us. We found our wagons, transferred our wounded, then hurried
down the road. We found the cross-roads and there, waiting for us, Semyonov and Marie Ivanovna.
Standing in the moonlight, commanding, as it seemed to me, all of us, even Semyonov, she was
a very different figure from the frightened girl of the early morning. Now her life was in
her eyes, her body inflamed with the fire of the things that had come to her. So young in experience
was she, so ignorant of all earlier adventure, that she could well be seized, utterly and completely,
by her new vision ... possessed by some vision she was.

And that vision was not Trenchard. Seeing her, he hurried towards her, with a glad cry:

"Ah, you are safe!"

But she did not notice him.

"Quick, this way!... Yes, the stretchers here.... No, I have everything.... At once. There
is little time!"

The wounded were laid on the stretchers in the square of the cross-roads. Semyonov and Marie
Ivanovna bandaged them under the moonlight and with the aid of electric-torches. On every side
of me there were little dialogues: "No ... not there. More this way. Yes, that bandage will
do. It's fresh. Hold up his leg. No, durak, under the knee there.... Where's the lint?... Turn
him a little--there--like that. Horosho, golubchik. Seitchass! No, turn it back over the thigh.
Now, once more ... that's it. What's that--bullet or shrapnel?... Take it back again, over
the shoulder.... Yes, twice!"

Once I caught sight of Trenchard, hurrying to be useful with the little bottle of iodine, stumbling
over one of the stretchers, causing the wounded man to cry out.

Then Semyonov's voice angrily:

"Tchort! Who's that?... Ah, Meester! of course!"

Then Marie Ivanovna's voice: "I've finished this, Alexei Petrovitch.... That's all, isn't it?"

These voices were all whispers, floating from one side of the road to the other. The wounded
men were lifted back on to the wagons. We moved off again; Semyonov, Trenchard, Marie Ivanovna
and I were now sitting together.

We left the flat fields where we had been so busy. Very slowly we began to climb the hill down
which I had come this afternoon. Behind me was a great fan of country, black now under a hidden
moon, dead as though our retreat from it, depriving it of the last proofs of life, had flung
it back into non-existence. Before us was the black forest. Not a sound save the roll of our
wheels and, sometimes, a cry from one of the wounded soldiers, not a stir of wind....

I looked back. Without an instant's warning that dead world, as a match is set to a waiting
bonfire, broke into flame. A thousand rockets rose, soaring, in streams of light into the dark
sky; the fields that had been vapour ran now with light. A huge projector, the eye, as it seemed
to me, of that enemy for whom I had all day been searching, slowly wheeled across the world,
cutting a great path across the plain, picking houses and trees and fields out of space, then
dropping them back again. The rockets were gold and green, sometimes as it seemed ringed with
fire, sometimes cold like dead moons, sometimes sparkling and quivering like great stars. And
with this light the whole world crackled into sound as though the sky, a vast china plate,
had been smashed by some angry god and been flung, in a million pieces, to earth. The rifle-fire
rose from horizon to horizon like a living thing. Now the shrapnel rose, breaking on the dark
sky in flashes of fire. Suddenly some house was burning! The flames rose in a column, breaking
into tongues that advanced and retreated, climbed and fell again. In the farthest distance
other houses had caught and their glow trembled in faint yellow light fading into shadow when
the projector found them. With a roar at our back our own cannon began; the world bellowed
and shook and trembled at our feet.

We reached the top of the hill. I caught one final vision, the picture seeming to sway with
all its lights, its shadows, its giant eye that governed it, its colours and its mist, like
a tapestry blown by wind. I saw in our wagon, their faces lighted by the fire, Semyonov and
Marie Ivanovna. Semyonov knelt on the wooden barrier of the cart, his figure outlined square
and strong. She was kneeling behind him, her hands on his shoulders. Her face was exultant,
victorious. She seemed to me the inspirer of that scene, to have created it, to hold it now
with the authority of her gaze.

Behind her Trenchard was in shadow.

We were on the hill-top, the cannon, as it seemed, on every side of us. We hung for a moment
so, the sky flaming up to our feet. Then we had fallen down between the woods, every step muffling
the sounds. Everything was dark as though a curtain had been dropped.

Semyonov turned round to me.

"Well," he said, "there's your battle.... You've been in the thick of it to-day!"

I saw his eyes turned to Marie Ivanovna as though already he possessed her.

I was suddenly tired, disappointed, exhausted.

"We've not been in the thick of it," I answered. "We have missed it--all day we have missed it!"

I tried to settle down in my wagon. "I beg your pardon," I said irritably to Trenchard, "but
your boot is in my neck!"

CHAPTER IV

NIKITIN

But this is not my story. If I have hitherto taken the chief place it is because, in some degree,
the impressions of Trenchard, Marie Ivanovna, Andrey Vassilievitch must, during those first
days, have run with my own. We had all been brought to the same point--that last vision from
the hill of the battle of S---- and from that day we were no longer apprentices.

I now then retire. What happened to myself during the succeeding months is of no matter. But
two warnings may be offered. The first is that it must not be supposed that the experiences
of myself, of Trenchard, of Nikitin in this business found their parallel in any other single
human being alive. It would be quite possible to select every individual member of our Otriad
and to prove from their case that the effect of war upon the human soul--whether Russian or
English--was thus and thus. A study, for example, might be made of Anna Petrovna to show that
the effect of war is simply nothing at all, that any one who pretends to extract cases and
contrasts from the contact of war with the soul is simply peddling in melodrama. Anna Petrovna
herself would certainly have been of that opinion. Or one might select Sister K---- and prove
from her case that the effect of war was to display the earthly failings and wickedness of
mankind, that it was a punishment hurled by an irate God upon an unrepentant people and that
any one who saw beauty or courage in such a business was a sham sentimentalist. Sister K----
would take a gloomy joy in such a denunciation. Or if one selected the boy Goga it would be
simply to state that war was an immensely jolly business, in which one stood the chance of
winning the Georgian medal and thus triumphing over one's schoolfellows, in which people were
certainly killed but "it couldn't happen to oneself"; meals were plentiful, there were horses
to ride, one was spoken to pleasantly by captains and even generals. Moreover one wore a uniform.

Or if Molozov, our chief, were questioned he would most certainly say that war, as he saw it,
was mainly a business of diplomacy, a business of keeping the people around one in good temper,
the soldiers in good order, the generals and their staffs in good appetite, the other Red Cross
organisations in good self-conceit, and himself in good health. All these things he did most
admirably and he had, moreover, a heart that felt as deeply for Russia as any heart in the
world; but see the matter psychologically or even dramatically he would not. He had his own
"nerves" and on occasion he displayed them, but war was for him, entirely, a thing of training
opposed to training, strategy opposed to strategy, method and system opposed to method and
system. For our doctors again, war was half an affair of blood and bones, half an affair of
longing for home and children. The army doctors contemplated our voluntary efforts with a certain
irony. What could we understand of war when we might, if we pleased, return home at any moment?
Why, it was simply a picnic to us.... No, they saw in it no drama whatever.

Nevertheless how are we to be assured that these others, Anna Petrovna, Sister K----, Goga,
the Doctors had not their own secret view? The subject here is simply the attitude of certain
private persons with whom I was allowed some intimacy ... for the rest one has no right to speak.

There comes then the second difficulty, namely: that of Nikitin, Andrey Vassilievitch, Semyonov
and Marie Ivanovna one can only present a foreign point of view. Of Nikitin and Andrey Vassilievitch,
at least, I was the friend, but however deeply a Russian admits an Englishman into friendship
he can, to the very last, puzzle, confuse, utterly surprise him. The Russian character seems,
superficially, with its lack of restraint, its idealism, its impracticality, its mysticism,
its material simplicities, to be so readily grasped that the surprise that finally remains
is the more dumbfounding. Perhaps after all it is the very closeness of our resemblance the
one to the other that confuses us. It is, perhaps, that in the Russians' soul the East can
never be reconciled to the West. It is perhaps that the Russian never reveals his secret ideal
even to himself; far distant is it then from his friend. It may be that towards other men the
Russian is indifferent and towards women his relation is so completely sexual that his true
character is hidden from her. Whatever it be that surprise remains. For to those whom Russia
and her people draw back again and again, however sternly they may resist, this sure truth
stands: that here there is a mystery, a mystery that may never be discovered. In the very soul
of Russia the mystery is stirring; here the restlessness, the eagerness, the disappointment,
the vision of the pursuit is working; and some who are outside her gates she has drawn into
that same search.

I am not sure whether I may speak of Nikitin as my friend. I believe that no one in our Otriad
save Trenchard could make, with truth, this claim. But for his own reasons or, perhaps, for
no reason at all, he chose me on two occasions as his confidant, and of these two occasions
I can recall every detail.

We returned that night from S---- to find that the whole Otriad had settled in the village
of M----, where I myself had been the night before. We were all living in an empty deserted
farmhouse, with a yard, a big orchard, wide barns and a wild overrun garden. We were, I think,
a little disappointed at the very languid interest that the history of our adventures roused,
but the truth was that the wounded had begun to arrive in great numbers and there was no time
for travellers' stories.

A dream, I know, yesterday's experiences seemed to me as I settled down to the business that
had filled so much of my earlier period at the war. Here, with the wounded, I was at home--the
bare little room, the table with the bottles and bandages and scissors, the basins and dishes,
the air ever thicker and thicker with that smell of dried blood, unwashed bodies, and iodine
that is like no other smell in the world. The room would be crowded, the sanitars supporting
legs and arms and heads, nurses dashing to the table for bandages or iodine or scissors, three
or four stretchers occupying the floor of the room with the soldiers who were too severely
wounded to sit or stand, these soldiers often utterly quiet, dying perhaps, or watching with
eyes that realised only dreams and shadows, the little window square, the strip of sky, the
changing colours of the day; then the sitting soldiers, on ordinary of a marvellous and most
simple patience, watching the bandaging of their arms and hands and legs, whispering sometimes
"Bojé moi! Bojé moi!" dragging themselves up from their desperate struggle for endurance to
answer the sanitars who asked their name, their regiments, the nature of their wounds. Sometimes
they would talk, telling how the thing had happened to them:

"And there, your Honour, before I could move, she had come--such a noise--eh, eh, a terrible
thing--I called out 'Zemliac. Here it is!' I said, and he...."

But as a rule they were very quiet, starting perhaps at the sting of the iodine, asking for
a bandage to be tighter or not so tight, sometimes suddenly slipping in a faint to the ground,
and then apologising afterwards. And in their eyes always that look as though, very shortly,
they would hear some story so marvellous that it would compensate for all their present pain
and distress. There would be the doctors, generally two at a time--Semyonov, unmoved, rough
apparently in his handling of the men but always accomplishing his work with marvellous efficiency,
abusing the nurses and sanitars without hesitation if they did not do as he wished, but never
raising his soft ironic voice, his square body of a solidity and composure that nothing could
ruffle, his fair beard, his blue eyes, his spotless linen all sharing in his self-assured superiority
to us all; one of the Division doctors, Alexei Ivanovitch, a man from Little Russia, beloved
of us all, whether in the Otriad or the army, a character possessing it seemed none of the
Russian moods and sensibilities, of the kindest heart but no sentimentality, utterly free from
self-praise, self-interest, self-assertion, humorous, loving passionately his country and,
with all his Russian romance and even mysticism, packed with practical common sense; another
Division doctor, a young man, carving for himself a practice out of Moscow merchants, crammed
with all the latest inventions and discoveries, caring for nothing save his own career and
frankly saying so, but a lively optimist whose belief in his own powers was quite refreshing
in its sincerity.

In such a place and under such conditions Semyonov had at the earlier period been master of
us all. The effect of his personality was such that we had, every one of us, believed him invincible.
The very frankness of his estimate of the world and ourselves as the most worthless and incompetent
bundle of rubbish, caused us to yield completely to him. We believed that he rated himself
but little higher than the rest of us. He was superior but only because he saw so clearly with
eyes purged of sentiment and credulity. We, poor creatures, had still our moments of faith
and confidence. I had never liked him and during these last days had positively hated him.
I did not doubt that he was making the frankest love to Marie Ivanovna and I thought he was
influencing her.... Trenchard was my friend, and what an infant indeed he seemed against Semyonov's
scornful challenge!

But now, behold, Semyonov had his rival! If Semyonov cared nothing for any of us, Nikitin,
it was plain enough, cared nothing for Semyonov. From the very first the two men had been opponents.
It seemed as though Nikitin's great stature and fine air, as of a king travelling in disguise
from some foreign country, made him the only man in the world to put out Semyonov's sinister
blaze. Nikitin was an idealist, a mystic, a dreamer--everything that Semyonov was not. It is
true that if we mattered nothing at all to Semyonov, we also mattered nothing at all to Nikitin,
but for Nikitin there were dreams, visions, memories and hopes. We were contented to be banished
from his attention when we were aware that happier objects detained him. We might envy him,
we could not dislike him.

Semyonov never sneered at Nikitin. From the first he left him absolutely alone. The two men
simply avoided one another in so far as was possible in a company so closely confined as ours.
From the first they treated one another with a high and almost extravagant politeness. As Nikitin
spoke but seldom, there was little opportunity for the manifestation of what Semyonov must
have considered "his childishly romantic mind," and Nikitin, on his side, made on no single
occasion a reply to the challenge of Semyonov's caustic cynicism.

But if Nikitin was an idealist he was also, as was quite evident, a doctor of absolutely first-rate
ability and efficiency. I was present at the first operation that he conducted with us--an
easy amputation. Semyonov was assisting and I know that he watched eagerly for some slip or
hesitation. It was an operation that any medical student might have conducted with success,
but the first incision of the knife showed Nikitin a surgeon of genius. Semyonov recognised
it.... I fancied that from that moment I could detect in his attitude to Nikitin a puzzled
wonder that such an artist could be at the same time such a fool.

I began to feel in Nikitin a very lively interest. I had from the first been conscious of his
presence, his distinction, his attitude of patient expectation and continuously happy reminiscence;
but I felt now for the first time a closer, more personal interest. From the first, as I have
said on an earlier page, his relationship to Andrey Vassilievitch had puzzled me. If Nikitin
were not of the common race of men, most assuredly was Andrey Vassilievitch of the most ordinary
in the world. He was a little man of a type in no way distinctively Russian--a type very common
in England, in America, in France, in Germany. He was, one would have said, of the world worldly,
a man who, with a sharp business brain, had acquired for himself houses, lands, food, servants,
acquaintances. Upon these achievements he would pride himself, having worked with his own hand
to his own advantage, having beaten other men who had started the race from the same mark as
himself. He would be a man of a kindly disposition, hospitable, generous at times when needs
were put plainly before him, but yet of little imagination, conventional in all his standards,
readily influenced outside his business by any chance acquaintance, but nevertheless having
his eye on worldly advantage and progress; he would be timid of soul, playing always for safety,
taking the easiest way with all emotion, treading always the known road, accepting day by day
the creed that was given to him; he would be, outside his brain, of a poor intelligence, accepting
the things of art on the standard of popular applause, talking with a stupid garrulity about
matters of which he had no first-hand knowledge--proud of his position as a man of the world,
wise in the character and moods of men of which, in reality, he knew nothing. Had he been an
Englishman or a German, this would have been all and yet, because he was a Russian, this was
not even the beginning of the matter.

I had, as I have already said, in earlier days known him only slightly. I had once stayed for
three days in his country-house and it was here that I had met his wife. Russian houses are
open to all the world and, with such a man as Andrey Vassilievitch, through the doors crowds
of men and women are always coming and going, treating their host like the platform of a railway
station, eating his meals, sleeping on his beds, making rendezvous with their friends, and
yet almost, on their departure, forgetting his very name.

My visit had been of a date now some five years old. I can only remember that his wife did
not make any very definite impression upon me, a little quiet woman, of a short figure, with
kind, rather sleepy eyes, a soft voice, and the air of one who knows her housewifely business
to perfection and has joy in her knowledge. "Not interesting," I would have judged her, but
I had during my stay no personal talk with her. It was only after my visit that I was told
that this quiet woman was the passion of Andrey Vassilievitch's life. He had been over thirty
when he had married her; she had been married before, had been treated, I was informed, with
great brutality by her husband who had left her. She had then divorced him. Praise of her,
I discovered, was universal. She was apparently a woman who created love in others, but this
by no marked virtues or cleverness; no one said of her that she was "brilliant," "charming,"
"fascinating." People spoke of her as though here at least there was some one of whom they
were sure, some one too who made them the characters they wished to be, some one finally who
had not surrendered herself, who gave them her love but not her whole soul, keeping always
mystery enough to maintain her independence. No scandal was connected with her name. I heard
of Nikitin and others as her friends, and that was all. Then, quite suddenly, two months before
the beginning of the war, she died. They said that Andrey Vassilievitch was like a lost dog,
wished also at first to talk to all who had known her, wearying her friends with his reminiscences,
his laments, his complaints--then suddenly silent, speaking to no one about her, at first burying
himself in his business, then working on some committee in connexion with one of the hospitals,
then, as it appeared on the impulse of a moment, departing to the war.

I had expected to find him a changed man and was, perhaps, disappointed that he should appear
the same chattering feather-headed little character whom I had known of old. Nevertheless I
knew well enough that there was more here than I could see, and that the root of the matter
was to be found in his connexion with Nikitin. In our Otriad, friendships were continually
springing up and dying down. Some one would confide to one that so-and-so was "wonderfully
sympathetic." From the other side one would hear the same. For some days these friends would
be undivided, would search out from the Otriad the others who were of their mind, would lose
no opportunity of declaring their "sympathy," would sit together at table, work together over
the bandaging, unite together in the public discussions that were frequent and to a stranger's
eye horribly heated. Then very soon there would come a rift. How could that Russian passionate
longing for justified idealism be realised? Once more there were faults, spots on the sun,
selfishness, bad temper, narrowness, what you please. And at every fresh disappointment would
my companions be as surprised as though the same thing had not happened to them only a fortnight
ago.

"But only last week you liked him so much!"

"How could I know that he would hold such opinions? Never in my life have I been more surprised."

So upon these little billows sailed the stout bark of Russian idealism, rising, falling, never
overwhelmed, always bravely confident, never seeking for calm waters, refusing them indeed
for their very placidity.

But in the midst of these shifting fortunes there were certain alliances and relationships
that never changed. Amongst these was the alliance of Nikitin and Andrey Vassilievitch. Friendship
it could not be called. Nikitin, although apparently he was kindly to the little man, yielded
him no intimacy. It seemed to us a very one-sided business, depending partly upon Andrey Vassilievitch's
continual assertions that Nikitin was "his oldest friend and the closest friend of his wife,"
that "Nikitin was one of the most remarkable men in the world," that "only his intimate friends
could know how remarkable he was"; partly too upon the dog-like capacity of Andrey Vassilievitch
to fetch and carry for his friend, to put himself indeed to the greatest inconvenience. It
was pathetic to see the flaming pleasure in the man's eyes when Nikitin permitted him to wait
upon him, and how ironically, upon such an occasion, would Semyonov watch them both!

In spite of Nikitin's passivity he did, I fancied, more than merely suffer this unequal alliance.
It seemed to me that there was behind his silence some active wish that the affair should continue.
I should speak too strongly if I were to say that he took pleasure in the man's company, but
he did, I believe, almost in spite of himself, secretly encourage it. And there was, in spite
of the comedy that persistently hovered about his figure and habits, some fine spirit in Andrey
Vassilievitch's championship of his hero. How he hated Semyonov! How he lost no single opportunity
of trying to bring Nikitin forward in public, of proving to the world who was the greater of
the two men! Something very single-hearted shone through the colour of his loyalty; nothing,
I was convinced, could swerve him from his fidelity. That, at least, was until death.

There arose then in these days of the wounded at M----a strange relationship between myself
and Nikitin. Friendship, I have said, I may not call it. Nikitin afterwards told me it was
my interest in the study of human character that led to his frankness--as though he had said,
"Here is a man who likes to play a certain game. I also enjoy it. We will play it together,
but when the game is finished we separate." Although discussions as to the characters of one
or another of us were continuous and, to an Englishman at any rate, most strangely public,
I do not think that the Russians in our Otriad were really interested in human psychology.
One criticised or praised in order to justify some personal disappointment or pleasure. There
was nothing that gave our company greater pleasure than to declare in full voice that "So-and-so
was a dear, most sympathetic, a fine man." Public praise was continuous and the most honest
and spontaneous affair; if criticism sometimes followed with surprising quickness that was
spontaneous too; all the emotions in our Otriad were spontaneous to the very extreme of spontaneity.
But we were not real students of one another; we were content to call things by their names,
to call silence silence, obstinacy obstinacy, good temper good temper, and leave it at that.

No one, I think, really considered Nikitin at all deeply. They admired him for his "quiet"
but would have liked him better had he shared some of their frankness--and that was all.

It happened that for several days I worked in the bandaging room directly under Nikitin. The
work had a peculiar and really unanalysable fascination for me. It was perhaps the directness
of contact that pleased me. I suppose one felt that here at any rate one was doing immediate
practical good, relieving distress and agony that must, by some one, be immediately relieved;
and, at any rate, in the first days at M---- when the press of wounded was terrific (we treated,
in one day and night, nine hundred wounded soldiers) there could be no doubt of the real demand
for incessant tireless work. But there was in my pleasure more than this. It was as though,
through the bodies of the wounded soldiers, I was helping to drive home the attack upon our
enemy. By our enemy I do not mean anything as concretely commonplace as the German nation.
One scarcely considered Germany as a definite personality. One was resolved to cripple its
power because one believed that power to be a menace to the helpless, the innocent, the lovers
of truth and beauty; but that resolve, although it never altered, seemed (the nearer one approached
the citadel) in some way to be farther and farther removed from the real question. Germany
was of no importance, and the ruin that Germany was wreaking was of no importance compared
with the histories of the individual souls that were now in the making. Here were we: Nikitin,
Trenchard, Sister K----, Molozov, myself and the others--engaged upon our great adventure.
Across the surface of the world, at this same instant, out upon the same hunt, seeking the
same answer to their mystery, were millions of our fellows. Somewhere in the heart of the deep
forest the enemy was hiding. We would defeat him? He would catch us unawares? He had some plot,
some hidden surprise? What should we find when we met him?... We hated Germany, God knows,
with a quiet, unresting, interminable hatred, but it was not Germany that we were fighting.

And these wounded knew something that we did not. In the first moments of their agony when
we met them their souls had not recovered from the shock of their encounter. It was, with many
of them, more than the mere physical pain. They were still held by some discovery at whose
very doors they had been. The discovery itself had not been made by them, but they had been
so near to it that many of them would never be the same man again. "No, your Honour," one soldier
said to me. "It isn't my arm.... That is nothing, Slava Bogu ... but life isn't so real now.
It is half gone." He would explain no more.

Since the battle of S----, I had been restless. I wanted to be back there again and this work
was to me like talking to travellers who had come from some country that one knew and desired.

In the early morning, when the light was so cold and inhuman, when the candles stuck in bottles
on the window-sills shivered and quavered in the little breeze, when the big basin on the floor
seemed to swell ever larger and larger, with its burden of bloody rags and soiled bandages
and filthy fragments of dirty clothes, when the air was weighted down with the smell of blood
and human flesh, when the sighs and groans and cries kept up a perpetual undercurrent that
one did not notice and yet faltered before, when again and again bodies, torn almost in half,
faces mangled for life, hands battered into pulp, legs hanging almost by a thread, rose before
one, passed and rose again in endless procession, then, in those early hours, some fantastic
world was about one. The poplar trees beyond the window, the little beechwood on the hill,
the pond across the road, a round grey sheet of ruffled water, these things in the half-light
seemed to wait for our defeat. One instant on our part and it seemed that all the pain and
torture would rise in a flood and overwhelm one ... in those early morning hours the enemy
crept very close indeed. We could almost hear his hot breath behind the bars of our fastened doors.

There was a peculiar little headache that I have felt nowhere else, before or since, that attacked
one on those early mornings. It was not a headache that afflicted one with definite physical
pain. It was like a cold hand pressing upon the brow, a hand that touched the eyes, the nose,
the mouth, then remained, a chill weight upon the head; the blood seemed to stop in its course,
one's heart beat feebly, and things were dim before one's eyes. One was stupid and chose one's
words slowly, looking at people closely to see whether one really knew them, even unsure about
oneself, one's history, one's future; neither hungry, tired, nor thirsty, neither sad nor joyful,
neither excited nor dull, only with the cold hand upon one's brow, catching (with troubled
breath) the beating of one's heart.

In normal times the night-duty was of course taken in rotation, but during the pressure of
these four days we had to snatch our rest when we might.

About midnight on the fifth day the procession of wounded suddenly slackened, and by two o'clock
in the morning had ceased entirely. The two nurses went to bed leaving Nikitin, myself, and
some sleepy sanitars alone. The little room was empty of all wounded, they having been removed
to the tent on the farther side of the road. The candles had sunk deep into the bottles and
were spluttering in a sea of grease. The room smelt abominably, the blood on the floor had
trickled in thin red lines into the cracks between the boards, and the basins with the soiled
bandages overflowed. There was absolute silence. One sanitar, asleep, had leaned, still standing,
over a chair, and his shadow with his heavy hanging head high above the candle against the wall.

Nikitin, seeming gigantic in the failing candlelight, stood back against the window. He did
not keep, as did Semyonov, perfect neatness. A night of work left him with his hair on end,
his black beard rough and disordered; his shirtsleeves were turned up, his arms stained with
blood, and in his white apron he looked like some kingly butcher. I was tired, the cold headache
was upon me. I wished that I could go, but I knew that both he and I must stay until eight
o'clock. While there was work to do nothing mattered, but now in the silence the whole world
seemed as empty and foul as a drained and stinking tub.

Nikitin looked at me.

"You're tired," he said.

"No, I'm not tired," I answered. "I shouldn't sleep if I went to bed. But I've got a headache
that is not a headache, I smell a smell that isn't a smell, I'm going to be sick--and yet I'm
not going to be sick."

"Come outside," he said, "and get rid of this air." We went out and sat down on a wooden bench
that bordered the yard. Before us was the high-road that ran from the town of S---- into the
very heart of the Carpathians. As the cold grey faded we could catch the thin outline of those
mountains, faint, like pencil-lines upon the sky now washed with pink, covered in their nearer
reaches by thick forests, insubstantial, although they were close at hand, like water or long
clouds. We could see the road, white and clear at our feet, melting into shadow beyond us,
and catching in the little misty pools the coloured reflection of the morning sky.

The air was very fresh; a cock behind me welcomed the sun; the cold band withdrew from my forehead.

Nikitin was silent and I, silent also, sat there, almost asleep, happy and tranquil. It seemed
to me very natural to him that he should neither move nor speak, but after a time he began
to talk. I had in that early morning a strange impression, as though deep in my dreams I was
listening to some history. I know that I did not sleep and yet even now as I recover his quiet
voice and, I believe, many of his very words, in reminiscence those hours are still dreaming
hours. I know that every word that he told me then was true in actual fact. And yet it seems
to me that we were all slumbering, the world at our feet, the sun in the sky, the wounded in
their tent, and that through the mist of all that slumber Nikitin's voice, soft, measured,
itself like an echo of some other voice miles away, penetrated--but to my heart rather than
to my brain. Afterwards this was all strangely parallel in my mind with that earlier conversation
that I had had with Trenchard in the train.... And now as I sit here, in so different a place,
amongst men so different, those other two come back to me, happy ghosts. Yes, happy I know
that one at least of them is!

Like water behind glass, like music behind a screen, Nikitin's voice comes back to me--dim
but so close, mysterious but so intimate. Ah, the questions that I would ask him now if only
I might have those morning hours over again!

"You're a solemn man altogether, Durward. Perhaps all Englishmen seem so to us, and it may
be only your tranquillity, so unlike our moods and nerves by which we kill ourselves dead before
we're half way through life.... I had an English tutor for a year when I was a boy. He didn't
teach me much: 'all right' and 'Tank you' is the only English I've kept, but I think of him
now as the very quietest man in all the universe. He never seemed to breathe, so still he was.
And how I admired him for that! My father was a very excitable man, his moods and tempers killed
him when he was just over forty.... We have a proverb, 'In the still marshes there are devils,'
and we admire and fear quiet men because they have something that we have not. And I like the
way that you watch us, Durward. Your friend Trenchard does not watch us at all and one could
be his friend. For you one has quite another feeling. It is as though I had something to give
you that you really want. Why should I not give it you? My giving it will do me no harm, it
may even yield me pleasure. You will not throw it away. You are an Englishman and will not
for a moment's temper or passion reveal secrets. And there are no secrets. What I tell you
you may tell the world--but I warn you that it will neither interest them nor will they believe
it.... There is, you see, no climax to my story. I have no story, indeed; like an old feldscher
in my village who hates our village Pope. 'Why, Georg Georgevitch,' I say, 'do you hate him?
He is a worthy man.' 'Your Honour,' he says, 'there is nothing there; a fat man, but God has
the rest of him--I hate him for his emptiness.' I'm in a humour to talk. I have, in a way,
fulfilled the purpose that my English tutor created in me. I've grown a sort of quiet skin,
you know, but under that skin the heart pounds away, the veins swell to bursting. I'm a fool
behind it all--just a fool as every Russian is a fool with more in hand than he knows how to
deal with. You don't understand Russia, do you? No, and I don't and no one does. But we can
all talk about her--and love her too, if you like, although our sentiment's a bad thing in
us, some say. But for us not to talk--for one of us to be silent--do you know how hard that
is?... And through it all how I despise myself for wishing to tell them! What business is it
of theirs? Then this war. Can you conceive what it is doing to Russians? If you have loved
Russia and dreamed for her and had your dreams flung again and again to the ground and trampled
on--and now, once more, the bubbles are in the sky, glittering, gleaming ... do we not have
to speak, do you think? Must it not be hard, when before we have not been able to be silent
about women and vodka, to be silent now about the dearest wish of our heart? We have come out
here, all of us, to see what we will find. I have come because I want to get nearer to something--I
had brought something in my heart about which I had learnt to be silent. 'That is enough!'
I thought, 'there can be nothing else about which I can wish to talk; but now, suddenly, like
that crucifix on the hillock by the road that the sun has just touched, there is something
more. And now here we are nothing ... two souls come together out of space for an hour ...
and it doesn't matter what I say to you, except that it's true and the truth will be something
for you. Here's what I've come to the war with ... my little bit of possession, if you like,
that I've brought with me, as we've all brought something. Will you understand me? Perhaps
not, and it really doesn't matter. I know what I have, what I want, but not what I am. So how
should you know if I do not? And I love life, I believe in God. I wish to meet Death. One can
be serious without being absurd at an early hour like this, when nothing is real except such
things.... Andrey Vassilievitch and myself have puzzled you, have we not? I have seen you watching
us very seriously, as though we were figures in a novel, and that has amazed me, because you
must not be solemn about us. You'll understand nothing about Russian life unless you laugh
at it during at least half the week.

"Almost five years ago I met Andrey Vassilievitch at a friend's house in Petrograd. He was
an acquaintance of mine of some years' duration, but I had avoided him because he seemed to
me the last kind of man whom I would ever care to know. I had been at this time five years
in Petrograd and had now a good practice there as a surgeon. I was a successful man and I knew
it, but I was also a disappointed man because my idealism, that was being for ever wounded
by my own actions, would not die. How I wished for it to die! I thought of the day when I should
be without it as the day of liberation, of freedom. That had become my idea, I must tell you,
the dominating idea of my life: that I should kill my idealism, laugh at the belief in God,
lose faith in every one and everything, and then simply enjoy myself--my work which I loved
and my pleasure which I should love when my idealism had died.... Sometimes during those years
I thought that it was dying. Women helped to kill it, I believed, and I knew many women, desperately
persistently laughing at them, leaving them or being left by them; and then, in spite of myself,
bitterly, deeply disappointed. Something always saying to me: 'I am God and you cannot hide
from me.' 'I am God and I will not be hidden.'

"And on this night, about five years ago, at the house of a friend, I met Andrey Vassilievitch.
We left the house together, and because it was a fine night, walked down the Nevski. There
at the corner of the Morskaia, because he was a nervous man who wished to be well with every
one in the world and because he had nothing especial to say, he asked me to dinner, and I,
because it was a fine night and there had been good wine, said that I would go.

"The next day I cursed my folly. I do not know to this day why I did not break the engagement,
it would have been sufficiently easy, but break it I did not and a week later, reluctantly,
I went. Do you know how houses and streets of which you have observed nothing, afterwards,
called out by some important event, leap into detail? That night I swear that I saw nothing
of that little street behind the Mariinsky Theatre. It was a fine 'white night' at the end
of May and the theatre was in a bustle of arrivals because it was nearly eight o'clock. Not
at all the hour of Russian dinner, as you know, but Andrey Vassilievitch always liked to be
as English as possible. I tell you that I saw nothing of the street and yet now I know that
at the door of the little trakteer there were two men and a woman laughing, that an isvotchik
was drawn up in front of a high white block of flats, asleep, his head fallen on his breast,
that the wonderful light, faintly blue and misty like gauze hung down from the sky, down over
the houses, but falling not quite on to the pavement which was hard and ugly and grey. The
little street was very silent and quiet and had, like so many Petrograd streets, a decorous
intimacy with the eighteenth century ghosts thronging its air....

"Afterwards, how I was to know that street, every stone and corner of it! It seems wonderful
to me now that I trod its pavement that night so carelessly. My destination was a square little
house at the corner on the right. Andrey Vassilievitch boasted a whole house to himself, a
rare pride in our city, as you know. When I was inside the doors I knew at once that it was
not Andrey Vassilievitch's house at all. Some stronger spirit than his was there. Knowing him,
I had expected to find there many modern things, some imitation of English manners, some bad
but expensive pictures, a gramophone, a pianolo, a library of Russian classics in our hideous
modern bindings, a billiard-room--you know the character. How quiet this little house was.
In the little square hall an old faded carpet, a grandfather's clock and two eighteenth century
prints of Petrograd. All the rooms were square, so Russian with their placid family portraits,
their old tables and chairs, not beautiful save for their fidelity, and old thumbed editions
of Pushkin and Gogol and Lermontov in the bookshelves. Clocks, old slow clocks, all telling
different time, all over the house. The house was very neat, but in odd corners there were
all those odd family things that Russians collect, china of the worst period, brass trays,
large candlesticks, musical boxes, anything you please. Only in the dining-room there was some
attempt at modernity. Bad modern furniture, on the walls bad copies of such things as Somoff's
'Blue Lady,' Vrubel's 'Pan' and one of Benoit's 'Peter the Great' water-colours. Beyond this
room the house was of eighty years ago, muffled in its old furniture, speaking with the voice
of its old clocks, scented with the scent of its musk and lavender, watched by the contented
gaze of the old family portraits.

"Alexandra Pavlovna, Andrey Vassilievitch's wife, was waiting for us. Has it happened to you
yet that your life that has been such and such a life is in the moment of a heart-beat all
another life? You have passed an examination, you are suddenly ill, you break your back by
a fall, or more simply than all of these, you enter a town, see a picture, hear a bar of music....
The thing's done: all values changed: what you saw before you see no longer, what you needed
before you need no longer, what you expected before you expect no longer.... Alexandra Pavlovna
was not a beautiful woman. Not tall, with hair quite grey, eyes not dark nor light--sad though.
When she smiled there was great charm but so it is true of many women. Her complexion was always
pale and her voice, although it was sweet to those who loved her, was perhaps too quiet to
be greatly remarked by strangers. I have known men who thought her an ordinary woman.... She
had much humour but did not show it to every one. She was as still as that cloud there above
the hill, full of colour; like, that is, to those who loved her; seen from another view, as
perhaps that cloud may be, there was nothing wonderful.... Nothing wonderful, but so many loved
her! There was never, I think, a woman so greatly beloved. And you may judge by me. I had led
a life in which after my work women had always played the chief part, and as the months passed
and I had grown proud I had vowed that women must be exceptional to please me. I had felt the
eye of the world upon me. 'You'll see no ordinary women in Victor Leontievitch's company' I
heard them say, and I was proud that they should say it. From the first instant of seeing Alexandra
Pavlovna I loved her and I loved her in a new, an utterly new way. For the first time in my
life I did not think of myself as a traveller who, passing for many years through countries
that did not greatly interest him, feels his aches and pains, his money troubles, his discomforts
and little personal irritations. Then suddenly he crosses the border and the new land so possesses
him that he is only a vessel for its beauty, to absorb it, to hold it, to carry the burden
of it in safety.... I crossed the border. For four years after that I pursued that enchanted
journey. Why did I love her? Who can say? Andrey Vassilievitch adored her with an utter devotion
and had done so since the first moment of meeting her. I have known many others, women and
men, who felt that devotion. On that first evening we were very quiet--only another woman,
a cousin of hers. After dinner I had half an hour's talk with her. I can see her--ah! how I
can see you, my dear!--sitting back a little in her chair, resting, her hands folded very quietly
in her lap, her eyes watching me gravely. I felt like a boy who has come into the world for
the first time. I could not talk to her--I stammered over the simplest things. But I was conscious
of a deep luxurious delight. I did not, as I had done before, lay plans, say that this-and-this
would be so if I did this-and-this, I did not consciously try to influence or direct her. I
felt no definite sensual attraction, did not say, as I had always done with other women, 'It
is the hair, the eyes, the mouth.' If I thought at all it was only 'This is better than anything
that I have known before; I had never dreamt of anything like this.'

"After I had left her that night I did not walk the streets, nor drink, nor find companions.
I went home and slept the soundest sleep of my life. In the morning I knew tranquillity for
the first time in all my days. I did not, as I had done after many earlier first meetings,
hasten to see my friend. I did not know even that she liked me and yet I felt no doubt nor
confusion. It was, perhaps, that I was ready to accept this new influence under any conditions,
was ready for once to leave the rules to another. I felt no curiosity, knew no determination
to discover the conditions of her life that I might bend them to my own purposes. I was quite
passive, untroubled, and of a marvellous, almost selfish happiness.

"Our friendship continued very easily. It soon came to our meeting every day. In the summer
they moved to their house in Finland and I went to stay with them. But it was not until her
return to Petrograd in September that I told her that I loved her. Upon one of the first autumn
days, upon an evening, when the little green tree outside their door was gold and there was
a slip of an apricot moon, when the first fires were lighted (Andrey Vassilievitch had English
fireplaces), sitting alone together in her little faded old-fashioned room, I told her that
I loved her. She listened very quietly as I talked, her eyes on my face, grave, sad perhaps,
and yet humorous, secure in her own settled life but sharing also in the life of others. She
watched me rather as a mother watches her child.... I told her that it mattered nothing the
conditions that she put upon me; that so long as I saw her and knew that she believed me to
be her friend I asked for nothing. She answered, still very quietly but putting her hand on
mine, that she had loved me from the first moment of our meeting. That she wondered that yet
once again love should have come into her life when she had thought that that was all finished
for her. She told me that love had been in her life nothing but pain and distress, and then
she asked me, very simply, whether I would try to keep this thing so that it should be happy
and should endure. I said that I would obey her in anything that she should command.... There
followed then the strangest life for me. Lovers in the fullest sense we were and yet it was
different from any love that I had ever known. When I ask myself why, in what, it differed
I cannot answer. Two old grey middle-aged people who happened to suit one another.... Not romantic....
But I think in the end of it all the reason was that she never revealed herself to me entirely.
I was always curious about her, always felt that other people knew more of her than I did,
always thought that one day I should know all. It is 'knowing all' that kills love, and I never
knew all. We were always together. She was a woman of very remarkable intelligence, loving
music, literature, painting, with a most excellently critical love. Her friendship with me
gave her, I do believe, a new youth and happiness. We became inseparable, and all my earlier
life had passed away from me like worn-out clothes. I was happy--but of course I was not satisfied.
I was jealous of that which Andrey Vassilievitch had--and I lacked. My whole relationship to
Andrey Vassilievitch was a curious one. My friendship for his wife must I am sure have been
torture to him. He knew that she had given me a great deal that she had never given to him.
And yet, because he loved her so profoundly, he was only anxious that she should be happy.
He saw that my friendship gave her new interests, new life even. He encouraged me, then, in
every way, to stay with them, to be with them. He left us alone continually. During the whole
of that four years he never once spoke in anger to me nor challenged my fidelity. My relationship
to him was difficult. We were, quite simply as men, the worst-suited in the world. He had not
a trick nor a habit that did not get on my nerves; he was intelligent only in those things
that I despised a man for knowing. This would have been well enough had he not persisted in
talking about matters of art and literature, of which, of course, he knew nothing. He did it,
I believe, to please his wife and myself. I despised him for many things and yet, in my heart,
I knew that he had much that I had not. He was, and is, a finer man than I.... And, last and
first of all, he possessed part of his wife that I did not. After all, she did, in her own
beautiful way, love him. She was a mother to him; she laughed tenderly at his foolishness,
cared for him, watched over him, defended him. Me she would never need to defend. Our relationship
was built rather on my defence of her. Sometimes I would wish that I were such a durak as Andrey
Vassilievitch, that I might have her protection.... There were many, many times when I hated
him--no times at all when he did not irritate me. I wished.... I wished.... I do not know what
I wished. Only I always waited for the time when I should have all of her, when I should hold
her against all the world. Then, after four years of this new life, she quite suddenly died.
Again in that little house, on a 'white night,' just as when I had at first met her, the purple
curtains hanging in the little street, the isvostchik sleeping, the clocks in the house chattering
in their haste to keep up with time.... Only two months before the outbreak of the war she
caught cold, for a week suffered from pneumonia and died. At the last Andrey Vassilievitch
and I were alone with her. He had her hand in his but her last cry was 'Victor,' and as she
died I felt as though, at last, after that long waiting, she had leapt into my arms for ever....

"After her death for many weeks, she was with me more completely than she had been during her
lifetime. I knew that she was dead, but I thought that I also had died. I went into Finland
alone, saw no one, talked to no one, saw only her. Then quite suddenly I came to life again.
She withdrew from me.... Work seemed the only possible thing; but I was, during all this time,
happy not miserable. She was not with me, but she was not very far away. Then Andrey Vassilievitch
came back to me. He told me that he knew that she had loved me--that he had tried to speak
of her to others who had known her, but they had, none of them, had real knowledge of her.
Might he speak to me sometimes about her?

"I found that though he irritated me more than ever I liked to talk about her to him. As I
spoke of her he scarcely was present at all and yet he had known her and loved her, and would
listen for ever and ever if I wished.

"When the war had lasted some months the fancy came to me that I could get nearer to her by
going into it. I might even die, which would be best of all. I did not wish to kill myself
because I felt that to be a coward's death, and in such a way I thought that I would only separate
myself from her. But in the war, perhaps, I might meet death in such a way as to show him that
I despised him both for myself and her. By suicide I would be paying him reverence.... Some
such thought also had Andrey Vassilievitch. I heard that he thought of attaching himself to
some Red Cross Otriad. I told him my plans. He said no more, but suddenly, as you know, I found
him on the platform of the Warsaw station. Afterwards he apologised to me, said that he must
be near me, that he would try not to annoy me, that if sometimes he spoke of her to me he hoped
that I would not mind.... And I? What do I feel? I do not know. He has some share in her that
I have not. I have some share in her that he has not, and I think that it has come to both
of us that the one of us who dies first will attain her. It seems to me now that she is continually
with me, but I believe that this is nothing to the knowledge I shall have of her one day. Am
I right? Is Andrey Vassilievitch right? Can it be that such a man--such men, I should say,
as either I or he--will ever be given such happiness? I do not know. I only know that God exists--that
Love is more powerful than man--that Death can fall before us if we believe that it will--that
the soul of man is Power and Love.... I believe in God...."

CHAPTER V

FIRST MOVE TO THE ENEMY

It was during two nights in the forest of S----, about which I must afterwards write, that
I had those long conversations with Trenchard, upon whose evidence now I must very largely
depend. Before me as I write is his Diary, left to me by him. In this whole business of the
war there is nothing more difficult than the varied and confused succession with which moods,
impressions, fancies, succeed one upon another, but Trenchard told me so simply and yet so
graphically of the events of these weeks that followed the battle of S---- that I believe I
am departing in no way from the truth in my present account, the truth, at any rate as he himself
believed it to be....

The only impression that he brought away with him from the battle of S---- was that picture,
lighted by the horizon fires, of Marie Ivanovna kneeling with her hand on Semyonov's shoulder.
That, every detail and colour of it, bit into his brain.

In understanding him it is of the first importance to remember that this was the one and only
love business of his life. The effect of those days in Petrograd when Marie Ivanovna had shown
him that she liked him, the thundering stupefying effect of that night when she had accepted
his love, must have caught his soul and changed it as glass is caught by the worker and blown
into shape and colour. There he was, fashioned and purified, ready for her use. What would
she make of him? That she should make nothing of him at all was as incredible to him as that
there should not be, somewhere in the world, Polchester town in Glebeshire county.

There had been with him, I think, from the first a fear that "it was all too good to be true"--Timeo
Danaos et dona ferentes. It is not easy for any man, after thirty years' shy shrinking from
the world, to shake himself free of superstitions, and such terrors the quiet and retired Polchester
had bred in Trenchard's heart as though it had been the very epitome of life at its lowest
and vilest. It simply came to this, that he refused to believe that Marie Ivanovna had been
given to him only to be taken away again. About women he knew simply nothing and Russian women
are not the least complicated of their sex. About Marie Ivanovna he of course knew nothing at all.

His first weeks in our Otriad had been like the painful return to drab reality after a splendid
dream. "After all I am the hopeless creature I thought I was. What was there, in those days
in Petrograd, that could blind me?" His shyness returned, his awkwardness, his mistakes in
tact and resource were upon him again like a suit of badly made clothes. He knew this but he
believed that it could make no difference to his lady. So sure was he of himself in regard
to her--she might be transformed into anything hideous or vile and still now he would love
her--that he could not believe that she would change. The love that had come to them was surely
eternal--it must be, it must be, it must be....

He failed altogether to understand her youth, her inexperience, above all her coloured romantic
fancy. Her romantic fancy had made him in her eyes for a brief hour something that he was not.
After a month at the war I believe that she had grown into a woman. She had loved him for an
instant as a young girl loves a hero of a novel. And although she was now a woman she must
still keep her romantic fancy. He was no longer part of that--only a clumsy man at whom people
laughed. She must, I think, have suffered at her own awakening, for she was honest, impetuous,
pure, if ever woman was those things.

He did not see her as she was--he still clung to his confidence; but he began as the days advanced
to be terribly afraid. His fears centred themselves round Semyonov. Semyonov must have seemed
to him an awful figure, powerful, contemptuous, all-conquering. Any blunders that he committed
were doubled by Semyonov's presence. He could do nothing right if Semyonov were there. He was
only too ready to believe that Semyonov knew the world and he did not, and if Semyonov thought
him a fool--it was quite obvious what Semyonov thought him--then a fool he must be. He clung
desperately to the hope that there would be a battle--a romantic dramatic battle--and that
in it he would most gloriously distinguish himself. He believed that, for her sake, he would
face all the terrors of hell. The battle came and there were no terrors of hell--only sick
headache, noise, men desperately wounded, and, once again, his own clumsiness. Then, in that
final picture of Marie Ivanovna and Semyonov he saw his own most miserable exclusion.

In the days that followed there was much work and he was forgotten. He assisted in the bandaging-room;
in later days he was to prove most efficient and capable, but at first he was shy and nervous
and Semyonov, who seemed always to be present, did not spare him.

Then, quite suddenly, Marie Ivanovna changed. She was kinder to him than she had ever been,
yes, kinder than during those early days in Petrograd. We all noticed the change in her. When
she was with him in the bandaging-room she whispered advice to him, helped him when she had
a free moment, laughed with him, put him, of course, into a heaven of delight. How happy at
once he was! His clumsiness instantly fell away from him, he only smiled when Semyonov sneered,
his Russian improved in a remarkable manner. She was tender to him as though she were much
older than he. He has told me that, in spite of his joy, that tenderness alarmed him. Also
when he kissed her she drew back a little--and she did not reply when he spoke of their marriage.

But for four days he was happy! He used to sing to himself as he walked about the house in
a high cracked voice--one song I did but see her passing by--another Early one morning--I can
hear him now, his voice breaking always on the high notes.

      Early one morning
    Just as the sun was rising
    I heard a maid singing
      In the valley below:
    "Ah! don't deceive me! Pray never leave me,'
    How could you treat a poor maiden so!"

His pockets were more full than ever of knives and string and buttons. His smile when he was
happy lightened his face, changing the lines of it, making it if not handsome pleasant and
friendly. He would talk to himself in English, ruffling his hands through his hair: "And then,
at three o'clock I must go with Andrey Vassilievitch ..." or "I wonder whether she'll mind
if I ask--" He had a large briar pipe at which he puffed furiously, but could not smoke without
an endless procession of matches that afterwards littered the floor around him. "The tobacco's
damp," he explained to us a hundred times. "It's better damp...."

Then, quite suddenly, the blow fell.

One evening, as they were standing alone together in the yard watching the yellow sky die into
dusk, without any preparation, she spoke to him.

"John," she said, "I can't marry you."

He heard her as though she had spoken to another man. It was as though he said: "Ah, that will
be bad news for so-and-so."

"I don't understand," he said, and instantly afterwards his heart began to beat like a raging
beast and his knees trembled.

"I can't marry you," she told him, "because I don't love you. Ah, I've known it a long time--ever
since we left Petrograd. I've often, often wanted to tell you ... I've been afraid."

"You can't marry me?" he repeated, "But you must...." Then hurriedly: "No, I shouldn't say
that. You must forgive me ... you have confused me."

"I'm very unhappy ... I've been unhappy a long time. It was a mistake in Petrograd. I don't
love you--but it isn't only that.... You wouldn't be happy with me. You think now ... but it's
a mistake."

He has told me that as the idea worked through to his brain his only thought was that he must
keep her at all costs, under any conditions, keep her.

"You can't--you mustn't," he whispered, staring as though he would hold her by her eyes. "Don't
you see that you mustn't? What am I to do after all this? What are we both to do? It's breaking
everything. I shan't believe in anything if you.... Ah! but no, you don't really mean anything...."

He saw that she was trembling and he bent forward, put his arm very gently round her as though
he would protect her.

But she very strongly drew away from him, looked him in the face, then dropped her eyes, let
her whole body droop as though she were most bitterly ashamed.

"I don't know," she said, "what I've been ... what I've done. During these last weeks I've
been terrible to myself--and yet it's better too. I didn't live a real life before, and now
I see things as they are. I don't love you, John, and so we mustn't marry."

He looked at her and then suddenly wild, furious, shouting at her:

"You mustn't.... You dare not.... Then go if you wish. I don't want you, do you hear?... I
don't want.... I don't want you!"

She turned and walked swiftly into the house. He watched her go, then with quick stumbling
steps hurried into the field below the farm.

There he stood, thinking of nothing, knowing nothing, seeing nothing. The dusk came up, there
had been rain during the day, the mist was in grey sheets, the wet dank smell of the earth
and of the vegetables amongst which he stood grew stronger as the light faded. He thought of
nothing, nothing at all. He felt in his pocket for his pipe, something dropped--and he knelt
down there on the soaking ground, searching. He searched furiously, raging to himself again
and again: "Oh! I must find it! I must find it! I must find it!" His hands tore the wet vegetables,
were thick with the soil. Other things fell from his pockets, Then the rain began to descend
again, thin and cold. In some building he could hear a horse moving, stamping. He pulled up
the vegetables by their roots in his search. As though a sword had struck him his brain was
clear. He knew of his loss. He flung himself on the ground, rubbing the wet soil on to his
face, whispering desperately: "Oh God!--Oh God!--Oh God!"

On the day following we did not know of what had happened. Trenchard was not with us, as he
was sent about midday with some sanitars to bury the dead in a wood five miles from M----.
That must have been, in many ways, the most terrible day of his life and during it, for the
first time, he was to know that unreality that comes to every one, sooner or later, at the
war. It is an unreality that is the more terrible because it selects from reality details that
cannot be denied, selects them without transformation, saying to his victim: "These things
are as you have always seen them, therefore this world is as you have always seen it. It is
real, I tell you." Let that false reality be admitted and there is no more peace.

On this day there were the two sanitars, whose faces now he knew, walking solidly beside his
cart, there were the little orchards with the soldiers' tents sheltering beneath them, the
villages with the old men, the women, the children, watching, like ghosts, their passage, the
fields in which the summer corn was ripening, the first trembling heat and beauty of a quiet
day in early June. No sound in the world but peace, the woods opening around them as they advanced.
He lay back on his bumping cart, watching the world as though he was seeing pictures of some
place where he had once been but long left. Yes, long ago he had left it. His world was now
a narrow burning chamber, in which dwelt with him a taunting jeering torturing spirit of reminiscence.
He saw with the utmost clearness every detail of his relationship with Marie Ivanovna. He had
no doubt at all that that relationship was finally, hopelessly closed. His was not a character
that was the stronger for misfortune. He submitted, crushed to the ground. His mind now dwelt
upon that journey from Petrograd, a journey of incredible, ironic ecstasy lighted with the
fires of the wonderful spring that had accompanied it. He recalled every detail of his conversation
with me. His confidence that life would now be fine for him--how could life ever be fine for
a man who let the prizes, the treasures, slip from his fingers, without an attempt to clutch
them? It was so now that he saw the whole of the affair--blame of Marie Ivanovna there was
none, only of his own weakness, his imbecile, idiotic weakness. In that last conversation with
her why could he not have said that he refused to let her go, held to her, dominated her, as
a strong man would have done? No, without a word, except a cry of impotent childish rage, he
had submitted.... So, all his life it had been--so, all his life it would be.

He could only wonder now at his easy ready belief that happiness would last for him. Had happiness
ever lasted? As a man began so he ended. Life laughed at him and would always laugh. Nevertheless,
he had that journey--five days of perfect unalloyed delight. Nobody could rob him of that.
She had said to him that even at the beginning of the journey she had known that she did not
love him--she had known but he had not, and even though he had cheated himself with the glittering
bubble of an illusion the splendour had been there....

Meanwhile behind his despair there was something else stirring. He has told me that upon that
afternoon he was only very dimly, very very faintly aware of it, aware of it only fiercely
to deny it. He knew, however stoutly he might refuse to acknowledge it, that the events of
the last weeks had bred in him some curiosity, some excitement that he could not analyse. He
would like to have thought that his life began and ended only in Marie Ivanovna, but the Battle
of S---- had, as it were in spite of himself, left something more.

He found that he recalled the details of that battle as though his taking part in it had bound
him to something. Even it was suggested to him that there was something now that he must do
outside his love for Marie Ivanovna, something that had perhaps no connexion with her at all.
In the very heart of his misery he was conscious that a little pulse was beating that was strange
to him, foreign to him; it was as though he were warned that he had embarked upon some voyage
that must be carried through to the very end. He was, in truth, less completely overwhelmed
by his catastrophe than he knew.

As they now advanced and entered upon the first outworks of the Carpathians the day clouded.
They stumbled down into a little narrow brown valley and drove there by the side of an ugly
naked stream, wandering sluggishly through mud and weeds. Over them the woods, grey and sullen,
had completely closed. The sun, a round glazed disk sharply defined but without colour, was
like a dirty plate in the sky. Up again into the woods, then over rough cart tracks, they came
finally to a standstill amongst thick brushwood and dripping undergrowth.

They could hear, very far away, the noise of cannon. The sanitars were inclined to grumble.
"Nice sort of business, looking for dead men here, your Honour.... We must leave the carts
here and go on foot. What's it wet for? It hasn't been raining."

Why was it wet, indeed? A heavy brooding inertia, Trenchard has told me, seemed to seize them
all. "They were not pleasant trees, you know," I remember his afterwards telling me, "all dirty
and tangled, and we all looked dirty too. There was an unpleasant smell in the air. But that
afternoon I simply didn't care about anything, nothing mattered." I don't think that the sanitars
at that time respected Trenchard very greatly. He wasn't, in any case, a man of authority and
his broken stammering Russian wouldn't help him. Then there is nothing stranger than the fashion
in which the Russian language will (if you are a timid foreigner), of a sudden wilfully desert
you. Be bold with it and it may, somewhat haughtily, perhaps, consent to your use of it ...
be frightened of it and it will despise you for ever. Upon that afternoon it deserted Trenchard;
even his own language seemed to have left him. His brain was cold and damp like the woods around
him.

They passed through the thickets and came, to their great surprise, upon a trench occupied
by soldiers. This surprised them because they had heard that the Austrians were many versts
distant. The soldiers also seemed to wonder. They explained their mission to a young officer
who seemed at first as though he would ask them something, then checked himself, gave them
permission to pass through and watched them with grave gaze. After they had crossed the barbed
wire the woods suddenly closed about them as though a door had been softly shut behind them.
The ground now squelched beneath their feet, the sky between the trees was like damp blotting-paper,
and the smell that had been only faintly in the air before was now heavy around them, blown
in thick gusts as the wind moved through the trees. Shrapnel now could be distinctly heard
at no great distance, with its hiss, its snap of sound, and sometimes rifle-shots like the
crack of a ball on a cricket bat broke through the thickets. They separated, spreading like
beaters in a long line: "Soon," Trenchard told me, "I was quite alone. I could hear sometimes
the breaking of a twig or a stumbling footfall but I might have been alone at the end of the
world. It was obvious that the regimental sanitars had been there before us because there were
many new roughly made graves. There were letters too and post cards lying about all heavy with
wet and dirt. I picked up some of these--letters from lovers and sisters and brothers. One
letter I remember in a large baby-hand from a boy to his father telling him about his lessons
and his drill, 'because he would soon be a soldier.' One letter, too, from a girl to her lover
saying that she had had a dream and knew now that her 'dear Franz, whom she loved with all
her soul, would return to her!... I am quite confident now that we shall be happy here again
very soon....' In such a place, those words."

As he walked alone there he felt, as I had felt before the battle of S----, that he had already
been there. He knew those trees, that smell, that heavy overhanging sky. Then he remembered,
as I had remembered, his dream. But whereas that dream had been to me only a reflected story,
with him it had lasted throughout his life. He knew every step of that first advance into the
forest, the look back to the long dim white house with shadowy figures still about it, the
avenue with many trees, the horses and dogs down the first grey path, then the sudden loneliness,
the quiet broken only by the dripping of the trees.

Always that had caught him by the throat with terror, and now to-day he was caught once again.
He was watched: he fancied that he could see the eyes behind the thicket and hear the rustling
movement of somebody. To-day he could hear nothing. If at last his dream was to be fashioned
into reality let it be so. Did the creature wish to destroy him, let it be so. He had no strength,
no hope, no desire....

"It was there," he told me, "when I scarcely knew what was real and what was not, that I saw
that for which I was searching. I noticed first the dark grey-blue of the trousers, then the
white skull. There was a horrible stench in the air. I called and the sanitars answered me.
Then I looked at it. I had never seen a dead man before. This man had been dead for about a
fortnight, I suppose. Its grey-blue trousers and thick boots were in excellent condition and
a tin spoon and some papers were showing out of the top of one boot. Its face was a grinning
skull and little black animals like ants were climbing in and out of the mouth and the eye-sockets.
Its jacket was in good condition, its arms were flung out beyond its head. I felt sick and
the whole place was so damp and smelt so badly that it must have been horribly unhealthy. The
sanitars began to dig a grave. Those who were not working smoked cigarettes, and they all stood
in a group watching the body with a solemn and serious interest. One of them made a little
wooden cross out of some twigs. There was a letter just beside the body which they brought
me. It began: 'Darling Heinrich,--Your last letter was so cheerful that I have quite recovered
from my depression. It may not be so long now before ...' and so on, like the other letters
that I had read. It grinned at us there with a devilish sarcasm, but its trousers and boots
were pitiful and human. The men finished the grave and then, with their feet, turned it over.
As it rolled a flood of bright yellow insects swarmed out of its jacket, and a grey liquid
trickled out of the skull. The last I saw of it was the gleam of the tin spoon above its boot...."

"We searched after that," he told me, "for several hours and found three more bodies. They
were Austrians, in the condition of the first. I walked in a dream of horror. It was, I suppose,
a bad day for me to have come with my other unhappiness weighing upon me, but I was, in some
stupid way, altogether unprepared for what I had seen. I had, as I have told you, thought of
death very often in my life but I had never thought of it like this. I did not now think of
death very clearly but only of the uselessness of trying to bear up against anything when that
was all one came to in the end. I felt my very bones crumble and my flesh decay on my body,
as I stood there. I felt as though I had really been caught at last after a silly aimless flight
and that even if I had the strength or cleverness to escape I had not the desire to try. I
had been mocked with a week's happiness only to have it taken from me for my enemy's ironic
enjoyment. I had a quite definite consciousness of my enemy. I had as a boy thought, you remember,
of my uncle--and now, as I moved through the wood, I could hear the old man's chuckle just
as he had chuckled in the old days, snapping his fingers together and twitching his nose...."

They searched the wood until late in the afternoon, trampling through the wet, peering through
thickets, listening for one another's voices, finding sometimes a trophy in the shape of an
empty shrapnel case, an Austrian cap or dagger. Then, quite suddenly, a sanitar noticed that
the bursting of the shrapnel was much closer than it had been during the early afternoon. It
was now, indeed, very near and they could sometimes see the flash of fire between the trees.

"There's something strange about this, your Honour," said one of the sanitars nervously, and
they all looked at Trenchard as though it were his fault that they were there. Then close behind
them, with a snap of rage, a shrapnel broke amongst the trees. After that they turned for home,
without a word to one another, not running but hastening with flushed faces as though some
one were behind them.

They came to the trench and to their surprise found it absolutely deserted. Then, plunging
on, they arrived at the two wagons, climbed on to one of them, leaving Trenchard alone with
the driver on the other. "I tell you," he remarked to me afterwards, "I sank into that wagon
as though into my grave. I don't know that ever before or since in my life have I felt such
exhaustion. It was reaction, I suppose--a miserable, wretched exhaustion that left me well
enough aware that I was the most unhappy of men and simply forced me, without a protest, to
accept that condition. Moreover, I had always before me the vision of the dead body. Wherever
I turned there it was, grinning at me, the black flies crawling in and out of its jaws, and
behind it something that said to me: 'There! now I have shown you what I can do.... To that
you're coming.'..."

He must have slept because he was suddenly conscious of sitting up in his car, surrounded by
an intense stillness. He looked about him but could see nothing clearly, as though he were
still sleeping. Then he was aware of a sanitar standing below the cart, looking up at him with
great agitation and saying again and again: "Borjé moi! Borjé moi! Borjé moi!"

"What is it?" he asked, rubbing his eyes. The sanitar then seemed to slip away leaving him
alone with a vague sense of disaster. The sun had set, but there was a moon, full and high,
and now by its light he could see that his wagon was standing outside the gate of the house
at M----. There was the yard, the bandaging-room, the long faded wall of the house, the barn,
but where? ... where?... He sat up, then jumped down on to the road. The big white tent on
the further side of the yard, the tent that had, that very morning, been full of wounded, was
gone. The lines of wagons, horses and tents that had filled the field across the road were
gone. No voices came from the house--somewhere a door banged persistently--other sound there
was none.

The sanitars then surrounded him, speaking all together, waving their arms, their faces white
under the moon, their eyes large and frightened like the eyes of little children. He tried
to push their babel off from him. He could not understand.... Was this a continuation of the
nightmare of the afternoon? There was a roar just behind their ears as it seemed. They saw
a light flash upon the sky and fade, flash again and fade. With their faces towards the horizon
they watched.

"What is it?" Trenchard said at last. There advanced towards him then from out of the empty
house an old man in a wide straw hat with a broom.

"What is it?" Trenchard said again.

"It's the Austrians," said the old man in Polish, of which Trenchard understood very little.
"First it's the Russians.... Then it's the Austrians.... Then it's the Russians.... Then it's
the Austrians. And always between each of them I have to clean things up"--and some more which
Trenchard did not understand. The old man then stood at his gate watching them with a gaze
serious, sad, reflective. Meanwhile the sanitars had discovered one of our own soldiers: this
man, who had been sitting under a hedge and listening to the Austrian cannon with very uncomfortable
feelings, told them of the affair. At three o'clock that afternoon our Otriad had been informed
that it must retreat "within half an hour." Not only our own Sixty-Fifth Division, but the
whole of the Ninth Army was retreating "within half an hour." Moreover the Austrians were advancing
"a verst a minute." By four o'clock the whole of our Otriad had disappeared, leaving only this
soldier to inform us that we must move on at once to T---- or S----, twenty or thirty versts
distant.

"Retreating!" cried Trenchard. "But we were winning! We'd just won a battle!"

"Tak totchno!" said the soldier gravely, "Twenty versts! the horses won't do it, your Honour!"

"They've got to do it!" said Trenchard sharply, and the echo of the Austrian cannon, again
as it seemed quite close at hand, emphasised his words. Except for this the silence of the
world around them was eerie; only far away they seemed to hear the persistent rumble of carts
on the road.

"They're gone! They're all gone! We're left last of all!" and "The Austrians advancing a verst
a minute!"

He took a last look at the house which had seemed yesterday so absolutely to belong to them
and now was already making preparations for its new guests. As he gazed he thought of his agony
in that field below the house. Only last night and now what years ago it seemed! What years,
what years ago!

He climbed wearily again upon his wagon. There had entered into his unhappiness now a new element.
This was a sensation of cold despairing anger that ground should be yielded so helplessly.
About every field, every hedge and lane and tree, as slowly they jogged along he felt this.
Only to-day this corn, these stones, these flowers were Russian, and to-morrow Austrian! This,
as it seemed, simply out of the air, dictated by some whispering devil crouching behind a hedge,
afraid to appear! This, too, when only a few hours ago there had been that battle of S----
won by them after a struggle of many days; that position, soaked with Russian blood, to be
surrendered now as a leaf blows in the wind.

When they arrived at T---- and found our Otriad he was, I believe, so deeply exhausted that
he was not conscious of his actions. His account to me of what then occurred is fantastic and
confused. He discovered apparently the house where we were; it was then one o'clock in the
morning. Every one was asleep. There seemed to be no place for him to be, he could find neither
candles nor matches, and he wandered out into the road again. Then, it seems, he was standing
beside a deep lake. "I can remember nothing clearly except that the lake was black and endless.
I stood looking at it. I could see the bodies out of the forest, only now they were slipping
along the water, their skulls white and gleaming. I had also a confused impression that Russia
was beaten and the war over. And that for me too life was utterly at an end.... I remember
that I deliberately thought of Marie because it hurt so abominably. I repeated to myself the
incidents of the night before, all of them, talking aloud to myself. I decided then that I
would drown myself in the lake. It seemed the only thing to do. I took my coat off. Then sat
down in the mud and took off my boots. Why I did this I don't know. I looked at the water,
thought that it would be cold, but that it would soon be over because I couldn't swim. I heard
the frogs, looked back at the flickering fires amongst our wagons, then walked down the bank...."

Nikitin must for some time have been watching him, because at that moment he stepped forward,
took Trenchard's arm, and drew him back. Nikitin has himself told me that he was walking up
and down the road that night because he could not sleep. When he spoke to Trenchard the man
seemed dazed and bewildered, said something about "life being all over for him and--death being
horrible!"

Nikitin put his arm round him, took him back to his room, where he made him a bed on the floor,
gave him a sleeping-draught and watched him until he slept.

That was the true beginning of the friendship between Nikitin and Trenchard.

CHAPTER VI

THE RETREAT

The retreat struck us as breathlessly as though we had been whirled by a wind-storm into midair
on the afternoon of a summer day. At five minutes to three we had been sitting round the table
in the garden of the house at M---- drinking tea. We were, I remember, very gay. We had heard
only the day before of the Russian surrender of Przemysl and that had for a moment depressed
us; but as always we could see very little beyond our own immediate Division. Here, on our
own Front, we had at last cleared the path before us. On that very afternoon we were gaily
anticipating our advance. Even Sister K---- who, for religious reasons, took always a gloomy
view of the future, was cheerful. She sipped her cherry jam and smiled upon us. Anna Petrovna,
imperturbably sewing, calmly sighed her satisfaction.

"Perhaps to-morrow we shall move. I feel like it. It will be splendid to go through the Carpathians--beautiful
scenery, I believe." Molozov was absent in the town of B---- collecting some wagons that had
arrived from Petrograd. "He'll be back to-night, I believe," said Sister K----. "Dear me, what
a pleasant afternoon!"

It was then that I saw the face of the boy Goga. I had turned, smiling, pleased with the sunshine,
cherry jam, and a good Russian cigarette straight from Petrograd. The boy Goga stared across
the yard at me, his round red cheeks pale, mouth open, and his eyes confused and unbelieving.

He seemed then to jump across the intervening space. Then he screamed at us:

"We're retreating.... We're retreating!" he shrieked in the high trembling voice peculiar to
agitated Russians. "We have only half an hour and the Austrians are almost here now!"

We were flung after that into a hurry of movement that left us no time for reasoning or argument.
Semyonov appeared and in Molozov's absence took the lead. He was, of course, entirely unmoved,
and as I now remember, combed his fair beard with a little tortoiseshell pocket comb as he
talked to us. "Yes, we must move in half an hour. Very sad ... the whole army is retreating.
Why, God knows...."

There arose clouds of dust in the yard where we had had our happy luncheon. The tents had disappeared.
The wounded were once more lying on the jolting carts, looking up through their pain and distress
to a heaven that was hot and grey and indifferent. An old man whom we had not seen during the
whole of our stay suddenly appeared from nowhere with a long broom and watched us complacently.
We had our own private property to pack. As I pressed my last things into my bag I turned from
my desolate little tent, looked over the fields, the garden, the house, the barns.... "But
it was ours--OURS," I thought passionately. We had but just now won a desperately-fought battle;
across the long purple misty fields the bodies of those fallen Russians seemed to rise and
reproach us. "We had won that land for you--and now--like this, you can abandon us!"

At that moment I cursed my lameness that would prevent me from ever being a soldier. How poor,
on that afternoon, it seemed to be unable to defend with one's own hand those fields, those
rivers, those hills! "Ah but Russia, I will serve you faithfully for this!" was the prayer
at all our hearts that afternoon....

Semyonov had wisely directed our little procession away from the main road to O---- which was
filled now with the carts and wagons of our Sixty-Fifth Division. We were to spend the night
at the small village of T----, twenty versts distant; then, to-morrow morning, to arrive at O----.

The carts were waiting in a long line down the road, the soldiers, hot and dusty, carried bags
and sacks and bundles. A wounded man cried suddenly: "Oh, Oh, Oh," an ugly mongrel terrier
who had attached himself to our Otriad tried to leap up at him, barking, in the air. There
was a scent of hay and dust and flowers, and, very faintly, behind it all, came the soft gentle
rumble of the Austrian cannon.

Nikitin, splendid on his horse, shouted to Semyonov:

"What of Mr.? Hadn't some one better go to meet him?"

"I've arranged that!" Semyonov answered shortly.

It was of course my fate to travel in the ancient black carriage that was one of the glories
of our Otriad, with Sister Sofia Antonovna, the Sister with the small red-rimmed eyes of whom
I have spoken on an earlier page. She was a woman who found in every arrangement in life, whether
made by God, the Germans, or the General of our Division, much cause for complaint and dismay.
She had never been pretty but had always felt that she ought to be; she was stupid but comforted
herself by the certain assurance that every one else was stupid too. She had come to the war
because a large family of brothers and sisters refused to have her at home. I disliked her
very much, and she hated myself and Marie Ivanovna more than any one else in the world. I don't
know why she grouped us together--she always did.

Marie Ivanovna was sitting with us now in the carriage, white-faced and silent. Sofia Antonovna
was very patronising.... "When you've worked a little more at the Front, dear, you'll know
that these things must happen. Bad work somewhere, of course. What can you expect from a country
like Russia? Everything mismanaged ... nothing but thieves and robbers. Of course we're beaten
and always will be."

"How can you, Sofia Antonovna?" Sister Marie interrupted in a low trembling voice. "It is nobody's
fault. It is only for a moment. We will return--soon--at once. I know it. Ah, we must, we must!
... and your courage all goes. Of course it would."

Sister Sofia Antonovna smiled and her eyes watched us both. "I'm afraid your Mr. will be left
behind," she said.

"Dr. Semyonov," Marie Ivanovna began--then stopped. We were all of us silent during the rest
of the journey.

And how is one to give any true picture of the confusion into which we flung ourselves at O----?
O---- had been the town at which, a little more than a month ago, we had arrived so eagerly,
so optimistically. It had been to us then the quietest retreat in the world--irritating, provoking
by reason of its peace. The little school-house, the green well, the orchard, the bees, the
long light evenings with no sound but the birds and running water--those things had been a
month ago.

We were hurled now into a world of dust and despair. The square market place, the houses that
huddled round it were swallowed up by soldiers, horses, carts and whirling clouds. A wind blew
and through the wind a hot sun blazed. Everywhere horses were neighing, cows and sheep were
driven in thick herds through columns of soldiers, motor cars frantically pushed their way
from place to place, and always, everywhere, covering every inch of ground flying, as it seemed,
from the air, on to roofs, in and out of windows, from house to house, from corner to corner,
was the humorous, pathetic, expectant, matter-of-fact, dreaming, stolid Russian soldier. He
was to come to me, later on, in a very different fashion, but on this dreadful day in O----
he was simply part of the intolerable, depressing background.

If this day were dreadful to me what must it have been to Trenchard! We were none of us aware
at this time of what had happened to him two days before, nor did we know of his adventure
of yesterday. O---- seemed to him, he has told me, like hell.

We spent the day gathered together in a large white house that had formerly been the town-hall
of O----. It had, I remember, high empty rooms all gilt and looking-glasses; the windows were
broken and the dust came, in circles and twisting spirals, blowing over the gilt chairs and
wooden floors.

We made tea and sat miserably together. Semyonov was in some other part of the town. We were
to wait here until Molozov arrived from B----.

There can be few things so bad as the sense of insecurity that we had that afternoon. The very
ground seemed to have been cut away from under our feet. We had gathered enough from the officers
of our Division to know that something very disastrous "somewhere" had occurred. It was the
very vagueness of the thing that terrified us. What could have happened? Only something very
monstrous could have compelled so general a retirement. We might all of us be prisoners before
the evening. That seemed to us, and indeed was afterwards proved in reality, to have been no
slender possibility. There was no spot on earth that belonged to us. So firm and solid we had
been at M----. Even we had hung pictures on the walls and planted flowers outside the dining-room.
Now all that remained for us was this horrible place with its endless looking-glasses, its
bare gleaming floors and the intolerable noise through its open windows of carts, soldiers,
horses, the smell of dung and tobacco, and the hot air, like gas, that flung the dust into
our faces.

Beyond the vague terrors of our uncertainty was the figure, seen quite clearly by all of us
without any sentiment, of Russia. Certainly Trenchard and I could feel with less poignancy
the appeal of her presence, and yet I swear that to us also on that day it was she of whom
we were thinking. We had been, until then, her allies; we were now her servants.

By Russia every one of us, sitting in that huge room, meant something different. To Goga she
was home, a white house on the Volga, tennis, long evenings, early mornings, holidays in a
tangled wilderness of happiness. To Sister K---- she was "Holy Russia," Russia of the Kremlin,
of the Lavra, of a million ikons in a million little streets, little rooms, little churches.
To Sister Sofia she was Petrograd with cafés, novels by such writers as Verbitzkaia and our
own Jack London, the cinematograph, and the Islands on a fine evening in May. To the student
like a white fish she was a platform for frantic speeches, incipient revolutions, little untidy
hysterical meetings in a dirty room in a back street, newspapers, the incapacities of the Douma,
the robberies and villainies of the Government. To Anna Petrovna she was comfortable, unspeculative,
friendly "home." To Nikitin she was the face of one woman upon whose eyes his own were always
fixed. To Marie Ivanovna she was a flaming glorious wonder, mystical, transplendent, revealed
in every blade of grass, every flash of sun across the sky, every line of the road, the top
of every hill.

And to Trenchard and myself? For Trenchard she had, perhaps, taken to herself some part of
his beloved country. He has told me--and I will witness in myself to the truth of this--that
he never in his life felt more burningly his love for England than at this first moment of
his consciousness of Russia. The lanes and sea of his remembered vision were not far from that
dirty, disordered town in Galicia--and for both of them he was rendering his service.

At any rate there we sat, huddled together, reflected in the countless looking-glasses as a
helpless miserable "lot," falling into long silences, hoping for the coming of Molozov with
later news, listening to the confusion in the street below. Marie Ivanovna with her hands behind
her back and her head up walked, nervously, up and down the long room. Her eyes stared beyond
us and the place, striving perhaps to find some reason why life should so continually insist
on being a different thing from her imaginings of it.

Lighted by the hot sun, blown upon by the dust, her figure, tall, thin, swaying a little in
its many reflections, had the determined valour of some Joan of Arc. But Joan of Arc, I thought
to myself, had at least some one definite against whom to wave her white banner; we were fighting
dust and the sun.

Trenchard and Nikitin had left us to go into the town to search for news. We were silent. Suddenly
Marie Ivanovna, turning upon us all as though she hated us, cried fiercely:

"I think you should know that Mr. Trenchard and I are no longer engaged."

It was neither the time nor the place for such a declaration. I cannot suggest why Marie Ivanovna
spoke unless it were that she felt life that was betraying her so basely that she, herself,
at least, must be honest. We none of us knew what to say. What could we say? This appalling
day had sunk for us all individualities. We were scarcely aware of one another's names and
here was Marie Ivanovna thrusting all these personalities upon us. Sister Sofia's red-rimmed
eyes glittered with pleasure but she only said: "Oh, dear, I'm very sorry." Sister K---- who
was always without tact made a most uncomfortable remark: "Poor Mr.!..."

That, I believe, was what we were all feeling. I had an impulse to run out into the street,
find Trenchard, and make him comfortable. I felt furiously indignant with the girl. We all
looked at her, I suppose, with indignation, because she regarded us with a fierce, insulting
smile, then turned her back upon us and went to a window.

At that moment Molozov with Trenchard, Nikitin and Semyonov, entered. I have said earlier in
this book that only upon one occasion have I seen Molozov utterly overcome, a defeated man.
This was the occasion to which I refer. He stood there in the doorway, under a vulgar bevy
of gilt and crimson cupids, his face dull paste in colour, his hands hanging like lead; he
looked at us without seeing us. Semyonov said something to him: "Why, of course," I heard him
reply, "we've got to get out as quickly as we can.... That's all."

He came over towards us and we were all, except Marie Ivanovna, desperately frightened. She
cried to him: "Well, what's the truth? How bad is it?"

He didn't turn to her but answered to us all.

"It's abominable--everywhere."

I know that then the great feeling of us all was that we must escape from the horrible place
in some way. This beastly town of O---- (once cursed by us for its gentle placidity) was responsible
for the whole disaster; it was as though we said to ourselves, "If we had not been here this
would not have happened."

We all stood up as though we felt that we must leave at once, and while we stood thus there
was a report that shook the floor so that we rocked on our feet, brought a shower of dust and
whitewash from the walls, cracked the one remaining pane of glass and drove two mice scattering
with terror wildly across the floor. The noise had been terrific. Our very hearts stood still.
The Austrians were here then.... This was the end....

"It's the bridge," Semyonov said quietly, and of course ironically. "We've blown it up. There'll
be the other in a moment."

There was--a second shock brought down more dust and a large scale of gilt wood from one of
the cornices. We waited then for our orders, looking down from the windows on to what seemed
a perfect babel of disorder and confusion.

"We must be at X---- to-night," Molozov told us. "The Staff is on its way already. We should
be moving in half an hour."

We made our preparations.

Trenchard, meanwhile, had had during this afternoon one driving compelling impulse beyond all
others, that he must, at all costs, escape all personal contact with Marie Ivanovna. It seemed
to him the most awful thing that could possibly happen to him now would be a compulsory conversation
with her. He did not, of course, know that she had spoken to us, and he thought that it would
be the easiest thing in all the confusion that this retreat involved that he should be flung
up against her. He sought his chief refuge in Nikitin. I am aware that in the things I have
said of Nikitin, in speaking both of his relation to Andrey Vassilievitch's wife and to Trenchard
himself, I have shown him as something of a sentimental figure. And yet sentimental was the
very last thing that he really was. He had not the "open-heartedness" that is commonly asserted
to be the chief glory and the chief defect of the Russian soul. He had talked to me because
I was a foreigner and of no importance to him--some one who would be entirely outside his life.
He took Trenchard now for his friend I believe because he really was attracted by the admixture
of chivalry and helplessness, of simplicity and credulity, of timidity and courage that the
man's character displayed. I am sure that had it been I who had been in Trenchard's position
he would not have stretched out one finger to help me.

Trenchard himself had only vague memories of the events of the preceding evening. He was aware
quite simply that the whole thing had been a horrible dream and that "nothing so bad could
ever possibly happen to him again." He had "touched the worst," and he undoubtedly found some
relief to-day in the general distress and confusion. It covered his personal disaster and forced
him to forget himself in other persons' misfortunes. He was, as it happened, of more use than
any one just then in getting every one speedily out of O----. He ran messages, found parcels
and bags for the Sisters, collected sanitars, even discovered the mongrel terrier, tied a string
to him and gave him to one of our soldiers to look after. In what a confusion, as the evening
fell, was the garden of our large white house! Huge wagons covered its lawn; horses, neighing,
stamping, jumping, were dragged and pulled and threatened; officers, from stout colonels to
very young lieutenants, came cursing and shouting, first this way and that. A huge bag of biscuits
broke away from a provision van and fell scattering on to the ground; the soldiers, told that
they might help themselves, laughing and shouting like babies, fell upon the store. But for
the most part there was gloom, gloom, gloom under the evening sky. Sometimes the reflections
of distant rockets would shudder and fade across the pale blue; incessantly, from every corner
of the world, came the screaming rattle of carts, a sound like many pencils drawn across a
gigantic slate--and always the dust rose and fell in webs and curtains of filmy gold, under
the evening sun.

At last Trenchard found himself with Molozov and Ivan Mihailovitch, the student like a fish,
in the old black carriage. Molozov had "flung the world to the devil," Trenchard afterwards
said, "and I sat there, you know, looking at his white face and wondering what I ought to talk
about." Trenchard suddenly found himself narrowly and aggressively English--and it is certain
that every Englishman in Russia on Tuesday thanks God that he is a practical man and has some
common sense, and on Wednesday wonders whether any one in England knows the true value of anything
at all and is ashamed of a country so miserably without a passion for "ideas."

To-night Trenchard was an Englishman. He had been really useful at O---- and he had felt a
new spirit of kindness around him. He did not know that Marie Ivanovna had made her declaration
to us and that we were therefore all anxious to show him that we thought that he had been badly
treated. Moreover he suspected, with a true English distrust of emotions, that the Russians
before him were inclined to luxuriate in their gloom. Molozov's despair and Ivan Mihailovitch's
passionate eyes and jerking white hands irritated him.

He smiled a practical English smile and looked about him at the swaying procession of carts
and soldiers with a practical eye.

"Come," he said to Molozov, "don't despair. There's nothing really to be distressed about.
There must be these retreats, you know. There must be. The great thing in this war is to see
the whole thing in proportion--the whole thing. France and England and the Dardanelles and
Italy--everything. In another month or two--"

But Molozov, frowning, shook his head.

"This country ... no method ... no system. Nothing. It is terrible.... That's a pretty girl!"
he added moodily, looking at a group of peasants in a doorway. "A very pretty girl!" he added,
sitting up a little and staring. Then he relapsed, "No system--nothing," he murmured.

"But there will be," continued Trenchard in his English voice. (He told me afterwards that
he was conscious at the time of a horrible priggish superiority.) "Here in Russia you go up
and down so. You've no restraint. Now if you had discipline--"

But he was interrupted by the melancholy figure of an officer who hung on to our slowly moving
carriage, walking beside it with his hand on the door. He did not seem to have anything very
much to say but looked at us with large melancholy eyes. He was small and needed dusting.

"What is it?" asked Molozov, saluting.

"I've had contusion," said the little officer in a dreamy voice. "Contusion ... I don't feel
very well. I don't quite know where I ought to go."

"Our doctors are just behind," said Molozov. "You can come on with them."

"Your doctors ..." the little officer repeated dreamily. "Very well...." But he continued with
us. "I've had contusion," he said. "At M----. Yes.... And now I don't quite know where I am.
I'm very depressed and unhappy. What do you advise?"

"There are our doctors," Molozov repeated rather irritably. "You'll find them ... behind there."

"Yes, I suppose so," the melancholy little figure repeated and disappeared.

In some way this figure affected Trenchard very dismally and drove all his English common sense
away. We were moving now slowly through clouds of dust, and peasants who watched us from their
doorways with a cold indifference that was worse than exultation.

When we arrived, at two or three in the morning, at X----, our destination, the spirits of
all of us were heavily weighted. Tired, cross, dirty, driven and pursued, and always with us
that harassing fear that we had now no ground upon which we might rest our feet, that nothing
in the world belonged to us, that we were fugitives and vagabonds by the will of God.

As our carriage stopped before the door of the large white building in X---- that seemed just
like the large white building in O----, the little officer was again at our side.

"I've got contusion ..." he said. "I'm very unhappy, and I don't know where to go."

Trenchard felt now as though in another moment he would tumble back again into his nightmare
of yesterday. The house at X---- indeed was fantastic enough. I feel that I am in danger of
giving too many descriptions of our various halting-places. For the most part they largely
resembled one another, large deserted country houses with broken windows, bare walls and floors,
a tangled garden and a tattered collection of books in the Polish language. But this building
at X---- was like no other of our asylums.

It was a huge place, a strange combination of the local town-hall and the local theatre. It
was the theatre that at that early hour in the morning seemed to our weary eyes so fantastic.
As we peered into it it was a huge place, already filled with wounded and lighted only by candles,
stuck here and there in bottles. I could see, dimly, the stage at the back of the room, and
still hanging, tattered and restless in the draught, a forgotten backcloth of some old play.
I could see that it was a picture of a gay scene in an impossibly highly coloured town--high
marble stairs down which flower-girls with swollen legs came tripping into a market-place filled
with soldiers and their lovers--"Carmen" perhaps. It seemed absurd enough there in the uncertain
candlelight with the wounded groaning and crying in front of it. There was already in the air
that familiar smell of blood and iodine, the familiar cries of: "Oh, Sestritza--Oh, Sestritza!"
the familiar patient faces of the soldiers, sitting up, waiting for their turn, the familiar
sharp voice of the sanitar: "What Division? What regiment? bullet or shrapnel?"

I remember that some wounded man, in high fever, was singing, and that no one could stop him.

"He's dead," I heard Semyonov's curt voice behind me, and turning saw them cover the body on
the stretcher with a sheet.

"Oh! Oh!... Oh! Oh!" shrieked a man from the middle of whose back Nikitin, probing with his
finger, was extracting a bullet. The candles flared, the ladies from "Carmen" wavered on the
marble steps, the high cracked voice of the soldier continued its song. I stood there with
Trenchard and Andrey Vassilievitch. Then we turned away.

"We're not wanted to-night," I said. "We'd better get out of the way and sleep somewhere. There'll
be plenty to do to-morrow!" Little Andrey Vassilievitch, whom during the retreat I had entirely
forgotten, looked very pathetic. He was dusty and dirty and hated his discomfort. He did not
know where to go and was in everybody's way. Nikitin was immensely busy and had no time to
waste on his friend. Poor Andrey was tired and terribly depressed.

"What I say is," he confided to us in a voice that trembled a little, "that we are not to despair.
We have to retreat to-day, but who knows what will happen to-morrow? Every one is aware that
Russia is a glorious country and has endless resources. Well then.... What I say is ..."; an
officer bundled into him, apologised but quite obviously cursed him for being in the way.

"Come along," said Trenchard, putting his arm on Andrey Vassilievitch's sleeve. "We'll find
somewhere to sleep. Of course we're not in despair. Why should we be? You'll feel better to-morrow."

They departed, and as they went I wondered at this new side in Trenchard's character. He seemed
strong, practical, and almost cheerful. I, knowing his disaster, was puzzled. My lame leg was
hurting me to-night. I found a corner to lie down in, rolled myself in my greatcoat and passed
through a strange succession of fantastic dreams in which Trenchard, Marie Ivanovna, Nikitin,
and Semyonov all figured. Behind them I seemed to hear some voice crying: "I've got you all!...
I've got you all!... You're caught!... You're caught!... You're caught!"

On the following day there happened to Trenchard the thing that he had dreaded. Writing of
it now I cannot disentangle it from the circumstances and surroundings of his account of it
to me. He was looking back then, when he spoke to me, to something that seemed almost fantastic
in its ironical reality. Every word of that conversation he afterwards recalled to himself
again and again. As to Marie Ivanovna I think that he never even began to understand her; that
he should believe in her was a different matter from his understanding her. That he should
worship her was a tribute both to his inexperience and to his sentiment. But his relation to
her and to this whole adventure of his was confused and complicated by the fact that he was
not, I believe, in himself a sentimental man. What one supposed to be sentiment was a quite
honest and naked lack of knowledge of the world. As experience came to him sentiment fell away
from him. But experience was never to come to him in regard to Marie Ivanovna; he was to know
as little of her at the end as he had known at the beginning, and this whole conversation with
her (of course, I have only his report of it) is clouded with his romantic conception of her.
To that I might add also my own romantic conception; if Trenchard never saw her clearly because
he loved her, I never saw her clearly because--because--why, I do not know.... She was, from
first to last, a figure of romance, irritating, aggressive, enchanting, baffling, always blinding,
to all of us.

During the morning after our arrival in M---- Trenchard worked in the theatre, bandaging and
helping with the transport of the wounded up the high and difficult staircase. Then at midday,
tired with the heat, the closeness of the place, he escaped into the little park that bordered
the farther side of the road. It was a burning day in June--the sun came beating through the
trees, and as soon as he had turned the corner of the path and had lost the line of ruined
and blackened houses to his right he found himself in the wildest and most glittering of little
orchards. The grass grew here to a great height--the apple-trees were of a fine age, and the
sun in squares and circles and stars of light flashed like fire through the thick green. He
stepped forward, blinded by the quivering gold, and walked into the arms of Marie Ivanovna.
He, quite literally, ran against her and put his arms about her for a moment to steady her,
not seeing who she was.

Then he gave a little cry.

She was also frightened. "It was the only time," he told me, "that I had ever seen her show fear."

They were silent, neither of them knowing the way to speak.

Then she said: "John, don't r-run away. It is very good. I wanted to speak to you. Here, sit
down here."

She herself sat down and patted the grass, inviting him. He at once sat down beside her, but
he could say nothing--nothing at all.

She waited for a time and then, seeing him, I suppose, at a loss and helpless, regained her
own courage. "Are you still angry with me?"

"No," he answered, not looking at her.

"You have a right to be; I behaved very badly."

"I don't understand," he replied, "why you thought in Petrograd that you loved me and then--so
soon--found that you did not--so soon."

He looked at her and then lowered his eyes.

"What do you know or I know?" she suddenly asked him impetuously. "Are we not both always thinking
that things will be so fine--seichass--and then they are not. How could we be happy together
when we are both so ignorant? Ah, you know, John, you know that happy together we could never be."

He looked at her clearly and without hesitation.

"I was very stupid," he said. "I thought that because I had come into a big thing I would be
big myself. It is not so; I am the same person as I was in England. I have not changed at all
and I shall never change ... only in this one thing that whether you go from me or whether
you stay I shall never love anybody but you. All men say that, I know," he added, "but there
are not many men who have had so little in their lives as I, and so perhaps it means more with
me than it does with others."

She made no reply to him. She had not, I believe, heard him. She said, as though she were speaking
to herself: "If we had not come, John, if we had stayed in Petrograd, anything might have been.
But here there is something more than people. I don't know whether I love or hate any one.
I cannot marry you or any man until this is all over."

"And then," he interrupted passionately, touching her sleeve with his hand. "After the war?
Perhaps--again, you will--"

She took his hand in hers, looking at him as though she were suddenly seeing him for the first
time:

"No--you, John, never. In Petrograd I didn't know what this could be--no idea--none. And now
that I'm here I can think of nothing else than what I'm going to find. There is something here
that I'd be afraid of if I let myself be and that's what I love. What will happen when I meet
it? Shall I feel fear or no? And so, too, if there were a man whom I feared...."

"Semyonov!" Trenchard cried.

She looked at him and did not answer. He caught her hand urgently. "No, Marie, no--any one
but Semyonov. It doesn't matter about me. But you must be happy--you must be. Nothing else--and
he won't make you. He isn't--"

"Happy!" she answered scornfully. "I don't want to be happy. That isn't it. But to be sure
that one's not afraid--" (She repeated to herself several times Hrabrost--the Russian for "bravery.")
"That is more than you, John, or than I or than--"

She broke off, looked at him suddenly as he told me "very tenderly and kindly as though she
liked me."

"John, I'm your friend. I've been bad to you, but I'm your friend. I don't understand why I've
been so bad to you because, I would be fur-rious--yes, fur-rious--if any one else were bad
to you. And be mine, John, whatever I do, be mine. I'm not really a bad character--only I think
it's too exciting now, here--everything--for me to stop and think."

"You know," he answered with a rather tired gesture (he had worked in that hot theatre all
the morning) "that I am always the same--but you must not marry Semyonov," he added fiercely.

She did not answer him, looked up at the sunlight and said after a time:

"I hate Sister K----. She is not really religious. She doesn't wash either. Let us go back.
I was away, I said, only for a little."

They walked back, he told me, in perfect silence. He was more unhappy than ever. He was more
unhappy because he saw quite clearly that he did not understand her at all; he felt farther
away from her than ever and loved her more devotedly than ever: a desperate state of things.
If he had taken that sentence of hers--"I think it's too exciting--now--here--for me to stop
and think," he would, I fancy, have found the clue to her, but he would not believe that she
was so simple as that. In the two days that followed, days of the greatest discomfort, disappointment
and disorder, his mind never left her for a moment. His diary for these four days is very short
and unromantic.

"June 23rd. In X----. Morning worked in the theatre. Bandaged thirty. Operation 1--arm amputated.
Learn that there has been a battle round the school-house at O---- where we first were. Wonderful
weather. Spent some time in the park. Talked to M. there. Evening moved--thirty versts to P----.
Much dust, very slow, owing to the Guards retreating at same time. Was with Durward and Andrey
Vassilievitch in a Podvoda--Like the latter, but he's out of place here. Arrived 1.30.

"June 24th. Off early morning. This time black carriage with Sisters K---- and Anna Petrovna.
More dust--thousands of soldiers passing us, singing as though there were no retreat. News
from L---- very bad. Say there's no ammunition. Arrived Nijnieff evening 7.30. Very hungry
and thirsty. We could find no house for some hours; a charming little town in a valley. Nestor
seems huge--very beautiful with wooded hills. But whole place so swallowed in dust impossible
to see anything. Heaps of wounded again. I and Molozov in nice room alone. Have not seen M.
all day.

"June 25th. This morning Nikitin, Sister K----, Goga, and I attempted to get back to P----
to see whether there were wounded. Started off on the carts but when we got to the hill above
the village met the whole of our Division coming out. The village abandoned, so back we had
to go again through all the dust. Evening nothing doing. Every one depressed.

"June 26th. Very early--half-past five in the morning--we were roused and had to take part
in an exodus like the Israelites. Most unpleasant, moving an inch an hour, Cossacks riding
one down if one preferred to go on foot to being bumped in the haycart. Every one in the depths
of depression. Crossed the Nestor, a perfectly magnificent river. Five versts further, then
stopped at a farmhouse, pitched tents. Instantly hundreds of wounded. Battle fierce just other
side of Nijnieff. Worked like a nigger--from two to eight never stopped bandaging. About ten
went off to the position with Molozov. Strange to be back in the little town under such different
circumstances. Dark as pitch--raining. Much noise, motors, soldiers like ghosts though--shrapnel
all the time. Tired, depressed and nervous. Horrid waiting doing nothing; two houses under
the shrapnel. Expected also at every moment bridge behind us to be blown up. At last wagons
filled with wounded, started back and got home eventually, taking two hours over it. Very glad
when it was over...."

We had arrived, indeed, although we did not then know it and were expecting, every moment,
to move back again, at the conclusion of our first exodus. Our only other transition, after
a day or two longer at our farmhouse, was forward four versts to a tiny village on a high hill
overlooking the Nestor, to the left of Nijnieff. This village was called Mittövo. Mittövo was
to be our world for many weeks to come. We inhabited once again the large white deserted country-house
with the tangled garden, the dusty bare floors, the broken windows. At the end of the tangled
garden there was a white stone cross, and here was a most wonderful view, the high hill running
precipitously down to the flat silver expanse of the Nestor that ran like a gleaming girdle
under the breasts of the slopes beyond. These further slopes were clothed with wood. I remember,
on the first day that I watched, the forest beyond was black and dense like a cloud resting
on the hill; the Nestor and our own country was soaked with sun.

"That's a fine forest," I said to my companion.

"Yes, the forest of S----, stretches miles back into Galicia." It was Nikitin that day who
spoke to me. We turned carelessly away. Meanwhile how difficult and unpleasant those first
weeks at Mittövo were! We had none of us realised, I suppose, how sternly those days of retreat
had tested our nerves. We had been not only retreating, but (at the same time) working fiercely,
and now, when for some while the work slackened and, under the hot blazing sun, we found nothing
for our hands to do, a grinding irritable reaction settled down upon us.

I had known in my earlier experience at the war the troubles that inevitably rise from inaction;
the little personal inconveniences, the tyrannies of habits and manners and appearances, when
you've got nothing to do but sit and watch your immediate neighbour. But on that earlier occasion
our army had been successful; it seemed that the war would soon find its conclusion in the
collapse of Germany, and good news from Europe smiled upon us every morning at breakfast. Now
we were tired and over-wrought. Good news there was none--indeed every day brought disastrous
tidings. We, ourselves, must look back upon a hundred versts of fair smiling country that we
had conquered with the sacrifice of many thousands of lives and surrendered without the giving
of a blow. And always the force that compelled us to this was sinister and ironical by its
invisibility.

It was the Russian temperament to declare exactly what it felt, to give free rein to its moods
and dislikes and discomforts. The weather was beginning to be fiercely hot, there were many
rumours of cholera and typhus--we, all of us, lost colour and appetite, slept badly and suffered
from sudden headaches.

Three days after our arrival at Mittövo we had all discovered private hostilities and resentments.
I was as bad as any one. I could not endure the revolutionary student, Ivan Mihailovitch. I
thought him most uncleanly in his habits, and I was compelled to sleep in the same room with
him. Certainly it was true that washing was not one of the most important things in the world
to him. In the morning he would lurch out of bed, put on a soiled shirt and trousers, dab his
face with a decrepit sponge, take a tiny piece of soap from an old tin box, look at it, rub
it on his fingers and put it hurriedly away again as though he were ashamed of it. Sometimes,
getting out of bed, he would cry: "Have you heard the latest scandal? About the ammunition
in the Tenth Army! They say--" and then he would forget his washing altogether. He did not
shave his head, as most of us had done, but allowed his hair to grow very long, and this, of
course, was often a subject of irritation to him. He had also a habit of sitting on his bed
in his nightclothes, yawning and scratching his body all over, very slowly, with his long (and
I'm afraid dirty) finger-nails, for the space, perhaps, of a quarter of an hour. This I found
difficult to endure. His long white face was always a dirty shade of grey and his jacket was
stained with reminiscences of his meals. His habits at table were terrible; he was always so
deeply interested in what he was saying that he had not time to close his mouth whilst he was
eating, to ask people to pass him food (he stretched his long dirty hand across the table)
or to pass food to others. He shouted a great deal and was in a furious passion every five
minutes. I also just at this time found the boy Goga tiresome; the boy had not been taught
by his parents the duty that children owe to their elders and I am inclined to believe that
this duty is almost universally untaught in Russia. To Goga a General was as nothing, he would
contradict our old white-haired General T----, when he came to dine with us, would patronise
the Colonel and assure the General's aide-de-camp that he knew better. He would advance his
father as a perpetual and faithful witness to the truth of his statements. "You may say what
you like," he would cry to myself or a Sister, "but my father knows better than you do. He
has the front seat in the Moscow Opera all through the season and has been to England three
times." Goga also had been once to England for a week (spent entirely on the Brighton Pier)
and he told me many things. He would forget, for a moment, that I was an Englishman and would
assure me that he knew better than I did. He was a being with the best heart in the world,
but his parents loved him so much that they had neglected his education.

These things may seem trifling enough, but they had, nevertheless, their importance. Among
the Sisters, Sister K---- was the unpopular one. I myself must honestly confess that she was
a woman ill-suited to company less worthy than herself. She had an upright virtuous character
but she was narrow (a rare fault in a Russian), superstitious, dogmatically religious, and
entirely without tact. She quite honestly thought us a poor lot and would say to me: "I hope,
Mr. Durward, you don't judge Russia by the specimens you find here," and was, of course, always
overheard. She was a strict moralist, but was also generous with all the warmth of Russian
generosity in money matters. She was a marvellous hard worker, quite fearless, accurate, and
punctual in all things. She fought incessant battles with Anna Petrovna who hated her as warmly
as it was in her quiet, unruffled heart to hate any one. The only thing stranger than the fierceness
of their quarrels was the suddenness of their conclusion. I remember that at dinner one day
they fought a battle over the question of a clean towel with a heat and vigour that was Homeric.
A quarter of an hour later I found them quietly talking together. Anna Petrovna was showing
Sister K---- a large and hideous photograph of her children.

"How sympathetic! How beautiful!" said Sister K----.

"But I thought you hated her?" I said afterwards in confusion to Anna Petrovna.

"She was very sympathetic about my children," said Anna Petrovna placidly.

Then, of course, Sister Sofia Antonovna, the sister with the red eyes, made trouble when she
could. She was, as I discovered afterwards, a bitterly disappointed woman, having been deserted
by her fiancé only a week before her marriage. That had happened three years ago and she still
loved him, so that she had her excuse for her view of the world. My friends seemed to me, during
those first weeks at Mittövo, simply a company of good-hearted, ill-disciplined children. I
had gone directly back to my days in the nursery. Restraint of any kind there was none, discipline
as to time or emotions was undreamed of, and with it all a vitality, a warmth of heart, a sincerity
and honesty that made that Otriad, perhaps, the most lovable company I have ever known. Russians
are fond of sneering at themselves; for him who declares that he likes Russia and Russians
they have either polite disbelief or gentle contempt. In England we have qualities of endurance,
of reliability, of solidity, to which, often enough, I long to return--but that warmth of heart
that I have known here for two long years, a warmth that means love for the neglected, for
the defeated, for the helpless, a warmth that lights a fire on every hearth in every house
in Russia--that is a greater thing than the possessors of it know.

Through all the little quarrels and disputes of our company there ran the thread of the affair
of Trenchard, Marie Ivanovna and Semyonov. Trenchard was lighted now with the pleasure of their
affection, and Marie Ivanovna, who had been at first so popular amongst them, was held to be
hard and capricious. She, at least, did not make it easy for them to like her. She had seemed
in those first days in O---- as though she wished to win all their hearts, but now it was as
though she had not time to consider any of us, as though she had something of far greater importance
to claim her attention. She was now very continually with Semyonov and yet it seemed to me
that it was rather respect for his opinion and admiration of his independence than liking that
compelled her. He was, beyond any question, in love with her, if the name of love can be given
to the fierce, intolerant passion that governed him.

He made no attempt to disguise his feelings, was as rude to the rest of us as he pleased, and,
of course, flung his scorn plentifully over Trenchard. But now I seemed to detect in him some
shades of restlessness and anxiety that I had never seen in him before. He was not sure of
her; he did not, I believe, understand her any more than did the rest of us. With justice,
indeed, I was afraid for her. His passion, I thought, was as surely and as nakedly a physical
one as any other that I had seen precede it, and would as certainly pass as all purely physical
passions do. She was as ignorant of the world as on the day when she arrived amongst us; but
my feeling about her was that she would receive his love almost as though in a dream, her thoughts
fixed on something far from him and in no way depending on him. At any rate she was with him
now continually. We judged her proud and hard-hearted, all of us except Trenchard who loved
her, Semyonov who wanted her, and Nikitin, who, as I now believe, even then understood her.

Trenchard meanwhile was confused and unsettled: inaction did not suit him any better than it
did the rest of us. He had too much time to think about Marie Ivanovna.

He was undoubtedly pleased at his new popularity. He expanded under it and became something
of the loquacious and uncalculating person that he had shown himself during his confession
to me in the train. To the Russians his loquacity was in no way strange or unpleasant. They
were in the habit of unburdening themselves, their hopes, their disappointments, their joys,
their tragedies, to the first strangers whom they met. It seemed quite natural to them that
Trenchard, puffing his rebellious pipe, should talk to them about Glebeshire, Polchester, Rafiel,
Millie and Katherine Trenchard.

"I'd like you to meet Katherine, Anna Petrovna," he would say. "You would find her delightful.
She's married now to a young man she ran away with, which surprised every one--her running
away, I mean, because she was always considered such a serious character."

"I forget whether you've seen my children, 'Mr.'" Anna Petrovna would reply. "I must show you
their photograph."

And she would produce the large and hideous picture.

He was the same as in those first days, and yet how immensely not the same. He bore himself
now with a chivalrous tact towards Marie Ivanovna that was beyond all praise. He always cherished
in his heart his memory of their little conversation in the orchard. "How I wish," he told
me, "that I had made that conversation longer. It was so very short and I might so easily have
lengthened it. There were so many things afterwards that I might have said--and she never gave
me another chance."

She never did--she kept him from her. Kind to him, perhaps, but never allowing him another
moment's intimacy. He had almost the air, it seemed to me, of patiently waiting for the moment
when she should need him, the air too of a man who was sure, in his heart, that that moment
would come.

And the other thing that stiffened him was his hatred for Semyonov. Hatred may seem too fierce
a word for the emotion of any one as mild and gentle as Trenchard--and yet hatred at this time
it was. He seemed no longer afraid of Semyonov and there was something about him now which
surprised the other man. Through all those first days at Mittövo, when we seemed for a moment
almost to have slipped out of the war and to be leading the smaller more quarrelsome life of
earlier days, Trenchard was occupied with only one question--"What was he feeling about Semyonov?"--"I
felt as though I could stand anything if only she didn't love him. Since that awful night of
the Retreat I had resigned myself to losing her; any one should marry her who would make her
happy--but he--never! But it was the indecision that I could not bear. I didn't know--I couldn't
tell, what she felt."

The indecision was not to last much longer. One evening, when we had been at Mittövo about
a week, he was at the Cross watching the sun, like a crimson flower, sink behind the dim grey
forest. The Nestor, in the evening mist, was a golden shadow under the hill. This beauty made
him melancholy. He was wishing passionately, as he stood there, for work, hard, dangerous,
gripping work. He did not know that that was to be the last idle minute of his life. Hearing
a step on the path he turned round to find Semyonov at his side.

"Lovely view, isn't it?" said Semyonov, watching him.

"Lovely," answered Trenchard.

Semyonov sat down on the little stone seat beneath the Cross and looked up at his rival. Trenchard
looked down at him, hating his square, stolid composure, his thick thighs, his fair beard,
his ironical eyes. "You're a beastly man!" he thought.

"How long are you going to be with us, do you think?" asked Semyonov.

"Don't know--depends on so many things."

"Why don't you go back to England? They want soldiers."

"Wouldn't pass my eyesight."

"When are they going to begin doing something on the other Front, do you think?"

"When they're ready, I suppose."

"They're very slow. Where's all your army we heard so much about?"

"There's a big army going to be ready soon."

"Yes, but we were told things would begin in May. It's only the Germans who've begun."

"I don't know; I've seen no English papers for some weeks."

There was a pause. Semyonov smiled, stood up, looked into Trenchard's eyes.

"I must go to England," he said slowly, "after the war. Marie Ivanovna and I will go, I hope,
together. She told me to-day that that is one of the things that she hopes we will do together--later
on."

Trenchard returned Semyonov's gaze. After a moment he said:

"Yes--you would enjoy it." He waited, then added: "I must be walking back now. I'm late!" And
he turned away to the house.

CHAPTER VII

ONE NIGHT

Marie Ivanovna herself spoke to me of Semyonov. She found me alone waiting for my morning tea.
We were before the others, and could hear, in the next room, Molozov splashing water about
the floor and crying to Michail, his servant, to pour "Yestsho! Yestsho!" "Yestsho! Yestsho!"--"Still
more! Still more," over his head.

She stood in the doorway looking as though she hated my presence.

"The others have not arrived," I said. "It's late to-day."

"I can see," she answered. "Every one is idle now."

Then her voice changed. She came across to me. We talked of unimportant things for a while.
Then she said: "I'm very happy, Mr. Durward.... Be kind about it. Alexei Petrovitch and I...."
She hesitated.

I looked at her and saw that she was again the young and helpless girl whom I had not seen
since that early morning before our first battle. I said, very lamely, "If you are happy, Marie
Ivanovna, I am glad."

"You think it terrible of me," she said swiftly. "And why do you all talk of being happy? What
does that matter? But I can trust him. He's strong and afraid of nothing."

I could say nothing.

"Of course you think me very bad--that I have treated --John--shamefully--yes?... I will not
defend myself to you. What is there to defend? John and I could never have lived together,
never. You yourself must see that."

"It does not matter what I think," I answered. "I am Trenchard's friend, and he has no knowledge
of life nor human nature. He has made a bad start. You must forgive me if I think more of him
than of you, Marie Ivanovna."

"Yes," she said fiercely. "It is John--John--John, you all think of. But John would not have
loved me if he knew me as I truly am. And now, at last, I can be myself. It does not matter
to Alexei Petrovitch what I am."

"But you have known him so short a time--and you have been so quick. If you had waited...."

"Waited!" she caught me up. "Waited! How can one wait when one isn't allowed to wait? It must
be finished here, at once, and I'm not going to finish alone. I'm frightened, Mr. Durward,
but also I must see it right through. He makes me brave. He's afraid of nothing. I couldn't
leave this, and yet I was frightened to go on alone. With him beside me I'm not afraid."

Anna Petrovna interrupted us.

"It's Goga's stomach again," she said placidly. "He's had great pain all night. It was those
sweets yesterday. Just give me that glass, my dear. Weak tea's the only thing he can have."

Well, I had said nothing to Marie Ivanovna. What was there I could have said?

And the next thing about Trenchard was that he had got his wish, and was lying on his back
once more, in one of our nice, simple, uncomfortable haycarts, looking up at the evening sky.
This was the evening after his conversation with Semyonov. Quite suddenly the battle had caught
us into its arms again. It was raging now in the woods to the right of us, woods on the further
side of the Nestor, situated on a tributary. I will quote now directly from his diary:

     As our line of carts crossed the great river I could hear
     the muffled "brum-brum" of the cannons and "tap-tap-tap" of
     the machine-guns now so conventionally familiar. Nikitin was
     lying in silence at my side. Behind us came twenty wagons
     with the sanitars; the evening was very still, plum-colour
     in the woods, misty over the river; the creaking of our
     carts was the only sound, save the "brum-brum" and the
     "tap-tap-tap"....

     I lay on my back and thought of Semyonov and myself. I had
     in my mind two pictures. One was of Semyonov sitting on the
     stone under the cross, looking up at me with comfortable and
     ironical insolence, Semyonov so strong and resolute and
     successful. Semyonov who got what he wanted, did what he
     wanted, said what he wanted.

     The other picture was of myself, as I had been the other
     night when I had gone with the wagons to Nijnieff to fetch
     the wounded. I saw myself standing in a muddy little lane
     just outside the town, under pouring rain. The wagons waited
     there, the horses stamping now and then, and the wounded men
     on the only wagon that was filled, moaned and cried.
     Shrapnel whizzed overhead--sometimes crying, like an echo,
     in the far distance, sometimes screaming with the rage of a
     hurt animal close at hand. Groups of soldiers ran swiftly
     past me, quite silent, their heads bent. Somewhere on the
     high road I could hear motor-cars spluttering and humming.
     At irregular intervals Red Cross men would arrive with
     wounded, would ask in a whisper that was inhuman and
     isolating whether there were room on my carts. Then the
     body would be lifted up; there would be muttered directions,
     the wounded man would cry, then the other wounded would also
     cry--after that, there would be the dismal silence again,
     silence broken only by the shrapnel and the heavy plopping
     smothers of the rain. But it was myself upon whom my eyes
     were fixed, myself, a miserable figure, the rain dripping
     from me, slipping down my neck, squelching under my boots.
     And as I stood there I was afraid. That was what I now saw.
     I had been terribly afraid for the first time since I had
     come to the war. I had worked all day in the bandaging room,
     and perhaps my physical weariness was responsible; but
     whatever it might be there I was, a coward. At the threat of
     every shrapnel I bent my head and shrugged my shoulders, at
     every cry of the wounded men--one man was delirious and sang
     a little song--a shudder trembled all down my body. I
     thought of the bridge between myself and the Otriad--how
     easily it might be blown up! and then, if the Division were
     beaten back what massacre there would be! I wanted to go
     home, to sleep, to be safe and warm--above all, to be safe!
     I saw before me some of the wounded whom I had bandaged
     to-day--men without faces or with hanging jaws that must be
     held up with the hand whilst the bandage was tied. One man
     blind, one man mad (he thought he was drowning in hot
     water), one man holding his stomach together with his hands.
     I saw all these figures crowding round me in the lane--I
     also saw the dead men in the forest, the skull, the flies,
     the strong blue-grey trousers.... I shook so that my teeth
     chattered--a very pitiful figure.

     Well, that was the other night. It was true that to-night I
     did not feel frightened--at least not as yet. But then it
     was a beautiful evening, very peaceful, still and warm--and
     there was Nikitin. In any case there were those two figures
     whom I must consider--Semyonov and myself. That brief
     conversation last night had brought us quite sharply face to
     face. I found to my own surprise that Semyonov's declaration
     of his engagement had not been a great shock to me, had not
     indeed altered very greatly the earlier situation. But it
     had shown me quite clearly that my own love for Marie
     Ivanovna was in no way diminished, that I must protect her
     from a man who was, I felt, quite simply a "beastly" man.

     Well, then if Semyonov and I were to fight it out, I would
     need to be at my best. Did that little picture of the other
     evening show me at my best? This business presented a bigger
     fight than the simple one with Semyonov. I knew, quite
     clearly, as I lay on my back in the cart, that the fight
     against Semyonov and the fight against ... was mingled
     together, depended for their issue one upon the other--that
     the dead men in the forest had no merely accidental
     connexion with Marie Ivanovna's safety and Semyonov's
     scornful piracies.

     Well, then ... Semyonov and I, I and my old dead uncle,
     myself shaking in the road the other night under the rain!
     What was to be the issue of all of it?

     I, on this lovely evening, saw quite clearly the progress of
     events that had brought me to this point. One: that drive
     with Durward on the first day when we had stopped at the
     trench and heard the frogs. Two: the evening at O----, when
     Marie Ivanovna had been angry and we had first heard the
     cannon. Three: the day at S---- and Marie kneeling on the
     cart with her hand on Semyonov's shoulder. Four: her refusal
     of me, the bodies in the forest, the Retreat, that night
     Nikitin (getting well into the thick of it now). Five: the
     talk with Marie in the park. Six: the wet night at
     Nijnieff. Seven: last night's little talk with Semyonov....
     Yes, I could see now that I had been advancing always
     forward into the forest, growing ever nearer and nearer,
     perceiving now the tactics of the enemy, beaten here,
     frightened there, but still penetrating--not, as yet,
     retreating ... and always, my private little history
     marching with me, confused with the private little histories
     of all of the others, all of them penetrating more deeply
     and more deeply....

     And if I lost my nerve I was beaten! If I had lost my nerve
     no protecting of Marie, no defiance of Semyonov--and, far
     beyond these, abject submission to my enemy in the forest.
     If I had lost my nerve!... Had I? Was it only weariness
     the other night? But twice now I had been properly beaten,
     and why, after all, should I imagine that I would be able to
     put up a fight--I who had never in all my life fought
     anything successfully? I lay on my back, looked at the sky.
     I sat up, looked at the country, I set my teeth, looked at
     Nikitin.

     Nikitin grunted. "I've had a good nap," he said. "You should
     have had one. There'll be plenty of work for us to-night by
     the sound of it." We turned a corner of the road through the
     wood and one of our own batteries jumped upon us.

     "I'm glad it's not raining," I said.

     "We've still some way to go," said Nikitin, sitting up.
     "What a lovely evening!" Then he added, quite without
     apparent connexion, "Well, you're more at home amongst us
     all now, aren't you?"

     "Yes," said I.

     "I'm glad of that. And what do you think of Andrey
     Vassilievitch?"

     I answered: "Oh! I like him! ... but I don't think he's
     happy at the war," I added.

     "I want you to like him," Nikitin said. "He's a splendid man ... I
     have known him many years. He is merry and simple and
     it is easy to laugh at him, but it is always easy to laugh
     at the best people. You must like him, 'Mr.'... He likes you
     very much."

     I felt as though Nikitin were here forming an alliance
     between the three of us. Well, I liked Nikitin, I liked
     Andrey Vassilievitch. I listened to the battery, now some
     way behind us, then said:

     "Of course, I am his friend if he wishes."

     Nikitin repeated solemnly: "Andrey Vassilievitch is a
     splendid fellow."

     Then we arrived. Here, beside the broad path of the forest
     there was a clearing and above the clearing a thick pattern
     of shining stars curved like the top of a shell. Here, in
     the open, the doctors had made a temporary hospital,
     fastening candles on the trees, arranging two tables on
     trestles, all very white and clean under a brilliant full
     moon. There were here two Sisters whom I did not know,
     several doctors, one of them a fat little army doctor who
     had often been a visitor to our Otriad. The latter greeted
     Nikitin warmly, nodded to me. He was a gay, merry little man
     with twinkling eyes. "Noo tak. Fine, our hospital, don't
     you think? Plenty to do this night, my friend. Here,
     golubchik, this way.... Finger, is it? Oh! that's nothing.
     Here, courage a moment. Where are the scissors?... scissors,
     some one. One moment.... One ... moment. Ah! there you
     are!" The finger that had been hanging by a shred fell into
     the basin. The soldier muttered something, slipped on to his
     knees, his face grey under the moon, then huddled into
     nothing, like a bundle of old clothes, fainted helplessly
     away.

     "Here, water!... No, take him over there! That's right.
     Well, 'Mr.'--how are you? Lovely night.... Plenty of work
     there'll be, too. Oh! you're going down to the Vengerovsky
     Polk? Yes, they're down to the right there
     somewhere--across the fields.... Warm over there."

     The noise just then of the batteries was terrific. We were
     compelled to shout at one another. A battery behind us
     bellowed like a young bull and the shrapnel falling at some
     distance amongst the trees had a strange splashing sound as
     of a stone falling into water.[A] The candles twinkled in
     the breeze and the place had the air of a Christmas-tree
     celebration, the wounded soldiers waiting their turn as
     children wait for their presents. The starlight gave the
     effect of a blue-frosted crispness to the pine-strewn
     ground. We arranged our wagons safely, then, followed by the
     sanitars, walked off, Nikitin almost fantastically tall
     under the starlight as he strode along. The forest-path
     stopped and we came to open country. Fields with waving corn
     stretched before us to be lost in the farther distance in
     the dark shadows of the forest.

     [Footnote A: It must be remembered that this account is
     Trenchard's--taken from his diary. In my own experience I
     have never known the bursting of shell to sound in the least
     like a stone in water. But he insists on the accuracy of
     this. Throughout this and the succeeding chapters there are
     many statements for which I have only his authority.--P.D.]

     A little bunch of soldiers crouched here, watching, Nikitin
     spoke to them.

     "Here, golubchik ... tell me! what polk?"

     "Moskovsky, your Honour."

     "And the Vengerovsky ... they're to the right, are they?"

     "Yes, your Honour. By the high road, when it comes into the
     forest."

     "What? There where the road turns?"

     "Tak totchno."

     "How are things down there just now? Wounded, do you think?"

     "Ne mogoo znat. I'm unable to say, your Honour ... but
     there's been an attack there an hour ago."

     "Are those ours?"--listening to a battery across the fields.

     "Ours, your Honour."

     "Well, we'll go on and see."

     I had listened to this conversation with the sensation of a
     man who has stopped himself on the very edge of a precipice.
     I thought in those few moments with a marvellous and
     penetrating clarity. I had, after all, been always until now
     at the battle of S----, or when I had gone with the wagons
     to Nijnieff, on the outskirts of the thing. I knew that
     to-night, in another ten minutes, I would be in the
     middle--the "very middle." As I waited there I recalled the
     pages of the diary of some officer, a diary that had been
     shown me quite casually by its owner. It had been a miracle
     of laconic brevity: "6.30 A. M., down to the battery. All
     quiet. 8.0, three of their shells. One of ours killed, two
     wounded. Five yards' distance. 8.30, breakfasted; K. arrived
     from the 'Doll's House'--all quiet there," and so on. This,
     I knew, was the proper way to look at the affair: "6.0 A.
     M., down to the battery. 7.0 A. M., breakfasted. 8.0 A. M.,
     dead...." For the life of me now I could not look at it like
     that. I saw a thousand things that were, perhaps, not really
     there, but were there at any rate for me. If I was beaten
     to-night I was beaten once and for all.... I saw the shining
     road under the starlight and shadows of wounded men,
     groaning and stumbling, whispering their way along.

     "Let's go," said Nikitin.

     I drew a breath and stepped out into the moonlight. A shell
     burst with a delicate splash of fire amongst the stars. The
     road looked very long and very, very lonely.

     However, soon I found myself walking along it quite casually
     and talking about unimportant peaceful things. "Come," I
     thought to myself. "This really isn't so bad."

     "It's a great pity," Nikitin said, "that I can't read
     English. Have to take your novelists as they choose to give
     them us. Who is there now in England?"

     "Well," said I as one talks in a dream, "there's Hardy, and
     Henry James, and Conrad. I've seen translations of Conrad in
     Petrograd. And then there's Wells--"

     "Yes, Wells I know. But he writes stories for boys....
     There's Jack London, but his are American. I like to read an
     English novel sometimes. Your English life is so cosy. You
     have tea before the fire and everything is comfortable. We
     don't know what comfort is in Russia."

     A machine gun "rat-tat-tat-tated" close to us, and three
     rockets, like a flight of startled birds, rose suddenly
     together on the far horizon.

     "No, we have no comfort in Russia," repeated Nikitin. "Now I
     fancy that an English country-house...."

     We had reached the further wood; the moonlight fell away
     from us and the shadows shifted and trembled under the
     reflection of rockets and a projector that swung lazily and
     unsteadily, like something nodding in its sleep.

     On the left of the road there was a house standing back in
     its own garden. I could see dimly that this was a row of
     country villas.

     "Stand by this gate five minutes," Nikitin whispered to me.
     "I must find the Colonel. The sanitars will come and fetch
     you when I've settled the spot for our bandaging."

     Nikitin disappeared and I was quite alone. I felt terribly
     desolate. I stood back against the gate of the villa
     watching soldiers hurry by, seeing high mysterious hedges,
     the roofs of houses, a line of lighted sky, the tops of
     trees, all these things rising and falling as the glare in
     the heavens rose and fell. There was sometimes a terrible
     noise and sometimes an equally terrible stillness. Somewhere
     in the darkness a man was groaning, "Oh! ah!--Oh! ah!"
     without cessation. Somewhere the gate of one of the villas
     swung to and fro, creaking. Sometimes soldiers would stare
     at my motionless figure and then pass on. All this time, as
     in one's dreams sometimes one holds off a nightmare, I was
     keeping my fear at bay. I had now exactly the sensation that
     I had known so often in my dream, that I was standing
     somewhere in the dark, that the Enemy was watching me and
     waiting to spring. But to-night I was only nearly afraid.
     One step on my part, one extra noise, one more flare of
     light, and I would abandon myself to panic, but, although
     the perspiration was wet on my forehead, my heart thumping,
     and my hands dry and hot, I was not yet quite afraid.

     I had a strange sensation of suffocation, as though I were
     at the bottom of a well, a well black and damp, with the
     stars of the sky miles away. There came to me, with a kind
     of ironic sentimentality, the picture of the drawing-room at
     home in Polchester, the corner where the piano stood with a
     palm in an ugly brass pot just behind it, the table near the
     door with a brass Indian tray and a fat photograph-book
     with, gilt clasps, the picture of "Christ being Scourged"
     above the fireplace, and the green silk screen that stood
     under the picture in the summer.

     A soldier stopped and spoke to me: "Your Honour, it's on the
     right--the next gate." I followed him without attention,
     having no doubt but that this was one of our own sanitars,
     and accompanied a group of soldiers that surrounded a
     bobbing kitchen on wheels. I was puzzled by the kitchen
     because I knew that one had not been brought by our Otriad,
     but I thought that the doctors of the Division had perhaps
     begged our men to aid the army sanitars.

     We hurried through a gate to the right, where in what
     appeared to be a yard of some kind, the kitchen was
     established and then, from out of the very earth as it
     seemed, soldiers appeared, clustering around it with their
     tin cans. The soldier who was in charge of the party said to
     me in a confidential whisper: "There's plenty of Kasha,
     your Honour, and the soup will last us, too."

     "Very good," said I in a bewildered voice. At the strange
     accent the soldier looked at me, and then I looked at the
     soldier. The soldier was a stranger to me (a pleasant round
     man with a huge smiling mouth and two chins) and I was a
     stranger to the soldier.

     "Well," said the soldier, looking, "I thought...."

     "I thought--" said I, most uncomfortable.

     The soldiers vanished back into the darknesses round the
     kitchen. Voices, whispering, could be heard.

     "Now, that's the end," thought I. "I'm shot as a German
     spy."

     I looked at the soldiers, clustered like bees round the
     kitchen, then I slipped through the gate into the dark road.
     I stood there listening. The battle seemed to have drawn
     away, because I could hear rifles, machine-guns, cannon
     muffled round a corner of the hill. Here there was now
     silence, broken only by soldiers who hurried up the road or
     went in and out at the villa gates. I felt abandoned. How
     was I to discover Nikitin again? Before what gate had I
     stood? I did not know; I seemed to know nothing.

     I moved down the road, very miserable and very cold. I had
     stupidly left my coat in one of the wagons. I walked on, my
     boots knocking against one another, thinking to myself: "If
     I'm not given something to do very soon I shall be just as I
     was the other night at Nijnieff--and then I shall suddenly
     take to my heels down this road as hard as I can go!"

     It was then that I tumbled straight into the arms of
     Nikitin, who was standing at the edge of the forest,
     watching for me. I was so happy that I felt now afraid of
     nothing. I held Nikitin's arm, babbling something about
     kitchens and Germans.

     "Well, I don't understand what you say," I remember Nikitin
     replied; "but you must come and work. There's plenty of it."

     We moved to a cottage on the very boundary of the forest,
     where a little common ran down to the moonlight. Passing
     through a narrow passage, I entered into a little room with
     a large white stove. On the top of the stove, under the
     roof, crouched a boy or a young man with long black hair and
     a white face. This youth wore what resembled a white shirt
     over baggy white trousers. His feet were bare and very
     dirty. Nothing moved except his eyes. He sat there, in
     exactly that position, all night.

     The room was small but was the best that could be obtained.
     Within the space of ten minutes it became a perfect
     shambles. The wounded were brought in without pause and
     under the candlelight Nikitin, two sanitars, and I worked
     until the sweat ran down our backs and arms in streams. It
     dripped from my nose, into my mouth, into my eyes. The
     wounds were horrible. No man seemed to come into the room
     with an unmangled body. The smell rose higher and higher,
     the bloody rags lay about the kitchen floor, torn arms,
     smashed legs, heads with gaping wounds, the pitiful crying
     and praying, the shrill voices of the delirious, Nikitin,
     his arms steeped in blood to the elbows, probing, cutting,
     digging, I myself bandaging until I did not know what my
     hands were doing.... Then suddenly the battle coming right
     back to us again, overhead now as it seemed; the cannon
     shaking three silly staring china dogs on the kitchen
     dresser, the rifle fire clattering like tumbling crockery
     about the walls of the cottage--and through it all the white
     youth, crouched like a ghost on the stove, watching without
     pause....

     "Ah, no, your Honour.... Ah, no! ... I can't! I can't! Oh,
     oh, oh, oh!" and then sobs, the man breaking down like a
     child, hiding his face in his arms, his wounded leg
     twitching convulsively. I paused, wiped the sweat from my
     eyes, stood up. Nikitin looked at me.

     "Take some fresh air!" he said. "Go out with the stretcher
     for half an hour. I can manage here."

     I wiped my forehead.

     "Sure you can manage?" I asked.

     "Quite," said Nikitin. "Here, hold his back!... No, durak,
     his back. Bojé moi, can't you get your arm under?
     There--like that. Horosho, golubchik, horosho ... only a
     minute! There! There!"

     I washed my hands and went out. The air caressed my forehead
     like cold water; from the little garden at the back there
     came scents of flowers; the moonlight was blue on the
     common. Eight sanitars were waiting to start. The Feldscher
     in charge of them did not, I thought, seem greatly pleased
     when he saw me, but then I am often stupidly sensitive; no
     one said anything and we started. We carried two stretchers
     and a soldier from the trenches was with us to guide us.

     I could see that the men were not happy. I heard one of them
     mutter to another that they should not have been sent now;
     that they should have waited until the attack was over ...
     "and the full moon.... Did any one ever see such a moon?"

     We came to cross-roads and advanced very carefully.

     As we crossed the road I was conscious of great excitement.
     The noise around us was terrific and different from any
     noise that I heard before. I did not think at the time, but
     was informed afterwards that it was because we were almost
     directly under a high-wooded cliff (the actual position
     about whose possession the battle was being fought), that
     the noise was so tremendous. The echo flung everything back
     so that each report sounded three or four times. This
     certainly had the strangest effect--a background as it were
     of rolling thunder, sometimes distant, sometimes very close
     and, in front of this, clapping, bellowing, stamping, and
     then suddenly an absolutely smashing effect as though some
     one cried: "Well, this will settle it!" In quieter intervals
     one heard the birdlike flight of bullets above one's head
     and the irritated bad temper of the machine-guns. At every
     smashing noise the sanitars, who were, I believe,
     schoolmasters and little clerks, and therefore of a more
     sensitive head than the peasant soldier, ducked their heads,
     and one fat red-faced man tried to lie down flat on two
     occasions and was cursed heartily by the Feldscher. I myself
     felt no fear but only a pounding exhilarating excitement,
     because I was at last "really in it." We found one wounded
     man very soon, lying under the hedge with the top of his
     head gone. Four sanitars (their relief showed very plainly
     in their faces) returned with him. We advanced again,
     skirting now a little orchard and keeping always in the
     shadow under the hedge. Our guide, the soldier, assured us
     that the wounded man was "very near--quite close." Then we
     came to a large barn on the edge of what seemed a silver
     lake but was in reality a long field under the full light of
     the moon. As we paused I saw, on the further side of the
     field, two shells burst, very quickly, one after the other.

     We all stopped under the shelter of the barn.

     "Well," said the Feldscher to the soldier, "where's your
     man?"

     "Only a short way," said the soldier. "Quite close."

     "Across that field?" asked the Feldscher, pointing to the
     moonlight.

     "Yes, certainly," said the soldier.

     The Feldscher scratched his head. "We can't go further
     without orders," he said. "That's very dangerous in front
     there. I'm responsible for these men. We must return and
     ask, your Honour," he said, turning to me.

     "We shall be nearly an hour returning," I said. "Is your
     friend badly wounded?" I asked the soldier.

     "Very," said he.

     "You see ..." I said to the Feldscher. "We can't possibly
     leave him like that. It's only a little way."

     The Feldscher shook his head. "I can't be responsible. I had
     my orders to go so far and no further. I must see that my
     men are safe."

     The sanitars who were sitting in a row on their haunches
     under the shadow of the barn all nodded their heads.

     "I didn't know Russians were cowards," I said fiercely.

     The Feldscher shook his head quite unmoved: "Your Honour
     must understand that I had my orders." Then he added slowly:
     "but of course if your Honour wishes to go yourself ... I
     would come with you. The others ... they must do as they
     please. They are in their right to return. But I should
     advise that we return."

     "I'm going on," I said.

     I must say here that I felt no other sensation than a blind
     and quite obstinate selfishness. I had no thought of Nikitin
     or of the sanitars. I did not (and this I must emphasise)
     think, for a moment, of the wounded man. If the situation
     had been that by returning I should save many lives and by
     advancing should save only my own I should still have
     advanced. If the only hope for the wounded man was my
     instant speech with Nikitin I would not have gone back to
     speak with him. I was at this moment neither brave nor
     fearful. I repeat that I had no sensation except an
     absolutely selfish obstinate challenge that I, myself, was
     addressing to Something in space. I was saying: "At last, my
     chance has come. Now you shall see whether I fly from you or
     no. Now you shall do your worst and fail. I'm the hunter
     now, not the hunted."

     I was conscious of nothing but this quite childish
     preoccupation with myself. I was, nevertheless, pleased with
     myself. "There, you see," some one near me seemed to say,
     "he's not quite so unpractical after all. He's full of
     common sense." I looked at the row of sanitars squatting on
     the ground, and felt like a schoolmaster with his children.

     "You'd better go home then," I said scornfully. The
     Feldscher, who was a short stocky man, with a red face and
     melancholy eyes (something like a prize-fighter turned
     poet), dismissed them. They went off in a line under the
     hedge.

     The man obviously thought me a tiresome prig. He had no
     romantic illusions about the business; he had not been a
     Feldscher during twenty years for nothing and knew that a
     wound was a wound; when a man was dead he was dead.

     However.... "Truly it's not far?" he asked the soldier.

     "Tak totchno," the man answered, his face quite without
     expression.

     We crossed the moonlit field and for a brief moment silence
     fell, as though an audience were holding its breath watching
     us. On the other side were cottages, the outskirts of a tiny
     village. Here beside these cottages we fell into a fantastic
     world. That small village must in other times have been a
     pretty place, nestling with its gardens by the river under
     the hill. It seemed now to rock and rattle under the noise
     of the cannon. All the open spaces were like white marble in
     the moonlight and in these open spaces there was utter
     silence and emptiness. The place seemed deserted--and yet,
     in every shadow, in long lines under the cottage wells, in
     little clumps and clusters round trees or ruins there were
     eyes staring, the gleam of muskets shone, little specks of
     light, dancing from wall to wall. Everywhere there were
     bodies, legs, boots, arms, heads, sudden caps, sudden
     fingers, sudden hot and streaming breaths. And over
     everything this infernal noise and yet no human sound. A
     nightmare of the true nightmare of dreams. The open silver
     spaces, the little gardens thick with flowers, the high moon
     and the starry sky, not a living soul to be seen--and
     nevertheless watchers everywhere. "Step forward on to that
     little plot of grass in front of the cottage windows and
     you're a dead man"--the moonlight said. There were men in
     the body of the earth, not in trenches, but in holes--my
     foot stepped on a head of hair and some low voice cursed me.
     I was, I suppose, by this time, a little delirious with my
     adventure. I know that I could now distinguish no separate
     sounds--shells and bullets had vanished and in their stead
     were whispers and screams and shouts of triumph and bursts
     of laughter. Songs in chorus, somewhere miners hammering
     below the earth, somewhere storm at sea with the crash of
     waves on rocks and the shriek of wind through rigging,
     somewhere some one who dropped heavy loads of furniture so
     carelessly that I cursed him--and always these little
     patches of moonlight, so tempting just because one was
     forbidden....

     We were not popular here. Husky, breathless voices whispered
     to us "to be away from here, quick. We would draw the fire.
     What did we want here now?"

     "Have you any wounded?" we whispered in return.

     "No, no," the answer came. "Keep away from the moonlight."
     The voices came to us connected sometimes with a nose, an
     eye, or a leg, often enough out of the heaven itself.

     "There's a man wounded behind the next lines," some voice
     murmured.

     We stumbled on and suddenly came to a river with very steep
     banks and a number of narrow and slender bridges. If this
     had in reality been a nightmare this river could not have
     obtruded itself more often than it did. We discovered to our
     dismay that our soldier-guide had disappeared (exactly as in
     a nightmare he would have done). We crossed the river
     (bathed of course in moonlight), the plank bridge shaking
     and quivering beneath us.

     We had then a difficult task. Here a row of cottages beneath
     the very edge of the bank and in the cottage shadow the
     soldiers were ranged in a long line. Their boots stretched
     to the verge of the bank, which was slippery and uncertain.
     We had to walk on this with our stretchers, stepping between
     the boots, stumbling often and slipping down towards the
     water.

     "Any wounded?" we whispered again and again.

     "No," the whisper came back. "Hasten.... Take care of the
     moonlight."

     And then, to my infinite relief and comfort, behind the
     cottages we found our wounded man. There was a dark yard
     here, apparently quite deserted. The Feldscher made an
     exclamation and stepped forward. Three bodies lay together,
     over one another; two men were dead and cold, the third
     stirred, very faintly, as we came up, opened his eyes,
     smiled and said:

     "Eh, Bojé moi ... at last!"

     As we moved him on to the stretcher, with a little sigh he
     fainted again. He had a bad stomach-wound. Before picking up
     the stretcher, the Feldscher wiped his forehead and crossed
     himself.

     "It's a heavy thing for two," he said. "He's a big man,"
     looking at the soldier. There was now somewhere, apparently
     not very far away, hot rifle fire. The crackle sparkled in
     the air, as though one were living in a world in which all
     the electricity was loose. The other firing seemed to have
     drawn away, and the "Boom--Boom--boom" in front of us was
     echo from the hill....

     We picked up the stretcher and started. It was fortunate for
     us that we had that difficult bit beside the river at the
     beginning of our journey. I don't know how we managed it,
     stepping over the endless row of legs, with every side step
     the stretcher lurching over to the left and threatening to
     pitch us into the river. So slippery too was the ground that
     our boots refused to grip. The man on the stretcher was
     dreaming, making a little sound like an unceasing lullaby on
     two notes--"Na ... na! Na ... na! Na ... na!"

     We were compelled to cross the river twice, and the planks
     bent under our weight until I was assured that they would
     snap. My arms were beginning to ache and the sweat to
     trickle down my spine. My right boot had rubbed my heel. We
     left the river behind us and then, suddenly, my right hand
     began to slip off the iron handle of the stretcher.

     "We'll have to put it down a moment," I said. We laid it on
     the ground and at the same instant a bullet sang so close to
     my ear that I felt it as though an insect had bitten me.
     Then a shell, exploding, as it seemed to us, amongst the
     very cottages where we had just been, startled us.

     "We saved our man," said the Feldscher, looking at the
     soldier, "but we'd better move on. It's uncomfortable here."

     We picked the thing up and started again, and at once my
     hand began to slip away from its hold (nightmare sensation
     exactly). I bent my head down, managed to lick my hand
     without raising it, and stiffened the muscles of my arm. We
     were watched, once more, by a million eyes--again I stepped
     on a head of hair buried somewhere in the ground. Then some
     voice cried shrilly: "Ah! Ah!" ... some man hit.

     Every bone in my body began to ache. I was, of course,
     rottenly trained, without a sound muscle in my body, and my
     legs threatened cramp, my heel grated against my boot and
     sent a stab to my stomach with every movement, my shoulders
     seemed to pull away from the stretcher as though they would
     separately rebel against my orders ... and my hand began
     again to slip. The Feldscher also began to feel the strain.
     Once he asked me to stop. He apologised; I could see the
     sweat pouring down his face: "A very big man'" he said.

