Isabel looked up, searching his face with the fond puzzlement which her eyes sometimes showed
when they rested upon him; then she glanced down the hall toward Fanny's room, and, after another
moment of hesitation, came quickly in, and closed the door.

"Dear," she said, "I wish you'd tell me something: Why don't you like Eugene?"

"Oh, I like him well enough," George returned, with a short laugh, as he sat down and began
to unlace his shoes. "I like him well enough--in his place."

"No, dear," she said hurriedly. "I've had a feeling from the very first that you didn't really
like him--that you really never liked him. Sometimes you've seemed to be friendly with him,
and you'd laugh with him over something in a jolly, companionable way, and I'd think I was
wrong, and that you really did like him, after all; but to-night I'm sure my other feeling
was the right one: you don't like him. I can't understand it, dear; I don't see what can be
the matter."

"Nothing's the matter."

This easy declaration naturally failed to carry great weight, and Isabel went on, in her troubled
voice, "It seems so queer, especially when you feel as you do about his daughter."

At this, George stopped unlacing his shoes abruptly, and sat up. "How do I feel about his daughter?"
he demanded.

"Well, it's seemed--as if--as if--" Isabel began timidly. "It did seem--At least, you haven't
looked at any other girl, ever since they came here and--and certainly you've seemed very much
interested in her. Certainly you've been very great friends?"

"Well, what of that?"

"It's only that I'm like your grandfather: I can't see how you could be so much interested
in a girl and--and not feel very pleasantly toward her father."

"Well, I'll tell you something," George said slowly; and a frown of concentration could be
seen upon his brow, as from a profound effort at self-examination. "I haven't ever thought
much on that particular point, but I admit there may be a little something in what you say.
The truth is, I don't believe I've ever thought of the two together, exactly--at least, not
until lately. I've always thought of Lucy just as Lucy, and of Morgan just as Morgan. I've
always thought of her as a person herself, not as anybody's daughter. I don't see what's very
extraordinary about that. You've probably got plenty of friends, for instance, that don't care
much about your son--"

"No, indeed!" she protested quickly. "And if I knew anybody who felt like that, I wouldn't--"

"Never mind," he interrupted. "I'll try to explain a little more. If I have a friend, I don't
see that it's incumbent upon me to like that friend's relatives. If I didn't like them, and
pretended to, I'd be a hypocrite. If that friend likes me and wants to stay my friend 'he'll
have to stand my not liking his relatives, or else he can quit. I decline to be a hypocrite
about it; that's all. Now, suppose I have certain ideas or ideals which I have chosen for the
regulation of my own conduct in life. Suppose some friend of mine has a relative with ideals
directly the opposite of mine, and my friend believes more in the relative's ideals than in
mine: Do you think I ought to give up my own just to please a person who's taken up ideals
that I really despise?"

"No, dear; of course people can't give up their ideals; but I don't see what this has to do
with dear little Lucy and--"

"I didn't say it had anything to do with them," he interrupted. "I was merely putting a case
to show how a person would be justified in being a friend of one member of a family, and feeling
anything but friendly toward another. I don't say, though, that I feel unfriendly to Mr. Morgan.
I don't say that I feel friendly to him, and I don't say that I feel unfriendly; but if you
really think that I was rude to him to-night--"

"Just thoughtless, dear. You didn't see that what you said to-night--"

"Well, I'll not say anything of that sort again where he can hear it. There, isn't that enough?"

This question, delivered with large indulgence, met with no response; for Isabel, still searching
his face with her troubled and perplexed gaze, seemed not to have heard it. On that account,
George repeated it, and rising, went to her and patted her reassuringly upon the shoulder.
"There, old lady, you needn't fear my tactlessness will worry you again. I can't quite promise
to like people I don't care about one way or another, but you can be sure I'll be careful,
after this, not to let them see it. It's all right, and you'd better toddle along to bed, because
I want to undress."

"But, George," she said earnestly, "you would like him, if you'd just let yourself. You say
you don't dislike him. Why don't you like him? I can't understand at all. What is it that you
don't--"

"There, there!" he said. "It's all right, and you toddle along."

"But, George, dear--"

"Now, now! I really do want to get into bed. Good-night, old lady."

"Good-night, dear. But--"

"Let's not talk of it any more," he said. "It's all right, and nothing in the world to worry
about. So good-night, old lady. I'll be polite enough to him, never fear--if we happen to be
thrown together. So good-night!"

"But, George, dear--"

"I'm going to bed, old lady; so good-night."'

Thus the interview closed perforce. She kissed him again before going slowly to her own room,
her perplexity evidently not dispersed; but the subject was not renewed between them the next
day or subsequently. Nor did Fanny make any allusion to the cryptic approbation she had bestowed
upon her nephew after the Major's "not very successful little dinner"; though she annoyed George
by looking at him oftener and longer than he cared to be looked at by an aunt. He could not
glance her way, it seemed, without finding her red-rimmed eyes fixed upon him eagerly, with
an alert and hopeful calculation in them which he declared would send a nervous man, into fits.
For thus, one day, he broke out, in protest:

"It would!" he repeated vehemently. "Given time it would--straight into fits! What do you find
the matter with me? Is my tie always slipping up behind? Can't you look at something else?
My Lord! We'd better buy a cat for you to stare at, Aunt Fanny! A cat could stand it, maybe.
What in the name of goodness do you expect to see?"

But Fanny laughed good-naturedly, and was not offended. "It's more as if I expected you to
see something, isn't it?" she said quietly, still laughing.

"Now, what do you mean by that?"

"Never mind!"

"All right, I don't. But for heaven's sake stare at somebody else awhile. Try it on the house-maid!"

"Well, well," Fanny said indulgently, and then chose to be more obscure in her meaning than
ever, for she adopted a tone of deep sympathy for her final remark, as she left him: "I don't
wonder you're nervous these days, poor boy!"

And George indignantly supposed that she referred to the ordeal of Lucy's continued absence.
During this period he successfully avoided contact with Lucy's father, though Eugene came frequently
to the house, and spent several evenings with Isabel and Fanny; and sometimes persuaded them
and the Major to go for an afternoon's motoring. He did not, however, come again to the Major's
Sunday evening dinner, even when George Amberson returned. Sunday evening was the time, he
explained, for going over the week's work with his factory managers.

When Lucy came home the autumn was far enough advanced to smell of burning leaves, and for
the annual editorials, in the papers, on the purple haze, the golden branches, the ruddy fruit,
and the pleasure of long tramps in the brown forest. George had not heard of her arrival, and
he met her, on the afternoon following that event, at the Sharons', where he had gone in the
secret hope that he might hear something about her. Janie Sharon had just begun to tell him
that she heard Lucy was expected home soon, after having "a perfectly gorgeous time"--information
which George received with no responsive enthusiasm--when Lucy came demurely in, a proper little
autumn figure in green and brown.

Her cheeks were flushed, and her dark eyes were bright indeed; evidences, as George supposed,
of the excitement incidental to the perfectly gorgeous time just concluded; though Janie and
Mary Sharon both thought they were the effect of Lucy's having seen George's runabout in front
of the house as she came in. George took on colour, himself, as, he rose and nodded indifferently;
and the hot suffusion to which he became subject extended its area to include his neck and
ears. Nothing could have made him much more indignant than his consciousness of these symptoms
of the icy indifference which it was his purpose not only to show but to feel.

She kissed her cousins, gave George her hand, said "How d'you do," and took a chair beside
Janie with a composure which augmented George's indignation.

"How d'you do," he said. "I trust that ah--I trust--I do trust--"

He stopped, for it seemed to him that the word "trust" sounded idiotic. Then, to cover his
awkwardness, he coughed, and even to his own rosy ears his cough was ostentatiously a false
one. Whereupon, seeking to be plausible, he coughed again, and instantly hated himself: the
sound he made was an atrocity. Meanwhile, Lucy sat silent, and the two Sharon girls leaned
forward, staring at him with strained eyes, their lips tightly compressed; and both were but
too easily diagnosed as subject to an agitation which threatened their self-control. He began
again.

"I er--I hope you have had a--a pleasant time. I er--I hope you are well. I hope you are extremely--I
hope extremely--extremely--" And again he stopped in the midst of his floundering, not knowing
how to progress beyond "extremely," and unable to understand why the infernal word kept getting
into his mouth.

"I beg your pardon?" Lucy said.

George was never more furious; he felt that he was "making a spectacle of himself"; and no
young gentleman in the world was more loath than George Amberson Minafer to look a figure of
fun. And while he stood there, undeniably such a figure, with Janie and Mary Sharon threatening
to burst at any moment, if laughter were longer denied them. Lucy sat looking at him with her
eyebrows delicately lifted in casual, polite inquiry. Her own complete composure was what most
galled him.

"Nothing of the slightest importance!" he managed to say. "I was just leaving. Good afternoon!"
And with long strides he reached the door and hastened through the hall; but before he closed
the front door he heard from Janie and Mary Sharon the outburst of wild, irrepressible emotion
which his performance had inspired.

He drove home in a tumultuous mood, and almost ran down two ladies who were engaged in absorbing
conversation at a crossing. They were his Aunt Fanny and the stout Mrs. Johnson; a jerk of
the reins at the last instant saved them by a few inches; but their conversation was so interesting
that they were unaware of their danger, and did not notice the runabout, nor how close it came
to them. George was so furious with himself and with the girl whose unexpected coming into
a room could make him look such a fool, that it might have soothed him a little if he had actually
run over the two absorbed ladies without injuring them beyond repair. At least, he said to
himself that he wished he had; it might have taken his mind off of himself for a few minutes.
For, in truth, to be ridiculous (and know it) was one of several things that George was unable
to endure. He was savage.

He drove into the Major's stable too fast, the sagacious Pendennis saving himself from going
through a partition by a swerve which splintered a shaft of the runabout and almost threw the
driver to the floor. George swore, and then swore again at the fat old darkey, Tom, for giggling
at his swearing.

"Hoopee!" said old Tom. "Mus' been some white lady use Mist' Jawge mighty bad! White lady say,
'No, suh, I ain' go'n out ridin' 'ith Mist' Jawge no mo'!' Mist' Jawge drive in. 'Dam de dam
worl'! Dam de dam hoss! Dam de dam nigga'! Dam de dam dam!' Hoopee!"

"That'll do!" George said sternly.

"Yessuh!"

George strode from the stable, crossed the Major's back yard, then passed behind the new houses,
on his way home. These structures were now approaching completion, but still in a state of
rawness hideous to George--though, for that matter, they were never to be anything except hideous
to him. Behind them, stray planks, bricks, refuse of plaster and lath, shingles, straw, empty
barrels, strips of twisted tin and broken tiles were strewn everywhere over the dried and pitted
gray mud where once the suave lawn had lain like a green lake around those stately islands,
the two Amberson houses. And George's state of mind was not improved by his present view of
this repulsive area, nor by his sensations when he kicked an uptilted shingle only to discover
that what uptilted it was a brickbat on the other side of it. After that, the whole world seemed
to be one solid conspiracy of malevolence.

In this temper he emerged from behind the house nearest to his own, and, glancing toward the
street, saw his mother standing with Eugene Morgan upon the cement path that led to the front
gate. She was bareheaded, and Eugene held his hat and stick in his hand; evidently he had been
calling upon her, and she had come from the house with him, continuing their conversation and
delaying their parting.

They had paused in their slow walk from the front door to the gate, yet still stood side by
side, their shoulders almost touching, as though neither Isabel nor Eugene quite realized that
their feet had ceased to bear them forward; and they were not looking at each other, but at
some indefinite point before them, as people do who consider together thoughtfully and in harmony.
The conversation was evidently serious; his head was bent, and Isabel's lifted left hand rested
against her cheek; but all the significances of their thoughtful attitude denoted companionableness
and a shared understanding. Yet, a stranger, passing, would not have thought them married:
somewhere about Eugene, not quite to be located, there was a romantic gravity; and Isabel,
tall and graceful, with high colour and absorbed eyes, was visibly no wife walking down to
the gate with her husband.

George stared at them. A hot dislike struck him at the sight of Eugene; and a vague revulsion,
like a strange, unpleasant taste in his mouth, came over him as he looked at his mother: her
manner was eloquent of so much thought about her companion and of such reliance upon him. And
the picture the two thus made was a vivid one indeed, to George, whose angry eyes, for some
reason, fixed themselves most intently upon Isabel's lifted hand, upon the white ruffle at
her wrist, bordering the graceful black sleeve, and upon the little indentations in her cheek
where the tips of her fingers rested. She should not have worn white at her wrist, or at the
throat either, George felt; and then, strangely, his resentment concentrated upon those tiny
indentations at the tips of her fingers--actual changes, however slight and fleeting, in his
mother's face, made because of Mr. Eugene Morgan. For the moment, it seemed to George that
Morgan might have claimed the ownership of a face that changed for him.. It was as if he owned
Isabel.

The two began to walk on toward the gate, where they stopped again, turning to face each other,
and Isabel's glance, passing Eugene, fell upon George. Instantly she smiled and waved her hand
to him; while Eugene turned and nodded; but George, standing as in some rigid trance, and staring
straight at them, gave these signals of greeting no sign of recognition whatever. Upon this,
Isabel called to him, waving her hand again.

"Georgie!" she called, laughing. "Wake up, dear! Georgie, hello!"

George turned away as if he had neither seen nor heard, and stalked into the house by the side
door.

Chapter XXI

He went to his room, threw off his coat, waistcoat, collar, and tie, letting them lie where
they chanced to fall, and then, having violently enveloped himself in a black velvet dressing-gown,
continued this action by lying down with a vehemence that brought a wheeze of protest from
his bed. His repose was only a momentary semblance, however, for it lasted no longer than the
time it took him to groan "Riffraff!" between his teeth. Then he sat up, swung his feet to
the floor, rose, and began to pace up and down the large room.

He had just been consciously rude to his mother for the first time in his life; for, with all
his riding down of populace and riffraff, he had never before been either deliberately or impulsively
disregardful of her. When he had hurt her it had been accidental; and his remorse for such
an accident was always adequate compensation--and more--to Isabel. But now he had done a rough
thing to her; and he did not repent; rather he was the more irritated with her. And when he
heard her presently go by his door with a light step, singing cheerfully to herself as she
went to her room, he perceived that she had mistaken his intention altogether, or, indeed,
had failed to perceive that he had any intention at all. Evidently she had concluded that he
refused to speak to her and Morgan out of sheer absent-mindedness, supposing him so immersed
in some preoccupation that he had not seen them or heard her calling to him. Therefore there
was nothing of which to repent, even if he had been so minded; and probably Eugene himself
was unaware that any disapproval had recently been expressed. George snorted. What sort of
a dreamy loon did they take him to be?

There came a delicate, eager tapping at his door, not done with a knuckle but with the tip
of a fingernail, which was instantly clarified to George's mind's eye as plainly as if he saw
it: the long and polished white-mooned pink shield on the end of his Aunt Fanny's right forefinger.
But George was in no mood for human communications, and even when things went well he had little
pleasure in Fanny's society. Therefore it is not surprising that at the sound of her tapping,
instead of bidding her enter, he immediately crossed the room with the intention of locking
the door to keep her out.

Fanny was too eager, and, opening the door before he reached it, came quickly in, and closed
it behind her. She was in a street dress and a black hat, with a black umbrella in her black-gloved
hand--for Fanny's heavy mourning, at least, was nowhere tempered with a glimpse of white, though
the anniversary of Wilbur's death had passed. An infinitesimal perspiration gleamed upon her
pale skin; she breathed fast, as if she had run up the stairs; and excitement was sharp in
her widened eyes. Her look was that of a person who had just seen something extraordinary or
heard thrilling news.

"Now, what on earth do you want?" her chilling nephew demanded.

"George," she said hurriedly, "I saw what you did when you wouldn't speak to them. I was sitting
with Mrs. Johnson at her front window, across the street, and I saw it all."

"Well, what of it?"

"You did right!" Fanny said with a vehemence not the less spirited because she suppressed her
voice almost to a whisper. "You did exactly right! You're behaving splendidly about the whole
thing, and I want to tell you I know your father would thank you if he could see what you're
doing."

"My Lord!" George broke out at her. "You make me dizzy! For heaven's sake quit the mysterious
detective business--at least do quit it around me! Go and try it on somebody else, if you like;
but I don't want to hear it!"

She began to tremble, regarding him with a fixed gaze. "You don't care to hear then," she said
huskily, "that I approve of what you're doing?"

"Certainly not! Since I haven't the faintest idea what you think I'm 'doing,' naturally I don't
care whether you approve of it or not. All I'd like, if you please, is to be alone. I'm not
giving a tea here, this afternoon, if you'll permit me to mention it!"

Fanny's gaze wavered; she began to blink; then suddenly she sank into a chair and wept silently,
but with a terrible desolation.

"Oh, for the Lord's sake!" he moaned. "What in the world is wrong with you?"

"You're always picking on me," she quavered wretchedly, her voice indistinct with the wetness
that bubbled into it from her tears. "You do--you always pick on me! You've always done it--always--ever
since you were a little boy! Whenever anything goes wrong with you, you take it out on me!
You do! You always--"

George flung to heaven a gesture of despair; it seemed to him the last straw that Fanny should
have chosen this particular time to come and sob in his room over his mistreatment of her!

"Oh, my Lord!" he whispered; then, with a great effort, addressed her in a reasonable tone:
"Look here, Aunt Fanny; I don't see what you're making all this fuss about. Of course I know
I've teased you sometimes, but--"

"Teased' me?" she wailed. "Teased' me! Oh, it does seem too hard, sometimes--this mean old
life of mine does seem too hard! I don't think I can stand it! Honestly, I don't think I can!
I came in here just to show you I sympathized with you--just to say something pleasant to you,
and you treat me as if I were--oh, no, you wouldn't treat a servant the way you treat me! You
wouldn't treat anybody in the world like this except old Fanny! 'Old Fanny' you say. 'It's
nobody but old Fanny, so I'll kick her--nobody will resent it. I'll kick her all I want to!'
You do! That's how you think of me-I know it! And you're right: I haven't got anything in the
world, since my brother died--nobody--nothing--nothing!"

"Oh my Lord!" George groaned.

Fanny spread out her small, soaked handkerchief, and shook it in the air to dry it a little,
crying as damply and as wretchedly during this operation' as before--a sight which gave George
a curious shock to add to his other agitations, it seemed so strange. "I ought not to have
come," she went on, "because I might have known it would only give you an excuse to pick on
me again! I'm sorry enough I came, I can tell you! I didn't mean to speak of it again to you,
at all; and I wouldn't have, but I saw how you treated them, and I guess I got excited about
it, and couldn't help following the impulse--but I'll know better next time, I can tell you!
I'll keep my mouth shut as I meant to, and as I would have, if I hadn't got excited and if
I hadn't felt sorry for you. But what does it matter to anybody if I'm sorry for them? I'm
only old Fanny!"

"Oh, good gracious! How can it matter to me who's sorry for me when I don't know what they're
sorry about!"

"You're so proud," she quavered, "and so hard! I tell you I didn't mean to speak of it to you,
and I never, never in the world would have told you about it, nor have made the faintest reference
to it, if I hadn't seen that somebody else had told you, or you'd found out for yourself some
way. I--"

In despair of her intelligence, and in some doubt of his own, George struck the palms of his
hands together. "Somebody else had told me what? I'd found what out for myself?"

"How people are talking about your mother."

Except for the incidental teariness of her voice, her tone was casual, as though she mentioned
a subject previously discussed and understood; for Fanny had no doubt that George had only
pretended to be mystified because, in his pride, he would not in words admit that he knew what
he knew.

"What did you say?" he asked incredulously.

"Of course I understood what you were doing," Fanny went on, drying her handkerchief again.
"It puzzled other people when you began to be rude to Eugene, because they couldn't see how
you could treat him as you did when you were so interested in Lucy. But I remembered how you
came to me, that other time when there was so much talk about Isabel; and I knew you'd give
Lucy up in a minute, if it came to a question of your mother's reputation, because you said
then that--"

"Look here," George interrupted in a shaking voice. "Look here, I'd like--" He stopped, unable
to go on, his agitation was so great. His chest heaved as from hard running, and his complexion,
pallid at first, had become mottled; fiery splotches appearing at his temples and cheeks. "What
do you mean by telling me--telling me there's talk about--about--" He gulped, and began again:
"What do you mean by using such words as 'reputation'? What do you mean, speaking of a 'question'
of my--my mother's reputation?"

Fanny looked up at him woefully over the handkerchief which she now applied to her reddened
nose. "God knows I'm sorry for you, George," she murmured. "I wanted to say so, but it's only
old Fanny, so whatever she says--even when it's sympathy--pick on her for it! Hammer her!"
She sobbed. "Hammer her! It's only poor old lonely Fanny!"

"You look here!" George said harshly. "When I spoke to my Uncle George after that rotten thing
I heard Aunt Amelia say about my mother, he said if there was any gossip it was about you!
He said people might be laughing about the way you ran after Morgan, but that was all."

Fanny lifted her hands, clenched them, and struck them upon her knees. "Yes; it's always Fanny!"
she sobbed. "Ridiculous old Fanny--always, always!"

"You listen!" George said. "After I'd talked to Uncle George I saw you; and you said I had
a mean little mind for thinking there might be truth in what Aunt Amelia said about people
talking. You denied it. And that wasn't the only time; you'd attacked me before then, because
I intimated that Morgan might be coming here too often. You made me believe that mother let
him come entirely on your account, and now you say--"

"I think he did," Fanny interrupted desolately. "I think he did come as much to see me as anything--for
a while it looked like it. Anyhow, he liked to dance with me. He danced with me as much as
he danced with her, and he acted as if he came on my account at least as much as he did on
hers. He did act a good deal that way--and if Wilbur hadn't died--"

"You told me there wasn't any talk."

"I didn't think there was much, then," Fanny protested. "I didn't know how much there was."

"What!"

"People don't come and tell such things to a person's family, you know. You don't suppose anybody
was going to say to George Amberson that his sister was getting herself talked about, do you?
Or that they were going to say much to me?"

"You told me," said George, fiercely, "that mother never saw him except when she was chaperoning
you."

"They weren't much alone together, then," Fanny returned. "Hardly ever, before Wilbur died.
But you don't suppose that stops people from talking, do you? Your father never went anywhere,
and people saw Eugene with her everywhere she went--and though I was with them people just
thought"--she choked--"they just thought I didn't count! 'Only old Fanny Minafer,' I suppose
they'd say! Besides, everybody knew that he'd been engaged to her--"

"What's that?" George cried.

"Everybody knows it. Don't you remember your grandfather speaking of it at the Sunday dinner
one night?"

"He didn't say they were engaged or--"

"Well, they were! Everybody knows it; and she broke it off on account of that serenade when
Eugene didn't know what he was doing. He drank when he was a young man, and she wouldn't stand
it, but everybody in this town knows that Isabel has never really cared for any other man in
her life! Poor Wilbur! He was the only soul alive that didn't know it!"

Nightmare had descended upon the unfortunate George; he leaned back against the foot-board
of his bed, gazing wildly at his aunt. "I believe I'm going crazy," he said. "You mean when
you told me there wasn't any talk, you told me a falsehood?"

"No!" Fanny gasped.

"You did!"

"I tell you I didn't know how much talk there was, and it wouldn't have amounted to much if
Wilbur had lived." And Fanny completed this with a fatal admission: "I didn't want you to interfere."

George overlooked the admission; his mind was not now occupied with analysis. "What do you
mean," he asked, "when you say that if father had lived, the talk wouldn't have amounted to
anything?"

"Things might have been--they might have been different."

"You mean Morgan might have married you?"

Fanny gulped. "No. Because I don't know that I'd have accepted him." She had ceased to weep,
and now she sat up stiffly. "I certainly didn't care enough about him to marry him; I wouldn't
have let myself care that much until he showed that he wished to marry me. I'm not that sort
of person!" The poor lady paid her vanity this piteous little tribute. "What I mean is, if
Wilbur hadn't died, people wouldn't have had it proved before their very eyes that what they'd
been talking about was true!"

"You say--you say that people believe--" George shuddered, then forced himself to continue,
in a sick voice: "They believe my mother is--is in love with that man?"

"Of course!"

"And because he comes here--and they see her with him driving--and all that--they think they
were right when they said she was in--in love with him before--before my father died?"

She looked at him gravely with her eyes now dry between their reddened lids. "Why, George,"
she said, gently, "don't you know that's what they say? You must know that everybody in town
thinks they're going to be married very soon."

George uttered an incoherent cry; and sections of him appeared to writhe. He was upon the verge
of actual nausea.

"You know it!" Fanny cried, getting up. "You don't think I'd have spoken of it to you unless
I was sure you knew it?" Her voice was wholly genuine, as it had been throughout the wretched
interview: Fanny's sincerity was unquestionable. "George, I wouldn't have told you, if you
didn't know. What other reason could you have for treating Eugene as you did, or for refusing
to speak to them like that a while ago in the yard? Somebody must have told you?"

"Who told you?" he said.

"What?"

"Who told you there was talk? Where is this talk? Where does it come from? Who does it?"

"Why, I suppose pretty much everybody," she said. "I know it must be pretty general."

"Who said so?"

"What?"

George stepped close to her. "You say people don't speak to a person of gossip about that person's
family. Well, how did you hear it, then? How did you get hold of it? Answer me!"

Fanny looked thoughtful. "Well, of course nobody not one's most intimate friends would speak
to them about such things, and then only in the kindest, most considerate way."

"Who's spoken of it to you in any way at all?" George demanded.

"Why--" Fanny hesitated.

"You answer me!"

"I hardly think it would be fair to give names."

"Look here," said George. "One of your most intimate friends is that mother of Charlie Johnson's,
for instance. Has she ever mentioned this to you? You say everybody is talking. Is she one?"

"Oh, she may have intimated--"

"I'm asking you: Has she ever spoken of it to you?"

"She's a very kind, discreet woman, George; but she may have intimated--"

George had a sudden intuition, as there flickered into his mind the picture of a street-crossing
and two absorbed ladies almost run down by a fast horse. "You and she have been talking about
it to-day!" he cried. "You were talking about it with her not two hours ago. Do you deny it?"

"I--"

"Do you deny it?"

"No!"

"All right," said George. "That's enough!"

She caught at his arm as he turned away. "What are you going to do, George?"

"I'll not talk about it, now," he said heavily. "I think you've done a good deal for one day,
Aunt Fanny!"

And Fanny, seeing the passion in his face, began to be alarmed. She tried to retain possession
of the black velvet sleeve which her fingers had clutched, and he suffered her to do so, but
used this leverage to urge her to the door. "George, you know I'm sorry for you, whether you
care or not," she whimpered. "I never in the world would have spoken of it, if I hadn't thought
you knew all about it. I wouldn't have--"

But he had opened the door with his free hand. "Never mind!" he said, and she was obliged to
pass out into the hall, the door closing quickly behind her.

Chapter XXII

George took off his dressing-gown and put on a collar and a tie, his fingers shaking so that
the tie was not his usual success; then he picked up his coat and waistcoat, and left the room
while still in process of donning them, fastening the buttons, as he ran down the front stairs
to the door. It was not until he reached the middle of the street that he realized that he
had forgotten his hat; and he paused for an irresolute moment, during which his eye wandered,
for no reason, to the Fountain of Neptune. This castiron replica of too elaborate sculpture
stood at the next corner, where the Major had placed it when the Addition was laid out so long
ago. The street corners had been shaped to conform with the great octagonal basin, which was
no great inconvenience for horse-drawn vehicles, but a nuisance to speeding automobiles; and,
even as George looked, one of the latter, coming too fast, saved itself only by a dangerous
skid as it rounded the fountain. This skid was to George's liking, though he would have been
more pleased to see the car go over, for he was wishing grief and destruction, just then, upon
all the automobiles in the world.

His eyes rested a second or two longer upon the Fountain of Neptune, not an enlivening sight
even in the shielding haze of autumn twilight. For more than a year no water had run in the
fountain: the connections had been broken, and the Major was evasive about restorations, even
when reminded by his grandson that a dry fountain is as gay as a dry fish. Soot streaks and
a thousand pits gave Neptune the distinction, at least, of leprosy, which the mermaids associated
with him had been consistent in catching; and his trident had been so deeply affected as to
drop its prongs. Altogether, this heavy work of heavy art, smoked dry, hugely scabbed, cracked,
and crumbling, was a dismal sight to the distracted eye of George Amberson Minafer, and its
present condition of craziness may have added a mite to his own. His own was sufficient, with
no additions, however, as he stood looking at the Johnsons' house and those houses on both
sides of it--that row of riffraff dwellings he had thought so damnable, the day when he stood
in his grandfather's yard, staring at them, after hearing what his Aunt Amelia said of the
"talk" about his mother.

He decided that he needed no hat for the sort of call he intended to make, and went forward
hurriedly. Mrs. Johnson was at home, the Irish girl who came to the door informed him, and
he was left to await the lady, in a room like an elegant well--the Johnsons' "reception room":
floor space, nothing to mention; walls, blue calcimined; ceiling, twelve feet from the floor;
inside shutters and gray lace curtains; five gilt chairs, a brocaded sofa, soiled, and an inlaid
walnut table, supporting two tall alabaster vases; a palm, with two leaves, dying in a corner.

Mrs. Johnson came in, breathing noticeably; and her round head, smoothly but economically decorated
with the hair of an honest woman, seemed to be lingering far in the background of the Alpine
bosom which took precedence of the rest of her everywhere; but when she was all in the room,
it was to be seen that her breathing was the result of hospitable haste to greet the visitor,
and her hand, not so dry as Neptune's Fountain, suggested that she had paused for only the
briefest ablutions. George accepted this cold, damp lump mechanically.

"Mr. Amberson--I mean Mr. Minafer!" she exclaimed. "I'm really delighted: I understood you
asked for me. Mr. Johnson's out of the city, but Charlie's downtown and I'm looking for him
at any minute, now, and he'll be so pleased that you--"

"I didn't want to see Charlie," George said. "I want"

"Do sit down," the hospitable lady urged him, seating herself upon the sofa. "Do sit down."

"No, I thank you. I wish--"

"Surely you're not going to run away again, when you've just come. Do sit down, Mr. Minafer.
I hope you're all well at your house and at the dear old Major's, too. He's looking--"

"Mrs. Johnson" George said, in a strained loud voice which arrested her attention immediately,
so that she was abruptly silent, leaving her surprised mouth open. She had already been concealing
some astonishment at this unexampled visit, however, and the condition of George's ordinarily
smooth hair (for he had overlooked more than his hat) had not alleviated her perplexity. "Mrs.
Johnson," he said, "I have come to ask you a few questions which I would like you to answer,
if you please."

She became grave at once. "Certainly, Mr. Minafer. Anything I can--"

He interrupted sternly, yet his voice shook in spite of its sternness. "You were talking with
my Aunt Fanny about my mother this afternoon."

At this Mrs. Johnson uttered an involuntary gasp, but she recovered herself. "Then I'm sure
our conversation was a very pleasant one, if we were talking of your mother, because--"

Again he interrupted. "My aunt has told me what the conversation virtually was, and I don't
mean to waste any time, Mrs. Johnson. You were talking about a--" George's shoulders suddenly
heaved uncontrollably; but he went fiercely on: "You were discussing a scandal that involved
my mother's name."

"Mr. Minafer!"

"Isn't that the truth?"

"I don't feel called upon to answer, Mr. Minafer," she said with visible agitation. "I do not
consider that you have any right--"

"My aunt told me you repeated this scandal to her."

"I don't think your aunt can have said that," Mrs. Johnson returned sharply. "I did not repeat
a scandal of any kind to your aunt and I think you are mistaken in saying she told you I did.
We may, have discussed some matters that have been a topic of comment about town--"

"Yes!" George cried. "I think you may have! That's what I'm here about, and what I intend to--"

"Don't tell me what you intend, please," Mrs. Johnson interrupted crisply. "And I should prefer
that you would not make your voice quite so loud in this house, which I happen to own. Your
aunt may have told you--though I think it would have been very unwise in her if she did, and
not very considerate of me--she may have told you that we discussed some such topic as I have
mentioned, and possibly that would have been true. If I talked it over with her, you may be
sure I spoke in the most charitable spirit, and without sharing in other people's disposition
to put an evil interpretation on what may, be nothing more than unfortunate appearances and--"

"My God!" said George. "I can't stand this!"

"You have the option of dropping the subject," Mrs. Johnson suggested tartly, and she added:
"Or of leaving the house."

"I'll do that soon enough, but first I mean to know--"

"I am perfectly willing to tell you anything you wish if you will remember to ask it quietly.
I'll also take the liberty of reminding you that I had a perfect right to discuss the subject
with your aunt. Other people may be less considerate in not confining their discussion of it,
as I have, to charitable views expressed only to a member of the family. Other people--"

"Other people!" the unhappy George repeated viciously. "That's what I want to know about--these
other people!"

"I beg your pardon."

"I want to ask you about them. You say you know of other people who talk about this."

"I presume they do."

"How many?"

"What?"

"I want to know how many other people talk about it?"

"Dear, dear!" she protested. "How should I know that?"

"Haven't you heard anybody mention it?"

"I presume so."

"Well, how many have you heard?"

Mrs. Johnson was becoming more annoyed than apprehensive, and she showed it. "Really, this
isn't a court-room," she said. "And I'm not a defendant in a libel-suit, either!"

The unfortunate young man lost what remained of his balance. "You may be!" he cried. "I intend
to know just who's dared to say these things, if I have to force my way into every house in
town, and I'm going to make them take every word of it back! I mean to know the name of every
slanderer that's spoken of this matter to you and of every tattler you've passed it on to yourself.
I mean to know--"

"You'll know something pretty quick!" she said, rising with difficulty; and her voice was thick
with the sense of insult. "You'll know that you're out in the street. Please to leave my house!"

George stiffened sharply. Then he bowed, and strode out of the door.

Three minutes later, disheveled and perspiring, but cold all over, he burst into his Uncle
George's room at the Major's without knocking. Amberson was dressing.

"Good gracious, Georgie!" he exclaimed. "What's up?"

"I've just come from Mrs. Johnson's--across the street," George panted.

"You have your own tastes!" was Amberson's comment. "But curious as they are, you ought to
do something better with your hair, and button your waistcoat to the right buttons--even for
Mrs. Johnson! What were you doing over there?"

"She told me to leave the house," George said desperately. "I went there because Aunt Fanny
told me the whole town was talking about my mother and that man Morgan--that they say my mother
is going to marry him and that proves she was too fond of him before my father died--she said
this Mrs. Johnson was one that talked about it, and I went to her to ask who were the others."

Amberson's jaw fell in dismay. "Don't tell me you did that!" he said, in a low voice; and then,
seeing that it was true, "Oh, now you have done it!"

Chapter XXIII

"I've 'done it'?" George cried. "What do you mean: I've done it? And what have I done?"

Amberson had collapsed into an easy chair beside his dressing-table, the white evening tie
he had been about to put on dangling from his hand, which had fallen limply on the arm of the
chair. The tie dropped to the floor before he replied; and the hand that had held it was lifted
to stroke his graying hair reflectively. "By Jove!" he muttered. "That is too bad!"

George folded his arms bitterly. "Will you kindly answer my question? What have I done that
wasn't honourable and right? Do you think these riffraff can go about bandying my mother's name--"

"They can now," said Amberson. "I don't know if they could before, but they certainly can now!"

"What do you mean by that?"

His uncle sighed profoundly, picked up his tie and, preoccupied with despondency, twisted the
strip of white lawn till it became unwearable. Meanwhile, he tried to enlighten his nephew.
"Gossip is never fatal, Georgie," he said, "until it is denied. Gossip goes on about every
human being alive and about all the dead that are alive enough to be remembered, and yet almost
never does any harm until some defender makes a controversy. Gossip's a nasty thing, but it's
sickly, and if people of good intentions will let it entirely alone, it will die, ninety-nine
times out of a hundred."

"See here," George said: "I didn't come to listen to any generalizing dose of philosophy! I
ask you--"

"You asked me what you've done, and I'm telling you." Amberson gave him a melancholy smile,
continuing: "Suffer me to do it in my own way. Fanny says there's been talk about your mother,
and that Mrs. Johnson does some of it. I don't know, because naturally nobody would come to
me with such stuff or mention it before me; but it's presumably true--I suppose it is. I've
seen Fanny with Mrs. Johnson quite a lot; and that old lady is a notorious gossip, and that's
why she ordered you out of her house when you pinned her down that she'd been gossiping. I
have a suspicion Mrs. Johnson has been quite a comfort to Fanny in their long talks; but she'll
probably quit speaking to her over this, because Fanny told you. I suppose it's true that the
'whole town,' a lot of others, that is, do share in the gossip. In this town, naturally, anything
about any Amberson has always been a stone dropped into the centre of a pond, and a lie would
send the ripples as far as a truth would. I've been on a steamer when the story went all over
the boat, the second day out,' that the prettiest girl on board didn't have any ears; and you
can take it as a rule that when a woman's past thirty-five the prettier her hair is, the more
certain you are to meet somebody with reliable information that it's a wig. You can be sure
that for many years there's been more gossip in this place about the Ambersons than about any
other family. I dare say it isn't so much so now as it used to be, because the town got too
big long ago, but it's the truth that the more prominent you are the more gossip there is about
you, and the more people would like to pull you down. Well, they can't do it as long as you
refuse to know what gossip there is about you. But the minute you notice it, it's got you!
I'm not speaking of certain kinds of slander that sometimes people have got to take to the
courts; I'm talking of the wretched buzzing the Mrs. John-sons do--the thing you seem to have
such a horror of--people 'talking'--the kind of thing that has assailed your mother. People
who have repeated a slander either get ashamed or forget it, if they're let alone. Challenge
them, and in self-defense they believe everything they've said: they'd rather believe you a
sinner than believe themselves liars, naturally. Submit to gossip and you kill it; fight it
and you make it strong. People will forget almost any slander except one that's been fought."

"Is that all?" George asked.

"I suppose so," his uncle murmured sadly.

"Well, then, may I ask what you'd have done, in my place?"

"I'm not sure, Georgie. When I was your age I was like you in many ways, especially in not
being very cool-headed, so I can't say. Youth can't be trusted for much, except asserting itself
and fighting and making love."

"Indeed!" George snorted. "May I ask what you think I ought to have done?"

"Nothing."

"'Nothing?" George echoed, mocking bitterly "I suppose you think I mean to let my mother's
good name--"

"Your mother's good name!" Amberson cut him off impatiently. "Nobody has a good name in a bad
mouth. Nobody has a good name in a silly mouth, either. Well, your mother's name was in some
silly mouths, and all you've done was to go and have a scene with the worst old woman gossip
in the town--a scene that's going to make her into a partisan against your mother, whereas
she was a mere prattler before. Don't you suppose she'll be all over town with this to-morrow? We think lightly of church belief in something that
is taught in schools and tested on middle-class, a distinguishing characteristic. It has Religion
as the "feeling of absolute dependence called," which emphasizes the binding and lacks the divine
freedom, the concept of transcendence is full of thought, and occasionally would I covenant with
God, sometimes God's freedom and prefer to say God's peace.

Shall we speak of faith and even of coming faith, it let us in great freedom and start without shame.
We who can not kneel in communities, before we dare to shame Awe not utter the words and highest
afraid to bare our souls. Will we overcome severe appointed as the Glaubensverkündern, this
shame to acknowledge, as it is in our hearts with faith, it should be done so unreserved, yes we want
to take, especially the attempt to reveal some hard self-examination of what those not responsible
for: the reluctance unconscious conscientious men of our time against faith.

The first is the inhibition of the moral attitude. Western morality and education based on the
old glorification of courage, fear of condemnation. Courage and his followers of truthfulness, loyalty,
Herrenhaftigkeit, make the surrender and fear with her family of secrecy, lies, purposefulness,
submission, greed and intrusiveness. The concept of sin does not exist. Do not discard the humanity
is in itself, at least Disobedience and self-glory, is reprehensible only the dishonest, the cowardice
and what she says. None of redemption is required, the decent man dared, with the world and over-world
to cope on their own, possibly using mutfreudiger powers, the brave, leave as one of their peers
not in the lurch.

It would never have succeeded the medieval church to break the Mutideal and the sign increasing
the submission, it would not be the European swelling underclass docile been. The church had
to accumulate the horrors of hell to the unspeakable, to the spark of to stir up fear in the
heart brave, they needed the docile child's soul and the world of women. Nevertheless, it has in
Western intellectual life is not achieved more than a balance in the strangest of all the
intellectual history of the earth. Apart from religious gifted natures and is limited to the
European man in his prime is not a Christian. At best, crosses in it a weekday view with a Sunday
faith, the feeling, let the action does not work. If Mutvorschriften, such as a duel, stand
in question, must mention the religious convention, the bid of the cheek is simply annoying.

Sun is mixing in the normal male adult Europeans in matters of faith Smacks of insincerity,
obsequiousness. Vile sins committed themselves up as one with whom one would not operate when
it Should that, ask for forgiveness in an unworthy attitude and bad conscience, to be saved by grace
of a deity; which accepts the worst of flattery, perhaps even demanded that one of their followers
common convention of the anointing in speech and gesture calls: these are feelings that Terror
suppressed and denied, to flee into the subconscious and the opposing faith . Nourish Anyone
who has experienced in his youth, a period of atheistic disbelief, reminding under the neediness
and emptiness of a feeling resolute honesty, the better to comfort Healing without a permanent
character and make the sacrifice of insight and the chivalrous spirit wants. A faint reflection
of that old feeling of dusk, when we a sturdy, scientific atheists encounter, we consider the
self-conscious, shaking his head Certainty with which is in the highest things, the primacy
of intellect required, but we feel that this man makes is not easy, he has a harder time than
us, and not from ignoble reasons. Past centuries had the power and duty to the atheist as Disturber
of earthly and divine order to pursue with fire and sword, but only a feeling angry self-consciousness
and involuntary respect explains the anger and selbstbetäubende acting vice-border contempt
of those zealous righteous.

Foresights we perceive that many believe future inheritance of Babylon
and Zion, by Byzantium and Rome, strip off quite a lot of Wittenberg
is also, he is a free and masculine his faith, and without Sündenlümmelei
Salbadarei, without self-degradation, flattery, begging Winselei and,
for us, but German as he comes from German hearts, and of German Lips
sounds.

Our inherited moral attitude of the Mutverehrung he will not destroy still less bow to her.
Because human morality is in the light of the world solar nothing; faith is at a higher law, and
if he forgives sin, so we will feel guilty when he calls for humility, we will bow down when he
promises salvation, so we will . Covet All of these things but do not proceed in the realm of
wishes and fears, the bustling Will, the spiritual operation and transport, but in the silence
of the heart and not goods courtship, but highest values.

The second is the inhibition of moral action. The faith is not in itself, with the devout attitude
is not done, believing it creates life, intercourse with the divine Powers and his image in daily
life.

The teachers of religion are inclined to hedonism, the pursuit of earthly happiness and to accept
God's good in traffic, by gentleness, historically minded, as after all all formulaic thinking
in our time, they recognize the hedonism of a religious archetypes,
a necessary and desired passage to the purer faith, and go easy over
it, that only an infinitesimal part of all religious practice goes
beyond hedonistic Summon.

However, we have to face this fact if we want to know what subconscious Flow many minds keeps
the faith.

It should be suspected not the original people and indulged his love consolation, if he considers
the divine persons and their followers for being, according to the human species determined. Not just
faith and the right attitude, but good works, confession and move repentance, thanksgiving and praise,
fervent prayer, and even vows and sacrifices the powers to abandon
their plan and to approve what one asks.

You ask to salvation and blessings in general, but also about health and long life for themselves
and others, for good weather, harvest, prosperity, destruction of enemies, victory. On War
reigns the idea of ​​the ordeal, by the bias in the divinity of one of the combatants decided.
Since then asks each of the things that all do, although not all can be consistently granted,
it creates a competition of piety to the divine favor.

It must not be forgotten that some internal, the material far in excess of emotion in this
mixed religious activity, yet is not its real nature Thing of the mind, but the relevant consideration
and the purposeful sustainability. For who is reasonably confident that all earthly blessings on
the Bittwege and gain by compliance of forms can be that easily becomes
all the more comfortable in all Way to prefer and do everything they
can by useful fervor all competitors from the to hit the field.

But here are the characters. It is not the worst, the path of spiritual Activity disdain to take
the full force of manly work up. See they now deliberately and pious among them sometimes a
head hanging generic form, which with contempt upon the wicked looks down, makes it so difficult
to reach and nothing must, so once again awakens a defiance that is not against the primitive
form of hedonism, but is against the essence of faith.

A religious establishment that earthly goals adapts, which may serve as a means to an end, they
will appear as magic, whether with good or bad will and success handled.

Teacher of religion and churches may wonder whether they have done as much as was necessary to educate
people about the true relationship of hedonism to the faith if they do not occasionally were called
the old utility side of faith welcome, whether as to keep education funds or the faithful in line.

Future
creditors will not be denied that faith has a secular mission if not that of the palpable
usefulness, for he creates values ​​and thus moves the whole structure
of the earth will he sanctify the people by the innermost, unconscious
Core of his will be affected, and he brings comfort by all the suffering,
the last in his Root is an internal, soothes in depth.

This is the earthly, the lower side of the Faith. There may be people they despise, but their
rejection is a passive be, as the tone deaf to the music, not a repellent from hurt feelings
and rebellion of the character.

The third arises from inhibition of the intellect. It is the obvious, constantly discussed,
to be brightened by us only in their last less conscious effects. Since faith has never stopped
being considered as true one, as the limits of what is held to be true should be, by most religious
teachers held dogmatically, by many of their followers be exceeded in doubt, this is how the
conflicts of scruple, the three solutions have: alienation from the faith, compromise, and sacrifice
of the intellect. As long as the dogmatic belief remains is the final solution of the victim,
the only complete and consistent. But they just raised anew concerns of the character. Again and
again feels the doubters that the calmed himself comfortable, makes
that the severity of the victim straight to the conscience growing,
and in the moment when he is ready to take it, he shrinks, as it his
conscience by the force of the benefits bribed fears.

Of course, the spiritually poor are good, they sit together and throw astonished looks on the
demonic, it has probably your own fault, so hard. But he is now in its doubts so far that he
considers the poor in spirit par excellence Limited, for an insignificant, and in selbstverwundetem
Pride recedes the farther from the gate of faith. He knows that he, as far as humanly possible
is, could force his intellect, he could try it with a symbolic interpretation, he could slide
over things, they move to a darker place of consciousness, by Suggestion of the will displace the
opposing forces. But this mechanism does not seem worthy of him; He can not look up to those
who have used it and now enjoy their rest. He just wants to avoid one, from the evil forces
of his being drawn to the good be.

False pride may take one half of the debt, the other half rests on the forms of mechanization
of faith that its content since time immemorial not developed and a changed humanity have adapted,
thus bringing the contents of faith, contrary to its founders, regarded as its essence.

Nations which are capable of myth-making, there are today, there are those in which the faith (in the sense
of belief) and knowledge (in the sense of conclusive Set determined) are not separately. Where
one has no interest in the evidence, because for the simple transport and ways of life the message
sufficient and lies is of no use, still happen every day Miracle, and miracle-worker create religions.
The separation of the proved by the unproven Believe that the separation of faith and knowledge
has created the Spirit of the West, and support the creation of this faith have taken no notice.

It
is no mean that they would rationalize myths and legends or intellectual
bourgeois As had to bend into the symbolic: it would have been small
and have the teaching of Centuries, are followed.

The lesson that the massive facts of a changed man and sprang a timeless faith, was that when faith is not
on the what, but depends on the how that faith is not of his topics, but by his spirit lives
that he is not managing, but a behavior.

The fourth is the inhibition of social feeling. All Western religions have, the European desire
for order and structure to the following, to the mechanization form of church bound. This age-old
bond is so deep into the consciousness of the people insisted that even the educated, and among
them even those who believe but are not religious, religion religious organization and hardly able
to separate.

No matter the spirit in which churches were built: its principal task
is the current temporal and spatial levels protect their religion,
protection against conversion time and spatial fragmentation.

Both tasks are intrinsically paradoxical, both are determinedly Conservatism and strong hierarchical structure.
Furthermore, since all the churches with good reason waive distinction between esoteric and
exoteric teaching, they have settings to seek and maintain that the capacity of the religious and spiritually
less gifted, so retarded not rule, and these settings are so one-sided, depending lost more of
the mentally high standing of the church.

At best, it still has the Catholic Church, from the philosophical work of the centuries so convinced,
is nourished by the living activity of the Order so that its infinite content for years without
proper discipline esoteric symbolism of a manifold and provides interpretation, which employs
the more sophisticated spirit, while a deep mysticism teaching and an outrageous Abnegation tame
the minds of the rules.

Stocks independence of the faith of the Church, or one available parallelism of the Movement,
the church was an independent development of faith, it would each Confessor exempted how far he
the spiritual, as far as he was inclined to organistic. In truth, however, these ratios fall
into the political life of, the Church is the state church and its adherents stem a gentle coercion.

Church
and politics, which unfaßbarste paradox, and yet in terms of church politics and entangled the
state church to the apparent unity. The communion of saints, whose Kingdom not of this world,
fights, organized as a corporation, and compete for Power, expansion,
money and state power.

The mechanized form of faith appears in the picture a bureaucracy, the consecrated person is official.

The ancient religions of priests who were not churches, could be state religions without Self-contradiction.
For it was not the concept of religious competition, especially as
the tolerated: they were devout Greeks, or they were criminally wicked,
or you had to Barbarella.

Its opposition was in the priesthood, so mild, the antiquity of the priesthood, the more dangerous,
according he is conscious of civil servants or to purchase class organized.

engage in a time of individual conscience and the competing confessions church and state bureaucracies
religions far beyond the intellectual district of faith addition,
they grow up political and social forces.

They take possession of the State: and he granted them, that every citizen will become a renegade
minority rights, committed them the education and civic honor consecration of the major life stages:
birth and Death, puberty and marriage. You submit to the state and grant him political education
for Existing, in support of the authorities, the class structure, the state-approved way of
thinking.

This politico-religious connection is not only from center to center of state government to church government
established, it disengages itself in the most remote link, and the Relationship of landlord and stem
parish of military command and pastoral care of school and spiritual authority, sensualizes
of urban wealth and the church community to the Grand Small and continuous
action of a feudal, militaristic, sized and unofficially directed
Church power.

A vast and venerable institution, which is based on the executive power of the state, all about
the youth of political right, in the rural areas of practical Authority over the women of
conscience influence of membership of a civic wholesomeness absolutely has, is a power that
any police to social orientation, Force-true and no one can escape if he is not the position of the
bourgeois to change the subject with the object is tilted.

But because the church as their confessors autocratic formative power in its own right confronts,
not designed as meeting its own religious will, it is an unshakeable commitment to meet him,
she's conservative requirement of against doubt and interpretation defended, and whose loud or
tacit recognition they forces. For political and traditional reasons, be it at the entrance to the
church community more difficult it was to sharpen the discipline,
it is the lesson for the lower classes to make binding or to prevent
even just relaxation and cleavage, the commitment such that it often
only freer spirits in the mediation of violent interpretation or daring
symbolism appears to be acceptable.

The rest is loose so the ghosts of the civil, social and political coercion the church and its dogma subject,
the more they get used to inner alienation and strive to see in equipment and content conventions
that we, for reasons of education and order can not do without.

There is much, if seen behind these conventions, the great religious truths and are honored
that they arose one day, too often it happens that the alienation extends to the faith itself.
People complain about the disappearance of the Church's relationship among educated young men
ages: the relationship does not disappear, because apart from Mass will fulfill the duties,
resignations are rare - but the more stringent the Church insist on their rights and relationships, the
more unstoppable you slip away the souls and not only her, but by faith.

That all these simple correlations are beyond the public mind, is because that we in Germany
only historically and scientifically, not objective and pragmatic .

Think It missed the comparisons and the views. You wonder how many of the educated the diversity
of the terms religion and church is internally familiar, like many of the most original questions
to make your own thoughts. Our thinking is in the hands of civil servant teachers of science
with the tools of their learning and over again Support the existing
theories, the journalists who work the day, and the agitators, the
fight with the existing keywords.

Here it is: the people must receive the faith to be there: Separation of Church and State,
and the problem lies somewhere else.

We, friends have it in our consideration of this policy and not to institutions To do but with
our attitude to the present and future. So must the last Religious doubts, which arises from the
real, but our time as a faith in faith reaffirm a untouchable. May the faith in the future,
create forms, which he wants: his political and social, educational
and military are not.

Faith will purify our souls and are the souls of our children, but means to an end, not the
noble, yet the low, he will not. Can not hold a belief, if it is not prescribed by the State can not
keep a state, if he is not a Church is defended, both will then decrease. For both are forces that
liberated in a Humanity can exist only in its own right. If beliefs through the ages does not
get fixed: so much the better, so they may change, as all earthly forms have changed, if only
you will keep your original ground. Can the unity of the confession preserve the diversity of
origin, country marks, not the freedom of levels: as may fragmenting it, if only the human community
of the faithful awake life, today does not exist. Like indulgences granted here and demons summoned
like, there the purest Sacraments received and the most glorified
messages are proclaimed, it's all perfect, what from a pure heart
is done, and everything is imperfect because it is earthly likeness.

Let believers gather, the urge to confess her heart together, or let them flee to the street
noise and woods to be alone with their soul, they may preach in markets or priest can exercise,
whether spiritual forces or civil service form sink or in mystical contemplation: the divine
powers to hear every word the heart and each falling drop. A belief, however, who did not go
as eager superstition not evil magic, not smarter competition, not therapeutic exercise and appropriate
exercise is a faith that will not earthly from the divine, but divine from the earthly, surrounds
mankind one nation, so that everyone understands each one, Whichever languages ​​of the mouth,
and heart he speaks, and all the one responsible stand and feel to be the untold misery, happiness
and responsibility, man.

There are some who do not have new faith because they see its degeneracy. Yes it is true to
each blade of faith is a bunch of superstitious and Muck generic weed . Overgrow It is true that its
venom is more repulsive than of disbelief, as honorable and courageous is the sober, solid atheist,
compared with the sweet cowardly bigots, the greedy Shamans, the shameless and the diligent servant
of sin God cheats. Should we discouraged for fear of the secondary? Who cleans a river may not be surprised
when the excavator brought up mud and the poison of Muckerei are in humanity, so should it
to light may destroy the sun and wind, which was fermenting in the depths.

There are others who create faith substitute. They delve into ancient mythology and legends
and customs, and think that even if one does not believe, so it is nice and serves to collect, to jump
over a fire or to call the sun.
 And they haven't done any harm: she made Wilbur happy, and
she was a true wife to him as long as he lived. It wasn't a crime for her to care for Eugene
all the time; she certainly never told him she did--and she gave me every chance in the world!
She left us alone together every time she could--even since Wilbur died--but what was the use?
And here I go, not doing myself a bit of good by it, and just"--Fanny wrung her hands again--"just
ruining them!"

"I suppose you mean I'm doing that," George said bitterly.

"Yes, I do!" she sobbed, and drooped upon the stairway railing, exhausted.

"On the contrary, I mean to save my mother from a calamity."

Fanny looked at him wanly, in a tired despair; then she stepped by him and went slowly to her
own door, where she paused and beckoned to him.

"What do you want?"

"Just come here a minute."

"What for?" he asked impatiently.

"I just wanted to say something to you."

"Well, for heaven's sake, say it! There's nobody to hear." Nevertheless, after a moment, as
she beckoned him again, he went to her, profoundly annoyed. "Well, what is it?"

"George," she said in a low voice, "I think you ought to be told something. If I were you,
I'd let my mother alone."

"Oh, my Lord!" he groaned. "I'm doing these things for her, not against her!"

A mildness had come upon Fanny, and she had controlled her weeping. She shook her head gently.
"No, I'd let her alone if I were you. I don't think she's very well, George."

"She! I never saw a healthier person in my life."

"No. She doesn't let anybody know, but she goes to the doctor regularly."

"Women are always going to doctors regularly."

"No. He told her to."

George was not impressed. "It's nothing at all; she spoke of it to me years ago--some kind
of family failing. She said grandfather had it, too; and look at him! Hasn't proved very serious
with him! You act as if I'd done something wrong in sending that man about his business, and
as if I were going to persecute my mother, instead of protecting her. By Jove, it's sickening!
You told me how all the riffraff in town were busy with her name, and then the minute I lift
my hand to protect her, you begin to attack me and--"

"Sh!" Fanny checked him, laying her hand on his arm. "Your uncle is going."

The library doors were heard opening, and a moment later there came the sound of the front
door closing.

George moved toward the head of the stairs, then stood listening; but the house was silent.

Fanny made a slight noise with her lips to attract his attention, and, when he glanced toward
her, shook her head at him urgently. "Let her alone," she whispered. "She's down there by herself.
Don't go down. Let her alone."

She moved a few steps toward him and halted, her face pallid and awestruck, and then both stood
listening for anything that might break the silence downstairs. No sound came to them; that
poignant silence was continued throughout long, long minutes, while the two listeners stood
there under its mysterious spell; and in its plaintive eloquence--speaking, as it did, of the
figure alone in the big, dark library, where dead Wilbur's new silver frame gleamed in the
dimness--there was something that checked even George.

Above the aunt and nephew, as they kept this strange vigil, there was a triple window of stained
glass, to illumine the landing and upper reaches of the stairway. Figures in blue and amber
garments posed gracefully in panels, conceived by some craftsman of the Eighties to represent
Love and Purity and Beauty, and these figures, leaded to unalterable attitudes, were little
more motionless than the two human beings upon whom fell the mottled faint light of the window.
The colours were growing dull; evening was coming on.

Fanny Minafer broke the long silence with a sound from her throat, a stilled gasp; and with
that great companion of hers, her handkerchief, retired softly to the loneliness of her own
chamber. After she had gone George looked about him bleakly, then on tiptoe crossed the hall
and went into his own room, which was filled with twilight. Still tiptoeing, though he could
not have said why, he went across the room and sat down heavily in a chair facing the window.
Outside there was nothing but the darkening air and the wall of the nearest of the new houses.
He had not slept at all, the night before, and he had eaten nothing since the preceding day
at lunch, but he felt neither drowsiness nor hunger. His set determination filled him, kept
him but too wide awake, and his gaze at the grayness beyond the window was wide--eyed and bitter.

Darkness had closed in when there was a step in the room behind him. Then someone knelt beside
the chair, two arms went round him with infinite compassion, a gentle head rested against his
shoulder, and there came the faint scent as of apple-blossoms far away.

"You mustn't be troubled, darling," his mother whispered.

Chapter XXVI

George choked. For an instant he was on the point of breaking down, but he commanded himself,
bravely dismissing the self-pity roused by her compassion. "How can I help but be?" he said.

"No, no." She soothed him. "You mustn't. You mustn't be troubled, no matter what happens."

"That's easy enough to say!" he protested; and he moved as if to rise.

"Just let's stay like this a little while, dear. Just a minute or two. I want to tell you:
brother George has been here, and he told me everything about--about how unhappy you'd been--and
how you went so gallantly to that old woman with the operaglasses." Isabel gave a sad little
laugh. "What a terrible old woman she is! What a really terrible thing a vulgar old woman can be!"

"Mother, I--" And again he moved to rise.

"Must you? It seemed to me such a comfortable way to talk. Well--" She yielded; he rose, helped
her to her feet, and pressed the light into being.

As the room took life from the sudden lines of fire within the bulbs Isabel made a deprecatory
gesture, and, with a faint laugh of apologetic protest, turned quickly away from George. What
she meant was: "You mustn't see my face until I've made it nicer for you." Then she turned
again to him, her eyes downcast, but no sign of tears in them, and she contrived to show him
that there was the semblance of a smile upon her lips. She still wore her hat, and in her unsteady
fingers she held a white envelope, somewhat crumpled.

"Now, mother--"

"Wait, dearest," she said; and though he stood stone cold, she lifted her arms, put them round
him again, and pressed her cheek lightly to his. "Oh, you do look so troubled, poor dear! One
thing you couldn't doubt, beloved boy: you know I could never care for anything in the world
as I care for you--never, never!"

"Now, mother--"

She released him, and stepped back. "Just a moment more, dearest. I want you to read this first.
We can get at things better." She pressed into his hand the envelope she had brought with her,
and as he opened it, and began to read the long enclosure, she walked slowly to the other end
of the room; then stood there, with her back to him, and her head drooping a little, until
he had finished.

The sheets of paper were covered with Eugene's handwriting.

George Amberson will bring you this, dear Isabel. He is waiting while I write. He and I have
talked things over, and before he gives this to you he will tell you what has happened. Of
course I'm rather confused, and haven't had time to think matters out very definitely, and
yet I believe I should have been better prepared for what took place to-day--I ought to have
known it was coming, because I have understood for quite a long time that young George was
getting to dislike me more and more. Somehow, I've never been able to get his friendship; he's
always had a latent distrust of me--or something like distrust--and perhaps that's made me
sometimes a little awkward and diffident with him. I think it may be he felt from the first
that I cared a great deal about you, and he naturally resented it. I think perhaps he felt
this even during all the time when I was so careful--at least I thought I was--not to show,
even to you, how immensely I did care. And he may have feared that you were thinking too much
about me--even when you weren't and only liked me as an old friend. It's perfectly comprehensible
to me, also, that at his age one gets excited about gossip. Dear Isabel, what I'm trying to
get at, in my confused way, is that you and I don't care about this nonsensical gossip, ourselves,
at all. Yesterday I thought the time had come when I could ask you to marry me, and you were
dear enough to tell me "sometime it might come to that." Well, you and I, left to ourselves,
and knowing what we have been and what we are, we'd pay as much attention to "talk" as we would
to any other kind of old cats' mewing! We'd not be very apt to let such things keep us from
the plenty of life we have left to us for making up to ourselves for old unhappinesses and
mistakes. But now we're faced with--not the slander and not our own fear of it, because we
haven't any, but someone else's fear of it--your son's. And, oh, dearest woman in the world,
I know what your son is to you, and it frightens me! Let me explain a little: I don't think
he'll change--at twenty-one or twenty-two so many things appear solid and permanent and terrible
which forty sees are nothing but disappearing miasma. Forty can't tell twenty about this; that's
the pity of it! Twenty can find out only by getting to be forty. And so we come to this, dear:
Will you live your own life your way, or George's way? I'm going a little further, because
it would be fatal not to be wholly frank now. George will act toward you only as your long
worship of him, your sacrifices--all the unseen little ones every day since he was born--will
make him act. Dear, it breaks my heart for you, but what you have to oppose now is the history
of your own selfless and perfect motherhood. I remember saying once that what you worshipped
in your son was the angel you saw in him--and I still believe that is true of every mother.
But in a mother's worship she may not see that the Will in her son should not always be offered
incense along with the angel. I grow sick with fear for you--for both you and me--when I think
how the Will against us two has grown strong through the love you have given the angel--and
how long your own sweet Will has served that other. Are you strong enough, Isabel? Can you
make the fight? I promise you that if you will take heart for it, you will find so quickly
that it has all amounted to nothing. You shall have happiness, and, in a little while, only
happiness. You need only to write me a line--I can't come to your house--and tell me where
you will meet me. We will come back in a month, and the angel in your son will bring him to
you; I promise it. What is good in him will grow so fine, once you have beaten the turbulent
Will--but it must be beaten!

Your brother, that good friend, is waiting with such patience; I should not keep him longer--and
I am saying too much for wisdom, I fear. But, oh, my dear, won't you be strong--such a little
short strength it would need! Don't strike my life down twice, dear--this time I've not deserved
it.                                  Eugene.

Concluding this missive, George tossed it abruptly from him so that one sheet fell upon his
bed and the others upon the floor; and at the faint noise of their falling Isabel came, and,
kneeling, began to gather them up.

"Did you read it, dear?"

George's face was pale no longer, but pink with fury. "Yes, I did."

"All of it?" she asked gently, as she rose.

"Certainly!"

She did not look at him, but kept her eyes downcast upon the letter in her hands, tremulously
rearranging the sheets in order as she spoke--and though she smiled, her smile was as tremulous
as her hands. Nervousness and an irresistible timidity possessed her. "I--I wanted to say,
George," she faltered. "I felt that if--if some day it should happen--I mean, if you came to
feel differently about it, and Eugene and I--that is if we found that it seemed the most sensible
thing to do--I was afraid you might think it would be a little queer about--Lucy, I mean if--if
she were your step-sister. Of course, she'd not be even legally related to you, and if you--if
you cared for her--"

Thus far she got stumblingly with what she wanted to say, while George watched her with a gaze
that grew harder and hotter; but here he cut her off. "I have already given up all idea of
Lucy," he said. "Naturally, I couldn't have treated her father as I deliberately did treat
him--I could hardly have done that and expected his daughter ever to speak to me again."

Isabel gave a quick cry of compassion, but he allowed her no opportunity to speak. "You needn't
think I'm making any particular sacrifice," he said sharply, "though I would, quickly enough,
if I thought it necessary in a matter of honour like this. I was interested in her, and I could
even say I did care for her; but she proved pretty satisfactorily that she cared little enough
about me! She went away right in the midst of a--of a difference of opinion we were having;
she didn't even let me know she was going, and never wrote a line to me, and then came back
telling everybody she'd had 'a perfectly gorgeous time!' That's quite enough for me. I'm not
precisely the sort to arrange for that kind of thing to be done to me more than once! The truth
is, we're not congenial and we'd found that much out, at least, before she left. We should
never have been happy; she was 'superior' all the time, and critical of me--not very pleasant,
that! I was disappointed in her, and I might as well say it. I don't think she has the very
deepest nature in the world, and--"

But Isabel put her hand timidly on his arm. "Georgie, dear, this is only a quarrel: all young
people have them before they get adjusted, and you mustn't let--"

"If you please!" he said emphatically, moving back from her. "This isn't that kind. It's all
over, and I don't care to speak of it again. It's settled. Don't you understand?"

"But, dear--"

"No. I want to talk to you about this letter of her father's."

"Yes, dear, that's why--"

"It's simply the most offensive piece of writing that I've ever held in my hands!"

She stepped back from him, startled. "But, dear, I thought--"

"I can't understand your even showing me such a thing!" he cried. "How did you happen to bring
it to me?"

"Your uncle thought I'd better. He thought it was the simplest thing to do, and he said that
he'd suggested it to Eugene, and Eugene had agreed. They thought--"

"Yes!" George said bitterly. "I should like to hear what they thought!"

"They thought it would be the most straightforward thing."

George drew a long breath. "Well, what do you think, mother?"

"I thought it would be the simplest and most straightforward thing; I thought they were right."

"Very well! We'll agree it was simple and straightforward. Now, what do you think of that letter
itself?"

She hesitated, looking away. "I--of course I don't agree with him in the way he speaks of you,
dear--except about the angel! I don't agree with some of the things he implies. You've always
been unselfish--nobody knows that better than your mother. When Fanny was left with nothing,
you were so quick and generous to give up what really should have come to you, and--"

"And yet," George broke in, "you see what he implies about me. Don't you think, really, that
this was a pretty insulting letter for that man to be asking you to hand your son?"

"Oh, no!" she cried. "You can see how fair he means to be, and he didn't ask for me to give
it to you. It was brother George who--"

"Never mind that, now! You say he tries to be fair, and yet do you suppose it ever occurs to
him that I'm doing my simple duty? That I'm doing what my father would do if he were alive?
That I'm doing what my father would ask me to do if he could speak from his grave out yonder?
Do you suppose it ever occurs to that man for one minute that I'm protecting my mother?" George
raised his voice, advancing upon the helpless lady fiercely; and she could only bend her head
before him. "He talks about my 'Will'--how it must be beaten down; yes, and he asks my mother
to do that little thing to please him! What for? Why does he want me 'beaten' by my mother?
Because I'm trying to protect her name! He's got my mother's name bandied up and down the streets
of this town till I can't step in those streets without wondering what every soul I meet is
thinking of me and of my family, and now he wants you to marry him so that every gossip in
town will say 'There! What did I tell you? I guess that proves it's true!' You can't get away
from it; that's exactly what they'd say, and this man pretends he cares for you, and yet asks
you to marry him and give them the right to say it. He says he and you don't care what they
say, but I know better! He may not care-probably he's that kind--but you do. There never was
an Amberson yet that would let the Amberson name go trailing in the dust like that! It's the
proudest name in this town and it's going to stay the proudest; and I tell you that's the deepest
thing in my nature--not that I'd expect Eugene Morgan to understand--the very deepest thing
in my nature is to protect that name, and to fight for it to the last breath when danger threatens
it, as it does now--through my mother!" He turned from her, striding up and down and tossing
his arms about, in a tumult of gesture. "I can't believe it of you, that you'd think of such
a sacrilege! That's what it would be--sacrilege! When he talks about your unselfishness toward
me, he's right--you have been unselfish and you have been a perfect mother. But what about
him? Is it unselfish of him to want you to throw away your good name just to please him? That's
all he asks of you--and to quit being my mother! Do you think I can believe you really care
for him? I don't! You are my mother and you're an Amberson--and I believe you're too proud!
You're too proud to care for a man who could write such a letter as that!" He stopped, faced
her, and spoke with more self-control: "Well, what are you going to do about it, mother?"

George was right about his mother's being proud. And even when she laughed with a negro gardener,
or even those few times in her life when people saw her weep, Isabel had a proud look--something
that was independent and graceful and strong. But she did not have it now: she leaned against
the wall, beside his dressing-table, and seemed beset with humility and with weakness. Her
head drooped.

"What answer are you going to make to such a letter?" George demanded, like a judge on the bench.

"I--I don't quite know, dear," she murmured.

"Wait," she begged him. "I'm so--confused."

"I want to know what you're going to write him. Do you think if you did what he wants you to
I could bear to stay another day in this town, mother? Do you think I could ever bear even
to see you again if you married him? I'd want to, but you surely know I just--couldn't!"

She made a futile gesture, and seemed to breathe with difficulty. "I--I wasn't--quite sure,"
she faltered, "about--about it's being wise for us to be married--even before knowing how you
feel about it. I wasn't even sure it was quite fair to--to Eugene. I have--I seem to have that
family trouble--like father's--that I spoke to you about once." She managed a deprecatory little
dry laugh. "Not that it amounts to much, but I wasn't at all sure that it would be fair to
him. Marrying doesn't mean so much, after all--not at my age. It's enough to know that--that
people think of you--and to see them. I thought we were all--oh, pretty happy the way things
were, and I don't think it would mean giving up a great deal for him or me, either, if we just
went on as we have been. I--I see him almost every day, and--"

"Mother!" George's voice was loud and stern. "Do you think you could go on seeing him after this!"

She had been talking helplessly enough before; her tone was little more broken now. "Not--not
even--see him?"

"How could you?" George cried. "Mother, it seems to me that if he ever set foot in this house
again--oh! I can't speak of it! Could you see him, knowing what talk it makes every time he
turns into this street, and knowing what that means to me? Oh, I don't understand all this--I
don't! If you'd told me, a year ago, that such things were going to happen, I'd have thought
you were insane--and now I believe I am!"

Then, after a preliminary gesture of despair, as though he meant harm to the ceiling, he flung
himself heavily, face downward, upon the bed. His anguish was none the less real for its vehemence;
and the stricken lady came to him instantly and bent over him, once more enfolding him in her
arms. She said nothing, but suddenly her tears fell upon his head; she saw them, and seemed
to be startled.

"Oh, this won't do!" she said. "I've never let you see me cry before, except when your father
died. I mustn't!"

And she ran from the room.

...A little while after she had gone, George rose and began solemnly to dress for dinner. At
one stage of these conscientious proceedings he put on, temporarily, his long black velvet
dressing-gown, and, happening to catch sight in his pier glass of the picturesque and medieval
figure thus presented, he paused to regard it; and something profoundly theatrical in his nature
came to the surface.

For, in truth, the mirrored princely image, with hair dishevelled on the white brow, and the
long tragic fall of black velvet from the shoulders, had brought about (in his thought at least)
some comparisons of his own times, so out of joint, with those of that other gentle prince
and heir whose widowed mother was minded to marry again.

"But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of Woe."

Not less like Hamlet did he feel and look as he sat gauntly at the dinner table with Fanny
to partake of a meal throughout which neither spoke. Isabel had sent word "not to wait" for
her, an injunction it was as well they obeyed, for she did not come at all. But with the renewal
of sustenance furnished to his system, some relaxation must have occurred within the high-strung
George. Dinner was not quite finished when, without warning, sleep hit him hard. His burning
eyes could no longer restrain the lids above them; his head sagged beyond control; and he got
to his feet, and went lurching upstairs, yawning with exhaustion. From the door of his room,
which he closed mechanically, with his eyes shut, he went blindly to his bed, fell upon it
soddenly, and slept--with his face full upturned to the light.

It was after midnight when he woke, and the room was dark. He had not dreamed, but he woke
with the sense that somebody or something had been with him while he slept--somebody or something
infinitely compassionate; somebody or something infinitely protective, that would let him come
to no harm and to no grief.

He got up, and pressed the light on. Pinned to the cover of his dressing-table was a square
envelope, with the words, "For you, dear," written in pencil upon it. But the message inside
was in ink, a little smudged here and there.

I have been out to the mail-box, darling, with a letter I've written to Eugene, and he'll have
it in the morning. It would be unfair not to let him know at once, and my decision could not
change if I waited. It would always be the same. I think it, is a little better for me to write
to you, like this, instead of waiting till you wake up and then telling you, because I'm foolish
and might cry again, and I took a vow once, long ago, that you should never see me cry. Not
that I'll feel like crying when we talk things over tomorrow. I'll be "all right and fine"
(as you say so often) by that time--don't fear. I think what makes me most ready to cry now
is the thought of the terrible suffering in your poor face, and the unhappy knowledge that
it is I, your mother who put it there. It shall never come again! I love you better than anything
and everything else on earth. God gave you to me--and oh! how thankful I have been every day
of my life for that sacred gift--and nothing can ever come between me and God's gift. I cannot
hurt you, and I cannot let you stay hurt as you have been--not another instant after you wake
up, my darling boy! It is beyond my power. And Eugene was right--I know you couldn't change
about this. Your suffering shows how deep-seated the feeling is within you. So I've written
him just about what I think you would like me to--though I told him I would always be fond
of him and always his best friend, and I hoped his dearest friend. He'll understand about not
seeing him. He'll understand that, though I didn't say it in so many words. You mustn't trouble
about that--he'll understand. Good-night, my darling, my beloved, my beloved! You mustn't be
troubled. I think I shouldn't mind anything very much so long as I have you "all to myself"--as
people say--to make up for your long years away from me at college. We'll talk of what's best
to do in the morning, shan't we? And for all this pain you'll forgive your loving and devoted
mother.

Isabel.

Chapter XXVII

Having finished some errands downtown, the next afternoon, George Amberson Minafer was walking
up National Avenue on his homeward way when he saw in the distance, coming toward him, upon
the same side of the street, the figure of a young lady--a figure just under the middle height,
comely indeed, and to be mistaken for none other in the world--even at two hundred yards. To
his sharp discomfiture his heart immediately forced upon him the consciousness of its acceleration;
a sudden warmth about his neck made him aware that he had turned red, and then, departing,
left him pale. For a panicky moment he thought of facing about in actual flight; he had little
doubt that Lucy would meet him with no token of recognition, and all at once this probability
struck him as unendurable. And if she did not speak, was it the proper part of chivalry to
lift his hat and take the cut bareheaded? Or should the finer gentleman acquiesce in the lady's
desire for no further acquaintance, and pass her with stony mien and eyes constrained forward?
George was a young man badly flustered.

But the girl approaching him was unaware of his trepidation, being perhaps somewhat preoccupied
with her own. She saw only that he was pale, and that his eyes were darkly circled. But here
he was advantaged with her, for the finest touch to his good looks was given by this toning
down; neither pallor nor dark circles detracting from them, but rather adding to them a melancholy
favour of distinction. George had retained his mourning, a tribute completed down to the final
details of black gloves and a polished ebony cane (which he would have been pained to name
otherwise than as a "walking-stick") and in the aura of this sombre elegance his straight figure
and drawn face were not without a tristful and appealing dignity.

In everything outward he was cause enough for a girl's cheek to flush, her heart to beat faster,
and her eyes to warm with the soft light that came into Lucy's now, whether she would or no.
If his spirit had been what his looks proclaimed it, she would have rejoiced to let the light
glow forth which now shone in spite of her. For a long time, thinking of that spirit of his,
and what she felt it should be, she had a persistent sense: "It must be there!" but she had
determined to believe this folly no longer. Nevertheless, when she met him at the Sharons',
she had been far less calm than she seemed.

People speaking casually of Lucy were apt to define her as "a little beauty," a definition
short of the mark. She was "a little beauty," but an independent, masterful, sell-reliant little
American, of whom her father's earlier gipsyings and her own sturdiness had made a woman ever
since she was fifteen. But though she was the mistress of her own ways and no slave to any
lamp save that of her own conscience, she had a weakness: she had fallen in love with George
Amberson Minafer at first sight, and no matter how she disciplined herself, she had never been
able to climb out. The thing had happened to her; that was all. George had looked just the
way she had always wanted someone to look--the riskiest of all the moonshine ambushes wherein
tricky romance snares credulous young love. But what was fatal to Lucy was that this thing
having happened to her, she could not change it. No matter what she discovered in George's
nature she was unable to take away what she had given him; and though she could think differently
about him, she could not feel differently about him, for she was one of those too faithful
victims of glamour. When she managed to keep the picture of George away from her mind's eye,
she did well enough; but when she let him become visible, she could not choose but love what
she disdained. She was a little angel who had fallen in love with high-handed Lucifer; quite
an experience, and not apt to be soon succeeded by any falling in love with a tamer party--and
the unhappy truth was that George did make better men seem tame. But though she was a victim,
she was a heroic one, anything but helpless.

As they drew nearer, George tried to prepare himself to meet her with some remnants of aplomb.
He decided that he would keep on looking straight ahead, and lift his hand toward his hat at
the very last moment when it would be possible for her to see him out of the corner of her
eye: then when she thought it over later, she would not be sure whether he had saluted her
or merely rubbed his forehead. And there was the added benefit that any third person who might
chance to look from a window, or from a passing carriage, would not think that he was receiving
a snub, because he did not intend to lift his hat, but, timing the gesture properly, would
in fact actually rub his forehead. These were the hasty plans which occupied his thoughts until
he was within about fifty feet of her--when he ceased to have either plans or thoughts, he
had kept his eyes from looking full at her until then, and as he saw her, thus close at hand,
and coming nearer, a regret that was dumfounding took possession of him. For the first time
he had the sense of having lost something of overwhelming importance.

Lucy did not keep to the right, but came straight to meet him, smiling, and with her hand offered
to him.

"Why--you--" he stammered, as he took it. "Haven't you--" What he meant to say was, "Haven't
you heard?"

"Haven't I what?" she asked; and he saw that Eugene had not yet told her.

"Nothing!" he gasped. "May I--may I turn and walk with you a little way?"

"Yes, indeed!" she said cordially.

He would not have altered what had been done: he was satisfied with all that--satisfied that
it was right, and that his own course was right. But he began to perceive a striking inaccuracy
in some remarks he had made to his mother. Now when he had put matters in such shape that even
by the relinquishment of his "ideals of life" he could not have Lucy, knew that he could never
have her, and knew that when Eugene told her the history of yesterday he could not have a glance
or word even friendly from her--now when he must in good truth "give up all idea of Lucy,"
he was amazed that he could have used such words as "no particular sacrifice," and believed
them when he said them! She had looked never in his life so bewitchingly pretty as she did
today; and as he walked beside her he was sure that she was the most exquisite thing in the world.

"Lucy," he said huskily, "I want to tell you something. Something that matters."

"I hope it's a lively something then," she said; and laughed. "Papa's been so glum to-day he's
scarcely spoken to me. Your Uncle George Amberson came to see him an hour ago and they shut
themselves up in the library, and your uncle looked as glum as papa. I'd be glad if you'll
tell me a funny story, George."

"Well, it may seem one to you," he said bitterly, "Just to begin with: when you went away you
didn't let me know; not even a word--not a line--"

Her manner persisted in being inconsequent. "Why, no," she said. "I just trotted off for some
visits."

"Well, at least you might have--"

"Why, no," she said again briskly. "Don't you remember, George? We'd had a grand quarrel, and
didn't speak to each other all the way home from a long, long drive! So, as we couldn't play
together like good children, of course it was plain that we oughtn't to play at all."

"Play!" he cried.

"Yes. What I mean is that we'd come to the point where it was time to quit playing--well, what
we were playing."

"At being lovers, you mean, don't you?"

"Something like that," she said lightly. "For us two, playing at being lovers was just the
same as playing at cross-purposes. I had all the purposes, and that gave you all the crossness:
things weren't getting along at all. It was absurd!"

"Well, have it your own way," he said. "It needn't have been absurd."

"No, it couldn't help but be!" she informed him cheerfully. "The way I am and the way you are,
it couldn't ever be anything else. So what was the use?"

"I don't know," he sighed, and his sigh was abysmal. "But what I wanted to tell you is this:
when you went away, you didn't let me know and didn't care how or when I heard it, but I'm
not like that with you. This time, I'm going away. That's what I wanted to tell you. I'm going
away tomorrow night--indefinitely."

She nodded sunnily. "That's nice for you. I hope you'll have ever so jolly a time, George."

"I don't expect to have a particularly jolly time."

"Well, then," she laughed, "if I were you I don't think I'd go."

It seemed impossible to impress this distracting creature, to make her serious. "Lucy," he
said desperately, "this is our last walk together."

"Evidently!" she said, "if you're going away tomorrow night."

"Lucy--this may be the last time I'll see you--ever--ever in my life."

At that she looked at him quickly, across her shoulder, but she smiled as brightly as before,
and with the same cordial inconsequence: "Oh, I can hardly think that!" she said. "And of course
I'd be awfully sorry to think it. You're not moving away, are you, to live?"

"No."

"And even if you were, of course you'd be coming back to visit your relatives every now and then."

"I don't know when I'm coming back. Mother and I are starting to-morrow night for a trip around
the world."

At this she did look thoughtful. "Your mother is going with you?"

"Good heavens!" he groaned. "Lucy, doesn't it make any difference to you that I am going?"

At this her cordial smile instantly appeared again. "Yes, of course," she said. "I'm sure I'll
miss you ever so much. Are you to be gone long?"

He stared at her wanly. "I told you indefinitely," he said. "We've made no plans--at all--for
coming back."

"That does sound like a long trip!" she exclaimed admiringly. "Do you plan to be travelling
all the time, or will you stay in some one place the greater part of it? I think it would be
lovely to--"

"Lucy!"

He halted; and she stopped with him. They had come to a corner at the edge of the "business
section" of the city, and people were everywhere about them, brushing against them, sometimes,
in passing.

"I can't stand this," George said, in a low voice. "I'm just about ready to go in this drug-store
here, and ask the clerk for something to keep me from dying in my tracks! It's quite a shock,
you see, Lucy!"

"What is?"

"To find out certainly, at last, how deeply you've cared for me! To see how much difference
this makes to you! By Jove, I have mattered to you!"

Her cordial smile was tempered now with good-nature. "George!" She laughed indulgently. "Surely
you don't want me to do pathos on a downtown corner!"

"You wouldn't 'do pathos' anywhere!"

"Well--don't you think pathos is generally rather fooling?"

"I can't stand this any longer," he said. "I can't! Good-bye, Lucy!" He took her hand. "It's
good-bye--I think it's good-bye for good, Lucy!"

"Good-bye! I do hope you'll have the most splendid trip." She gave his hand a cordial little
grip, then released it lightly. "Give my love to your mother. Good-bye!"

He turned heavily away, and a moment later glanced back over his shoulder. She had not gone
on, but stood watching him, that same casual, cordial smile on her face to the very last; and
now, as he looked back, she emphasized her friendly unconcern by waving her small hand to him
cheerily, though perhaps with the slightest hint of preoccupation, as if she had begun to think
of the errand that brought her downtown.

In his mind, George had already explained her to his own poignant dissatisfaction--some blond
pup, probably, whom she had met during that "perfectly gorgeous time!" And he strode savagely
onward, not looking back again.

But Lucy remained where she was until he was out of sight. Then she went slowly into the drugstore
which had struck George as a possible source of stimulant for himself.

"Please let me have a few drops of aromatic spirits of ammonia in a glass of water," she said,
with the utmost composure.

"Yes, ma'am!" said the impressionable clerk, who had been looking at her through the display
window as she stood on the corner.

But a moment later, as he turned from the shelves of glass jars against the wall, with the
potion she had asked for in his hand, he uttered an exclamation: "For goshes' sake, Miss!"
And, describing this adventure to his fellow-boarders, that evening, "Sagged pretty near to
the counter, she was," he said. "If I hadn't been a bright, quick, ready-for-anything young
fella she'd 'a' flummixed plum! I was watchin' her out the window--talkin' to some young s'iety
fella, and she was all right then. She was all right when she come in the store, too. Yes,
sir; the prettiest girl that ever walked in our place and took one good look at me. I reckon
it must be the truth what some you town wags say about my face!"

Chapter XXVIII

At that hour the heroine of the susceptible clerk's romance was engaged in brightening the
rosy little coal fire under the white mantelpiece in her pretty white-and-blue boudoir. Four
photographs all framed in decorous plain silver went to the anthracite's fierce destruction--frames
and all--and three packets of letters and notes in a charming Florentine treasure-box of painted
wood; nor was the box, any more than the silver frames, spared this rousing finish. Thrown
heartily upon live coal, the fine wood sparkled forth in stars, then burst into an alarming
blaze which scorched the white mantelpiece, but Lucy stood and looked on without moving.

It was not Eugene who told her what had happened at Isabel's door. When she got home, she found
Fanny Minafer waiting for her--a secret excursion of Fanny's for the purpose, presumably, of
"letting out" again; because that was what she did. She told Lucy everything (except her own
lamentable part in the production of the recent miseries) and concluded with a tribute to George:
"The worst of it is, he thinks he's been such a hero, and Isabel does, too, and that makes
him more than twice as awful. It's been the same all his life: everything he did was noble
and perfect. He had a domineering nature to begin with, and she let it go on, and fostered
it till it absolutely ruled her. I never saw a plainer case of a person's fault making them
pay for having it! She goes about, overseeing the packing and praising George and pretending
to be perfectly cheerful about what he's making her do and about the dreadful things he's done.
She pretends he did such a fine thing--so manly and protective--going to Mrs. Johnson. And
so heroic--doing what his 'principles' made him--even though he knew what it would cost him
with you! And all the while it's almost killing her--what he said to your father! She's always
been lofty enough, so to speak, and had the greatest idea of the Ambersons being superior to
the rest of the world, and all that, but rudeness, or anything like a 'scene,' or any bad manners--they
always just made her sick! But she could never see what George's manners were--oh, it's been
a terrible adulation!... It's going to be a task for me, living in that big house, all alone:
you must come and see me--I mean after they've gone, of course. I'll go crazy if I don't see
something of people. I'm sure you'll come as often as you can. I know you too well to think
you'll be sensitive about coming there, or being reminded of George. Thank heaven you're too
well-balanced," Miss Fanny concluded, with a profound fervour, "you're too well-balanced to
let anything affect you deeply about that--that monkey!"

The four photographs and the painted Florentine box went to their cremation within the same
hour that Miss Fanny spoke; and a little later Lucy called her father in, as he passed her
door, and pointed to the blackened area on the underside of the mantelpiece, and to the burnt
heap upon the coal, where some metallic shapes still retained outline. She flung her arms about
his neck in passionate sympathy, telling him that she knew what had happened to him; and presently
he began to comfort her and managed an embarrassed laugh.

"Well, well--" he said. "I was too old for such foolishness to be getting into my head, anyhow."

"No, no!" she sobbed. "And if you knew how I despise myself for--for ever having thought one
instant about--oh, Miss Fanny called him the right name: that monkey! He is!"

"There, I think I agree with you," Eugene said grimly, and in his eyes there was a steady light
of anger that was to last. "Yes, I think I agree with you about that!"

"There's only one thing to do with such a person," she said vehemently. "That's to put him
out of our thoughts forever--forever!"

And yet, the next day, at six o'clock, which was the hour, Fanny had told her, when George
and his mother were to leave upon their long journey, Lucy touched that scorched place on her
mantel with her hand just as the little clock above it struck. Then, after this odd, unconscious
gesture, she went to a window and stood between the curtains, looking out into the cold November
dusk; and in spite of every reasoning and reasonable power within her, a pain of loneliness
struck through her heart. The dim street below her window, the dark houses across the way,
the vague air itself--all looked empty, and cold and (most of all) uninteresting. Something
more sombre than November dusk took the colour from them and gave them that air of desertion.

The light of her fire, flickering up behind her showed suddenly a flying group of tiny snowflakes
nearing the window-pane; and for an instant she felt the sensation of being dragged through
a snows drift under a broken cutter, with a boy's arms about her--an arrogant, handsome, too-conquering
boy, who nevertheless did his best to get hurt himself, keeping her from any possible harm.

She shook the picture out of her eyes indignantly, then came and sat before her fire, and looked
long and long at the blackened mantelpiece. She did not have the mantelpiece repainted--and,
since she did not, might as well have kept his photographs. One forgets what made the scar
upon his hand but not what made the scar upon his wall.

She played no marche funebre upon her piano, even though Chopin's romantic lamentation was
then at the top of nine-tenths of the music-racks in the country, American youth having recently
discovered the distinguished congeniality between itself and this deathless bit of deathly
gloom. She did not even play "Robin Adair"; she played "Bedelia" and all the new cake-walks,
for she was her father's housekeeper, and rightly looked upon the office as being the same
as that of his heart-keeper. Therefore it was her affair to keep both house and heart in what
state of cheerfulness might be contrived. She made him "go out" more than ever; made him take
her to all the gayeties of that winter, declining to go herself unless he took her, and, though
Eugene danced no more, and quoted Shakespeare to prove all lightfoot caperings beneath the
dignity of his age, she broke his resolution for him at the New Year's Eve "Assembly" and half
coaxed, half dragged him forth upon the floor, and made him dance the New Year in with her. One day Yasuna been in the woods and only came back late in the evening. When he before his Home
arrived, he did one at the door, his parents and his wife want to see the talked vividly, and
he stepped closer, she greeted and asked why they were not in the house, but circumstances at
the door.

His father drove him to anger but what does that mean that he did
all these years not long worried about his bride had and now living
with another woman.

Yasuna did not know what to say to such a speech and was even more surprising, and his bride, he made
the same allegations. He opened the door of the house a short hand and invited all to enter.
"We can continue in there talking about what your charges should mean, here on the street is
not the place to "he said, and wanted to go forward! bounced back, however, because his wife
was sitting in the room and sewed! - Out here, I also had his wife, but claimed that it was
not his wife but only his fiancee! Who was the correct one, who the wrong Kuzunoha? - He then
opened the door very quietly, went back and told his parents: "Wait
here a moment, I'll be right back!

"

Then he entered his house, greeted his wife and told her: "Your parents have arrived, brace yourself
to receive it! In an hour we are back here! "

After the woman agreed to consider that you get everything in the best way Yasuna went to the in-laws
back and asked him to take a walk, after an hour he would be in Home run.

On the way he told the parents that the girls actually located in them Kuzunoha her daughter,
was his bride and that this heartbroken about the fact that in the
Yasuna long time nothing was heard from again, her parents have arranged
for the long journey to do with it.

Now arrived, they would have to see to her great sorrow, that even
another woman in the house was!

Yasuna told his adventure and his happy marriage.

In this conversation, the hour had passed, all came back and went into the house, but it was to
see no woman, only the child was lying on his bed and wept, cheered but the Kuzunoha, which took
the boy in his arms and joked with him. Then told the boy its a strange dream he had and asked
what he meant. He told the Kuzunoha: "Before, when I was sleeping, you said to me that you
are enchanted not human, but a Fox mayest.

The father had once saved the life of you and so you had human Taken shape and Seist him in
the form of his bride appeared to thank him. Now But is the real bride came and then you must
part.

I should notify the father and tell me to become and remain well-behaved
and well.

    A stupid dream, is not it! "
    

    All looked in amazement, but now the mystery was resolved. The real
    Kuzunoha remained now in the home as a lawful wife, and brought the
little Yasunas Dokyo a clever Man who was wise and brave.

    

  

Of the white fox you never heard from again.

[Note 1: Shimoda = place on the Izu Peninsula, near Yokohama.]

[Note 2: = Kumamoto city and province in the south of Japan near in Nagasaki.]

[Note 3: Dokyo = courage.]

[Decoration]

Urashima Taro [1].

lived in a fishing village near present-day Yokohama many, many years ago a young Fisherman
named Urashima Taro.

One evening as he returned from fishing and quite satisfied and was in good spirits because
he had made good booty, he saw a crowd on the beach boys a small turtle was caught and fixed
to the front at one of its legs Cord in a circle waving and tormented [2]. Urashima, who liked
the animals and any Cruelty to innocent animals detested felt again now, sorry for the poor
animals and went to the children.

By giving his voice a vigorous tone, he scolded the children.

"What is this Malice, "he exclaimed indignantly," this innocent and helpless animal to torment so! Do
you not know that God in heaven those punished naughty children who
mistreat the poor animals?

Show me once, To whom is this turtle? "

"This animal belongs to no one," said the eldest of the boys and added even more outrageous added:
"We can do what we want, and if we have a pleasure in the animal to kill, so this is our free
will and no one else goes to something! "

Urashima saw that he was not the naughty boy should come with moral lessons, for in Such a hard
heart, words have no influence; so he changed his tactics and said
now with possible mild voice now, "Well, you just do not offend, that
was not meant so bad; but enjoy this most delightful turtle me and
I would like to own.

Ye you engage in a trade with me?

How about if you give me the animal would you sell? For their money you can buy something and
make you more joy than to be this animal spun around in circles here!

"

The children were delighted to trade quickly, leaving Urashima against some silver coins the
turtle.

Urashima took her in hand, walked to the water and put the animal into the sea, saying:

"Poor little creatures, not to deprive you of freedom, but you play
the freedom I bought you and now swim out and be more careful in future,
lest you again fall into evil hands boys!

"He stood there for a while and looked happy, smiling the fast in the water then swimming turtle
after, until he no longer saw; then he took his fishing gear and his fish and went cheerfully
to his tent.

The next morning he went as usual to his craft. When he and his canoe on the Sea and had thrown his
net, he heard suddenly a delicate little voice:

"Urashima Sama!"

[3]

Astonished, he looked around, but could not discover where the voice was heard and who his Name
called. As it rang again:

"Urashima Sama!"

Now he realized that the voice came from the water and he leaned over
the edge of his Boat and saw the little turtle that he the day before
from the hands of the boys was freed.

At first he was frightened, but he took heart and asked: "Was it
you who called me?"

"Certainly," answered the little creature. "I came to you my gratitude for your yesterday noble
deed to say.

And because you have given me my freedom, I want to tell you something right Nice show! Did
you like, follow me! "

Urashima thought: What it may well be that I could show this innocuous animal? But nothing special.
But that does not matter, it will prove to be grateful to me and so will I told him not to
spoil the joy.

After he had been so careful for a while, asked precaution, but he:

"It does not take too long? I will follow you, but I did not miss too much time. Where should
it go? "

"Not at all far from here. I intend only to you the palace of our marine Queen Otohime and to lead
you there to show miracles! "

"That's impossible," said Urashima, "because I can not swim as fast and not as good as you dive and
what is the main thing after all, I can in the water not breathe and therefore do not accompany
you to the bottom! "

"Make yourself so do not worry, Urashima," replied the turtle, "rises to my And the further back you
will see! "

"But my boat - said," Urashima alarmingly -.

"It can be found here again, I lead you back," interrupted the animal.

"But you're so small, you can not carry me," said Urashima still questionable.

As it roared in the water, the turtle stretched and stretched and looked astonished Urashima,
as more and more enlarged, until it had the same size of the boat, then asked she laughed

"Well?" - Am I too weak for you, "Since all concerns vanished Urashima, hastily rose? he made
his boat after he had the same precaution anchored and took the Back of the animal room.

"Hold on tight right and fear not" After some time, called the Turtle!: "Now shut his eyes tight
and do not open it till I tell you. Also consider breath for a while, it does not last long! "

Urashima did as he was told and then he felt the animal in the water sank and the water roared and
roared around his ears, anxious, he clung with both hands at the sign his strange horse riding,
but mindful of the warning, he kept his eyes closed and held his breath.

Even he thought it would go with him to the end, because the cry was heard: "Now!"

As he opened his eyes and looked at the bottom of the sea, the fine sand of nothing Beads was.
Shimmering in the distance he saw a huge building in dazzling splendor, on that the turtle
with her rider zuschwamm. At last they came and stood in front of a great gates, which was
decorated with pure gold with precious stones. Two large eerie sea dragon lay by the gate and stared
Urashima with terrible rolling eyes, so that it completely was anxious. When the dragon but saw
the turtle left their menacing look and after they tried to make friendly faces.

"Now climb off and wait here," said the turtle, and then went after Urashima has gone and had
sat on the floor, through the gate.

Urashima looked around then and was very surprised that he, though he was on the bottom of the sea
was and the sea water around him, but quite dry and was able to breathe without discomfort,
even the air he was even more pure and spicy ago, when the top of the earth.

It was not long since returned to the turtle, it was followed by a large number Fish of all sizes,
shapes and colors, as it brings the ocean, all wore only a very bright fabric in blue, like a dress,
and had silver premium.

They surrounded Urashima, who had stood up and saluted him respectfully by tilting her head.

Then approached two larger fish, which also wore a blue dress with gold but Premiums, and just such
a dress and put something without talking, Urashima the fisherman clothes went out and brought
the blue-clad attire.

Urashima left everything without will be done with it, he told himself, now I am here and alone
can not proceed. Bad it will certainly not happen to me, for who you with a Robe of honor, wearing the one
will not swallow well.

After he also wonderful Sammetpantoffel were put on the feet, there
came a wonderful beautiful maid, took him by the hand and led him
through the gate, while the fish as an honorary escort followed at
a respectful distance in perfect order.

After they had walked through the door, they came to a marble staircase, the seven stages and
had flickered at a gate of polished mahogany, in which many emeralds,
ended.

Once there, the maid opened the door and let Urashima occur, which is now in a large hall was,
the indescribable beauty his eyes almost blinded. Twenty Columns of the purest crystal wore
formed from coral ceiling of the room, from which a Vast amount of precious lamps hung down, in
which burned fragrant oils. The walls were all marble and contributed
to a variety of jewelry gemstones and rubies. In the middle the hall
was a diamond throne, on which Otohime, the sea queen sat, beautiful
like the dawn, which distributes the pale Queen of Night. The throne
was surrounded by infinite Amount of dignitaries and palace officials,
all clad in costly garments. The splendor was not the usual beauty
and wonder of such young fisherman so dazzling that He only reluctantly
and half involuntarily, slowly put one foot before the other and thus
the Throne was near, where he wanted to bow down reverently and humbly.
But the queen, had observed that his surprise and his hesitation with
a mild, pleasant smile, rose quickly, Urashima by the hand and prevented
his falling down. With a voice that resembled the sound of a silver
bell, sweet and pure, she said to him:

"Let me welcome. I have heard
you yesterday in a selfless way one of my favorite Servants of the
lives you saved. It was my sincere wish to you this noble deed to
retaliate and prove to you my gratitude. That is why I have invited
you to me and I was glad that you were so fearless of danger and not
eight test, the way to do here. Who is fearless, is also usually true!
The young fisherman knew not how it happened and he was so embarrassed
and self-conscious that he does not respond to a word could, he made
only a silent, demure bow.

At a sign from the Queen he was now brought
silk cushion on which he settle had to be put to an ivory table in
front of him on the red on a Coating plate tasty food of various kinds
were that it was all unknown. He was no longer necessary, but said
the food and drink to brave. It was for him in the true sense of the
word for a divine meal, he had in his whole life never seen such things,
let alone ever tasted.

When he had finished his meal, he asked the
Queen to look at the palace; they led him from room to room, from
room to room through any premises, with the lavish Splendor were equipped
and had every possible convenience only.

But the most wonderful was
the garden, the four large beds containing the four seasons corresponded.

One
bed, spring, contained numerous plum and cherry trees all over strewn
with flowers were sealed and were standing on a lush dark green grass.
On the branches were numerous nightingales, who had their sweet romance
and a melodic sound infinite set Larks had built their nests in the
sea of ​​flowers.

To the south there was the bed of the summer: Here
stood pear and Aepfelbäume whose Branches under the weight of the
finest fruits to near the ground bent. Grilling and cicadas filled
the air with their monotonous and deafening clamor. The great heat,
which prevailed in this part was tempered by a gentle, cooling breeze. Well, you're pretty refreshingly out of the smoke up here."

"Yes, for a while," Lucy laughed. "Until it comes and we have to move out farther."

"No, you'll stay here," he assured her. "It will be somebody else who'll move out farther."

He continued to talk of the house after Eugene arrived, and gave them no account of his journey
until they had retired from the dinner table to Eugene's library, a gray and shadowy room,
where their coffee was brought. Then, equipped with a cigar, which seemed to occupy his attention,
Amberson spoke in a casual tone of his sister and her son.

"I found Isabel as well as usual," he said, "only I'm afraid 'as usual' isn't particularly
well. Sydney and Amelia had been up to Paris in the spring, but she hadn't seen them. Somebody
told her they were there, it seems. They'd left Florence and were living in Rome; Amelia's
become a Catholic and is said to give great sums to charity and to go about with the gentry
in consequence, but Sydney's ailing and lives in a wheel-chair most of the time. It struck
me Isabel ought to be doing the same thing."

He paused, bestowing minute care upon the removal of the little band from his cigar; and as
he seemed to have concluded his narrative, Eugene spoke out of the shadow beyond a heavily
shaded lamp: "What do you mean by that?" he asked quietly.

"Oh, she's cheerful enough," said Amberson, still not looking at either his young hostess or
her father. "At least," he added, "she manages to seem so. I'm afraid she hasn't been really
well for several years. She isn't stout you know--she hasn't changed in looks much--and she
seems rather alarmingly short of breath for a slender person. Father's been that way for years,
of course; but never nearly so much as Isabel is now. Of course she makes nothing of it, but
it seemed rather serious to me when I noticed she had to stop and rest twice to get up the
one short flight of stairs in their two-floor apartment. I told her I thought she ought to
make George let her come home."

"Let her?" Eugene repeated, in a low voice. "Does she want to?"

"She doesn't urge it. George seems to like the life there-in his grand, gloomy, and peculiar
way; and of course she'll never change about being proud of him and all that--he's quite a
swell. But in spite of anything she said, rather than because, I know she does indeed want
to come. She'd like to be with father, of course; and I think she's--well, she intimated one
day that she feared it might even happen that she wouldn't get to see him again. At the time
I thought she referred to his age and feebleness, but on the boat, coming home, I remembered
the little look of wistfulness, yet of resignation, with which she said it, and it struck me
all at once that I'd been mistaken: I saw she was really thinking of her own state of health."

"I see," Eugene said, his voice even lower than it had been before. "And you say he won't 'let'
her come home?"

Amberson laughed, but still continued to be interested in his cigar. "Oh, I don't think he
uses force! He's very gentle with her. I doubt if the subject is mentioned between them, and
yet--and yet, knowing my interesting nephew as you do, wouldn't you think that was about the
way to put it?"

"Knowing him as I do-yes," said Eugene slowly. "Yes, I should think that was about the way
to put it."

A murmur out of the shadows beyond him--a faint sound, musical and feminine, yet expressive
of a notable intensity--seemed to indicate that Lucy was of the same opinion.

Chapter XXIX

"Let her" was correct; but the time came--and it came in the spring of the next year when it
was no longer a question of George's letting his mother come home. He had to bring her, and
to bring her quickly if she was to see her father again; and Amberson had been right: her danger
of never seeing him again lay not in the Major's feebleness of heart but in her own. As it
was, George telegraphed his uncle to have a wheeled chair at the station, for the journey had
been disasterous, and to this hybrid vehicle, placed close to the platform, her son carried
her in his arms when she arrived. She was unable to speak, but patted her brother's and Fanny's
hands and looked "very sweet," Fanny found the desperate courage to tell her. She was lifted
from the chair into a carriage, and seemed a little stronger as they drove home; for once she
took her hand from George's, and waved it feebly toward the carriage window.

"Changed," she whispered. "So changed."

"You mean the town," Amberson said. "You mean the old place is changed, don't you, dear?"

She smiled and moved her lips: "Yes."

"It'll change to a happier place, old dear," he said, "now that you're back in it, and going
to get well again."

But she only looked at him wistfully, her eyes a little frightened.

When the carriage stopped, her son carried her into the house, and up the stairs to her own
room, where a nurse was waiting; and he came out a moment later, as the doctor went in. At
the end of the hall a stricken group was clustered: Amberson, and Fanny, and the Major. George,
deathly pale and speechless, took his grandfather's hand, but the old gentleman did not seem
to notice his action.

"When are they going to let me see my daughter?" he asked querulously. "They told me to keep
out of the way while they carried her in, because it might upset her. I wish they'd let me
go in and speak to my daughter. I think she wants to see me."

He was right--presently the doctor came out and beckoned to him; and the Major shuffled forward,
leaning on a shaking cane; his figure, after all its Years of proud soldierliness, had grown
stooping at last, and his untrimmed white hair straggled over the back of his collar. He looked
old--old and divested of the world--as he crept toward his daughter's room. Her voice was stronger,
for the waiting group heard a low cry of tenderness and welcome as the old man reached the
open doorway. Then the door was closed.

Fanny touched her nephew's arm. "George, you must need something to eat--I know she'd want
you to. I've had things ready: I knew she'd want me to. You'd better go down to the dining
room: there's plenty on the table, waiting for you. She'd want you to eat something."

He turned a ghastly face to her, it was so panic-stricken. "I don't want anything to eat!"
he said savagely. And he began to pace the floor, taking care not to go near Isabel's door,
and that his footsteps were muffled by the long, thick hall rug. After a while he went to where
Amberson, with folded arms and bowed head, had seated himself near the front window. "Uncle
George," he said hoarsely. "I didn't--"

"Well?"

"Oh, my God, I didn't think this thing the matter with her could ever be serious! I--" He gasped.
"When that doctor I had meet us at the boat--" He could not go on.

Amberson only nodded his head, and did not otherwise change his attitude.

Isabel lived through the night. At eleven O'clock Fanny came timidly to George in his room.
"Eugene is here," she whispered. "He's downstairs. He wants--" She gulped. "He wants to know
if he can't see her. I didn't know what to say. I said I'd see. I didn't know--the doctor said--"

"The doctor said we 'must keep her peaceful,'" George said sharply. "Do you think that man's
coming would be very soothing? My God! if it hadn't been for him this mightn't have happened:
we could have gone on living here quietly, and--why, it would be like taking a stranger into
her room! She hasn't even spoken of him more than twice in all the time we've been away. Doesn't
he know how sick she is? You tell him the doctor said she had to be quiet and peaceful. That's
what he did say, isn't it?"

Fanny acquiesced tearfully. "I'll tell him. I'll tell him the doctor said she was to be kept
very quiet. I--I didn't know--" And she pottered out.

An hour later the nurse appeared in George's doorway; she came noiselessly, and his back was
toward her; but he jumped as if he had been shot, and his jaw fell, he so feared what she was
going to say.

"She wants to see you."

The terrified mouth shut with a click; and he nodded and followed her; but she remained outside
his mother's room while he went in.

Isabel's eyes were closed, and she did not open them or move her head, but she smiled and edged
her hand toward him as he sat on a stool beside the bed. He took that slender, cold hand, and
put it to his cheek.

"Darling, did you--get something to eat?" She could only whisper, slowly and with difficulty.
It was as if Isabel herself were far away, and only able to signal what she wanted to say.

"Yes, mother."

"All you--needed?"

"Yes, mother."

She did not speak again for a time; then, "Are you sure you didn't--didn't catch cold coming home?"

"I'm all right, mother."

"That's good. It's sweet--it's sweet--"

"What is, mother darling?"

"To feel--my hand on your cheek. I--I can feel it."

But this frightened him horribly--that she seemed so glad she could feel it, like a child proud
of some miraculous seeming thing accomplished. It frightened him so that he could not speak,
and he feared that she would know how he trembled; but she was unaware, and again was silent.
Finally she spoke again:

"I wonder if--if Eugene and Lucy know that we've come--home."

"I'm sure they do."

"Has he--asked about me?"

"Yes, he was here."

"Has he--gone?"

"Yes, mother."

She sighed faintly. "I'd like--"

"What, mother?"

"I'd like to have--seen him." It was just audible, this little regretful murmur. Several minutes
passed before there was another. "Just--just once," she whispered, and then was still.

She seemed to have fallen asleep, and George moved to go, but a faint pressure upon his fingers
detained him, and he remained, with her hand still pressed against his cheek. After a while
he made sure she was asleep, and moved again, to let the nurse come in, and this time there
was no pressure of the fingers to keep him. She was not asleep, but thinking that if he went
he might get some rest, and be better prepared for what she knew was coming, she commanded
those longing fingers of hers--and let him go.

He found the doctor standing with the nurse in the hall; and, telling them that his mother
was drowsing now, George went back to his own room, where he was startled to find his grandfather
lying on the bed, and his uncle leaning against the wall. They had gone home two hours before,
and he did not know they had returned.

"The doctor thought we'd better come over," Amberson said, then was silent, and George, shaking
violently, sat down on the edge of the bed. His shaking continued, and from time to time he
wiped heavy sweat from his forehead.

The hours passed, and sometimes the old man upon the bed would snore a little, stop suddenly,
and move as if to rise, but George Amberson would set a hand upon his shoulder, and murmur
a reassuring word or two. Now and then, either uncle or nephew would tiptoe into the hall and
look toward Isabel's room, then come tiptoeing back, the other watching him haggardly.

Once George gasped defiantly: "That doctor in New York said she might get better! Don't you
know he did? Don't you know he said she might?"

Amberson made no answer.

Dawn had been murking through the smoky windows, growing stronger for half an hour, when both
men started violently at a sound in the hall; and the Major sat up on the bed, unchecked. It
was the voice of the nurse speaking to Fanny Minafer, and the next moment, Fanny appeared in
the doorway, making contorted efforts to speak.

Amberson said weakly: "Does she want us--to come in?"

But Fanny found her voice, and uttered a long, loud cry. She threw her arms about George, and
sobbed in an agony of loss and compassion:

"She loved you!" she wailed. "She loved you! She loved you! Oh, how she did love you!"

Isabel had just left them.

Chapter XXX

Major Amberson remained dry-eyed through the time that followed: he knew that this separation
from his daughter would be short, that the separation which had preceded it was the long one.
He worked at his ledgers no more under his old gas drop-light, but would sit all evening staring
into the fire, in his bedroom, and not speaking unless someone asked him a question. He seemed
almost unaware of what went on around him, and those who were with him thought him dazed by
Isabel's death, guessing that he was lost in reminiscences and vague dreams. "Probably his
mind is full of pictures of his youth, or the Civil War, and the days when he and mother were
young married people and all of us children were jolly little things--and the city was a small
town with one cobbled street and the others just dirt roads with board sidewalks." This was
George Amberson's conjecture, and the others agreed; but they were mistaken. The Major was
engaged in the profoundest thinking of his life. No business plans which had ever absorbed
him could compare in momentousness with the plans that absorbed him now, for he had to plan
how to enter the unknown country where he was not even sure of being recognized as an Amberson--not
sure of anything, except that Isabel would help him if she could. His absorption produced the
outward effect of reverie, but of course it was not. The Major was occupied with the first
really important matter that had taken his attention since he came home invalided, after the
Gettysburg campaign, and went into business; and he realized that everything which had worried
him or delighted him during this lifetime between then and to-day--all his buying and building
and trading and banking--that it all was trifling and waste beside what concerned him now.

He seldom went out of his room, and often left untouched the meals they brought to him there;
and this neglect caused them to shake their heads mournfully, again mistaking for dazedness
the profound concentration of his mind. Meanwhile, the life of the little bereft group still
forlornly centering upon him began to pick up again, as life will, and to emerge from its own
period of dazedness. It was not Isabel's father but her son who was really dazed.

A month after her death he walked abruptly into Fanny's room, one night, and found her at her
desk, eagerly adding columns of figures with which she had covered several sheets of paper.
This mathematical computation was concerned with her future income to be produced by the electric
headlight, now just placed on the general market; but Fanny was ashamed to be discovered doing
anything except mourning, and hastily pushed the sheets aside, even as she looked over her
shoulder to greet her hollow-eyed visitor.

"George! You startled me."

"I beg your pardon for not knocking," he said huskily. "I didn't think."

She turned in her chair and looked at him solicitously. "Sit down, George, won't you?"

"No. I just wanted--"

"I could hear you walking up and down in your room," said Fanny. "You were doing it ever since
dinner, and it seems to me you're at it almost every evening. I don't believe it's good for
you--and I know it would worry your mother terribly if she--" Fanny hesitated.

"See here," George said, breathing fast, "I want to tell you once more that what I did was
right. How could I have done anything else but what I did do?"

"About what, George?"

"About everything!" he exclaimed; and he became vehement. "I did the right thing, I tell you!
In heaven's name, I'd like to know what else there was for anybody in my position to do! It
would have been a dreadful thing for me to just let matters go on and not interfere--it would
have been terrible! What else on earth was there for me to do? I had to stop that talk, didn't
I? Could a son do less than I did? Didn't it cost me something to do it? Lucy and I'd had a
quarrel, but that would have come round in time--and it meant the end forever when I turned
her father back from our door. I knew what it meant, yet I went ahead and did it because knew
it had to be done if the talk was to be stopped. I took mother away for the same reason. I
knew that would help to stop it. And she was happy over there--she was perfectly happy. I tell
you, I think she had a happy life, and that's my only consolation. She didn't live to be old;
she was still beautiful and young looking, and I feel she'd rather have gone before she got
old. She'd had a good husband, and all the comfort and luxury that anybody could have--and
how could it be called anything but a happy life? She was always cheerful, and when I think
of her I can always see her laughing--I can always hear that pretty laugh of hers. When I can
keep my mind off of the trip home, and that last night, I always think of her gay and laughing.
So how on earth could she have had anything but a happy life? People that aren't happy don't
look cheerful all the time, do they? They look unhappy if they are unhappy; that's how they
look! See here"--he faced her challengingly--"do you deny that I did the right thing?"

"Oh, I don't pretend to judge," Fanny said soothingly, for his voice and gesture both partook
of wildness. "I know you think you did, George."

"Think I did!" he echoed violently. "My God in heaven!" And he began to walk up and down the
floor. "What else was there to do? What, choice did I have? Was there any other way of stopping
the talk?" He stopped, close in front of her, gesticulating, his voice harsh and loud: "Don't
you hear me? I'm asking you: Was there any other way on earth of protecting her from the talk?"

Miss Fanny looked away. "It died down before long, I think," she said nervously.

"That shows I was right, doesn't it?" he cried. "If I hadn't acted as I did, that slanderous
old Johnson woman would have kept on with her slanders--she'd still be--"

"No," Fanny interrupted. "She's dead. She dropped dead with apoplexy one day about six weeks
after you left. I didn't mention it in my letters because I didn't want--I thought--"

"Well, the other people would have kept on, then. They'd have--"

"I don't know," said Fanny, still averting her troubled eyes. "Things are so changed here,
George. The other people you speak of--one hardly knows what's become of them. Of course not
a great many were doing the talking, and they--well, some of them are dead, and some might
as well be--you never see them any more--and the rest, whoever they were, are probably so mixed
in with the crowds of new people that seem never even to have heard of us--and I'm sure we
certainly never heard of them--and people seem to forget things so soon--they seem to forget
anything. You can't imagine how things have changed here!"

George gulped painfully before he could speak. "You--you mean to sit there and tell me that
if I'd just let things go on--Oh!" He swung away, walking the floor again. "I tell you I did
the only right thing! If you don't think so, why in the name of heaven can't you say what else
I should have done? It's easy enough to criticize, but the person who criticizes a man ought
at least to tell him what else he should have done! You think I was wrong!"

"I'm not saying so," she said.

"You did at the time!" he cried. "You said enough then, I think! Well, what have you to say
now, if you're so sure I was wrong?"

"Nothing, George."

"It's only because you're afraid to!" he said, and he went on with a sudden bitter divination:
"You're reproaching yourself with what you had to do with all that; and you're trying to make
up for it by doing and saying what you think mother would want you to, and you think I couldn't
stand it if I got to thinking I might have done differently. Oh, I know! That's exactly what's
in your mind: you do think I was wrong! So does Uncle George. I challenged him about it the
other day, and he answered just as you're answering--evaded, and tried to be gentler. I don't
care to be handled with gloves! I tell you I was right, and I don't need any coddling by people
that think I wasn't! And I suppose you believe I was wrong not to let Morgan see her that last
night when he came here, and she--she was dying. If you do, why in the name of God did you
come and ask me? You could have taken him in! She did want to see him. She--"

Miss Fanny looked startled. "You think--"

"She told me so!" And the tortured young man choked. "She said--'just once.' She said 'I'd
like to have seen him--just once!' She meant--to tell him good-bye! That's what she meant!
And you put this on me, too; you put this responsibility on me! But I tell you, and I told
Uncle George, that the responsibility isn't all mine! If you were so sure I was wrong all the
time--when I took her away, and when I turned Morgan out--if you were so sure, what did you
let me do it for? You and Uncle George were grown people, both of you, weren't you? You were
older than I, and if you were so sure you were wiser than I, why did you just stand around
with your hands hanging down, and let me go ahead? You could have stopped it if it was wrong,
couldn't you?"

Fanny shook her head. "No, George," she said slowly. "Nobody could have stopped you. You were
too strong, and--"

"And what?" he demanded loudly.

"And she loved you--too well."

George stared at her hard, then his lower lip began to move convulsively, and he set his teeth
upon it but could not check its frantic twitching.

He ran out of the room.

She sat still, listening. He had plunged into his mother's room, but no sound came to Fanny's
ears after the sharp closing of the door; and presently she rose and stepped out into the hall--but
could hear nothing. The heavy black walnut door of Isabel's room, as Fanny's troubled eyes
remained fixed upon it, seemed to become darker and vaguer; the polished wood took the distant
ceiling light, at the end of the hall, in dim reflections which became mysterious; and to Fanny's
disturbed mind the single sharp point of light on the bronze door-knob was like a continuous
sharp cry in the stillness of night. What interview was sealed away from human eye and ear
within the lonely darkness on the other side of that door--in that darkness where Isabel's
own special chairs were, and her own special books, and the two great walnut wardrobes filled
with her dresses and wraps? What tragic argument might be there vainly striving to confute
the gentle dead? "In God's name, what else could I have done?" For his mother's immutable silence
was surely answering him as Isabel in life would never have answered him, and he was beginning
to understand how eloquent the dead can be. They cannot stop their eloquence, no matter how
they have loved the living: they cannot choose. And so, no matter in what agony George should
cry out, "What else could I have done?" and to the end of his life no matter how often he made
that wild appeal, Isabel was doomed to answer him with the wistful, faint murmur:

"I'd like to have-seen him. Just--just once."

A cheerful darkey went by the house, loudly and tunelessly whistling some broken thoughts upon
women, fried food and gin; then a group of high school boys, returning homeward after important
initiations, were heard skylarking along the sidewalk, rattling sticks on the fences, squawking
hoarsely, and even attempting to sing in the shocking new voices of uncompleted adolescence.
For no reason, and just as a poultry yard falls into causeless agitation, they stopped in front
of the house, and for half an hour produced the effect of a noisy multitude in full riot.

To the woman standing upstairs in the hall, this was almost unbearable; and she felt that she
would have to go down and call to them to stop; but she was too timid, and after a time went
back to her room, and sat at her desk again. She left the door open, and frequently glanced
out into the hall, but gradually became once more absorbed in the figures which represented
her prospective income from her great plunge in electric lights for automobiles. She did not
hear George return to his own room.

A superstitious person might have thought it unfortunate that her partner in this speculative
industry (as in Wilbur's disastrous rolling-mills) was that charming but too haphazardous man
of the world, George Amberson. He was one of those optimists who believe that if you put money
into a great many enterprises one of them is sure to turn out a fortune, and therefore, in
order to find the lucky one, it is only necessary to go into a large enough number of them.
Altogether gallant in spirit, and beautifully game under catastrophe, he had gone into a great
many, and the unanimity of their "bad luck," as he called it, gave him one claim to be a distinguished
person, if he had no other. In business he was ill fated with a consistency which made him,
in that alone, a remarkable man; and he declared, with some earnestness, that there was no
accounting for it except by the fact that there had been so much good luck in his family before
he was born that something had to balance it.

"You ought to have thought of my record and stayed out," he told Fanny, one day the next spring,
when the affairs of the headlight company had begun to look discouraging. "I feel the old familiar
sinking that's attended all my previous efforts to prove myself a business genius. I think
it must be something like the feeling an aeronaut has when his balloon bursts, and, looking
down, he sees below him the old home farm where he used to live--I mean the feeling he'd have
just before he flattened out in that same old clay barnyard. Things do look bleak, and I'm
only glad you didn't go into this confounded thing to the extent I did."

Miss Fanny grew pink. "But it must go right!" she protested. "We saw with our own eyes how
perfectly it worked in the shop. The light was so bright no one could face it, and so there
can't be any reason for it not to work. It simply--"

"Oh, you're right about that," Amberson said. "It certainly was a perfect thing--in the shop!
The only thing we didn't know was how fast an automobile had to go to keep the light going.
It appears that this was a matter of some importance."

"Well, how fast does one have to--"

"To keep the light from going entirely out," he informed her with elaborate deliberation, "it
is computed by those enthusiasts who have bought our product--and subsequently returned it
to us and got their money back--they compute that a motor car must maintain a speed of twenty-five
miles an hour, or else there won't be any light at all. To make the illumination bright enough
to be noticed by an approaching automobile, they state the speed must be more than thirty miles
an hour. At thirty-five, objects in the path of the light begin to become visible; at forty
they are revealed distinctly; and at fifty and above we have a real headlight. Unfortunately
many people don't care to drive that fast at all times after dusk, especially in the traffic,
or where policemen are likely to become objectionable."

"But think of that test on the road when we--"

"That test was lovely," he admitted. "The inventor made us happy with his oratory, and you
and Frank Bronson and I went whirling through the night at a speed that thrilled us. It was
an intoxicating sensation: we were intoxicated by the lights, the lights and the music. We
must never forget that drive, with the cool wind kissing our cheeks and the road lit up for
miles ahead. We must never forget it and we never shall. It cost--"

"But something's got to be done."

"It has, indeed! My something would seem to be leaving my watch at my uncle's. Luckily, you--"

The pink of Fanny's cheeks became deeper. "But isn't that man going to do anything to remedy
it? can't he try to--"

"He can try," said Amberson. "He is trying, in fact. I've sat in the shop watching him try
for several beautiful afternoons, while outside the windows all Nature was fragrant with spring
and smoke. He hums ragtime to himself as he tries, and I think his mind is wandering to something
else less tedious--to some new invention in which he'd take more interest."

"But you mustn't let him," she cried. "You must make him keep on trying!"

"Oh, yes. He understands that's what I sit there for. I'll keep sitting!"

However, in spite of the time he spent sitting in the shop, worrying the inventor of the fractious
light, Amberson found opportunity to worry himself about another matter of business. This was
the settlement of Isabel's estate.

"It's curious about the deed to her house," he said to his nephew. "You're absolutely sure
it wasn't among her papers?"

"Mother didn't have any papers," George told him. "None at all. All she ever had to do with
business was to deposit the cheques grandfather gave her and then write her own cheques against
them."

"The deed to the house was never recorded," Amberson said thoughtfully. "I've been over to
the courthouse to see. I asked father if he never gave her one, and he didn't seem able to
understand me at first. Then he finally said he thought he must have given her a deed long
ago; but he wasn't sure. I rather think he never did. I think it would be just as well to get
him to execute one now in your favour. I'll speak to him about it."

George sighed. "I don't think I'd bother him about it: the house is mine, and you and I understand
that it is. That's enough for me, and there isn't likely to be much trouble between you and
me when we come to settling poor grandfather's estate. I've just been with him, and I think
it would only confuse him for you to speak to him about it again. I notice he seems distressed
if anybody tries to get his attention--he's a long way off, somewhere, and he likes to stay
that way. I think--I think mother wouldn't want us to bother him about it; I'm sure she'd tell
us to let him alone. He looks so white and queer."

Amberson shook his head. "Not much whiter and queerer than you do, young fellow! You'd better
begin to get some air and exercise and quit hanging about in the house all day. I won't bother
him any more than I can help; but I'll have the deed made out ready for his signature."

"I wouldn't bother him at all. I don't see--"

"You might see," said his uncle uneasily. "The estate is just about as involved and mixed-up
as an estate can well get, to the best of my knowledge; and I haven't helped it any by what
he let me have for this infernal headlight scheme which has finally gone trolloping forever
to where the woodbine twineth. Leaves me flat, and poor old Frank Bronson just half flat, and
Fanny--well, thank heaven! I kept her from going in so deep that it would leave her flat. It's
rough on her as it is, I suspect. You ought to have that deed."

"No. Don't bother him."

"I'll bother him as little as possible. I'll wait till some day when he seems to brighten up
a little."

But Amberson waited too long. The Major had already taken eleven months since his daughter's
death to think important things out. He had got as far with them as he could, and there was
nothing to detain him longer in the world. One evening his grandson sat with him--the Major
seemed to like best to have young George with him, so far as they were able to guess his preferences--and
the old gentleman made a queer gesture: he slapped his knee as if he had made a sudden discovery,
or else remembered that he had forgotten something.

George looked at him with an air of inquiry, but said nothing. He had grown to be almost as
silent as his grandfather. However, the Major spoke without being questioned.

"It must be in the sun," he said. "There wasn't anything here but the sun in the first place,
and the earth came out of the sun, and we came out of the earth. So, whatever we are, we must
have been in the sun. We go back to the earth we came out of, so the earth will go back to
the sun that it came out of. And time means nothing--nothing at all--so in a little while we'll
all be back in the sun together. I wish--"

He moved his hand uncertainly as if reaching for something, and George jumped up. "Did you
want anything, grandfather?"

"What?"

"Would you like a glass of water?"

"No--no. No; I don't want anything." The reaching hand dropped back upon the arm of his chair,
and he relapsed into silence; but a few minutes later he finished the sentence he had begun:

"I wish--somebody could tell me!"

The next day he had a slight cold, but he seemed annoyed when his son suggested calling the
doctor, and Amberson let him have his own way so far, in fact, that after he had got up and
dressed, the following morning, he was all alone when he went away to find out what he hadn't
been able to think out--all those things he had wished "somebody" would tell him.

Old Sam, shuffling in with the breakfast tray, found the Major in his accustomed easy-chair
by the fireplace--and yet even the old darkey could see instantly that the Major was not there.

Chapter XXXI

When the great Amberson Estate went into court for settlement, "there wasn't any," George Amberson
said--that is, when the settlement was concluded there was no estate. "I guessed it," Amberson
went on. "As an expert on prosperity, my career is disreputable, but as a prophet of calamity
I deserve a testimonial banquet." He reproached himself bitterly for not having long ago discovered
that his father had never given Isabel a deed to her house. "And those pigs, Sydney and Amelia!"
he added, for this was another thing he was bitter about. "They won't do anything. I'm sorry
I gave them the opportunity of making a polished refusal. Amelia's letter was about half in
Italian; she couldn't remember enough ways of saying no in English. One has to live quite a
long while to realize there are people like that! The estate was badly crippled, even before
they took out their 'third,' and the 'third' they took was the only good part of the rotten
apple. Well, I didn't ask them for restitution on my own account, and at least it will save
you some trouble, young George. Never waste any time writing to them; you mustn't count on them."

"I don't," George said quietly. "I don't count on anything."

"Oh, we'll not feel that things are quite desperate," Amberson laughed, but not with great
cheerfulness. "We'll survive, Georgie--you will, especially. For my part I'm a little too old
and too accustomed to fall back on somebody else for supplies to start a big fight with life:
I'll be content with just surviving, and I can do it on an eighteen-hundred-dollar--a-year
consulship. An ex-congressman can always be pretty sure of getting some such job, and I hear
from Washington the matter's about settled. I'll live pleasantly enough with a pitcher of ice
under a palm tree, and black folks to wait on me--that part of it will be like home--and I'll
manage to send you fifty dollars every now and then, after I once get settled. So much for
me! But you--of course you've had a poor training for making your own way, but you're only
a boy after all, and the stuff of the old stock is in you. It'll come out and do something.
I'll never forgive myself about that deed: it would have given you something substantial to
start with. Still, you have a little tiny bit, and you'll have a little tiny salary, too; and
of course your Aunt Fanny's here, and she's got something you can fall back on if you get too
pinched, until I can begin to send you a dribble now and then."

George's "little tiny bit" was six hundred dollars which had come to him from the sale of his
mother's furniture; and the "little tiny salary" was eight dollars a week which old Frank Bronson
was to pay him for services as a clerk and student-at-law. Old Frank would have offered more
to the Major's grandson, but since the death of that best of clients and his own experience
with automobile headlights, he was not certain of being able to pay more and at the same time
settle his own small bills for board and lodging. George had accepted haughtily, and thereby
removed a burden from his uncle's mind.

Amberson himself, however, had not even a "tiny bit"; though he got his consular appointment;
and to take him to his post he found it necessary to borrow two hundred of his nephew's six
hundred dollars. "It makes me sick, George," he said. "But I'd better get there and get that
salary started. Of course Eugene would do anything in the world, and the fact is he wanted
to, but I felt that--ah--under the circumstances--"

"Never!" George exclaimed, growing red. "I can't imagine one of the family--" He paused, not
finding it necessary to explain that "the family" shouldn't turn a man from the door and then
accept favours from him. "I wish you'd take more."

Amberson declined. "One thing I'll say for you, young George; you haven't a stingy bone in
your body. That's the Amberson stock in you--and I like it!"

He added something to this praise of his nephew on the day he left for Washington. He was not
to return, but to set forth from the capital on the long journey to his post. George went with
him to the station, and their farewell was lengthened by the train's being several minutes late.

"I may not see you again, Georgie," Amberson said; and his voice was a little husky as he set
a kind hand on the young man's shoulder. "It's quite probable that from this time on we'll
only know each other by letter--until you're notified as my next of kin that there's an old
valise to be forwarded to you, and perhaps some dusty curios from the consulate mantelpiece.
Well, it's an odd way for us to be saying good-bye: one wouldn't have thought it, even a few
years ago, but here we are, two gentlemen of elegant appearance in a state of bustitude. We
can't ever tell what will happen at all, can we? Once I stood where we're standing now, to
say good-bye to a pretty girl--only it was in the old station before this was built, and we
called it the 'depot.' She'd been visiting your mother, before Isabel was married, and I was
wild about her, and she admitted she didn't mind that. In fact, we decided we couldn't live
without each other, and we were to be married. But she had to go abroad first with her father,
and when we came to say good-bye we knew we wouldn't see each other again for almost a year.
I thought I couldn't live through it--and she stood here crying. Well, I don't even know where
she lives now, or if she is living--and I only happen to think of her sometimes when I'm here
at the station waiting for a train. If she ever thinks of me she probably imagines I'm still
dancing in the ballroom at the Amberson Mansion, and she probably thinks of the Mansion as
still beautiful--still the finest house in town. Life and money both behave like loose quicksilver
in a nest of cracks. And when they're gone we can't tell where--or what the devil we did with
'em! But I believe I'll say now--while there isn't much time left for either of us to get embarrassed
about it--I believe I'll say that I've always been fond of you, Georgie, but I can't say that
I always liked you. Sometimes I've felt you were distinctly not an acquired taste. Until lately,
one had to be fond of you just naturally--this isn't very 'tactful,' of course--for if he didn't,
well, he wouldn't! We all spoiled you terribly when you were a little boy and let you grow
up en prince--and I must say you took to it! But you've received a pretty heavy jolt, and I
had enough of your disposition, myself, at your age, to understand a little of what cocksure
youth has to go through inside when it finds that it can make terrible mistakes. Poor old fellow!
You get both kinds of jolts together, spiritual and material--and you've taken them pretty
quietly and--well, with my train coming into the shed, you'll forgive me for saying that there
have been times when I thought you ought to be hanged--but I've always been fond of you, and
now I like you! And just for a last word: there may be somebody else in this town who's always
felt about you like that--fond of you, I mean, no matter how much it seemed you ought to be
hanged. You might try--Hello, I must run. I'll send back the money as fast as they pay me--so,
good-bye and God bless you, Georgie!"

He passed through the gates, waved his hat cheerily from the other side of the iron screen,
and was lost from sight in the hurrying crowd. And as he disappeared, an unexpected poignant
loneliness fell upon his nephew so heavily and so suddenly that he had no energy to recoil
from the shock. It seemed to him that the last fragment of his familiar world had disappeared,
leaving him all alone forever.

He walked homeward slowly through what appeared to be the strange streets of a strange city;
and, as a matter of fact, the city was strange to him. She
always wanted to humiliate him in front of his friend, always remember publicly that he still
a child was that he had to go to school and was only tolerated among adults. This time his intention
was but too clear. He gave no answer, but turned summarily order.

"Ah, again," offended, "she said with a smile, and then to the Baron:" Would it really so bad;
if he even wants to work for an hour? "

And there - in the heart of the child was a bit cold and rigid - the Baron, he said, which is
called his friend, he who had scorned him as a couch potato, "Well,
an hour or two could not really damage.

"

Was this an agreement? Did they really both allied against him? In the view the child's anger flared.
"My dad has forbidden that I'm learning here, Dad wants me to me here recovering, "he flung
out with the pride of his illness, despair are clinging to the word, to the authority of his father.
Like a threat, he thrust it out. And what was most remarkable: the word actually appeared in
both a discomfort to awaken. The mother looked away and nervously drummed his fingers on the
table. A awkward silence between them was wide. What do you mean, Edi said, including the Baron,
with a forced smile.

"I must not do that test, I am a long time ago all failed. "

But Edgar did not smile at the joke, but only saw him with a searching, yearning penetrating
gaze, as if to grab him up in the soul. What was going on?

Something was changed between them, and the child did not know why.

It was the restless eyes wander. In his heart pounded a little, hastily hammer: The first suspected.

Burning
Secret

"What has so changed?" Thought the child, who sat opposite them in a rolling cart. "Why Are they
not to me as before? Why does Mama always avoids my gaze when I look at them? Why does he
always make jokes in front of me and play the clown? Both they do not talk to me like yesterday
and the day before me is almost as if they had other Faces get. Mom has now so red lips, she must
have dyed. I have never seen her. And he always gets the frown, as if he had offended. I have them
done nothing, said nothing could annoy you? No, I can not Identify be because they themselves
are different from one another as before. They are as if they done something had they not dare
to say. They no longer talk to yesterday, they laugh not, they are prejudiced, they are hiding
something. Some secret between them, they do not tell me. A secret I must fathom at all costs.
I know it already, it must be the same before me, always seal the door of the in the books are
mentioned in the opera, when the men and women with extensive Poor singing to each other, and
include push away. It must somehow be the same like the French with my teacher, was consistent
with dad so bad and then was sent away.
Its next neighbour also sported a remodelled front and permitted no doubt that its mission
in life was to attend cosily upon death: "J. M. Rolsener. Caskets. The Funeral Home." And beyond
that, a plain old honest four-square gray-painted brick house was flamboyantly decorated with
a great gilt scroll on the railing of the old-fashioned veranda: "Mutual Benev't Order Cavaliers
and Dames of Purity." This was the old Minafer house.

George passed it without perceptibly wincing; in fact, he held his head up, and except for
his gravity of countenance and the prison pallor he had acquired by too constantly remaining
indoors, there was little to warn an acquaintance that he was not precisely the same George
Amberson Minafer known aforetime. He was still so magnificent, indeed, that there came to his
ears a waft of comment from a passing automobile. This was a fearsome red car, glittering in
brass, with half-a-dozen young people in it whose motorism had reached an extreme manifestation
in dress. The ladies of this party were favourably affected at sight of the pedestrian upon
the sidewalk, and, as the machine was moving slowly, and close to the curb, they had time to
observe him in detail, which they did with a frankness not pleasing to the object of their
attentions. "One sees so many nice-looking people one doesn't know nowadays," said the youngest
of the young ladies. "This old town of ours is really getting enormous. I shouldn't mind knowing
who he is."

"I don't know," the youth beside her said, loudly enough to be heard at a considerable distance.
"I don't know who he is, but from his looks I know who he thinks he is: he thinks he's the
Grand Duke Cuthbert!" There was a burst of tittering as the car gathered speed and rolled away,
with the girl continuing to look back until her scandalized companions forced her to turn by
pulling her hood over her face. She made an impression upon George, so deep a one, in fact,
that he unconsciously put his emotion into a muttered word:

Riffraff!

This was the last "walk home" he was ever to take by the route he was now following: up National
Avenue to Amberson Addition and the two big old houses at the foot of Amberson Boulevard; for
tonight would be the last night that he and Fanny were to spend in the house which the Major
had forgotten to deed to Isabel. To-morrow they were to "move out," and George was to begin
his work in Bronson's office. He had not come to this collapse without a fierce struggle--but
the struggle was inward, and the rolling world was not agitated by it, and rolled calmly on.
For of all the "ideals of life" which the world, in its rolling, inconsiderately flattens out
to nothingness, the least likely to retain a profile is that ideal which depends upon inheriting
money. The Baron, he had first Teeth.
When the morning came down, passing him in a cordial "Hello, Edi", welcomed growled Edgar, who, without
looking up, was sitting in an armchair, he just a hard "Tomorrow" back.

And his nephew had the awakening experience of seeing the great Amberson Estate vanishing into
such a nest--in a twinkling, it seemed, now that it was indeed so utterly vanished.

