325. VIII. THE STATE OF A WIDOW IS MORE GRIEVOUS THAN THAT OF A WIDOWER. The reasons for this
are both external and internal; the external are such as all can comprehend; as: 1. That a
widow cannot provide for herself and her family the necessaries of life, nor dispose of them
when acquired, as a man can and as she previously did by and with her husband. 2. That neither
can she defend herself and her family as is expedient; for, while she was a wife, her husband
was her defence, and as it were her arm; and while she herself was her own (defence and arm),
she still trusted to her husband. 3. That of herself she is deficient of counsel in such things
as relate to interior wisdom and the prudence thence derived. 4. That a widow is without the
reception of love, in which as a woman she is principled; thus she is in a state contrary to
that which was innate and induced by marriage. These external reasons, which are natural, have
their origin from internal reasons also, which are spiritual, like all other things in the
world and in the body; respecting which see above, n. 220. {Ash.} Of Ash we have two sorts, agreeing
nearly with the English in the Grain. One of our sorts is tough, like the English, but differs something
in the Leaf, and much more in the Bark. Neither of them bears Keys. The Water-Ash is brittle.
The Bark is Food for the Bevers.

{Elm.} There are two sorts of Elm; the first grows on our High-Land,
and approaches our English. The Indians take the Bark of its Root,
and beat it, whilst green, to a Pulp; and then dry it in the Chimney,
where it becomes of a reddish Colour. Now since by creation the husband is truth,
and the wife the good thereof; or, what is the same thing, since by creation the husband is
understanding, and the wife the love thereof, it is evident that the external or natural reasons,
which aggravate the widowhood of a woman, have their origin from internal or spiritual reasons.
These spiritual reasons, together with natural, are meant by what is said of widows in several
passages in the Word; as may be seen in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 764.

       *       *       *       *       *

326. To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. After the problem concerning
the soul had been discussed and solved in the gymnasium, I saw them coming out in order: first
came the chief teacher, then the elders, in the midst of whom were the five youths who had
given the answers, and after these the rest. When they were come out they went apart to the
environs of the house, where there were piazzas surrounded by shrubs; and being assembled,
they divided themselves into small companies, which were so many groups of youths conversing
together on subjects of wisdom, in each of which was one of the wise persons from the orchestra.
As I saw these from my apartment, I became in the spirit, and in that state I went out to them,
and approached the chief teacher, who had lately proposed the problem concerning the soul.
On seeing me, he said. "Who are you? I was surprised as I saw you approaching in the way, that
at one instant you came into my sight, and the next instant went out of it; or that at one
time I saw you, and suddenly I did not see you: assuredly you are not in the same state of
life that we are." To this I replied, smiling, "I am neither a player nor a vertumnus; but
I am alternate, at one time in your light, and at another in your shade; thus both a foreigner
and a native." Hereupon the chief teacher looked at me, and said, "You speak things strange
and wonderful: tell me who you are." I said, "I am in the world in which you have been, and
from which you have departed, and which is called the natural world; and I am also in the world
into which you have come, and in which you are, which is called the spiritual world. Hence
I am in a natural state, and at the same time in a spiritual state; in a natural state with
men of the earth and in a spiritual state with you; and when I am in the natural state, you
do not see me, but when I am in the spiritual state, you do; that such should be my condition,
has been granted me by the Lord. It is known to you, illustrious sir, that a man of the natural
world does not see a man of the spiritual world, nor vice versa; therefore when I let my spirit
into the body, you did not see me; but when I let it out of the body, you did see me. You have
been teaching in the gymnasium, that you are souls, and that souls see souls, because they
are human forms; and you know, that when you were in the natural world, you did not see yourself
or your souls in your bodies; and this is a consequence of the difference between what is spiritual
and what is natural." When he heard of the difference between what is spiritual and what is
natural, he said, "What do you mean by that difference? is it not like the difference between
what is more or less pure? for what is spiritual but that which is natural in a higher state
of purity?" I replied, "The difference is of another kind; it is like that between prior and
posterior, which bear no determinate proportion to each other: for the prior is in the posterior
as the cause is in the effect; and the posterior is derived from the prior as the effect from
its cause: hence, the one does not appear to the other." To this the chief teacher replied,
"I have meditated and ruminated upon this difference, but heretofore in vain; I wish I could
perceive it." I said, "You shall not only perceive the difference between what is spiritual
and what is natural, but shall also see it." I then proceeded as follows: "You yourself are
in a spiritual state with your associate spirits, but in a natural state with me; for you converse
with your associates in the spiritual language, which is common to every spirit and angel,
but with me in my mother tongue; for every spirit and angel, when conversing with a man, speaks
his peculiar language; thus French with a Frenchman, English with an Englishman, Greek with
a Greek, Arabic with an Arabian, and so forth. That you may know therefore the difference between
what is spiritual and what is natural in respect to languages, make this experiment; withdraw
to your associates, and say something there: then retain the expressions, and return with them
in your memory, and utter them before me." He did so, and returned to me with those expressions
in his mouth, and uttered them; and they were altogether strange and foreign, such as do not
occur in any language of the natural world. By this experiment several times repeated, it was
made very evident that all the spiritual world have the spiritual language, which has in it
nothing that is common to any natural language, and that every man comes of himself into the
use of that language after his decease. At the same time also he experienced, that the sound
of the spiritual language differs so far from the sound of natural language, that a spiritual
sound, though loud, could not at all be heard by a natural man, nor a natural sound by a spirit.
Afterwards I requested the chief teacher and the bystanders to withdraw to their associates,
and write some sentence or other on a piece of paper, and then return with it to me, and read
it. They did so, and returned with the paper in their hand; but when they read it, they could
not understand any part of it, as the writing consisted only of some letters of the alphabet,
with turns over them, each of which was significative of some particular sense and meaning:
because each letter of the alphabet is thus significative, it is evident why the Lord is called
Alpha and Omega. On their repeatedly withdrawing, and writing in the same manner, and returning
to me, they found that their writing involved and comprehended innumerable things which no
natural writing could possibly express; and they were given to understand, that this was in
consequence of the spiritual man's thoughts being incomprehensible and ineffable to the natural
man, and such as cannot flow and be brought into any other writing or language. Then as some
present were unwilling to comprehend that spiritual thought so far exceeds natural thought,
as to be respectively ineffable, I said to them, "Make the experiment; withdraw into your spiritual
society, and think on some subject, and retain your thoughts, and return, and express them
before me." They have the Power, or Art (I know not which to call it) to charm Squirrels, Hares,
Partridges, or any such thing, in such a manner, that they run directly into their Mouths.
This I have seen by a Squirrel and one of these Rattle-Snakes; and other Snakes have, in some
measure, the same Power. The Rattle-Snakes have many small Teeth, of which I cannot see they
make any use; for they swallow every thing whole; but the Teeth which poison, are only four;
two on each side of their Upper-Jaws. These are bent like a Sickle, and hang loose as if by
a Joint. Towards the setting on of these, there is, in each Tooth, a little Hole, wherein you
may just get in the Point of a small Needle.
 It was then told them from the third heaven, that there
is a wisdom still interior and superior, which is called celestial, bearing a proportion to
spiritual wisdom like that which spiritual wisdom bears to natural, and that these descend
by an orderly influx according to the heavens from the divine wisdom of the Lord, which is
infinite.

327. After this I said to the by-standers, "You have seen from these three experimental proofs
what is the difference between spiritual and natural, and also the reason why the natural man
does not appear to the spiritual, nor the spiritual to the natural, although they are consociated
as to affections and thoughts, and thence as to presence. Hence it is that, as I approached,
at one time you, Sir, (addressing the chief teacher), saw me, and at another you did not."
After this, a voice was heard from the superior heaven to the chief teacher, saying, "Come
up hither;" and he went up: and on his return, he said, that the angels, as well as himself,
did not before know the differences between spiritual and natural, because there had never
before been an opportunity of comparing them together, by any person's existing at the same
time in both worlds; and without such comparison and reference those differences were not ascertainable.

328. After this we retired, and conversing again on this subject, I said, "Those differences
originate solely in this circumstance of your existence in the spiritual world, that you are
in substantials and not in materials: and substantials are the beginning of materials. You
are in principles and thereby in singulars; but we are in principiates and composites; you
are in particulars, but we are in generals; and as generals cannot enter into particulars,
so neither can natural things, which are material, enter into spiritual things which are substantial,
any more than a ship's cable can enter into, or be drawn though, the eye of a fine needle;
or than a nerve can enter or be let into one of the fibres of which it is composed, or a fibre
into one of the fibrils of which it is composed: this also is known in the world: therefore
herein the learned are agreed, that there is no such thing as an influx of what is natural
into what is spiritual, but of what is spiritual into what is natural. This now is the reason
why the natural man cannot conceive that which the spiritual man conceives, nor consequently
express such conceptions; wherefore Paul calls what he heard from the third heaven ineffable. This
is a very large magnificent Cabin, (according to their Building) which is rais'd at the Publick Charge
of the Nation, and maintain'd in a great deal of Form and Neatness. {Idols at the Beds.} About
seven foot high, is a Floor or Loft made, on which lie all their Princes, and Great Men, that have
died for several hundred Years, all attir'd in the Dress I before told you of. No Person is
to have his Bones lie here, and to be thus dress'd, unless he gives
a round Sum of their Money to the Rulers, for Admittance. In this respect also spiritual thoughts and perceptions differ from natural;
therefore you can think of the essence and omnipresence of God from eternity, that is, of God
before the creation of the world, since you think of the essence of God from eternity abstracted
from time, and of his omnipresence abstracted from space, and thus comprehend such things as
transcend the ideas of the natural man." I then related to them, how I once thought of the
essence and omnipresence of God from eternity, that is of God before the creation of the world;
and that because I could not yet remove spaces and times from the ideas of my thought, I was
brought into anxiety; for the idea of nature entered instead of God: but it was said to me,
"Remove the ideas of space and time, and you will see." I did so and then I saw; and from that
time I was enabled to think of God from eternity, and not of nature from eternity; because
God is in all time without time, and in all space without space, whereas nature in all time
is in time, and in all space in space; and nature with her time and space, must of necessity
have a beginning and a birth, but not God who is without time, and space; therefore nature
is from God, not from eternity, but in time, that is, together with her time and space.

329. After the chief teacher and the rest of the assembly had left me, some boys who were also
engaged in the gymnasian exercise, followed me home, and stood near me for a little while as
I was writing: and lo! at that instant they saw a moth running upon my paper, and asked in
surprise what was the name of that nimble little creature? I said, "It is called a moth; and
I will tell you some wonderful things respecting it. This little animal contains in itself
as many members and viscera as there are in a camel, such as brains, hearts, pulmonary pipes,
organs of sense, motion, and generation, a stomach, intestines, and several others; and each
of these organs consists of fibres, nerves, blood-vessels, muscles, tendons, membranes; and
each of these of still purer parts, which escape the observation of the keenest eye." They
then said that this little animal appeared to them just like a simple substance; upon which
I said, "There are nevertheless innumerable things within it. I mention these things that you
may know, that the case is similar in regard to every object which appears before you as one,
simple and least, as well in your actions as in your affections and thoughts. I can assure
you that every grain of thought, that every drop of your affection, is divisible ad infinitum:
and that in proportion as your ideas are divisible, so you are wise. Know then, that every
thing divided is more and more multiple, and not more and more simple; because what is continually
divided approaches nearer and nearer to the infinite, in which all things are infinitely. What
I am now observing to you is new and heretofore unheard of." When I concluded, the boys took
their leave of me, and went to the chief teacher, and intreated him to take an opportunity
to propose in the gymnasium somewhat new and unheard of as a problem. He inquired, "What?"
they said, "That every thing divided is more and more multiple, and not more and more simple;
because it approaches nearer and nearer to the infinite, in which all things are infinitely:"
and he pledged himself to propose it, and said, "I see this, because I have perceived that
one natural idea contains innumerable spiritual ideas; yea, that one spiritual idea contains
innumerable celestial ideas. Herein is grounded the difference between the celestial wisdom
of the angels of the third heaven, and the spiritual wisdom of the angels of the second heaven,
and also the natural wisdom of the angels of the last heaven and likewise of men."

330. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. I once heard a pleasant discussion between some men respecting
the female sex, whether it be possible for a woman to love her husband, who constantly loves
her own beauty, that is, who loves herself from her form. They agreed among themselves first,
that women have two-fold beauty; one natural, which is that of the face and body, and the other
spiritual which is that of the love and manners; they agreed also, that these two kinds of
beauty are often divided in the natural world, and are always united in the spiritual world;
for in the latter world beauty is the form of the love and manners; therefore after death it
frequently happens that deformed women become beauties, and beautiful women become deformities.
While the men were discussing this point, there came some wives, and said, "Admit of our presence;
because what you are discussing, you have learned by science, but we are taught it by experience;
and you likewise know so little of the love of wives, that it scarcely amounts to any knowledge.
Do you know that the prudence of the wives' wisdom consists in hiding their love from their
husbands in the inmost recess of their bosoms, or in the midst of their hearts?" The discussion
then proceeded; and the FIRST CONCLUSION made by the men was, That every woman is willing to
appear beautiful as to face and manners, because she is born an affection of love, and the
form of this affection is beauty; therefore a woman that is not desirous to be beautiful, is
not desirous to love and to be loved, and consequently is not truly a woman. Hereupon the wives
observed, "The beauty of a woman resides in soft tenderness, and consequently in exquisite
sensibility; hence comes the woman's love for the man, and the man's for the woman. This possibly
you do not understand." The SECOND CONCLUSION of the men was, That a woman before marriage
is desirous to be beautiful for the men, but after marriage, if she be chaste, for one man
only, and not for the men. Proceeding down the River 2 or 3 Leagues farther, we came to a Place where
were 9 or 10 Canoes all together. We went ashoar there, and found several Indians; but most of them
were the same which had made Peace with us before. The THIRD CONCLUSION of their discussion
was, That if a woman after marriage is desirous to appear beautiful in like manner as before
marriage, she loves the men, and not a man: because a woman loving herself from her beauty
is continually desirous that her beauty should be sipped; and as this no longer appears to
her husband, as you observed, she is desirous that it may be sipped by the men to whom it appears.
It is evident that such a one has a love of the sex, and not a love of one of the sex. Hereupon
the wives were silent; yet they murmured, "What woman is so void of vanity, as not to desire
to seem beautiful to the men also, at the same time that she seems beautiful to one man only?"
These things were heard by some wives from heaven, who were beautiful, because they were heavenly
affections. They confirmed the conclusions of the men; but they added, "Let them only love
their beauty and its ornaments for the sake of their husbands, and from them."

331. They are a very stupid Creature, utterly neglecting their Safety. They are most like Rats
of any thing. I have, for Necessity in the Wilderness, eaten of them. Their Flesh is very white,
and well tasted; but their ugly Tails put me out of Conceit with that Fare.
 Be present and hear." This was their
FIRST CONCLUSION; No wife loves her husband on account of his face, but on account of his intelligence
in his business and manners: know therefore, that a wife unites herself with a man's intelligence
and thereby with the man: therefore if a man loves himself on account of his intelligence,
he withdraws it from the wife into himself, whence comes disunion and not union: moreover to
love his own intelligence is to be wise from himself, and this is to be insane; therefore it
is to love his own insanity. Hereupon the men observed, "Possibly the wife unites herself with
the man's strength or ability." At this the wives smiled, saying, "There is no deficiency of
ability while the man loves the wife from intelligence; but there is if he loves her from insanity.
Intelligence consists in loving the wife only: and in this love there is no deficiency of ability;
but insanity consists in not loving the wife but the sex, and in this love there is a deficiency
of ability. You comprehend this." The SECOND CONCLUSION was; We women are born into the love
of the men's intelligence; therefore if the men love their own intelligence, it cannot be united
with its genuine love, which belongs to the wife; and if the man's intelligence is not united
with its genuine love, which belongs to the wife, it becomes insanity grounded in haughtiness,
and conjugial love becomes cold. What woman in such case can unite her love to what is cold;
and what man can unite the insanity of his haughtiness to the love of intelligence? But the
men said, "Whence has a man honor from his wife but by her magnifying his intelligence?" The
wives replied, "From love, because love honors; and honor cannot be separated from love, but
love maybe from honor." Afterwards they came to this THIRD CONCLUSION; You seemed as if you
loved your wives; and you do not see that you are loved by them, and thus that you re-love;
and that your intelligence is a receptacle: if therefore you love your intelligence in yourselves,
it becomes the receptacle of your love; and the love of proprium (or self-hood), since it cannot
endure an equal, never becomes conjugial love; but so long as it prevails, so long it remains
adulterous. Hereupon the men were silent; nevertheless they murmured, "What is conjugial love?"
Some husbands in heaven heard what passed, and confirmed thence the three conclusions of the wives.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON POLYGAMY.

