The dullness left her face, and an unselfish light dawned in its place. As she rose to go,
she leaned over the other figure, and he looked up at her, with something of the old-time love.

I replenished the fire after they had gone—they went out together—and as I sat there thinking
of it all, I heard a sudden rushing sound in the street.

I ran to the door, just in time to see a farm wagon, drawn by two strong horses, go pell-mell
past my house, and overturn, as the frightened animals dashed around the corner. The neighborhood
was agog in a moment, and I joined the rest in trying to help the occupants of the broken vehicle.
We brought them into the house—the man and woman and a little child.

As soon as they were in the light, I knew them; they were some of my people—a German family,
by the name of Abraham, who lived on a little farm just outside our suburb. They had been to
me typical representatives of a stupid class, who have all the hardships of life, and none
of its soft lights and shades. They were the kind that plant their pig-sty on the lake side
of their house—put the pig-sty betwixt them and every other beauty, it seemed to me. What can
life hold for such people? They know nothing of love, or any other joy. Merely an animal existence
is theirs.

We fetched a doctor as speedily as possible—the parents were merely bruised, but the little
child was badly hurt. At first we feared she was dying, and it was a relief to be told that
she would probably live.

I went out of the room to get some bandages, and the doctor followed me. Returning suddenly,
I ran upon an unexpected scene; up to that time, before us all, the parents had seemed perfectly
stolid; but just as I opened the door, the wife and mother rose from her knees by the bed,
and I have seldom seen a look more expressive of tender love than that with which her husband
took her in his arms.

We have many things to learn in the next world; one of these, I am sure, will be, not to judge
by the life upon the surface. There is a deep fount of feeling beneath, and often it is those
whom we least suspect, who dip down into it.

I was still busy with these people, when Randolph Chance walked in upon me. His kind heart
needed no prompting to join in our little attentions, and he was of especial use in getting
a vehicle to take the family home.

After they had gone, and we found ourselves alone, a great embarrassment seemed to seize him
in a fatal grasp.

By and by I realized that I was really getting incensed, and I was afraid I should soon be
in the position of the man who went to another, whom he had ill-treated, to apologize for his
bad conduct, and, “By Jove, sir”—to use his own phrase, “I hit him again.”

I tried to keep my letter before my eyes. I didn’t want to be forced by that inexorable tyrant—conscience—to
write another. And I should, if I didn’t hold on to myself, and this man didn’t behave differently.

To avoid a clash, I set to work to clear away some of the confusion consequent upon the accident,
and he helped me in this.

One would suppose that might serve to cool him, and it did indeed, to such an extent that,
upon our settling down again, he began the most commonplace conversation, giving me some incidents
of his trip; discussing the scenery; weather; population, and general aspects of Buffalo; with
much more of the dryest, most disagreeable stuff, that a man ever had the temerity to use,
as a means of wasting a woman’s evening.

To employ a childish phrase—it best fits the occasion—I grew madder and madder, until at last
matters within me rose to such a height, that when he began to tell of his brother’s house
in Buffalo, and to dwell upon the peculiarities of its furniture, I felt peculiar enough to
hurl all of mine at him.

