Hobson Newcome, Esquire, was more portly than his elder brother, and allowed his red whiskers
to grow on his cheeks and under his chin. He wore thick shoes with nails in them, and affected
the country gentleman in his appearance. His hat had a broad brim, and his ample pockets always
contained agricultural produce, samples of bean or corn, or a whiplash or balls for horses.
In fine, he was a good old country gentleman, and a better man of business than his more solemn
brother, at whom he laughed in his jocular way; and said rightly that a gentleman must get
up very early to get ahead of him.

These gentlemen each received the Colonel in a manner consistent with his peculiar nature.
Sir Bryan regretted that Lady Ann was away from London, being at Brighton with the children,
who were all ill of the measles. Hobson said, "Maria can't treat you to such good company as
Lady Ann could give you; but when will you take a day and come and dine with us? Let's see,
to-day is Wednesday; to-morrow we are engaged. Friday, we dine at Judge Budge's; Saturday I
am going down to Marblehead to look after the hay. Come on Monday, Tom, and I'll introduce
you to the missus and the young uns."

"I will bring Clive," says Colonel Newcome, rather disturbed at this reception. "After his
illness my sister-in-law was very kind to him."

"No, hang it, don't bring boys; there's no good in boys; they stop the talk downstairs, and
the ladies don't want 'em in the drawing-room. Send him to dine with the children on Sunday,
if you like, and come along down with me to Marblehead, and I'll show you such a crop of hay
as will make your eyes open. Are you fond of farming?"

"I have not seen my boy for years," says the Colonel; "I had rather pass Saturday and Sunday
with him, if you please, and some day we will go to Marblehead together."

"Well, an offer's an offer. I don't know any pleasanter thing than getting out of this confounded
city and smelling the hedges, and looking at the crops coming up, and passing the Sunday in
quiet." And his own tastes being thus agricultural, the worthy gentleman thought that everybody
else must delight in the same recreation.

"In the winter, I hope, we shall see you at Newcome," says the elder brother, blandly smiling.
"I can't give you any tiger-shooting, but I'll promise you that you shall find plenty of pheasants
in our jungle," and he laughed very gently at this mild sally.

At this moment a fair-haired young gentleman, languid and pale, and dressed in the height of
fashion, made his appearance and was introduced as the Baronet's oldest son, Barnes Newcome.
He returned Colonel Newcome's greeting with a smile, saying, "Very happy to see you, I am sure.
You find London very much changed since you were here? Very good time to come, the very full
of the season."

Poor Thomas Newcome was quite abashed by his strange reception. Here was a man, hungry for
affection, and one relation asked him to dinner next Monday, and another invited him to shoot
pheasants at Christmas. Here was a beardless young sprig, who patronised him and asked him
whether he found London was changed. As soon as possible he ended the interview with his step-brothers,
and drove back to Ludgate Hill, where he dismissed his cab and walked across the muddy pavements
of Smithfield, on his way back to the old school where his son was, a way which he had trodden
many a time in his own early days. There was Cistercian Street, and the Red Cow of his youth;
there was the quaint old Grey Friars Square, with its blackened trees and garden, surrounded
by ancient houses of the build of the last century, now slumbering like pensioners in the sunshine.

Under the great archway of the hospital he could look at the old Gothic building; and a black-gowned
pensioner or two crawling over the quiet square, or passing from one dark arch to another.
The boarding-houses of the school were situated in the square, hard by the more ancient buildings
of the hospital. A great noise of shouting, crying, clapping forms and cupboards, treble voices,
bass voices, poured out of the schoolboys' windows; their life, bustle, and gaiety contrasted
strangely with the quiet of those old men, creeping along in their black gowns under the ancient
arches yonder, whose struggle of life was over, whose hope and noise and bustle had sunk into
that grey calm. There was Thomas Newcome arrived at the middle of life, standing between the
shouting boys and the tottering seniors and in a situation to moralise upon both, had not his
son Clive, who espied him, come jumping down the steps to greet his sire. Clive was dressed
in his very best; not one of those four hundred young gentlemen had a better figure, a better
tailor, or a neater boot. Schoolfellows, grinning through the bars, envied him as he walked
away; senior boys made remarks on Colonel Newcome's loose clothes and long moustaches, his
brown hands and unbrushed hat. The Colonel was smoking a cheroot as he walked; and the gigantic
Smith, the cock of the school, who happened to be looking majestically out of the window, was
pleased to say that he thought Newcome's governor was a fine manly-looking fellow.

"Tell me about your uncles, Clive," said the Colonel, as they walked on arm in arm.

"What about them, sir?" asks the boy. "I don't think I know much."

"You have been to stay with them. You wrote about them. Were they kind to you?"

"Oh, yes, I suppose they are very kind. They always tipped me: only you know when I go there
I scarcely ever see them. Mr. Newcome asks me the oftenest--two or three times a quarter when
he's in town, and gives me a sovereign regular."

"Well, he must see you to give you the sovereign," says Clive's father, laughing.

The boy blushed rather.

"Yes. When it's time to go back to Smithfield on a Saturday night, I go into the dining-room
to shake hands, and he gives it to me; but he don't speak to me much, you know, and I don't
care about going to Bryanstone Square, except for the tip (of course that's important), because
I am made to dine with the children, and they are quite little ones; and a great cross French
governess, who is always crying and shrieking after them, and finding fault with them. My uncle
generally has his dinner parties on Saturday, or goes out; and aunt gives me ten shillings
and sends me to the play; that's better fun than a dinner party." Here the lad blushed again.
"I used," said he, "when I was younger, to stand on the stairs and prig things out of the dishes
when they came out from dinner, but I'm past that now. Maria (that's my cousin) used to take
the sweet things and give 'em to the governess. Fancy! she used to put lumps of sugar into
her pocket and eat them in the schoolroom! Uncle Hobson don't live in such good society as
Uncle Newcome. You see, Aunt Hobson, she's very kind, you know, and all that, but I don't think
she's what you call comme il faut"

"Why, how are you to judge?" asks the father, amused at the lad's candid prattle, "and where
does the difference lie?"

"I can't tell you what it is, or how it is," the boy answered, "only one can't help seeing
the difference. It isn't rank and that: only somehow there are some men gentlemen and some
not, and some women ladies and some not. There's Jones now, the fifth-form master, every man
sees he's a gentleman, though he wears ever so old clothes; and there's Mr. Brown, who oils
his hair, and wears rings, and white chokers--my eyes! such white chokers!--and yet we call
him the handsome snob! And so about Aunt Maria, she's very handsome and she's very finely dressed,
only somehow she's not the ticket, you see."

"Oh, she's not the ticket?" says the Colonel, much amused.

"Well, what I mean is--but never mind," says the boy. "I can't tell you what I mean. I am weary
of the word. Make a man feel the want of it; rouse him, if you can, to the self-knowledge of the need
of it; and you may safely trust it to its own evidence." Religion approaches men saying, "O
taste and see that the Lord is good." He cannot be good unless He is. A fancied Deity, an invention
however beautiful of men's brain, supposed to be a living Being, cannot be a blessing, but,
like every other falsehood, a curse. If our religion is a stained glass window we color to hide the
void beyond, then in the name of things as they are, whether they
have a God or not, let us smash the deceiving glass, and face the
darkness or the daylight outside.

"Religion is nothing unless it is true," and its workableness is
the test of its truth.

 That time I went down to Newcome I went to see old Aunt Sarah, and she told
me everything, and do you know, I was a little hurt at first, for I thought we were swells
till then? And when I came back to school, where perhaps I had been giving myself airs, and
bragging about Newcome, why, you know, I thought it was right to tell the fellows."

"That's a man," said the Colonel, with delight; though had he said, "That's a boy," he had
spoken more correctly. "That's a man," cried the Colonel; "never be ashamed of your father, Clive."

"Ashamed of my father!" says Clive, looking up to him, and walking on as proud as a peacock.
"I say," the lad resumed, after a pause--

"Say what you say," said the father.

"Is that all true what's in the Peerage--in the Baronetage, about Uncle Newcome and Newcome;
about the Newcome who was burned at Smithfield; about the one that was at the battle of Bosworth;
and the old, old Newcome who was bar--that is, who was surgeon to Edward the Confessor, and
was killed at Hastings? I am afraid it isn't; and yet I should like it to be true."

"I think every man would like to come of an ancient and honourable race," said the Colonel
in his honest way. "As you like your father to be an honourable man, why not your grandfather,
and his ancestors before him? But if we can't inherit a good name, at least we can do our best
to leave one, my boy; and that is an ambition which, please God., you and I will both hold by."

With this simple talk the old and young gentleman beguiled their way, until they came into
the western quarter of the town, where Hobson Newcome lived in a handsome and roomy mansion.
Colonel Newcome was bent on paying a visit to his sister-in-law, although as they waited to
be let in they could not but remark through the opened windows of the dining-room that a great
table was laid and every preparation was made for a feast.

"My brother said he was engaged to dinner to-day," said the Colonel.

"Does Mrs. Newcome give parties when he is away?"

"She invites all the company," answered Clive. "My uncle never asks any one without aunt's leave."

The Colonel's countenance fell. "He has a great dinner, and does not ask his own brother!"
Newcome thought. "Why, if he had come to India with all his family, he might have stayed for
a year, and I should have been offended had he gone elsewhere."

A hot menial in a red waistcoat came and opened the door, and without waiting for preparatory
queries said, "Not at home."

"It's my father, John," said Clive. "My aunt will see Colonel Newcome."

"Missis is not at home," said the man. "Missis is gone in carriage--Not at this door!--Take
them things down the area steps, young man!"

This latter speech was addressed to a pastry cook's boy with a large sugar temple and many
conical papers containing delicacies for dessert. "Mind the hice is here in time; or there'll
be a blow-up with your governor,"--and John struggled back, closing the door on the astonished
Colonel.

"Upon my life, they actually shut the door in our faces," said the poor gentleman.

"The man is very busy, sir. There's a great dinner. I'm sure my aunt would not refuse you,"
Clive interposed. "She is very kind. I suppose it's different here from what it is in India.
There are the children in the Square,--those are the girls in blue,--that's the French governess,
the one with the yellow parasol. How d'ye do, Mary? How d'ye do, Fanny? This is my father,--this
is your uncle."

The Colonel surveyed his little nieces with that kind expression which his face always wore
when it was turned toward children.

"Have you heard of your uncle in India?" he asked them.

"No," says Maria.

"Yes," says Fannie. "You know mademoiselle said that if we were naughty we should be sent to
our uncle in India. I think I should like to go with you."

"Oh, you silly child!" cries Maria.

"Yes, I should, if Clive went, too," says little Fanny.

"Behold madame, who arrives from her promenade!" mademoiselle exclaimed, and, turning round,
Colonel Newcome beheld, for the first time, his sister-in-law, a stout lady with fair hair
and a fine bonnet and a pelisse, who was reclining in her barouche with the scarlet plush garments
of her domestics blazing before and behind her.

Clive ran towards his aunt. She bent over the carriage languidly towards him. She liked him.
"What, you, Clive!" she said, "How come you away from school of a Thursday, sir?"

"It is a holiday," said he. "My father is come; and he is come to see you."

She bowed her head with an expression of affable surprise and majestic satisfaction. "Indeed,
Clive!" she exclaimed, and the Colonel stepped forward and took off his hat and bowed and stood
bareheaded. She surveyed him blandly, and put forward a little hand, saying, "You have only
arrived to-day, and you came to see me? That was very kind. Have you had a pleasant voyage?
These are two of my girls. My boys are at school. I shall be so glad to introduce them to their
uncle. This naughty boy might never have seen you, but that we took him home after the scarlet
fever, and made him well, didn't we Clive? And we are all very fond of him, and you must not
be jealous of his love for his aunt. We feel that we quite know you through him, and we know
that you know us, and we hope you will like us. Do you think your papa will like us, Clive?
Or, perhaps you will like Lady Ann best? Yes; you have been to her first, of course? Not been?
Oh! because she is not in town." Leaning fondly on Clive's arm, mademoiselle standing with
the children hard by, while John with his hat off stood at the opened door, Mrs. Newcome slowly
uttered the above remarkable remarks to the Colonel, on the threshold of her house, which she
never asked him to pass.

"If you will come in to us about ten this evening," she then said, "you will find some men
not undistinguished, who honour me of an evening. Perhaps they will be interesting to you,
Colonel Newcome, as you are newly arriven in Europe. A stranger coming to London could scarcely
have a better opportunity of seeing some of our great illustrations of science and literature.
We have a few friends at dinner, and now I must go in and consult with my housekeeper. Good-bye
for the present. Mind, not later than ten, as Mr. Newcome must be up betimes in the morning,
and our parties break up early. When Clive is a little older I dare say we shall see him, too.
Goodbye!"

And again the Colonel was favoured with a shake of the hand, and the lady sailed up the stair,
and passed in at the door, with not the faintest idea but that the hospitality which she was
offering to her kinsman was of the most cordial and pleasant kind.

Having met Colonel Newcome on the steps of her house, she ordered him to come to her evening
party; and though he had not been to an evening party for five and thirty years--though he
had not been to bed the night before--he never once thought of disobeying Mrs. Newcome's order,
but was actually at her door at five minutes past ten, having arrayed himself, to the wonderment
of Clive, and left the boy to talk to Mr. Binnie, a friend and fellow-passenger, who had just
arrived from Portsmouth, who had dined with him, and taken up his quarters at the same hotel.

Well, then, the Colonel is launched in English society of an intellectual order, and mighty
dull he finds it. During two hours of desultory conversation and rather meagre refreshments,
the only bright spot is his meeting with Charles Honeyman, his dead wife's brother, whom he
was mighty glad to see. Except for this meeting there was little to entertain the Colonel,
and as soon as possible he and Honeyman walked away together, the Colonel returning to his
hotel, where he found his friend James Binnie installed in his room in the best arm-chair,
sleeping-cosily, but he woke up briskly when the Colonel entered. "It is you, you gadabout,
is it?" cried Binnie. "See what it is to have a real friend now, Colonel! I waited for you,
because I knew you would want to talk about that scapegrace of yours."

"Isn't he a fine fellow, James?" says the Colonel, lighting a cheroot as he sits on the table.
Was it joy, or the bedroom candle with which he lighted his cigar, which illuminated his honest
features so, and made them so to shine?

"I have been occupied, sir, in taking the lad's moral measurement: and I have pumped him as
successfully as ever I cross-examined a rogue in my court. I place his qualities thus:--Love
of approbation, sixteen. Benevolence, fourteen. Combativeness, fourteen. Adhesiveness, two.
Amativeness is not yet of course fully developed, but I expect will be prodigiously strong.
The imaginative and reflective organs are very large; those of calculation weak. He may make
a poet or a painter, or you may make a sojor of him, though worse men than him's good enough
for that--but a bad merchant, a lazy lawyer, and a miserable mathematician. My opinion, Colonel,
is that young scapegrace will give you a deal of trouble; or would, only you are so absurdly
proud of him, and you think everything he does is perfection. He'll spend your money for you;
he'll do as little work as need be. He'll get into scrapes with the sax. He's almost as simple
as his father, and that is to say that any rogue will cheat him; and he seems to me to have
your obstinate habit of telling the truth, Colonel, which may prevent his getting on in the
world; but on the other hand will keep him from going very wrong. So that, though there is
every fear for him, there's some hope and some consolation."

"What do you think of his Latin and Greek?" asked the Colonel. Before going out to his party
Newcome had laid a deep scheme with Binnie, and it had been agreed that the latter should examine
the young fellow in his humanities.

"Wall," cries the Scot, "I find that the lad knows as much about Greek and Latin as I knew
myself when I was eighteen years of age."

"My dear Binnie, is it possible? You, the best scholar in all India!"

"And which amounted to exactly nothing. By the admirable seestem purshood at your public schools,
just about as much knowledge as he could get by three months' application at home. Mind ye,
I don't say he would apply; it is most probable he would do no such thing. But, at the cost
of--how much? two hundred pounds annually--for five years--he has acquired about five and twenty
guineas' worth of classical leeterature--enough, I dare say, to enable him to quote Horace
respectably through life, and what more do you want from a young man of his expectations? I
think I should send him into the army, that's the best place for him--there's the least to
do and the handsomest clothes to wear," says the little wag, daintily taking up the tail of
his friend's coat. "In earnest now, Tom Newcome, I think your boy is as fine a lad as I ever
set eyes on. He seems to have intelligence and good temper. He carries his letter of recommendation
in his countenance; and with the honesty--and the rupees, mind ye,--which he inherits from
his father, the deuce is in it if he can't make his way. What time's the breakfast? Eh, but
it was a comfort this morning not to hear the holystoning on the deck. We ought to go into
lodgings, and not fling our money out of the window of this hotel. We must make the young chap
take us about and show us the town in the morning, eh, Colonel?"

With this the jolly gentleman nodded over his candle to his friend, and trotted off to bed.

The Colonel and his friend were light sleepers and early risers. The next morning when Binnie
entered the sitting-room he found the Colonel had preceded him. "Hush," says the Colonel, putting
a long finger up to his mouth, and advancing towards him as noiselessly as a ghost.

"What's in the wind now?" asks the little Scot; "and what for have ye not got your shoes on?"

"Clive's asleep," says the Colonel, with a countenance full of extreme anxiety.

"The darling boy slumbers, does he?" said the wag. "Mayn't I just step in and look at his beautiful
countenance whilst he's asleep, Colonel?"

"You may if you take off those confounded creaking, shoes," the other answered, quite gravely:
and Binnie turned away to hide his jolly round face, which was screwed up with laughter.

"Have ye been breathing a prayer over your rosy infant's slumbers, Tom?" asks Mr. Binnie.

"And if I have, James Binnie," the Colonel said gravely, and his sallow face blushing somewhat,
"if I have I hope I've done no harm. The last time I saw him asleep was nine years ago, a sickly
little pale-faced boy, in his little cot, and now, sir, that I see him again, strong and handsome
and all that a fond father can wish to see a boy, I should be an ungrateful villain, James,
if I didn't do what you said just now, and thank God Almighty for restoring him to me."

Binnie did not laugh any more. "By George! Tom Newcome," said he, "you're just one of the saints
of the earth. If all men were like you there'd be an end of both our trades; and there would
be no fighting and no soldiering, no rogues, and no magistrates to catch them." The Colonel
wondered at his friend's enthusiasm, who was not used to be complimentary; indeed what so usual
with him as that simple act of gratitude and devotion about which his comrade spoke to him?
To ask a blessing for his boy was as natural to him as to wake with the sunrise, or to go to
rest when the day was over. His first and his last thought was always the child.

The two gentlemen were home in time enough to find Clive dressed, and his uncle arrived for
breakfast. The Colonel said a grace over that meal; the life was begun which he had longed
and prayed for, and the son smiling before his eyes who had been in his thoughts for so many
fond years.

If my memory serves me right it was at about this time that I, the humble biographer of Mr.
Clive Newcome's life, met him again for the first time since my school days at Grey Friars.

Going to the play one night with some fellows of my own age, and laughing enthusiastically
at the farce, we became naturally hungry at midnight, and a desire for Welch Rabbits and good
old glee-singing led us to the "Cave of Harmony," then kept by the celebrated Hoskins, with
whom we enjoyed such intimacy that he never failed to greet us with a kind nod. We also knew
the three admirable glee-singers. It happened that there was a very small attendance at the
"Cave" that night, and we were all more sociable and friendly because the company was select.
The songs were chiefly of the sentimental class; such ditties were much in vogue at the time
of which I speak.

There came into the "Cave" a gentleman with a lean brown face and long black moustaches, dressed
in very loose clothes, and evidently a stranger to the place. Its own favorite quarter, however,
is the southwest, so that it is distinguished in its malignity equally from the Bise of Provence,
which is a north wind always, and from our own old friend, the east.

3.

It always blows tremulously, making the leaves of the trees shudder as if they were all aspens,
but with a peculiar fitfulness which gives them--and I watch them this moment as I write--an
expression of anger as well as of fear and distress.

You may see the kind of quivering, and hear the ominous whimpering,
in the gusts that precede a great thunderstorm; but plague-wind is
more panic-struck, and feverish; and its sound is a hiss instead of
a wail.

When I was last at Avallon, in South France, I went to see 'Faust' played at the little country
theater: it was done with scarcely any means of pictorial effect,
except a few old curtains, and a blue light or two.

But the night on the Brocken was nevertheless extremely appalling to me,--a strange ghastliness
being obtained in some of the witch scenes merely by fine management of gesture and drapery;
and in the phantom scenes, by the half-palsied, half-furious, faltering or fluttering past
of phantoms stumbling as into graves; as if of not only soulless, but senseless, Dead, moving
with the very action, the rage, the decrepitude, and the trembling of the plague-wind.

4. Not only tremulous at every moment, it is also intermittent with
a rapidity quite unexampled in former weather.

There are, indeed, days--and weeks, on which it blows without cessation, and is as inevitable as the
Gulf Stream; but also there are days when it is contending with healthy weather, and on such
days it will remit for half an hour, and the sun will begin to show
itself, and then the wind will come back and cover the whole sky with
clouds in ten minutes; and so on, every half-hour, through the whole
day; so that it is often impossible to go on with any kind of drawing
in color, the light being never for two seconds the same from morning
till evening.

5. It degrades, while it intensifies, ordinary storm; but before I read you any description of
its efforts in this kind, I must correct an impression which has
got abroad through the papers, that I speak as if the plague-wind
blew now always, and there were no more any natural weather.

On the contrary, the winter of 1878-9 was one of the most healthy and lovely I ever saw ice in;--Coniston
lake shone under the calm clear frost in one marble field, as strong as the floor of Milan
Cathedral, half a mile across and four miles down; and the first
entries in my diary which I read you shall be from the 22d to 26th
June, 1876, of perfectly lovely and natural weather.

"Sunday, 25th June, 1876.


And so they were. A lady's school might have come in, and have taken no harm by what happened.
It was worth a guinea to see the simple Colonel and his delight at the music. He forgot all
about the distinguished wits whom he had expected to see, in his pleasure over the glees, and
joined in all the choruses with an exceedingly sweet voice.

And now young Nadab commenced one of those surprising feats of Improvisation with which he
used to charm audiences. He took us all off and had rhymes pat about all the principal persons
in the room; when he came to the Colonel himself, he burst out--

A military gent I see, and while his face I scan, I think you'll all agree with me he came
from Hindostan. And by his side sits laughing free a youth with curly head, I think you'll
all agree with me that he was best in bed. Ritolderol, etc., etc.

The Colonel laughed immensely at this sally, and clapped his son, young Clive, on the shoulder.
"Hear what he says of you, sir? Clive, best be off to bed, my boy--ho, ho! No, no. We know
a trick worth two of that. 'We won't go home till morning, till daylight does appear.' Why
should we? Why shouldn't my boy have innocent pleasure? I was allowed none when I was a young
chap, and the severity was nearly the ruin of me. I must go and speak with that young man--the
most astonishing thing I ever heard in my life. What's his name? Mr. Nadab? Mr. Nadab; sir,
you have delighted me. May I make so free as to ask you to come and dine with me to-morrow
at six. I am always proud to make the acquaintance of men of genius, and you are one or my
name is not Newcome!"

"Sir, you do me the Honour," says Mr. Nadab, "and perhaps the day will come when the world
will do me justice,--may I put down your Honoured name for my book of poems?"

"Of course, my dear sir," says the enthusiastic Colonel, "I'll send them all over India. Put
me down for six copies and do me the favour to bring them to-morrow when you come to dinner."

And now Mr. Hoskins, asking if any gentleman would volunteer a song, what was our amazement
when the simple Colonel offered to sing himself, at which the room applauded vociferously;
whilst methought poor Clive Newcome hung down his head, and blushed as red as a peony.

The Colonel selected the ditty of "Wapping Old Stairs," which charming old song he sang so
pathetically that even the professional gentlemen buzzed a sincere applause, and some wags
who were inclined to jeer at the beginning of the performance, clinked their glasses and rapped
their sticks with quite a respectful enthusiasm. When the song was over, Clive held up his
head too; looked round with surprise and pleasure in his eyes; and we, I need not say, backed
our friend, delighted to see him come out of his queer scrape so triumphantly. The Colonel
bowed and smiled with very pleasant good-nature at our plaudits. There was something touching
in the naivetée and kindness of the placid and simple gentleman.

Whilst the Colonel had been singing his ballad there had come into the room a gentleman, by
name Captain Costigan, who was in his usual condition at this hour of the night. Holding on
by various tables, he had sidled up without accident to himself or any of the jugs and glasses
round about him, to the table where we sat, and seated himself warbling the refrain of the
Colonel's song. Then having procured a glass of whiskey and water he gave what he called one
of his prime songs. The unlucky wretch, who scarcely knew what he was doing or saying, selected
the most offensive song in his repertoire. At the end of the second verse the Colonel started
up, clapping on his hat, seizing his stick, and looking ferocious. "Silence!" he roared out.

"Hear, hear!" cried certain wags at a farther table. "Go on, Costigan!" said others.

"Go on!" cries the Colonel in his high voice, trembling with anger. "Does any gentleman say
go on? Does any man who has a wife and sisters or children at home, say go on? Do you dare,
sir, to call yourself a gentleman, and to say that you hold the King's commission, and to sit
amongst Christians and men of honour, and defile the ears of young boys with this wicked balderdash?"

"Why do you bring young boys here, old boy?" cries a voice of the malcontents.

"Why? Because I thought I was coming to a society of gentlemen," cried out the indignant Colonel.
"Because I never could have believed that Englishmen could meet together and allow a man, and
an old man, so to disgrace himself. For shame, you old wretch! Go home to your bed, you hoary
old sinner! And for my part, I'm not sorry that my son should see, for once in his life, to
what shame and degradation and dishonour, drunkenness and whiskey may bring a man. Never mind
the change, sir!--Curse the change!" says the Colonel, facing the amazed waiter. "Keep it till
you see me in this place again; which will be never--by George, never!" And shouldering his
stick, and scowling round at the company of scared bacchanalians, the indignant gentleman stalked
away, his boy after him.

Clive seemed rather shamedfaced, but I fear the rest of the company looked still more foolish.
For if the truth be told that uplifted cane of the Colonel's had somehow fallen on the back
of every man in the room.

While Clive and his father are becoming better acquainted let us pass on to Brighton, and glance
at the household of that good, brisk old lady, Clive's Aunt Honeyman. Now Aunt Honeyman was
a woman of spirit and resolution, and when she found her income sadly diminished by financial
reverses she brought her furniture to Brighton, also a faithful maid servant who had learned
her letters and worked her first sampler under Miss Honeyman's own eye, and whom she adored
all through her life. With this outfit the brisk little lady took a house, and let the upper
floors to lodgers, and because of her personal attractions and her good housekeeping her rooms
were seldom empty.

On the morning when we first visit Miss Honeyman's a gentleman had just applied there for rooms.
"Please to speak to mistress," says Hannah, the maid, opening the parlour door with a curtsey.
"A gentleman about the apartments, mum."

"Fife bet-rooms," says the man entering. "Six bets, two or dree sitting-rooms? We gome from
Dr. Good-enough."

"Are the apartments for you, sir?" says Miss Honeyman, looking up at the large gentleman.

"For my lady," answers the man.

"Had you not better take off your hat?" asks Miss Honeyman.

The man grins and takes off his hat. Whereupon Miss Honeyman, having heard also that a German's
physician has especially recommended Miss Honeyman's as a place in which one of his patients
can have a change of air and scene, informs the man that she can let his mistress have the
desired number of apartments. The man reports to his mistress, who descends to inspect the
apartments, and pronounces them exceedingly neat and pleasant and exactly what are wanted.
The baggage is forthwith ordered to be brought from the carriages. The little invalid, wrapped
in his shawl, is carried upstairs as gently as possible, while the young ladies, the governess,
the maids, are shown to their apartments. The eldest young lady, a slim black-haired young
lass of thirteen, frisks about the rooms, looks at all the pictures, runs in and out of the
veranda, tries the piano, and bursts out laughing at its wheezy jingle. She also kisses her
languid little brother laid on the sofa, and performs a hundred gay and agile motions suited
to her age.

"Oh, what a piano! Why, it is as cracked as Miss Quigley's voice!"

"My dear!" says mamma. The little languid boy bursts out into a jolly laugh.

"What funny pictures, mamma! Action with Count de Grasse; the death of General Wolfe; a portrait
of an officer, an old officer in blue, like grandpapa; Brasenose College, Oxford; what a funny
name."

At the idea of Brasenose College, another laugh comes from the invalid. "I suppose they've
all got brass noses there," he says; and he explodes at this joke. The poor little laugh ends
in a cough, and mamma's travelling basket, which contains everything, produces a bottle of
syrup, labelled "Master A. Newcome. A teaspoonful to be taken when the cough is troublesome."

"Oh, the delightful sea! the blue, the fresh, the ever free," sings the young lady, with a
shake. "How much better is this than going home and seeing those horrid factories and chimneys!
I love Dr. Goodenough for sending us here. What a sweet house it is. What nice rooms!"

Presently little Miss Honeyman makes her appearance in a large cap bristling with ribbons,
with her best chestnut front and her best black silk gown, on which her gold watch shines very
splendidly. She curtseys with dignity to her lodger, who vouchsafes a very slight inclination
of the head, saying that the apartments will do very well.

"And they have such a beautiful view of the sea!" cries Ethel.

"As if all the houses hadn't a view of the sea, Ethel! The price has been arranged, I think?
My servants will require a comfortable room to dine in--by themselves mam, if you please. My
governess and the younger children will dine together. My daughter dines with me--and my little
boy's dinner will be ready at two o'clock precisely if you please. It is now near one."

"Am I to understand--?" interposed Miss Honeyman.

"Oh! I have no doubt we shall understand each other, mam," cried Lady Ann Newcome, for it was
no other than that noble person, with her children, who had invaded the precincts of Miss Honeyman's
home. "Dr. Goodenough has given me a most satisfactory account of you--more satisfactory, perhaps,
than you are aware of. Breakfast and tea, if you please, will be served in the same manner
as dinner, and you will have the kindness to order fresh milk every morning for my little boy--ass's
milk. Dr. Goodenough has ordered ass's milk. Anything further I want I will communicate through
the man who first spoke to you--and that will do."

A heavy shower of rain was descending at this moment, and little Miss Honeyman, looking at
her lodger, who had sat down and taken up her book, said, "Have your ladyship's servants unpacked
your trunks?"

"What on earth, madam, have you--has that to do with the question?"

"They will be put to the trouble of packing again, I fear. I cannot provide--three times five
are fifteen--fifteen separate meals for seven persons--besides those of my own family. If your
servants cannot eat with mine, or in my kitchen, they and their mistress must go elsewhere.
And the sooner the better, madam, the sooner the better!" says Miss Honeyman, trembling with
indignation, and sitting down in a chair, spreading her silks.

"Do you know who I am?" asks Lady Ann, rising.

"Perfectly well, madam," says the other, "And had I known, you should never have come into
my house, that's more."

"Madam!" cries the lady, on which the poor little invalid, scared and nervous, and hungry for
his dinner, began to cry from his sofa.

"It will be a pity that the dear little boy should be disturbed. Dear little child, I have
often heard of him, and of you, miss," says the little householder, rising. "I will get you
some dinner, my dear, for Clive's sake. And meanwhile your ladyship will have the kindness
to seek for some other apartments--for not a bit shall my fire cook for any one else of your
company." And with this the indignant little landlady sailed out of the room.

"Gracious goodness! Who is the woman?" cries Lady Ann. "I never was so insulted in my life."

"Oh, mamma, it was you began!" says downright Ethel. "That is--Hush, Alfred dear,--Hush my
darling!"

"Oh, it was mamma began! I'm so hungry! I'm so hungry!" howled the little man on the sofa,
or off it rather, for he was now down on the ground kicking away the shawls which enveloped him.

"What is it, my boy? What is it, my blessed darling? You shall have your dinner! Give her all,
Ethel. There are the keys of my desk, there's my watch, there are my rings. Let her take my
all. The monster! The child must live! It can't go away in such a storm as this. Give me a
cloak, a parasol, anything--I'll go forth and get a lodging. I'll beg my bread from house to
house, if this fiend refuses me. Eat the biscuits, dear! A little of the syrup, Alfred darling;
it's very nice, love, and come to your old mother--your poor old mother."

Alfred roared out, "No, it's not n--ice; it's n-a-a-sty! I won't have syrup. I will have dinner."
The mother, whose embraces the child repelled with infantine kicks, plunged madly at the bells,
rang them all four vehemently, and ran downstairs towards the parlour, whence Miss Honeyman
was issuing.

The good lady had not at first known the names of her lodgers, until one of the nurses intrusted
with the care of Master Alfred's dinner informed her that she was entertaining Lady Ann Newcome;
and that the pretty girl was the fair Miss Ethel; the little sick boy, the little Alfred of
whom his cousin spoke, and of whom Clive had made a hundred little drawings in his rude way,
as he drew everybody. Then bidding Sally run off to St. James Street for a chicken, she saw
it put on the spit, and prepared a bread sauce, and composed a batter-pudding, as she only
knew how to make batter puddings. Then she went to array herself in her best clothes, as we
have seen; then she came to wait upon Lady Ann, not a little flurried as to the result of that
queer interview; then she whisked out of the drawing-room, as before has been shown; and, finding
the chicken roasted to a turn, the napkin and tray ready spread by Hannah the neat-handed,
she was bringing them up to the little patient when the frantic parent met her on the stair.

"Is it--is it for my child?" cried Lady Ann, reeling against the bannister.

"Yes, it's for the child," says Miss Honeyman, tossing up her head. "But nobody else has anything
in the house."

"God bless you! God bless you! A mother's bl--l-ess-ings go with you," gurgled the lady, who
was not, it must be confessed, a woman of strong moral character.

It was good to see the little man eating the fowl. Ethel, who had never cut anything in her
young existence, except her fingers now and then with her brother's and her governess's penknives,
bethought her of asking Miss Honeyman to carve the chicken. Lady Ann, with clasped hands and
streaming eyes, sat looking on at the ravishing scene.

"Why did you not let us know you were Clive's aunt?" Ethel asked, putting out her hand. The
old lady took hers very kindly, and said, "Because you didn't give me time,--and do you love
Clive, my dear?"

The reconciliation between Miss Honeyman and her lodger was perfect, and for a brief season
Lady Ann Newcome was in rapture with her new lodgings and every person and thing which they
contained. The drawing-rooms were fitted with the greatest taste; the dinner was exquisite;
were there ever such delicious veal cutlets, such fresh French beans?

"Indeed they were very good," said Miss Ethel, "I am so glad you like the house, and Clive,
and Miss Honeyman."

Ethel's mother was constantly falling in love with new acquaintances; so these raptures were
no novelty to her daughter. Ethel had had so many governesses, all darlings during the first
week, and monsters afterwards, that the poor child possessed none of the accomplishments of
her age. She could not play on the piano; she could not speak French well; she could not tell
you when gunpowder was invented; she had not the faintest idea of the date of the Norman Conquest,
or whether the earth went round the sun, or vice versa. She did not know the number of counties
in England, Scotland and Wales, let alone Ireland; she did not know the difference between
latitude and longitude. She had had so many governesses; their accounts differed; poor Ethel
was bewildered by a multiplicity of teachers, and thought herself a monster of ignorance. They
gave her a book at a Sunday school, and little girls of eight years old answered questions
of which she knew nothing. The place swam before her. She could not see the sun shining on
their fair flaxen heads and pretty faces. The rosy little children, holding up their eager
hands and crying the answer to this question and that, seemed mocking her. She seemed to read
in the book, "Oh, Ethel, you dunce, dunce, dunce!" She went home silent in the carriage, and
burst into bitter tears on her bed. Naturally a haughty girl of the highest spirit, resolute
and imperious, this little visit to the parish school taught Ethel lessons more valuable than
ever so much arithmetic and geography.

When Ethel was thirteen years old she had grown to be such a tall girl that she overtopped
her companions by a head or more, and morally perhaps, also, felt herself too tall for their
society. "Fancy myself," she thought, "dressing a doll like Lily Putland, or wearing a pinafore
like Lucy Tucker!" She did not care for their sports. She could not walk with them; it seemed
as if everyone stared; nor dance with them at the academy; nor attend the Cours de Litterature
Universelle et de Science Comprehensive of the professor then the mode. The smallest girls
took her up in the class. She was bewildered by the multitude of things they bade her learn.
At the youthful little assemblies of her sex, when, under the guide of their respected governesses,
the girls came to tea at six o'clock, dancing, charades, and so forth, Ethel herded not with
the children of her own age, nor yet with the teachers who sat apart at these assemblies, imparting
to each other their little wrongs. But Ethel romped with the little children, the rosy little
trots, and took them on her knees, and told them a thousand stories. By these she was adored,
and loved like a mother almost, for as such the hearty, kindly girl showed herself to them;
but at home she was alone, and intractable, and did battle with the governesses, and overcame
them one after another.

While Lady Ann Newcome and her children were at Brighton, Lady Kew, mother of Lady Ann, was
also staying there, but refused to visit the house in which her daughter was stopping for fear
that she herself might contract the disease from which her grandchildren were recovering. She
received news of them, however, through her grandson, Lord Kew, and his friend Jack Belsize,
who enjoyed dining with the old lady whenever they were given the opportunity. Having met their
cousins one day before dining with Lady Kew their news was most interesting and enthusiastic.

"That little chap who has just had the measles--he's a dear little brick," said Jack Belsize.
"And as for Miss Ethel--"

"Ethel is a trump, mam," says Lord Kew, slapping his hand on his knee.

"Ethel is a brick, and Alfred is a trump, I think you say," remarks Lady Kew, "and Barnes is
a snob. This is very satisfactory to know."

"We met the children out to-day," cries the enthusiastic Kew, "as I was driving Jack in the
drag, and I got out and talked to 'em. The little fellow wanted a drive and I said I would
drive him and Ethel, too, if she would come. Upon my word she's as pretty a girl as you can
see on a summer's day. And the governess said, no, of course; governesses always do. But I
said I was her uncle, and Jack paid her such a fine compliment that she finally let the children
take their seats beside me, and Jack went behind. We drove on to the Downs; my horses are young,
and when they get on the grass they are as if they were mad. They ran away, ever so far, and
I thought the carriage must upset. The poor little boy, who has lost his pluck in the fever,
began to cry; but that young girl, though she was as white as a sheet, never gave up for a
moment, and sat in her place like a man. We met nothing, luckily; and I pulled the horses in
after a mile or two, and I drove 'em into Brighton as quiet as if I had been driving a hearse.
And that little trump of an Ethel, what do you think she said? She said: 'I was not frightened,
but you must not tell mamma.' My aunt, it appears, was in a dreadful commotion. I ought to
have thought of that."

There is a brother of Sir Brian Newcome's staying with them, Lord Kew perceives; an East India
Colonel, a very fine-looking old boy. He was on the lookout for them, and when they came in
sight he despatched a boy who was with him, running like a lamplighter, back to their aunt
to say all was well. And he took little Alfred out of the carriage, and then helped out Ethel,
and said, "My dear, you are too pretty to scold; but you have given us all a great fright."
And then he made Kew and Jack a low bow, and stalked into the lodgings. Then they went up and
made their peace and were presented in form to the Colonel and his youthful cub.

"As fine a fellow as I ever saw," cries Jack Belsize. "The young chap is a great hand at drawing--upon
my life the best drawings I ever saw. And he was making a picture for little What-do-you-call-'im,
and Miss Newcome was looking over them. And Lady Ann pointed out the group to me, and said
how pretty it was."

In consequence of this conversation, which aroused her curiosity, Lady Kew sent a letter that
night to Lady Ann Newcome, desiring that Ethel should be sent to see her grandmother; Ethel,
who was no weakling in character despite her youth, and who always rebelled against her grandmother
and always fought on her Aunt Julia's side when that amiable invalid lady, who lived with her
mother, was oppressed by the dominating older woman.

From the foregoing facts we gather that Thomas Newcome had not been many weeks in England before
he favoured good little Miss Honeyman with a visit, to her great delight. You may be sure that
the visit was an event in her life. And she was especially pleased that it should occur at
the time when the Colonel's kinsfolk were staying under her roof. On the day of the Colonel's
arrival all the presents which Newcome had ever sent his sister-in-law from India had been
taken out of the cotton and lavender in which the faithful creature kept them. It was a fine
hot day in June, but I promise you Miss Honeyman wore her blazing scarlet Cashmere shawl; her
great brooch, representing the Taj of Agra, was in her collar; and her bracelets decorated
the sleeves round her lean old hands, which trembled with pleasure as they received the kind
grasp of the Colonel of colonels. How busy those hands had been that morning! What custards
they had whipped! What a triumph of pie-crusts they had achieved! Before Colonel Newcome had
been ten minutes in the house the celebrated veal-cutlets made their appearance. Was not the
whole house adorned in expectation of his coming? The good woman's eyes twinkled, the kind
old hand and voice shook, as, holding up a bright glass of Madeira, Miss Honeyman drank the
Colonel's health. "I promise you, my dear Colonel," says she, nodding her head, adorned with
a bristling superstructure of lace and ribbons, "I promise you, that I can drink your health
in good wine!" The wine was of his own sending, and so were the China firescreens, and the
sandal-wood work-box, and the ivory card case, and those magnificent pink and white chessmen,
carved like little sepoys and mandarins, with the castles on elephants' backs, George the Third
and his queen in pink ivory against the Emperor of China and lady in white--the delight of
Clive's childhood, the chief ornament of the old spinster's sitting-room.

Miss Honeyman's little feast was pronounced to be the perfection of cookery; and when the meal
was over, came a noise of little feet at the parlour door, which being opened, there appeared:
first, a tall nurse with a dancing baby; second and third, two little girls with little frocks,
little trowsers, long ringlets, blue eyes, and blue ribbons to match; fourth, Master Alfred,
now quite recovered from his illness and holding by the hand, fifth, Miss Ethel Newcome, blushing
like a rose.

Hannah, grinning, acted as mistress of the ceremonies, calling out the names of "Miss Newcome,
Master Newcome, to see the Colonel, if you please, ma'am," bobbing a curtsey, and giving a
knowing nod to Master Clive, as she smoothed her new silk apron. Miss Ethel did not cease blushing
as she advanced towards her uncle; and the honest campaigner started up, blushing too. Mr.
Clive rose also, as little Alfred, of whom he was a great friend, ran towards him. Clive rose,
laughed, nodded at Ethel, and ate ginger-bread nuts all at the same time. As for Colonel Thomas
Newcome and his niece, they fell in love with each other instantaneously, like Prince Camaralzaman
and the Princess of China.

"Mamma has sent us to bid you welcome to England, uncle," says Miss Ethel, advancing, and never
thinking for a moment of laying aside that fine blush which she brought into the room, and
which was her pretty symbol of youth and modesty and beauty.

He took a little slim white hand and laid it down on his brown palm, where it looked all the
whiter; he cleared the grizzled moustache from his mouth, and stooping down he kissed the little
white hand with a great deal of grace and dignity, after which he was forever the humble and
devoted admirer of that bright young girl.

Raising himself from his salute, he heard a pretty little infantile chorus. "How do you do,
uncle?" said girls number two and three, while the dancing baby in the arms of the bobbing
nurse babbled a welcome. Alfred looked up for a while at his uncle in the white trousers, and
then instantly proposed that Clive should make some drawings; and was on his knees at the next
moment. He was always climbing on somebody or something, or winding over chairs, curling through
bannisters, standing on somebody's head, or his own head; as his convalescence advanced, his
breakages were fearful. Miss Honeyman and Hannah talked about his dilapidations for years after.
When he was a jolly young officer in the Guards, and came to see them at Brighton, they showed
him the blue dragon Chayny jar on which he would sit, and over which he cried so fearfully
upon breaking it.

When this little party had gone out smiling to take its walk on the sea shore, the Colonel
from his balcony watched the slim figure of pretty Ethel, looked fondly after her, and as the
smoke of his cigar floated in the air, formed a fine castle in it, whereof Clive was Lord,
and Ethel Lady. "What a frank, generous, bright young creature is yonder!" thought he. "How
cheering and gay she is; how good to Miss Honeyman, to whom she behaved with just the respect
that was the old lady's due. How affectionate with her brothers and sisters! What a sweet voice
she had! What a pretty little white hand it is! When she gave it me, it looked like a little
white bird lying in mine."

Thus mused the Colonel, upon the charms of the young girl who was henceforth to occupy the
first place in his affection.

His admiration for her might have been still further heightened had he been at Lady Ann's breakfast
table some four or five weeks later, when Lady Ann and her nursery had just returned to London,
little Alfred being perfectly set up by a month of Brighton air. Barnes Newcome had just discovered
an article in the Newcome Independent commenting warmly upon a visit which Colonel Newcome
and Clive had recently paid to Newcome, the object of that visit having been the Colonel's
desire to gladden the eyes of his old nurse Sarah with a sight of him. Inhabitants of Newcome,
feeling that the same Sarah Mason, who was a much respected member of the community, was much
neglected by her rich and influential relatives in London, took great delight in commenting
upon the Colonel's attention to the aged woman. The article in the Independent on that subject
was anything but pleasing to the family pride of Mr. Barnes, who remarked in a sneering tone,
"My uncle the Colonel, and his amiable son, have been paying a visit to Newcome. That is the
news which the paper announces triumphantly," said Mr. Barnes.

"You are always sneering about our uncle," broke in Ethel, impetuously, "and saying unkind
things about Clive. Our uncle is a dear, good, kind man, and I love him. He came to Brighton
to see us, and went out every day for hours and hours with Alfred; and Clive, too, drew pictures
for him. And he is good, and kind, and generous, and honest as his father. Barnes is always
speaking ill of him behind his back; and Miss Honeyman is a dear little old woman too. Was
not she kind to Alfred, mamma, and did not she make him nice jelly?"

"Did you bring some of Miss Honeyman's lodging-house cards with you, Ethel?" sneered her brother,
"and had we not better hang up one or two in Lombard Street; hers and our other relation's,
Mrs. Mason?"

"My darling love, who is Mrs. Mason?" asks Lady Ann.

"Another member of the family, ma'am. She was cousin--"

"She was no such thing, sir," roars Sir Brian.

"She was relative and housemaid of my grandfather during his first marriage. She has retired
into private life in her native town of Newcome. The Colonel and young Clive have been spending
a few days with their elderly relative. It's all here in the paper, by Jove!" Mr. Barnes clenched
his fist and stamped upon the newspaper with much energy.

"And so they should go down and see her, and so the Colonel should love his nurse and not forget
his relations if they are old and poor!" cries Ethel, with a flush on her face, and tears starting
in her eyes. "The Colonel went to her like a kind, dear, good brave uncle as he is. The very
day I go to Newcome I'll go to see her." She caught a look of negation in her father's eye.
"I will go--that is, if papa will give me leave," says Miss Ethel, adding simply, "if we had
gone sooner there would not have been all this abuse of us in the papers." To which statement
her worldly father and brother perforce agreeing, we may congratulate good old nurse Sarah
upon adding to the list of her friends such a frank, open-hearted, high-spirited young woman
as Miss Ethel Newcome.

In spite of the notoriety given him in the newspapers by his visit to Nurse Sarah, at his native
place, he still remained in high favour with Sir Brian Newcome's family, where he paid almost
daily visits, and was received with affection at least by the ladies and children of the house.
Who was it that took the children to Astley's but Uncle Newcome? I saw him there in the midst
of a cluster of these little people, all children together, the little girls, Sir Brian's daughters,
holding each by a finger of his hands, young Masters Alfred and Edward clapping and hurrahing
by his side; while Mr. Clive and Miss Ethel sat in the back of the box enjoying the scene,
but with that decorum which belonged to their superior age and gravity. As for Clive, he was
in these matters much older than the grizzled old warrior his father. It did one good to hear
the Colonel's honest laughs at Clown's jokes, and to see the tenderness and simplicity with
which he watched over this happy brood of young ones. How lavishly did he supply them with
sweetmeats between the acts! There he sat in the midst of them, and ate an orange himself with
perfect satisfaction, and was eager to supply any luxury longed for by his young companions.

The Colonel's organ of benevolence was so large that he would have liked to administer bounties
to the young folks his nephews and nieces in Brianstone Square, as well as to their cousins
in Park Lane; but Mrs. Newcome was a great deal too virtuous to admit of such spoiling of children.
She took the poor gentleman to task for an attempt upon her boys when those lads came home
for their holidays, and caused them ruefully to give back the shining gold sovereigns with
which their uncle had thought to give them a treat. So the Colonel was obliged to confine his
benevolence to that branch of the family where it was graciously accepted.

Meanwhile the Colonel had a new interest to absorb his attention. He had taken a new house
at 120 Fitzroy Square in connection with that Indian friend of his, Mr. Binnie. The house being
taken, there was fine amusement for Clive, Mr. Binnie, and the Colonel, in frequenting sales,
in inspection of upholsterers' shops, and the purchase of furniture for the new mansion. There
were three masters with four or five servants under them. Irons for the Colonel and his son,
a smart boy with boots for Mr. Binnie; Mrs. Irons to cook and keep house, with a couple of
maids under her. The Colonel himself was great at making hash mutton, hotpot, and curry. What
cosy pipes did we not smoke in the dining-room, in the drawing-room, or where we would! What
pleasant evenings did we not have together.

Clive had a tutor--Grindley of Corpus--with whom the young gentleman did not fatigue his brains
very much, his great talent lying decidedly in drawing. He sketched the horses, he sketched
the dogs, all the servants, from the bleer-eyed boot-boy to the rosy cheeked lass whom the
housekeeper was always calling to come downstairs. He drew his father in all postures, and
jolly little Mr. Binnie too. Young Ridley, known to his young companions as J.J., was his daily
friend now, to the great joy of that young man, who considered Clive Newcome to be the most
splendid, fortunate, beautiful, high-born and gifted youth in the world. What generous boy
in his time has not worshipped somebody? Before the female enslaver makes her appearance, every
lad has a friend of friends, a crony of cronies, to whom he writes immense letters in vacation,
whom he cherishes in his hearts of hearts; whose sister he proposes to marry in after life;
whose purse he shares; for whom he will take a thrashing if need be; who is his hero. Clive
was John James's youthful divinity; when he wanted to draw Thaddeus of Warsaw, a Prince, Ivanhoe,
or some one splendid and egregious, it was Clive he took for a model. His heart leapt when
he saw the young fellow. He would walk cheerfully to Grey Friars with a letter or message for
C. on the chance of seeing him and getting a kind word from him or a shake of the hand. The
poor lad was known by the boys as Newcome's Punch. He was all but hunchback, long and lean
in the arm; sallow, with a great forehead and waving black hair, and large melancholy eyes.
But his genius for drawing was enormous, which fact Clive fully appreciated. Because of J.
J.'s admiration for Clive it was his joy to be with Clive constantly; and after Grindley's
classics and mathematics in the morning, the young men would attend Gandish's Drawing Academy,
together.

"Oh," says Clive, if you talk to him now about those early days, "it was a jolly time! I do
not believe there was any young fellow in London so happy."

Clive had many conversations with his father as to the profession which he should follow. As
regarded mathematical and classical learning, the elder Newcome was forced to admit that out
of every hundred boys there were fifty as clever as his own, and at least fifty more industrious;
the army in time of peace Colonel Newcome thought a bad trade for a young fellow so fond of
ease and pleasure as his son. His delight in the pencil was manifest to all. Were not his school
books full of caricatures of the masters? While his tutor was lecturing him, did he not draw
Grindley instinctively under his very nose? A painter Clive was determined to be, and nothing
else; and Clive, being then some sixteen years of age, began to study art under the eminent
Mr. Gandish of Soho.

It was that well-known portrait painter, Andrew Smee, Esq., R.A., who recommended Gandish to
Colonel Newcome one day when the two gentleman met at dinner at Lady Ann Newcome's. Mr. Smee
happened to examine some of Clive's drawings, which the young fellow had executed for his cousins.
Clive found no better amusement than in making pictures for them and would cheerfully pass
evening after evening in that direction. He had made a thousand sketches of Ethel before a
year was over; a year every day of which seemed to increase the attractions of the fair young
creature. Also, of course Clive drew Alfred and the nursery in general, Aunt Ann and the Blenheim
spaniels, the majestic John bringing in the coal-scuttle, and all persons or objects in that
establishment with which he was familiar.

"What a genius the lad has," the complimentary Mr. Smee averred; "what a force and individuality
there is in all his drawings! Look at his horses! Capital, by Jove, capital! And Alfred on
his pony, and Miss Ethel in her Spanish hat, with her hair flowing in the wind! I must take
this sketch, I positively must now, and show it to Landseer."

And the courtly artist daintily enveloped the drawing in a sheet of paper, put it away in his
hat, and vowed subsequently that the great painter had been delighted with the young man's
performance. Smee was not only charmed with Clive's skill as an artist, but thought his head
would be an admirable one to paint. Such a rich complexion, such fine turns in his hair! Such
eyes! To see real blue eyes was so rare now-a-days! And the Colonel too, if the Colonel would
but give him a few sittings, the grey uniform of the Bengal Cavalry, the silver lace, the little
bit of red ribbon just to warm up the picture! It was seldom, Mr. Smee declared, that an artist
could get such an opportunity for colour. But no cajoleries could induce the Colonel to sit
to any artist save one. There hangs in Clive's room now, a head, painted at one sitting, of
a man rather bald, with hair touched with grey, with a large moustache and a sweet mouth half
smiling beneath it, and melancholy eyes. Clive shows that portrait of their grandfather to
his children, and tells them that the whole world never saw a nobler gentleman.

Well, then; Clive having decided to become an artist, on a day marked with a white stone, Colonel
Newcome with his son and Mr. Smee, R. A., walked to Gandish's and entered the would-be artist
on the roll call of that famous academy, and of J. J. as well, for the Colonel had insisted
upon paying his expenses as an art student together with his son.

Mr. Gandish was an excellent master and the two lads made great progress under his excellent
training. Clive used to give droll accounts of the young disciples at Gandish's, who were of
various ages and conditions, and in whose company the young fellow took his place with that
good temper and gaiety which seldom deserted him and put him at ease wherever his fate led
him. Not one of the Gandishites but liked Clive, and at that period of his existence he enjoyed
himself in all kinds of ways, making himself popular with dancing folks and with drawing folks,
and the jolly king of his company everywhere. He gave entertainments in the rooms in Fitzroy
Square which were devoted to his use, inviting his father and Mr. Binnie now and then, but
the good Colonel did not often attend those parties. He saw that his presence rather silenced
the young men, and went away to play his rubber of whist at the club. And although time hung
a bit heavily on the good Colonel's hands, now that Clive's interests were separate from his
own, yet of nights as he heard Clive's companions tramping by his bedchamber door, where he
lay wakeful within, he was happy to think his son was happy. As for Clive, those were glorious
days for him. If he was successful in the Academy, he was doubly victorious out of it. His
person was handsome, his courage high, his gaiety and frankness delightful and winning. His
money was plenty and he spent it like a young king. He was not the most docile of Mr. Gandish's
pupils, and if the truth must be told about him, though one of the most frank, generous and
kind-hearted persons, was somewhat haughty and imperious. He had been known to lament since
that he was taken from school too early where a further course of thrashings would, he believed,
have done him good. He lamented that he was not sent to college, where if a young man receives
no other discipline at least he meets his equals in society and assuredly finds his betters;
whereas in Mr. Gandish's studio our young gentleman scarcely found a comrade that was not in
one way or other his flatterer, his inferior, his honest or dishonest admirer. The influence
of his family's rank and wealth acted more or less on all these simple folks, who would run
on his errands and vied with each other winning his favour. His very goodness of heart rendered
him a more easy prey to their flattery, and his kind and jovial disposition led him into company
from which he had much better have been away. In fact, as the Colonel did not attempt in any
way to check him in his youthful career of extravagance and experiences which were the result
of an excessive high spirit, our young gentleman at this time brought down upon himself much
adverse criticism for his behaviour, especially from his uncles. Because of this and other
reasons there was not much friendliness exhibited by the several branches of the family for
Clive and his father. Colonel Newcome, in spite of coldness, felt it his duty to make constant
attempts to remain on friendly terms at least with the wives of his stepbrothers. But after
he had called twice or thrice upon his sister-in-law in Brianstone Square, bringing as was
his wont a present for this little niece or a book for that, Mrs. Newcome gave him to understand
that the occupation of an English matron would not allow her to pass the mornings in idle gossip,
and with curtseys and fine speeches actually bowed her brother out of doors; and the honest
gentleman meekly left her, though with bewilderment as he thought of the different hospitality
to which he had been accustomed in the East, where no friend's house was ever closed to him,
where no neighbour was so busy but he had time to make Thomas Newcome welcome.

When Hobson Newcome's boys came home for the holidays, their kind uncle was for treating them
to the sights of the town, but here Virtue again interposed, and laid his interdict upon pleasure.
"Thank you, very much, my dear Colonel," says Virtue; "there never was surely such a kind,
affectionate, unselfish creature as you are, and so indulgent for children, but my boys and
yours are brought up on a very different plan. Excuse me for saying that I do not think it
is advisable that they should even see too much of each other, Clive's company is not good
for them."

"Great heavens, Maria!" cries the Colonel, starting up, "do you mean that my boy's society
is not good enough for any boy alive?"

Maria turned very red; she had said not more than she meant, but more than she meant to say.
"My dear Colonel, how hot we are! how angry you Indian gentlemen become with us poor women!
Your boy is much older than mine. He lives with artists, with all sorts of eccentric people.
Our children are bred on quite a different plan. Hobson will succeed his father in the bank,
and dear Samuel, I trust, will go into the church. I told you before the views I had regarding
the boys; but it was most kind of you to think of them--most generous and kind."

"That nabob of ours is a queer fish," Hobson Newcome remarked to his nephew Barnes. "He is
as proud as Lucifer; he is always taking huff about one thing or the other. He went off in
a fume the other night because your aunt objected to his taking the boys to the play. And then
he flew out about his boy, and said that my wife insulted him! I used to like that boy. Before
his father came he was a good lad enough--a jolly, brave little fellow. But since he has taken
this madcap freak of turning painter there is no understanding the chap. I don't care what
a fellow is, if he is a good fellow, but a painter is no trade at all! I don't like it, Barnes!"

To Lady Ann Newcome the Colonel's society was more welcome than to her sister-in-law, and the
affectionate gentleman never tired of doing kindnesses for her children, and consoled himself
as best he might for Clive's absences with his nephews and nieces, especially with Ethel, for
whom his admiration conceived at first sight never diminished. He found a fine occupation in
breaking a pretty little horse for her, of which he made her a present, and there was no horse
in the Park that was so handsome, and surely no girl who looked more beautiful than Ethel Newcome
with her broad hat and red ribbon, with her thick black locks waving round her bright face,
galloping along the ride on "Bhurtpore." Occasionally Clive was at their riding-parties, but
Ethel rallied him and treated him with such distance and dignity, at the same time looking
fondly and archly at her uncle, that Clive set her down as a very haughty, spoiled, aristocratic
young creature. In fact, the two young people were too much alike in disposition to agree perfectly,
and Ethel's parents were glad that it was so.

It was pleasant to watch the kind old face of Clive's father, that sweet young blushing lady
by his side, as the two rode homewards at sunset talking happily together. Ethel wanted to
know about battles; about lover's lamps, which she had read of in "Lalla Rookh." "Have you
ever seen them, uncle, floating down the Ganges of a night? About Indian widows, did you actually
see one burning, and hear her scream as you rode up?"

She wonders whether he will tell her anything about Clive's mother; how she must have loved
Uncle Newcome! Rambling happily from one subject to another Ethel commands: "Next year, when
I am presented at Court, you must come, too, sir! I insist upon it, you must come, too!"

"I will order a new uniform, Ethel," says her uncle.

The girl laughs. "When little Egbert took hold of your sword, and asked you how many people
you had killed, do you know I had the same question in my mind? I thought perhaps the King
would knight you instead of that horrid little Sir Danby Jilks, and I won't have you knighted
anymore!"

The Colonel, laughing, says he hopes Egbert won't ask Sir Danby Jilks how many men he has killed;
then thinking the joke too severe upon Sir Danby, hastens to narrate some anecdotes about the
courage of surgeons in general. Ethel declares that her uncle always will talk of other people's
courage, and never say a word about his own. So the pair talked kindly on, riding homewards
through the pleasant summer twilight. Mamma had gone out to dinner and there were cards for
three parties afterward.

"Oh, how I wish it was next year!" says Miss Ethel.

Many a splendid assembly and many a brilliant next year will the young creature enjoy; but
in the midst of her splendour and triumphs she will often think of that quiet happy season
before the world began for her, and of that dear old friend on whose arm she leaned while she
was yet a young girl.

On account of the ugly rumours spread abroad concerning young Clive's extravagant habits and
gaiety of living, also on account of the profession he had chosen, Sir Bryan Newcome's family
preferred to have young Clive see as little of his handsome Cousin Ethel as possible, and Ethel's
brother, Barnes, whose hatred for Clive was not untinged by jealousy, was the most vigorous
of the family in spreading disagreeable reports about his cousin, whom he spoke of as an impudent
young puppy.

Even old Lady Kew was particularly rude to Colonel Newcome and Clive. On Ethel's birthday she
had a small party chiefly of girls of her own age who came and played and sang together and
enjoyed such mild refreshments as sponge cake, jellies, tea, and the like. The Colonel, who
was invited to this little party, sent a fine present to his favourite Ethel; and Clive and
his friend J. J. made a funny series of drawings, representing the life of a young lady as
they imagined it, and drawing her progress from her cradle upwards: now engaged with her doll,
then with her dancing master; now marching in her backboard; now crying over her German lessons;
and dressed for her first ball finally, and bestowing her hand upon a dandy of preternatural
ugliness, who was kneeling at her feet as the happy man. This picture was the delight of the
laughing, happy girls; except, perhaps, the little cousins from Brianstone Square, who were
invited to Ethel's party, but were so overpowered by the prodigious new dresses in which their
mamma had attired them that they could admire nothing but their rustling pink frocks, their
enormous sashes, their lovely new silk stockings.

Lady Kew, coming to London, attended on the party, and presented her granddaughter with a sixpenny
pincushion. The Colonel had sent Ethel a beautiful little gold watch and chain. Her aunt had
complimented her with that refreshing work, "Allison's History of Europe," richly bound. Lady
Kew's pincushion made rather a poor figure among the gifts, whence probably arose her ladyship's
ill-humour.

Ethel's grandmother became exceedingly testy, when, the Colonel arriving, Ethel ran up to him
and thanked him for the beautiful watch, in return for which she gave him a kiss, which I daresay
amply repaid Colonel Newcome; and shortly after him Mr. Clive arrived. As he entered, all the
girls who had been admiring his pictures began to clap their hands. Mr. Clive Newcome blushed,
and looked none the worse for that indication of modesty.

Lady Kew had met Colonel Newcome a half-dozen times at her daughter's house; but on this occasion
she had quite forgotten him, for when the Colonel made a bow, her ladyship regarded him steadily,
and beckoning her daughter to her, asked who the gentleman was who had just kissed Ethel.

With the clapping of hands that greeted Clive's arrival, the Countess was by no means more
good-humoured. Not aware of her wrath, the young fellow, who had also previously been presented
to her, came forward presently to make her his compliments. "Pray, who are you?" she said,
looking at him very earnestly in the face. He told her his name.

"H'm," said Lady Kew, "I have heard of you, and I have heard very little good of you."

"Will your ladyship please to give me your informant?" cried out Colonel Newcome.

Barnes Newcome, who had condescended to attend his sister's little party, and had been languidly
watching the frolics of the young people, looked very much alarmed, and hastened to soften
the incident by a change of conversation.

But the attitude of Lady Kew and young Barnes was only a reflection of the attitude of Ethel's
parents concerning Clive, and Ethel, who was really friendly towards him, found it difficult
to deny the charges which were constantly brought against the boy. The truth was the young
fellow enjoyed life, as one of his age and spirit might be expected to do; but he did very
little harm and meant less; and was quite unconscious of the reputation which he was gaining.

There had been a long-standing promise that Clive and his father were to go to Newcome at Christmas;
and I daresay Ethel proposed to reform the young prodigal, if prodigal he was, for she busied
herself delightedly in preparing the apartments for their guests and putting off her visit
to this pleasant neighbour, or that pretty scene in the vicinity, until her uncle should come
and they might enjoy the excursion together. And before the arrival of her relatives, Ethel,
with one of her young brothers, went to see Mrs. Mason and introduced herself as Colonel Newcome's
niece, and came back charmed with the old lady and eager once more in defence of Clive, for
had she not seen the kindest letter which Clive had written to old Mrs. Mason, and the beautiful
drawing of his father on horseback, and in regimentals, waving his sword in front of the gallant
Bengal Cavalry, which the lad had sent down to the good old woman? He could not be very bad,
Ethel thought, who was so kind and thoughtful for the poor. And the young lady went home quite
fired with enthusiasm for her cousin, but encountered Barnes, who was more than usually bitter
and sarcastic on the subject. Ethel lost her temper, and then her firmness, while bursting
into tears she taxed Barnes with cruelty for uttering stories to his cousin's disadvantage
and for pursuing with constant slander one of the very best of men. But notwithstanding her
defence of the Colonel and Clive, when they came to Newcome for the Christmas holidays, there
was no Ethel there. She had gone on a visit to her sick aunt. Colonel Newcome passed the holidays
sadly without her, and Clive consoled himself by knocking down pheasants with Sir Brian's keepers;
and increased his cousin's attachment for him by breaking the knees of Barnes's favourite mare
out hunting. It was a dreary holiday; father and son were glad enough to get away from it,
and to return to their own humbler quarters in London.

Thomas Newcome had now been for three years in the possession of that joy which his soul longed
after, and yet in spite of his happiness, his honest face grew more melancholy, his loose clothes
hung only the looser on his lean limbs; he ate his meals without appetite; his nights were
restless and he would sit for hours silent, and was constantly finding business which took
him to distant quarters of England. Notwithstanding this change in him the Colonel insisted
that he was perfectly happy and contented, but the truth was, his heart was aching with the
knowledge that Clive had occupations, ideas, associates, in which the elder could take no interest.
Sitting in his blank, cheerless bedroom, Newcome could hear the lad and his friends making
merry and breaking out in roars of laughter from time to time. The Colonel longed to share
in the merriment, but he knew that the party would be hushed if he joined it, that the younger
men were happier and freer without him, and without laying any blame upon them for this natural
state of affairs, it saddened the days and nights of our genial Colonel.

Clive, meanwhile, passed through the course of study prescribed by Mr. Gandish and drew every
cast and statue in that gentleman's studio. Grindley, his tutor, getting a curacy, Clive did
not replace him, but took a course of modern languages, which he learned with great rapidity.
And now, being strong enough to paint without a master, Mr. Clive must needs have a studio,
as there was no good light in the house in Fitzroy Square. If his kind father felt any pang
even at this temporary parting, he was greatly soothed and pleased by a little mark of attention
on Clive's part. He walked over with Colonel Newcome to see the new studio, with its tall centre
window, and its curtains and hard wardrobes, china jars, pieces of armour, and other artistic
properties, and with a very sweet smile of kindness and affection lighting up his honest face,
took out a house-key and gave it to his father: "That's your key, sir," he said to the Colonel;
"and you must be my first sitter, please, father; for, though I am to be a historical painter,
I shall condescend to do a few portraits, you know." The Colonel grasped his son's hand as
Clive fondly put the other hand on his father's shoulder. Then Colonel Newcome walked away
for a minute or two, and came back wiping his moustache with his handkerchief, and still holding
the key in the other hand. He spoke about some trivial subject when he returned; but his voice
quite trembled, his face glowed with love and pleasure, and the little act of affection compensated
him for many weary hours of solitude. It is certain that Clive worked much better after he
had this apartment of his own, and meals at home were gayer; and the rides with his father
more frequent and agreeable. The Colonel used his key not infrequently, and found Clive and
his friend J. J. as a general thing absorbed in executing historical subjects on the largest
possible canvases. Meanwhile Colonel Newcome was preparing his mind to leave his idol, who
he knew would be happy without as with him. During the three years since he had come from India
the Colonel had spent money lavishly and had also been obliged to pay dearly for some of Clive's
boyish extravagances. At first, the Colonel had thought he might retire from the army altogether,
but experience showed him that he could not live upon his income. He proposed now to return
to India to get his promotion as full Colonel when the thousand a year to which that would
entitle him, together with his other investments, would be ample for Clive and himself to live
on. While the Colonel's thoughts were absorbed in this matter his favourite Ethel was constantly
away with her grandmother. The Colonel went to see her at Brighton, and once, twice, thrice,
Lady Kew's door was denied to him. Once when the Colonel encountered his pretty Ethel with
her riding master she greeted him affectionately, but when he rode up to her she looked so
constrained, when he talked about Clive she was so reserved, when he left her, so sad, he could
only feel pain and regret. Back he went to London, having in a week only caught this single
glance of his darling, but filled with determination to have a frank talk with his sister-in-law,
Lady Ann, and if possible to mend the family disagreement and turn the tide of Lady Ann's affection
again towards his son. This he attempted to do, and would have succeeded had not Barnes Newcome
been the head of the house. As we know, his opinion of Clive was not to that young man's advantage.
These opinions were imparted to his Uncle Hobson at the bank, and Uncle Hobson carried them
home to his wife, who took an early opportunity of repeating them to the Colonel, and the Colonel
was brought to see that Barnes was his boy's enemy, and words very likely passed between them,
for Thomas Newcome took a new banker at this time, and was very angry because Hobson Brothers
wrote to him to say that he had overdrawn his account. "I am sure there is some screw loose,"
remarked Clive to a friend, "and that my father and the people in Park Lane have disagreed,
because he goes there very little now; and he promised to go to Court when Ethel was presented
and he didn't go." This state of affairs between the members of the Newcome family continued
for some months. Then, happily, a truce was declared, the quarrel between the Newcome brothers
came to an end--for that time at least--and was followed by a rather showy reconciliation and
a family dinner at Brianstone Square. Everybody was bent upon being happy and gracious. It
was "My dear brother, how do you do?" from Sir Brian. "My dear Colonel, how glad we are to
see you! How well you look!" from Lady Ann. Ethel Newcome ran to him with both hands out, an
eager welcome on her beautiful face. And even Lady Kew held out her hand to Colonel Newcome,
saying briskly: "Colonel, it is an age since we met," and turning to Clive with equal graciousness
to say, "Mr. Clive, let me shake hands with you; I have heard all sorts of good of you, that
you have been painting the most beautiful things, that you are going to be quite famous." There
was no doubt about it,--it was an evening of reconciliation on every side.

Ethel was so happy to see her dear uncle that she had no eyes for any one else, until Clive
advancing, those bright eyes became brighter still as she saw him; and as she looked she saw
a very handsome fellow, for Clive at that time was of the ornamental class of mankind--a customer
to tailors, a wearer of handsome rings, shirt studs, long hair, and the like; nor could he
help, in his costume or his nature, being picturesque, generous, and splendid. Silver dressing
cases and brocade morning gowns were in him a sort of propriety at this season of his youth.
It was a pleasure to persons of colder temperament to sun themselves in the warmth of his bright
looks and generous humour. His laughter cheered one like wine. I do not know that he was very
witty; but he was pleasant. He was prone to blush; the history of a generous trait moistened
his eyes instantly. He was instinctively fond of children and of the other sex from one year
old to eighty. Coming from the Derby once and being stopped on the road in a lock of carriages
during which the people in a carriage ahead saluted us with many insulting epithets, and seized
the heads of our leaders, Clive in a twinkling jumped off the box, and the next minute we saw
him engaged with a half dozen of the enemy: his hat gone, his fair hair falling off his face,
his blue eyes flashing fire, his lips and nostrils quivering with wrath. His father sat back
in the carriage looking on with delight and wonder while a policeman separated the warriors.
Clive ascended the box again, with his coat gashed from waist to shoulder. I hardly ever saw
the elder Newcome in such a state of triumph.

While we have been making this sketch of Clive, Ethel was standing looking at him, and the
blushing youth cast down his eyes before hers while her face assumed a look of arch humour.
And now let us have a likeness of Ethel. She was seventeen years old; rather taller than the
majority of girls; her face somewhat grave and haughty, but on occasion brightening with humour
or beaming with kindliness and affection. Too quick to detect affectation or insincerity in
others, too impatient of dulness or pomposity, she was more sarcastic now than she became when
after-years of suffering had softened her nature. Truth looked out of her bright eyes, and
rose up armed and flashed scorn or denial when she encountered flattery or meanness or imposture.

But those who had no cause to fear her keenness or her coldness admired her beauty; nor could
the famous Parisian model whom Clive said she resembled be more perfect in form than this young
lady. Her hair and eyebrows were jet black, but her complexion was dazzlingly fair and her
cheeks as red as those belonging by right to a blonde. In her black hair there was a slight
natural ripple. Her eyes were grey; her mouth rather large; her teeth were regular and white,
her voice was low and sweet; and her smile, when it lighted up her face and eyes, as beautiful
as spring sunshine; also her eyes could lighten and flash often, and sometimes, though rarely,
rain. As for her figure, the tall, slender form clad in a simple white muslin robe in which
her fair arms were enveloped, and which was caught at her slim waist by a blue ribbon, let
us make a respectful bow to that fair image of youth, health, and modesty, and fancy it as
pretty as we will.

Not yet overshadowed by the cloud of Colonel Newcome's departure, light-hearted in the joy
of reconciliation and meeting, once again full of high spirits and mindful of no moment beyond
the present, the two cousins never looked brighter or happier, and as Colonel Newcome gazed
upon them in the freshness of their youth and vigour his heart was filled with delight.

Not many days after the dinner the good Colonel found it necessary to break the news of his
intended departure to Clive. His resolution to go being taken, and having been obliged to dip
somewhat deeply into the little purse he had set aside for European expenses to help a kinsman
in distress, the Colonel's departure came somewhat sooner than he had expected. But, as he
said, "A year sooner or later, what does it matter? Clive will go away and work at his art,
and see the great schools of painting while I am absent. I thought at one time how pleasant
it would be to accompany him. I fancy now a lad is not the better for being always tied to
his parents' apron-strings. You young fellows are too clever for me. I haven't learned your
ideas or read your books. I feel myself very often an old damper in your company. I will go
back, sir, where I have some friends, and where I am somebody still. I know an honest face
or two, white and brown, that will lighten up in the old regiment when they see Tom Newcome again."

With this resolution taken, the Colonel began saying farewell to his friends. He and Clive
made a pilgrimage to Grey Friars; and the Colonel ran down to Newcome to give Mrs. Mason a
parting benediction; went to all the boys' and girls' schools where his little protégés were,
so as to be able to take the very latest account of the young folks to their parents in India;
and thence proceeded to Brighton to pass a little time with good Miss Honeyman. With Sir Brian's
family he parted on very good terms. I believe Sir Brian even accompanied him downstairs from
the drawing-room in Park Lane, and actually saw his brother into his cab, but as for Ethel,
she was not going to be put off with this sort of parting; and the next morning a cab dashed
up to Fitzroy Square and she was closeted with Colonel Newcome for five minutes, and when he
led her back to the carriage there were tears in his eyes. Then came the day when Clive and
his father travelled together to Southampton, where a group of the Colonel's faithful friends
were assembled to say a "God bless you" to their dear old friend, and see the vessel sail.
To the end Clive remained with his father and went below with him, and when the last bell was
ringing, came from below looking very pale. The plank was drawn after him almost as soon as
he stepped on land, and the vessel had sailed.

Although Thomas Newcome had gone back to India in search of more money, he was nevertheless
rather a wealthy man and was able to leave a hundred a year in England to be transferred to
his boy as soon as he came of age. He also left a considerable annual sum to be paid to the
boy, and so as soon as the parting was over and his affairs were settled, Clive was free to
start on his travels, to study art in new lands, accompanied by his faithful friend J.J. They
went first to Antwerp; thence to Brussels, and next Clive's correspondents received a letter
from Bonn: in which Master Clive said, "And whom should I find here but Aunt Ann, Ethel, Miss
Quigley and the little ones. Uncle Brian is staying at Aix, and, upon my conscience, I think
my pretty cousin looks prettier every day. J.J. and I were climbing a little hill which leads
to a ruin, when I heard a little voice cry, 'Hello! it's Clive! Hooray, Clive,' and an ass
came down the incline with a little pair of white trousers at an immensely wide angle over
the donkey's back, and there was little Alfred grinning with all his might.

"He turned his beast and was for galloping up the hill again, I suppose to inform his relations;
but the donkey refused with many kicks, one of which sent Alfred plunging amongst the stones,
and we were rubbing him down just as the rest of the party came upon us. Miss Quigley looked
very grim on an old white pony; my aunt was on a black horse that might have turned grey, he
is so old. Then came two donkeys-full of children, with Kuhn as supercargo; then Ethel on donkey
back, too, with a bunch of wild flowers in her hand, a great straw hat with a crimson ribbon,
a white muslin jacket, you know, bound at the waist with a ribbon of the first, and a dark
skirt, with a shawl round her feet, which Kuhn had arranged. As she stopped, the donkey fell
to cropping greens in the hedge; the trees there chequered her white dress and face with shadow.
Her eyes, hair, and forehead were in shadow, too, but the light was all upon her right cheek.
Upon her shoulder down to her arm, which was of a warmer white, and on the bunch of flowers
which she held, blue, yellow, and red poppies, and so forth.

"J. J. says, 'I think the birds began to sing louder when she came.' We have both agreed that
she is the handsomest woman in England. It's not her form merely, which is certainly as yet
too thin and a little angular; it is her colour. I do not care for women or pictures without
colour. Oh, ye carnations! Oh, such black hair and solemn eyebrows. It seems to me the roses
and carnations have bloomed again since we saw them last in London, when they were drooping
from the exposure to night air, candle light, and heated ballrooms.

"Here I was in the midst of a regiment of donkeys bearing a crowd of relations; J. J. standing
modestly in the background, beggars completing the group. Throw in the Rhine in the distance
flashing by the Seven Mountains--but mind and make Ethel the principal figure: if you make
her like she certainly will be, and other lights will be only minor fires. You may paint her
form, but can't paint her colour."

Thus wrote Clive from Bonn, and now that the old Countess and Barnes were away, the barrier
between Clive and this family was withdrawn. The young folks who loved him were free to see
him as often as he would come. They were going to Baden: would he come, too? He was glad enough
to go with them, and to travel in the orbit of such a lovely girl as Ethel Newcome, whose beauty
made all the passengers on all the steamers look round and admire. The journey was all sunshine
and pleasure and novelty; and I like to think of the pretty girl and the gallant young fellow
enjoying this holiday. Few sights are more pleasant than to watch a happy, manly English youth,
freehanded and generous-hearted, content and good-humour shining in his honest face, pleased
and pleasing, eager, active, and thankful for services, and exercising bravely his noble youthful
privilege to be happy and to enjoy. As for J. J., he, too, had his share of enjoyment. Clive
was still his hero as ever, his patron, his splendid young prince and chieftain. Who was so
brave, who was so handsome, generous, witty as Clive? To hear Clive sing, as the lad would
whilst they were seated at their work, or driving along on this happy journey, through fair
landscapes in the sunshine, gave J. J. the keenest pleasure; his wit was a little slow, but
he would laugh with his eyes at Clive's sallies, or ponder over them and explode with laughter
presently, giving a new source of amusement to these merry travellers, and little Alfred would
laugh at J.J.'s laughing; and so, with a hundred harmless jokes to enliven, and the ever-changing,
ever-charming smiles of Nature to cheer and accompany it, the happy day's journey would come
to an end.

So they travelled by the accustomed route to the prettiest town of all places where Pleasure
has set up her tents, and there enjoyed themselves to the fullest extent.

Among Colonel Newcome's papers to which the family biographer has had access, there are a couple
of letters from Clive, dated Baden this time, and full of happiness, gaiety, and affection.
Letter No. 1 says: "Ethel is the prettiest girl here. At the Assemblies all the princes, counts,
dukes, etc., are dying to dance with her. She sends her dearest love to her uncle." By the
side of the words "Prettiest girl" are written in a frank female hand the monosyllable "stuff";
and as a note to the expression "dearest love," with a star to mark the text and the note,
are squeezed in the same feminine characters at the bottom of Clive's page the words "that
I do. E. N."

In letter No. 2, Clive, after giving amusing details of life at Baden and the company whom
he met there, concludes with this: "Ethel is looking over my shoulder. She thinks me such a
delightful creature that she is never easy without me. She bids me to say that I am the best
of sons and cousins, and am, in a word, a darling du--" Nominally these officers are chosen
by each house, but as a matter of practice the choice is made by
the caucus of the majority party, which is held a few days before
the organization of each house.

551. THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.--A few days before the organization of the House,
the caucus of the majority party settles upon its choice for Speaker. The candidate chosen invariably
receives the solid vote of his party in the House, since it is a
rule of the caucus that party members who take part in its discussions
must abide by its decisions.

As chairman of the House, the Speaker performs the customary duties of a presiding officer. He
opens and closes the sittings of the House, maintains order, and decides questions of parliamentary
law. The Speaker acts as the official representative of the House in its collective capacity,
and authenticates all official proceedings by his signature. It is he who announces the order
of business, states the question, and announces the vote. He also has the right to appoint
the chairman of the committee of the whole. The Speaker takes part in debate and may also vote.

552.
POWER OF THE SPEAKER OVER LEGISLATION.--In addition to performing
the customary duties of a presiding officer, the Speaker possesses
important powers over legislation.

The imperfect organization of the House, and its lack of effective
leadership, as well as the vast amount of business coming before it,
have tended to centralize much of the legislative power of the House
in the hands of this officer.

The Speaker of the House has the power to determine to which committee a bill shall be referred.
Thus he may determine the fate of a measure by sending it to a committee which he knows to be hostile
to the bill, or to a friendly committee, just as he likes.
 He had a Cornish pedigree which carried the Pendennises back
to the time of the Druids. He had had a piece of University education, and might have pursued
that career with honour, but in his second year at Oxford his father died insolvent, and he
was obliged to betake himself to the trade which he always detested. For some time he had a
hard struggle with poverty, but his manners were so gentleman-like and soothing that he was
called in to prescribe for some of the ladies in the best families of Bath. Then his humble
little shop became a smart one; then he shut it up altogether; then he had a gig with a man
to drive in; and before she died his poor old mother had the happiness of seeing her beloved
son step into a close carriage of his own; with the arms of the family of Pendennis handsomely
emblazoned on the panels. He married Miss Helen Thistlewood, a very distant relative of the
noble family of Bareacres, having met that young lady under Lady Pentypool's roof.

The secret ambition of Mr. Pendennis had always been to be a gentleman. By prudence and economy,
his income was largely increased, and finally he sold his business for a handsome sum, and
retired forever from handling of the mortar and pestle, having purchased as a home the house
of Fair-Oaks, nearly a mile out of Clavering.

The estate was a beautiful one, and Arthur Pendennis, his son, being then but eight years of
age, dated his earliest recollections from that place.

Fair-Oaks lawn comes down to the little river Brawl, and on the other side were the plantations
and woods of Clavering Park. The park was let out in pasture when the Pendennises came first
to live at Fair-Oaks. Shutters were up in the house; a splendid free stone palace, with great
stairs, statues and porticos. Sir Richard Clavering, Sir Francis's grandfather, had commenced
the ruin of the family by the building of this palace: his successor had achieved the ruin
by living in it. The present Sir Francis was abroad somewhere, and until now nobody could be
found rich enough to rent that enormous mansion; through the deserted rooms, mouldy, clanking
halls, and dismal galleries of which Arthur Pendennis many a time walked trembling when he
was a boy. At sunset from the lawn of Fair-Oaks there was a pretty sight: it and the opposite
park of Clavering were in the habit of putting on a rich golden tinge, which became them both
wonderfully. The upper windows of the great house flamed so as to make your eyes wink; the
little river ran off noisily westward and was lost in sombre wood, behind which the towers
of the old abbey church of Clavering (whereby that town is called Clavering St. Mary's to the
present day) rose up in purple splendour. Little Arthur's figure and his mother's cast long
blue shadows over the grass: and he would repeat in a low voice (for a scene of great natural
beauty always moved the boy, who inherited this sensibility from his mother) certain lines
beginning, "These are thy glorious works. Parent of Good; Almighty! thine this universal frame,"
greatly to Mrs. Pendennis's delight. Such walks and conversation generally ended in a profusion
of filial and maternal embraces; for to love and to pray were the main occupations of this
dear woman's life; and I have often heard Pendennis say in his wild way, that he felt that
he was sure of going to heaven, for his mother never could be happy there without him.

As for John Pendennis, as the father of the family, and that sort of thing, everybody had the
greatest respect for him: and his orders were obeyed like those of the Medes and Persians.
His hat was as well brushed perhaps as that of any man in this empire. His meals were served
at the same minute every day, and woe to those who came late, as little Pen, a disorderly little
rascal, sometimes did. Prayers were recited, his letters were read, his business despatched,
his stables and garden inspected, his hen-houses and kennel, his barn and pig-sty visited,
always at regular hours. After dinner he always had a nap with the Globe newspaper on his knee,
and his yellow bandanna handkerchief on his face. And so, as his dinner took place at six o'clock
to a minute, and the sunset business alluded to may be supposed to have occurred at half-past
seven, it is probable that he did not much care for the view in front of his lawn windows,
or take any share in the poetry and caresses which were taking place there.

They seldom occurred in his presence. However frisky they were before, mother and child were
hushed and quiet when Mr. Pendennis walked into the drawing-room, his newspaper under his arm.
And here, while little Pen, buried in a great chair, read all the books on which he could lay
hold, the Squire perused his own articles in the Gardener's Gazette, or took a solemn hand
at piquet with Mrs. Pendennis, or an occasional friend from the village.

As for Mrs. Pendennis, she was conspicuous for her tranquil beauty, her natural sweetness and
kindness, and that simplicity and dignity which purity and innocence are sure to bestow upon
a handsome woman, and during her son's childhood and youth the boy thought of her as little
less than an angel, a supernatural being, all wisdom, love and beauty. But Mrs. Pendennis had
one weakness,--pride of family. She spoke of Mr. Pendennis as if he had been the Pope of Rome
on his throne, and she a cardinal kneeling at his feet, and giving him incense. Mr. Pendennis's
brother, the Major, she held to be a sort of Bayard among Majors, and as for her son Arthur,
she worshipped that youth with an ardour which the young scapegrace accepted almost as coolly
as the statue of the saint in St. Peter's receives the rapturous kisses which the faithful
deliver on his toe.

Notwithstanding his mother's worship of him, Arthur Pendennis's school-fellows at the Grey
Friars School state that as a boy he was in no way remarkable either as a dunce or as a scholar.
He never read to improve himself out of school-hours, but on the contrary devoured all the
novels, plays and poetry he could get hold of. He never was flogged, but it was a wonder how
he escaped the whippingpost. When he had money he spent it royally in tarts for himself and
his friends, and had been known to disburse nine and sixpence out of ten shillings awarded
to him in a single day. When he had no funds he went on tick. When he could get no credit he
went without, and was almost as happy. He had been known to take a thrashing for a crony without
saying a word; but a blow ever so slight from a friend would make him roar. To fighting he
was averse from his earliest youth, and indeed to physic, the Greek Grammar, or any other exertion,
and would engage in none of them, except at the last extremity. He seldom if ever told lies,
and never bullied little boys. Those masters or seniors who were kind to him, he loved with
boyish ardour. And though the Doctor, when he did not know his Horace, or could not construe
his Greek play, said that that boy Pendennis was a disgrace to the school, a candidate for
ruin in this world, and perdition in the next; a profligate who would most likely bring his
venerable father to ruin and his mother to a dishonoured grave, and the like--yet as the Doctor
made use of these compliments to most of the boys in the place, little Pen, at first uneasy
and terrified by these charges, became gradually accustomed to hear them; and he has not, in
fact, either murdered his parents or committed any act worthy of transportation or hanging
up to the present day.

Thus with various diversions and occupations his school days passed until he was about sixteen
years old, when he was suddenly called away from his academic studies.

It was at the close of the forenoon school, and Pen had been unnoticed all the previous part
of the morning till now, when the Doctor put him on to construe in a Greek play. He did not
know a word of it, though little Timmins, his form-fellow, was prompting him with all his might.
Pen had made a sad blunder or two, when the awful chief broke out upon him.

"Pendennis, sir," he said, "your idleness is incorrigible and your stupidity beyond example.
You are a disgrace to your school, and to your family, and I have no doubt will prove so in
after-life to your country. If that vice, sir, which is described to us as the root of all
evil, be really what moralists have represented, what a prodigious quantity of future crime
and wickedness are you, unhappy boy, laying the seed! Miserable trifler! A boy, sir, who does
not learn his Greek play cheats the parent who spends money for his education. A boy who cheats
his parent is not very far from robbing or forging upon his neighbour. A man who forges on
his neighbour pays the penalty of his crime at the gallows. And it is not such a one that I
pity, for he will be deservedly cut off, but his maddened and heartbroken parents, who are
driven to a premature grave by his crimes, or, if they live, drag on a wretched and dishonoured
old age. Go on, sir, and I warn you that the very next mistake that you make shall subject
you to the punishment of the rod. Who's that laughing? What ill-conditioned boy is there that
dares to laugh?" shouted the Doctor.

Indeed, while the master was making this oration, there was a general titter behind him in
the schoolroom. The orator had his back to the door of this ancient apartment, which was open,
and a gentleman who was quite familiar with the place (for both Major Arthur, Pen's uncle,
and Mr. John Pendennis had been at the school) was asking the fifth-form boy who sat by the
door for Pendennis. The lad, grinning, pointed to the culprit against whom the Doctor was pouring
out the thunders of his just wrath. Major Pendennis could not help laughing. He remembered
having stood under that very pillar where Pen the younger now stood, and having been assaulted
by the Doctor's predecessor years and years ago. The intelligence was "passed round" in an
instant that it was Pendennis's uncle, and a hundred young faces, wondering and giggling, between
terror and laughter, turned now to the newcomer and then to the awful Doctor.

The Major asked the fifth-form boy to carry his card up to the Doctor, which the lad did with
an arch look. Major Pendennis had written on the card: "I must take A.P. home; his father is
very ill."

As the Doctor received the card, and stopped his harangue with rather a scared look, the laughter
of the boys, half constrained until then, burst out in a general shout. "Silence!" roared out
the Doctor, stamping with his foot. Pen looked up and saw who was his deliverer; the Major
beckoned to him gravely, and, tumbling down his books, Pen went across.

The Doctor took out his watch. It was two minutes to one. "We will take the Juvenal at afternoon
school," he said, nodding to the Captain, and all the boys, understanding the signal, gathered
up their books and poured out of the hall.

Young Pen saw by his uncle's face that something had happened at home. "Is there anything the
matter with--my mother?" he said. He could hardly speak for emotion and the tears which were
ready to start.

"No," said the Major, "but your father's very ill. Go and pack your trunk directly; I have
got a post-chaise at the gate."

Pen went off quickly to his boarding-house to do as his uncle bade him; and the Doctor, now
left alone in the schoolroom, came out to shake hands with the Major.

"There is nothing serious, I hope," said the Doctor. "It is a pity to take the boy otherwise.
He is a good boy, rather idle and unenergetic, but an honest, gentleman-like little fellow,
though I can't get him to construe as I wish. Won't you come in and have some luncheon? My
wife will be very happy to see you."

But Major Pendennis declined the luncheon. He said his brother was very ill, and had had a
fit the day before, and it was a great question if they should see him alive.

"There's no other son, is there?" said the Doctor. The Major answered "No."

"And there's a good eh--a good eh--property, I believe?" asked the other in an off-hand way.

"H'm--so-so," said the Major. Whereupon this colloquy came to an end. And Arthur Pendennis
got into a post-chaise with his uncle, never to come back to school any more.

As the chaise drove through Clavering, the ostler standing whistling under the archway of the
Clavering Arms winked to the postilion ominously, as much as to say all was over. The gardener's
wife came and opened the lodge-gates and let the travellers through with a silent shake of
the head. All the blinds were down at Fair-Oaks; and the face of the old footman was as blank
when he let them in. Arthur's face was white, too, with terror more than with grief. Whatever
of warmth and love the deceased man might have had, and he adored his wife, and loved and admired
his son with all his heart, he had shut them up within himself; nor had the boy ever been able
to penetrate that frigid outward barrier.

A little girl, who was Mrs. Pendennis's adopted daughter, the child of a dear old friend, peered
for a moment under the blinds as the chaise came up, opened the door from the stairs into the
hall, and there taking Arthur's hand silently as he stooped down to kiss her, led him upstairs
to his mother. What passed between that lady and the boy is not of import; a veil should be
thrown over those sacred emotions of love and grief.

As for Arthur Pendennis, after that awful shock which the sight of his dead father must have
produced on him, and the pity and feeling which such an event no doubt occasioned, I am not
sure that in the very moment of the grief, and as he embraced his mother and tenderly consoled
her and promised to love her forever, there was not springing up in his breast a sort of secret
triumph and exultation. He was the chief now and lord. He was Pendennis; and all round about
him were his servants and handmaids.

"You'll never send me away," little Laura said, tripping by him and holding his hand. "You
won't send me to school, will you, Arthur?"

Arthur kissed her and patted her head. No, she shouldn't go to school. As for going himself
that was quite out of the question. He had determined that his life should be all holidays
for the future; that he wouldn't get up till he liked, or stand the bullying of the Doctor
any more; and made a hundred such day-dreams and resolves for the future. Then in due time
they buried John Pendennis, Esquire, in the Abbey Church of Clavering St. Mary's, and Arthur
Pendennis reigned in his stead.

Arthur was about sixteen years old when he began to reign; in person he had what his friends
would call a dumpy, but his mamma styled, a neat little figure. His hair was of a healthy brown
colour, which looked like gold in the sunshine. His face was round, rosy, freckled, and good-humoured.
In fact, without being a beauty, he had such a frank, good-natured, kind face and laughed so
merrily at you out of his honest blue eyes that no wonder Mrs. Pendennis thought him the pride
of the whole country. You may be certain he never went back to school; the discipline of the
establishment did not suit him, and he liked being at home much better. The question of his
return was debated, and his uncle was for his going back. The Doctor wrote his opinion that
it was most important for Arthur's success in after life that he should know a Greek play thoroughly,
but Pen adroitly managed to hint to his mother what a dangerous place Grey Friars was, and
what sad wild fellows some of the chaps there were, and the timid soul, taking alarm at once,
acceded to his desire to stay at home.

Then Pen's uncle offered to use his influence with his Royal Highness, the Commander-in-Chief,
to get Pen a commission in the Foot Guards. Pen's heart leaped at this: he had been to hear
the band at St. James's play on a Sunday, when he went out to his uncle. He had seen Tom Ricketts,
of the fourth form, who used to wear a jacket and trousers so ludicrously tight that the elder
boys could not forbear using him in the quality of a butt or "cockshy"--he had seen this very
Ricketts arrayed in crimson and gold, with an immense bearskin cap on his head, staggering
under the colours of the regiment. Tom had recognised him and gave him a patronising nod--Tom,
a little wretch whom he had cut over the back with a hockey-stick last quarter, and there he
was in the centre of the square, rallying round the flag of his county, surrounded by bayonets,
cross-belts, and scarlet, the band blowing trumpets and banging cymbals--talking familiarly
to immense warriors with tufts to their chins and Waterloo medals. What would not Pen have
given to enter such a service?

But Helen Pendennis, when this point was proposed to her by her son, put on a face full of
terror and alarm, and confessed that she should be very unhappy if he thought of entering the
army. Now Pen would as soon have cut off his nose and ears as deliberately and of malice aforethought
have made his mother unhappy; and as he was of such a generous disposition that he would give
away anything to any one, he instantly made a present of his visionary red coat and epaulettes
to his mother.

She thought him the noblest creature in the world. But Major Pendennis, when the offer of the
commission was acknowledged and refused, wrote back a curt and somewhat angry letter to the
widow, and thought his nephew was rather a spooney.

He was contented, however, when he saw the boy's performances out hunting at Christmas, when
the Major came down as usual to Fair-Oaks. Pen had a very good mare, and rode her with uncommon
pluck and grace. He took his fences with great coolness and judgment. He wrote to the chaps
at school about his topboots, and his feats across country. He began to think seriously of
a scarlet coat: and his mother must own that she thought it would become him remarkably well;
though, of course, she passed hours of anguish during his absence, and daily expected to see
him brought home on a shutter.

With these amusements, in rather too great plenty, it must not be assumed that Pen neglected
his studies altogether. He had a natural taste for reading every possible kind of book which
did not fall into his school course. It was only when they forced his head into the waters
of knowledge that he refused to drink. He devoured all the books at home and ransacked the
neighbouring book-cases. He found at Clavering an old cargo of French novels which he read
with all his might; and he would sit for hours perched on the topmost bar of Dr. Portman's
library steps with an old folio on his knees.

Mr. Smirke, Dr. Portman's curate, was engaged at a liberal salary to pass several hours daily
with the young gentleman. He was a decent scholar and mathematician, and taught Pen as much
as the lad was ever disposed to learn, which was not much. Pen soon took the measure of his
tutor, who, when he came riding into the court-yard at Fair-Oaks on his pony, turned out his
toes so absurdly, and left such a gap between his knees and the saddle, that it was impossible
for any lad endowed with a sense of humour to respect such a rider. He nearly killed Smirke
with terror by putting him on his mare, and taking him a ride over a common where the county
fox-hounds happened to meet.

Smirke and his pupil read the ancient poets together, and rattled through them at a pleasant
rate, very different from that steady grubbing pace with which he was obliged to go over the
classis ground at Grey Friars, scenting out each word and digging up every root in the way.
Pen never liked to halt, but made his tutor construe when he was at fault, and thus galloped
through the Iliad and the Odyssey and the charming, wicked Aristophanes. But he went so fast
that though he certainly galloped through a considerable extent of the ancient country, he
clean forgot it in after life. Besides the ancient poets, Pen read the English with great gusto.
Smirke sighed and shook his head sadly both about Byron and Moore. But Pen was a sworn fire-worshipper
and a corsair; he had them by heart, and used to take little Laura into the window and say,
"Zuleika, I am not thy brother," in tones so tragic that they caused the solemn little maid
to open her great eyes still wider. She sat sewing at Mrs. Pendennis's knee, listening to Pen
reading to her without understanding one word of what he said.

He read Shakespeare to his mother, and Byron and Pope, and his favourite "Lalla Rookh" and
Bishop Heber and Mrs. Hemans, and about this period of his existence began to write verses
of his own. He broke out in the poet's corner of the County Chronicle with some verses with
which he was perfectly well satisfied. His are the verses signed NEP addressed "To a Tear,"
"On the Anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo," "On St. Bartholomew's Day," etc., etc., all
of which masterpieces Mrs. Pendennis kept along with his first socks, the first cutting of
his hair, his bottle and other interesting relics of his infancy. His genius at this time was
of a decidedly gloomy cast. He brought his mother a tragedy in which, though he killed sixteen
people before the second act, she laughed so that he thrust the masterpiece into the fire in
a pet. Solomon would have written, had he lived in our day; but we will be content with the ends
at present. No scientific people, as I told you at first, have taken any notice of the more
or less temporary phenomena of which I have to-night given you register. But, from the constant
arrangements of the universe, the same respecting which the thinkers of former time came to
the conclusion that they were essentially good, and to end in good,
the modern speculator arrives at the quite opposite and extremely
uncomfortable conclusion that they are essentially evil, and to end--in
nothing.

And I have here a volume,[C] before quoted, by a very foolish and very lugubrious author, who
in his concluding chapter gives us,--founded, you will observe, on a series of 'ifs,'--the
latest scientific views concerning the order of creation. "We have spoken already about a medium
pervading space"--this is the Scientific God, you observe, differing from the unscientific one, in
that the purest in heart cannot see--nor the softest in heart feel--this spacious Deity--a Medium,
pervading space--"the office of which"

(italics all mine) "appears to be to degrade and ultimately extinguish, all differential motion.
It has been well pointed out by Thomson, that, looked at in this light, the universe is a
system that had a beginning and must have an end, for a process of degradation cannot be eternal.
If we could view the Universe as a candle not lit, then it is perhaps conceivable to regard
it as having been always in existence; but if we regard it rather as a candle that has been lit,
we become absolutely certain that it cannot have been burning from eternity, and that a time will
come when it will cease to burn. We are led to look to a beginning in which the particles
of matter were in a diffuse chaotic state, but endowed with the power of gravitation; and we
are led to look to an end in which the whole Universe will be one equally heated inert mass,
and from which everything like life, or motion, or beauty, will have
utterly gone away."

Do you wish me to congratulate you on this extremely cheerful result of telescopic and microscopic
observation, and so at once close my lecture? or may I venture yet to trespass on your time
by stating to you any of the more comfortable views held by persons
who did not regard the universe in what my author humorously calls
"this light"?

In the peculiarly characteristic notice with which
the 'Daily News' honored my last week's lecture, that courteous journal
charged me, in the metaphorical term now classical on Exchange, with
"hedging," to conceal my own opinions. Notwithstanding his sentimental mood, Pen was so normal in mind
and body that he slept as soundly as ever, but when he awoke he felt himself to be many years
older than yesterday. He dressed himself in some of his finest clothes, and came down to breakfast,
patronising his mother and little Laura, who wondered at his grand appearance, and asked him
to tell her what the play was about.

Pen laughed and declined to tell her. Then she asked him why he had got on his fine pin and
beautiful new waistcoat?

Pen blushed and said that Mr. Foker was reading with a tutor at Baymouth, a very learned man;
and as he was himself to go to college he was anxious to ride over--and--just see what their
course of reading was. The truth was Pen had resolved that he must see Foker that morning and
find out all that was possible concerning the object of his last night's enthusiasm; and soon
after breakfast he was on his horse galloping away towards Baymouth like a madman.

From that time the lad's chief object in life was visiting the theatre, or Miss Fotheringay
herself, to whom he had speedily received an introduction; and although she was a young woman
not at all conversant with the social side of life with which he was familiar, she was nevertheless
fascinating to Pen, who saw her always in the glamour of lime lights and applause. It was not
long before Mrs. Pendennis discovered the lad's new interest, which naturally disquieted her.
Finally, however, for reasons of her own, she assented to Pen's suggestion that Miss Fotheringay
was to appear as Ophelia in a benefit performance.

"Suppose we were to go--Shakespeare, you know, mother. We can get horses from the Clavering
Arms," he said. Little Laura sprang up with delight; she longed for a play. The mother was
delighted that Pen should suggest their going, and in her good-humour asked Mr. Smirke to be
one of the party. They arrived at the theatre ahead of time, and were cordially saluted by
Mr. Foker and a friend, who sat in a box near theirs. The young fellows saluted Pen cordially,
and examined his party with approval; for little Laura was a pretty red-cheeked girl with a
quantity of shining brown ringlets, and Mrs. Pendennis, dressed in black velvet, with a diamond
cross which she wore on great occasions, looked uncommonly handsome and majestic.

"Who is that odd-looking person bowing to you, Arthur?" Mrs. Pendennis asked of her son, after
a critical examination of the audience.

Pen blushed a great deal. "His name is Captain Costigan, ma'am," he said, "a Peninsular officer."
Pen did not volunteer anything more; and how was Mrs. Pendennis to know that Mr. Costigan was
the father of Miss Fotheringay?

We have nothing to do with the play except to say that Ophelia looked lovely, and performed
with admirable wild pathos, laughing, weeping, gazing wildly, waving her beautiful white arms
and flinging about her snatches of flowers and songs with the most charming madness. What an
opportunity her splendid black hair had of tossing over her shoulders! She made the most charming
corpse ever seen, and while Hamlet and Laertes were battling in her grave she was looking out
from the back scenes with some curiosity towards Pen's box, and the family party assembled in it.

There was but one voice in her praise there. Mrs. Pendennis was in ecstasies with her beauty.
Little Laura was bewildered by the piece and the Ghost, and the play within the play, but cried
out great praises of that beautiful young creature, Ophelia. Pen was charmed with the effect
which she produced on his mother, and the clergyman on his part was exceedingly enthusiastic.

When the curtain fell upon that group of slaughtered personages who are despatched so suddenly
at the end of "Hamlet," and whose death astonished poor little Laura, there was an immense
shouting and applause from all quarters of the house. There was a roar of bravoes rang through
the house; Pen bellowing with the loudest. "Fotheringay! Fotheringay!" Even Mrs. Pendennis
began to wave about her pocket-handkerchief, and little Laura danced, laughed, clapped, and
looked up at Pen with wonder.

If Pen had been alone with his mother in the carriage as they drove home that night he would
have told her the extent of his devotion for Miss Fotheringay, but he had no chance to do so,
and it remained for that good lady to hear of her boy's intimacy with the actress from good
Dr. Portman, who, on the following evening, happening to see Pen in Miss Fotheringay's company
and much absorbed by her charms, lost no time in hurrying to Mrs. Pendennis with the news.
Now, although Mrs. Pendennis had been wise enough to appreciate Pen's infatuation, she had
looked upon it as the merest boyish fancy, induced by the glamour of the stage, and did not
dream that there was a personal intimacy behind it. She heard Dr. Portman's statement in horrified
silence, and before she slept that night had despatched letters to Major Pendennis demanding
his immediate return from London to help her in the management of her son at this critical
point in his youthful career.

Although loath to leave London, Major Pendennis straightway came to Fair-Oaks. He came; he
saw the situation at a glance; and after a prolonged conversation with Mrs. Pendennis he summoned
Pen himself. That young man having strung up his nerves, and prepared himself for the encounter,
determined to face the awful uncle, with all the courage and dignity of the famous family which
he represented. He marched into Major Pendennis's presence with a most severe and warlike expression,
as if to say, "Come on, I am ready."

The old man of the world, as he surveyed the boy's demeanour, could hardly help a grin at his
admirable pompous simplicity, and having a shrewd notion that threats and tragic exaltations
would have no effect upon the boy, said with the most good-humoured smile in the world, as
he shook Pen's passive fingers gaily: "Well, Pen, my boy, tell us all about it!"

Helen was delighted with the generosity of the Major's good-humour. On the contrary, it quite
took aback and disappointed poor Pen, whose nerves were strung up for a tragedy, and who felt
that his grand entrance was altogether balked and ludicrous. He blushed and winced with mortified
vanity and bewilderment. He felt immensely inclined to begin to cry. "I--I didn't know you
were come till just now," he said; "is--is--town very full, I suppose?"

If Pen could hardly gulp his tears down it was all the Major could do to keep from laughter.
He turned round and shot a comical glance at Mrs. Pendennis, who, too, felt that the scene
was at once ridiculous and sentimental. And so, having nothing to say, she went up and kissed
Mr. Pen, while the Major said: "Come, come, Pen, my good fellow, tell us the whole story."

Pen got back at once to his tragic and heroical air while he told the story of his devotion
to the charming Miss Fotheringay, to which the Major gave quiet attention, and then asked many
practical questions, and made so many remarks of a worldly-wise nature that the boy was obliged
to give in and acknowledge the sound wisdom of them, and also before the interview was over
he gave his mother a promise that he would never do anything which would bring shame upon the
family; which promise given, the Major could contain his gravity at the situation no longer,
but burst into a fit of laughter so infectious that Pen was obliged to join in it. This sent
them with great good-humour into Mrs. Pendennis's drawing-room, and she was pleased to hear
the Major and Pen laughing together as they walked across the hall with the Major's arm laid
gayly on Pen's shoulder. The pair came to the tea-table in the highest spirits. The Major's
politeness was beyond expression. He was secretly delighted with himself that he had been able
to win such a victory over the young fellow's feelings. He had never tasted such good tea,
and such bread was only to be had in the country. He asked Mrs. Pendennis for one of her charming
songs. He then made Pen sing, and was delighted at the beauty of the boy's voice; he made his
nephew fetch his maps and drawings, and praised them as really remarkable works of talent in
a young fellow; he complimented him on his French pronunciation. He flattered the simple boy
to the extent of his ability, and when bedtime came mother and son went to their rooms perfectly
enchanted with him.

Unwilling to leave his work half done, the Major remained at Fair-Oaks for some time that he
might watch his nephew's actions. Pen never rode over to Chatteris but that the Major found
out on what errand the boy had been. Faithful to his plan, he gave his nephew no hindrance.
Yet somehow the constant feeling that his uncle's eye was upon him made Pen go less frequently
to sigh away his soul at the feet of his charmer than he had done before his uncle's arrival.
But even so, and despite Pen's promise to his mother, the Major felt that if he were to succeed
in permanently curing the lad of his interest in the actress, it would be well to have more
help in achieving it. In pursuance of this aim, the Major went to Chatteris himself privately,
sought out the actress's father, and presented to him the practical facts of his nephew's extreme
youth and lack of money, as hindrances to his devotion going further. After a rather heated
argument with Captain Costigan, that gentleman was made to understand the situation, and finally
gave his promise so to present the case to his daughter, that she should herself write a letter
to Pen setting forth her firm determination to have no more intercourse with him.

Captain Costigan was as good as his word, and his letter to Pen was sent immediately. A few
lines from Miss Costigan were enclosed. She agreed in the decision of her papa, pointed out
several reasons why they should meet no more, and thanked him for his kindness and friendship.

Major Pendennis had won a complete victory, and his secret delight at having rescued Pen from
an unwise attachment was only equalled by his regret at the real suffering he was obliged to
allow the lad to go through.

After receiving the letter Pen rushed wildly off to Chatteris; but in vain attempted to see
Miss Fotheringay, for whom he left a letter enclosed to her father. The enclosure was returned
by Mr. Costigan, who begged that all correspondence might end; and after one or two further
attempts of the lad's, Captain Costigan insisted that their acquaintance should cease. He cut
Pen in the street. As Arthur and Foker were pacing the street one day they came upon the daughter
on her father's arm. She passed without any nod of recognition. Foker felt poor Pen trembling
on his arm.

His uncle wanted him to travel, and his mother urged him, too, for he was in a state of restless
unhappiness. But he said point blank he would not go, and his mother was too fond, and his
uncle too wise, to force him. Whenever Miss Fotheringay acted, he rode over to the Chatteris
theatre and saw her; and between times found the life at Fair-Oaks extremely dreary and uninteresting.
He sometimes played backgammon with his mother, or took dinner with Dr. Portman or some other
neighbour; these were the chief of his pleasures; or he would listen to his mother's simple
music of summer evenings. But he was very restless and wretched in spite of all. By the pond
and under a tree, which was his favourite resort in moods of depression, Pen, at that time,
composed a number of poems suitable to his misery--over which verses he blushed in after days,
wondering how he could have ever invented such rubbish. He had his hot and cold fits, his days
of sullenness and peevishness, and occasional mad paroxysms of rage and longing, in which fits
his horse would be saddled and galloped fiercely about the country, bringing him back in such
a state of despair as brought much worry to his mother and the Major. In fact, Pen's attitude
towards life and his actions at that time were so unlike what they should have been at his
age that his proceedings tortured his mother not a little, and her anxiety would have led her
often to interfere with Pen's doings had not the Major constantly checked her; fancying that
he saw a favourable turn in Pen's malady, which was shown by a violent attack of writing verses;
also spouting them as he sat with the home party of evenings; and one day the Major found a
great bookful of original verses in the lad's study. Also he discovered that the young gentleman
had a very creditable appetite for his meals, and slept soundly at night. From these symptoms
the Major argued that Pen was leaving behind him his infatuation.

Dr. Portman was of the opinion that Pen should go to college. He thought the time had come
for the boy to leave his old surroundings, and, besides study, have a moderate amount of the
best society, too. Pen, who was thoroughly out of harmony with his present surroundings, gloomily
said he would go, and in consequence of this decision not many weeks later the widow and Laura
nervously set about filling trunks with his books, and linen, and making all necessary preparation
for his departure, writing cards with the name of Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, which were duly
nailed on the boxes; at which both the widow and Laura looked with tearful eyes.

A night soon came when the coach, with echoing horn and blazing lamps, stopped at the lodge
gate of Fair-Oaks, and Pen's trunks and his Uncle's were placed on the roof of the carriage,
into which the pair presently afterwards entered. Mrs. Pendennis and Laura were standing by
the evergreens of the shrubbery, their figures lighted up by the coach lamps. The guard cried
"All right"; in another instant the carriage whirled onward; the lights disappeared, and his
mother's heart and prayers went with them. Her sainted benedictions followed the departing
boy. He had left the home-nest in which he had been chafing; eager to go forth and try his
restless wings.

How lonely the house was without him! The corded trunks and book-boxes were there in his empty
study. Laura asked leave to come and sleep in her aunt's room: and when she cried herself to
sleep there, the mother went softly into Pen's vacant chamber, and knelt down by the bed on
which the moon shone, and there prayed for her boy, as mothers only know how to plead.

Pen passed a few days at the Major's lodgings in London, of which he wrote a droll account
to his dearest mother; and she and Laura read that letter, and those which followed, many,
many times, and brooded over them, while Pen and the Major were arriving at Oxbridge; and Pen
was becoming acquainted with his surroundings. The boxes that his mother had packed with so
much care arrived in a few days. Pen was touched as he read the cards in the dear well-known
hand, and as he arranged in their places all the books, and all the linen and table-cloths
which Helen had selected for him from the family stock, and all the hundred simple gifts of
home. Then came the Major's leave-taking, and truth to tell our friend Pen was not sorry when
he was left alone to enter upon his new career, and we may be sure that the Major on his part
was very glad to have done his duty by Pen, and to have finished that irksome work. Having
left Pen in the company of Harry Foker, who would introduce him to the best set at the University,
the Major rushed off to London and again took up his accustomed life.

We are not about to go through young Pen's academical career very minutely. During the first
term of his university life he attended lectures with tolerable regularity, but soon discovering
that he had little taste for pursuing the exact sciences, he gave up his attendance at that
course and announced that he proposed to devote himself exclusively to Greek and Roman Literature.

Mrs. Pendennis was for her part quite satisfied that her darling boy should pursue that branch
of learning for which he had the greatest inclination; and only besought him not to ruin his
health by too much study, for she had heard the most melancholy stories of young students who
by overfatigue had brought on brain-fevers, and perished untimely in the midst of their university
career. Pen's health, which was always delicate, was to be regarded, as she justly said, beyond
all considerations or vain honours. Pen, although not aware of any lurking disease which was
likely to endanger his life, yet kindly promised his mamma not to sit up reading too late of
nights, and stuck to his word in this respect with a great deal more tenacity of resolution
than he exhibited upon some other occasions, when perhaps he was a little remiss.

Presently he began to find that he learned little good in the classical lecture. His fellow-students
there were too dull, as in mathematics they were too learned for him. Pen grew weary of hearing
the students and tutor blunder through a few lines of a play which he could read in a tenth
part of the time which they gave to it. After all, private reading, he decided, was the only
study which was really profitable, and he announced to his mamma that he should read by himself
a great deal more and in public a great deal less. That excellent woman knew no more about
Homer than she did about Algebra, but she was quite contented with Pen's arrangements regarding
his course of study, and felt perfectly confident that her dear boy would get the place which
he merited.

Pen did not come home until after Christmas, a little to the fond mother's disappointment,
and Laura's, who was longing for him to make a fine snow fortification, such as he had made
three winters before. But he was invited to Logwood, Lady Agnes Foker's, where there were private
theatricals, and a gay Christmas party of very fine folks, some of whom Major Pendennis would
on no account have his nephew neglect. However, he stayed at home for the last three weeks
of the vacation, and Laura had the opportunity of remarking what a quantity of fine new clothes
he brought with him, and his mother admired his improved appearance and manly and decided tone.

He had not come home at Easter; but when he arrived for the long vacation he brought more smart
clothes; appearing in the morning in wonderful shooting-jackets, with remarkable buttons; and
in the evening in gorgeous velvet waistcoats, with richly embroidered cravats, and curious
linen. And as she pried about his room, she saw, oh, such a beautiful dressing-case, with silver
mountings, and a quantity of lovely rings and jewellery. And he had a new French watch and
gold chain, in place of the big old chronometer, with its bunch of jingling seals, which had
hung from the fob of John Pendennis. It was but a few months back Pen had longed for this watch,
which he thought the most splendid and august time-piece in the world; and just before he went
to college, Helen had taken it out of her trinket box and given it to Pen with a solemn and
appropriate little speech respecting his father's virtues and the proper use of time. This
portly and valuable chronometer Pen now pronounced to be out of date, and indeed made some
comparisons between it and a warming-pan, which Laura thought disrespectful; and he left it
in a drawer in the company of soiled primrose gloves and cravats which had gone out of favour.
His horse Pen pronounced no longer up to his weight, and swapped her for another for which
he had to pay rather a heavy figure. Mrs. Pendennis gave the boy the money for the new horse,
and Laura cried when the old one was fetched away.

Arthur's allowances were liberal at this time, and thus he, the only son of a country gentleman,
and of a gentleman-like bearing and person, was looked up to as a lad of much more consequence
than he really was. His manner was frank, brave and perhaps a little impertinent, as becomes
a high-spirited youth. He was generous and freehanded with his money, loved joviality, and
had a good voice for a song. He rode well to hounds, appeared in pink as became a young buck,
and managed to run up fine bills in a number of quarters. In fact, he had almost every taste
to a considerable degree. He was very fond of books of all sorts and had a very fair taste
in matters of art; also a great partiality for fine clothes and expensive jewellery.

In the course of his second year he had become one of the men of fashion in the University,
and a leader of the faithful band who hung around him and wondered at him and loved him and
imitated him. Now, it is easy to calculate that with such tastes as Mr. Pen possessed he must
in the course of two or three years spend or owe a very handsome sum of money. As he was not
of a calculating turn he certainly found himself frequently in debt, but this did not affect
his gaiety of spirit. He got a prodigious in the University and was hailed as a sort of Crichton:
and as for the English verse prize, although Jones carried it that year, the undergraduates
thought Pen's a much finer poem, and he had his verses printed at his own expense, and distributed
in gilt morocco covers amongst his acquaintance.

Amidst his friends, and a host of them there were, Pen passed more than two brilliant and happy
years. He had his fill of pleasure and popularity. No dinner or supper party was complete without
him. He became the favourite and leader of young men who were his superiors in wealth and station,
but also did not neglect the humblest man of his acquaintance in order to curry favour with
the richest young grandee in the University. He became famous and popular: not that he did
much, but there was a general idea that he could do a great deal if he chose. "Ah, if Pendennis
would only try" the men said, "he might do anything." One by one the University honours were
lost by him, until he ceased to compete. But he got a declamation prize and brought home to
his mother and Laura a set of prize books begilt with the college arms, and so magnificent
that the ladies thought that Pen had won the largest honour which Oxbridge was capable of awarding.

Vacation after vacation passed without the desired news that Pen had sat for any scholarship
or won any honour, and Pen grew rebellious and unhappy, and there was a tacit feud between
Dr. Portman, who was disappointed in Arthur, and the lad himself. Mrs. Pendennis, hearing Dr.
Portman prophesy that Pen would come to ruin, trembled in her heart, and little Laura also--Laura
who had grown to be a fine young stripling, graceful and fair, clinging to her adopted mother
and worshipping her with a passionate affection. Both of these women felt that their boy was
changed. He was no longer the artless Pen of old days, so brave, so impetuous, so tender. He
spent little of his vacations at home, but went on visits, and scared the quiet pair at Fair-Oaks
by stories of great houses to which he had been invited, and by talking of lords without their
titles.

But even with all his weaknesses there was a kindness and frankness about Arthur Pendennis
which won most people who came in contact with him, and made it impossible to resist his good-nature,
or in his worst moments not to hope for his rescue from utter ruin. At the time of his career
of university pleasure he would leave the gayest party to sit with a sick friend and was only
too ready to share any money which he had with a poorer one.

In his third year at college the duns began to gather awfully round about him, and descended
upon him in such a number that the tutors were scandalised, and even brave-hearted Pen was
scared. Hearing of his nephew's extravagances, Major Pendennis interviewed that young man,
and was thunderstruck at the extent of his liabilities after receiving Pen's dismal confession
of the trouble in which he was involved.

Perhaps it was because she was so tender and good that Pen was terrified lest his mother should
know of his sins. "I can't bear to break it to her," he said to the tutor, in an agony of grief.
"Oh! sir, I've been a villain to her!"

--and he repented, and asked himself, Why, why, did his uncle insist upon the necessity of
living with great people, and in how much did all his grand acquaintance profit him?

They were not shy of him, but Pen thought they were, and slunk from them during his last terms
at college. He was as gloomy as a death's-head at parties, which he avoided of his own part,
or to which his young friends soon ceased to invite him. Everybody knew that Pendennis was
"hard up."

At last came the Degree Examinations. Many a young man of his year, whose hob-nailed shoes
Pen had derided, and whose face or coat he had caricatured, many a man whom he had treated
with scorn in the lecture-room or crushed with his eloquence in the debating club, many of
his own set who had not half his brains, but a little regularity and constancy of occupation,
took high places in the honours or passed within decent credit. And where in the list was Pen,
the superb; Pen, the wit and dandy; Pen, the poet and orator? Ah, where was Pen, the widow's
darling and sole pride? Let us hide our heads and shut up the page. The lists came out; and
a dreadful rumour rushed through the University, that Pendennis of Boniface was plucked.

During the latter part of Pen's university career the Major had become very proud of Arthur
on account of his high spirits, frank manners, and high, gentleman-like bearing. He made more
than one visit to Oxbridge and had an almost paternal fondness for Pen, whom he bragged about
at his clubs, and introduced with pleasure into his conversation. He boasted everywhere of
the boy's great talents and of the brilliant degree he was going to take as he wrote over and
over again to Pen's mother, who for her part was ready to believe anything that anybody chose
to say in favour of her son.

And all this pride and affection of uncle and mother had been trampled down by Pen's wicked
extravagance and idleness. I don't envy Pen's feelings as he thought of what he had done. He
had marred at its outset what might have been a brilliant career. He had dipped ungenerously
into a generous mother's purse, and basely and recklessly spent her little income. Poor Arthur
Pendennis felt perfectly convinced that all England would remark the absence of his name from
the examination lists and talk about his misfortune. His wounded tutor, his many duns, the
undergraduates--how could he bear to look any of them in the face now? After receiving the
news of his disgrace he rushed to his rooms and there penned a letter to his tutor full of
thanks, regards, remorse and despair, requesting that his name might be taken off the college
books, and intimating a wish that death might speedily end the woes of the disgraced Arthur
Pendennis. Then he slunk out, scarcely knowing where he went, taking the unfrequented little
lanes at the backs of the college buildings until he found himself some miles distant from
Oxbridge. As he went up a hill, a drizzling January rain beating in his face and his ragged
gown flying behind him, for he had not taken it off since the morning, a post-chaise came rattling
up the road with a young gentleman in it who caught sight of poor Pen's pale face, jumped out
of the carriage and ran towards him, exclaiming, "I say,--Hello, old boy, where are you going,
and what's the row now?"

"I am going where I deserve to go," said Pen.

"This ain't the way," said his friend Spavin, smiling. "I say, Pen, don't take on because you
are plucked. It is nothing when you are used to it. I've been plucked three times, old boy,
and after the first time I didn't care. You'll have better luck next time."

Pen looked at his early acquaintance who had been plucked, who had been rusticated, who had
only after repeated failures learned to read and write correctly, but who, in spite of all
these drawbacks had attained the honour of a degree.

"This man has passed," he thought, "and I have failed." It was almost too much for him to bear.

"Good-bye," said he; "I am very glad you are through. Don't let me keep you. I am in a hurry--I
am going to town to-night."

"Gammon!" said his friend, "this ain't the way to town; this is the Fenbury road, I tell you."

"I was just going to turn back," Pen said.

"All the coaches are full with the men going down," Spavin said. Pen winced. "You'd not get
a place for a ten-pound note. Get in here. I'll drop you where you have a chance of the Fenbury
mail. I'll lend you a hat and coat; I've got lots. Come along; jump in, old boy--go it, leathers!"

And in this way Pen found himself in Mr. Spavin's post-chaise and rode with that gentleman
as far as the Ram Inn at Mudford, fifteen miles from Oxbridge, where the Fenbury mail changed
horses, and where Pen got a place on to London.

The next day there was an immense excitement at Oxbridge, where, for some time, a rumour prevailed,
to the terror of Pen's tutor and tradesmen, that Pendennis, maddened at losing his degree,
had made away with himself. A battered cap, in which his name was almost discernible, together
with a seal bearing his crest of an eagle looking at a now extinct sun, had been found three
miles on the Fenbury road, near a mill stream; and for four-and-twenty hours it was supposed
that poor Pen had flung himself into the stream, until letters arrived from him, bearing the
London post-mark.

The coach reached London at the dreary hour of five; and he hastened to the inn at Covent Garden,
where the ever-wakeful porter admitted him, and showed him to a bed. Pen looked hard at the
man, and wondered whether Boots knew he was plucked? When in bed he could not sleep there.
He tossed about restlessly until the appearance of daylight, when he sprang up desperately,
and walked off to his uncle's lodgings in Bury Street.

"Good 'evens! Mr. Arthur, what 'as 'appened, sir?" asked the valet, who was just carrying in
his wig to the Major.

"I want to see my uncle," Pen cried in a ghastly voice, and flung himself down on a chair.

The valet backed before the pale and desperate-looking young man, with terrified and wondering
glances, and disappeared into his master's apartment, whence the Major put out his head as
soon as he had his wig on.

"What? Examination over? Senior Wrangler, Double First Class, hey?" said the old gentleman.
"I'll come directly," and the head disappeared.

Pen was standing with his back to the window, so that his uncle could not see the expression
of gloomy despair on the young man's face. But when he held out his hand to Pen, and was about
to address him in his cheery, high-toned voice, he caught sight of the boy's face; and dropping
his hand said, "Why, Pen, what's the matter?"

"You'll see it in the papers at breakfast, sir," Pen said.

"See what?"

"My name isn't there, sir."

"Hang it, why should it be?" asked the Major, more perplexed.

"I have lost everything, sir," groaned out Pen; "my honour's gone; I'm ruined irretrievably;
I can't go back to Oxbridge."

"Lost your honour?" screamed out the Major. "Heaven alive! You don't mean to say you have shown
the white feather?"

Pen laughed bitterly at the word feather, and repeated it. "No, it isn't that, sir. I'm not
afraid of being shot; I wish anybody would shoot me. I have not got my degree. I--I'm plucked,
sir."

The Major had heard of plucking, but in a very vague and cursory way, and concluded that it
was some ceremony performed corporally upon rebellious university youth. "I wonder you can
look me in the face after such a disgrace, sir," he said; "I wonder you submitted to it as
a gentleman."

"I couldn't help it, sir. I did my classical papers well enough: it was those infernal mathematics,
which I have always neglected."

"Was it--was it done in public, sir?" the Major said.

"What?"

"The--the plucking?" asked the guardian, looking Pen anxiously in the face.

Pen perceived the error under which his guardian was labouring, and in the midst of his misery
the blunder caused the poor wretch a faint smile, and served to bring down the conversation
from the tragedy-key in which Pen had been disposed to carry it on. He explained to his uncle
that he had gone in to pass his examination, and failed. On which the Major said, that though
he had expected far better things of his nephew, there was no great misfortune in this, and
no dishonour as far as he saw, and that Pen must try again.

"Me again at Oxbridge!" Pen thought, "after such a humiliation as that?" He felt that, except
he went down to burn the place, he could not enter it.

But it was when he came to tell his uncle of his debts that the other felt surprise and anger
most keenly, and broke out into speeches most severe upon Pen, which the lad bore, as best
he might, without flinching.

It appeared that his bills in all amounted to about £700; and furthermore it was calculated
that he had had more than twice that sum during his stay at Oxbridge. This sum he had spent,
and for it he had to show--what?

"You need not press a man who is down, sir," Pen said to his uncle, gloomily. "I know very
well how wicked and idle I have been. My mother won't like to see me dishonoured, sir," he
continued, with his voice failing; "and I know she will pay these accounts. But I shall ask
her for no more money."

"As you like, sir," the Major said. "You are of age, and my hands are washed of your affairs.
But you can't live without money, and have no means of making it that I see, though you have
a fine talent in spending it, and it is my belief that you will proceed as you have begun,
and ruin your mother before you are five years older. Good-morning; it is time for me to go
to breakfast. My engagements won't permit me to see you much during the time that you stay
in London. I presume that you will acquaint your mother with the news which you have just conveyed
to me."

And pulling on his hat, and trembling in his limbs somewhat, Major Pendennis walked out of
his lodgings before his nephew, and went ruefully off to take his accustomed corner at the
club, where he saw the Oxbridge examination lists in the morning papers, and read over the
names with mournful accuracy, thinking also with bitterness of the many plans he had formed
to make a man of his nephew, of the sacrifices which he had made, and of the manner in which
he was disappointed. And he wrote a letter to Dr. Portman telling him what had happened and
begging the Doctor to break the sad news to Helen. Then the Major went out to dinner, one of
the saddest men in any London dining-room that day.

On receipt of the Major's letter Dr. Portman went at once to Fair-Oaks to break the disagreeable
news to Mrs. Pendennis. She had already received a letter from Pen, and to the Doctor's great
indignation she seemed to feel no particular unhappiness except that her darling boy should
be unhappy. What was this degree that they made such an outcry about, and what good would it
do Pen? Why did Dr. Portman and his uncle insist upon sending the boy where there was so much
temptation to be risked, and so little good to be won? Why didn't they leave him at home with
his mother? Her boy was coming back to her repentant and tender-hearted,--why should she want
more? As for his debts, of course they must be paid;--his debts.--Wasn't his father's money
all his, and hadn't he a right to spend it? In this way the widow met the virtuous Doctor,
and all his anger took no effect upon her gentle bosom.

As for Laura, Pen's little adopted sister, she was no longer the simple girl of Pen's college
days, but a tall, slim, handsome young lady. At the age of sixteen she was a sweet young lady
indeed, ordinarily pale, with a faint rose-tinge in her cheeks. Her eyes were very large and
some critics said that she was in the habit of making play with those eyes, but the fact is
that nature had made them so to shine and to look, that they could no more help so looking
and shining than one star can help being brighter than another. It was doubtless to soften
their brightness that Miss Laura's eyes were provided with two veils in the shape of the longest
and finest black eyelashes. Her complexion was brilliant, her smile charming, while her voice
was so low and sweet that to hear it was like listening to sweet music.

Now, this same charming Miss Laura had only been half pleased with Pen's general conduct and
bearing during the past two years. His letters to his mother had been very rare and short.
It was in vain that the fond widow urged how constant Arthur's occupations and studies were,
and how many his engagements. "It is better that he should lose a prize," Laura said, "than
forget his mother: and indeed, Mamma, I don't see that he gets many prizes. Why doesn't he
come home and stay with you, instead of passing his vacations at his great friends' fine houses?
There is nobody there that will love him half as much as you do." Thus Laura declared stoutly,
nor would she be convinced by any of Helen's fond arguments that the boy must make his way
in the world; that his uncle was most desirous that Pen should cultivate the acquaintance of
persons who were likely to befriend him in life; that men had a thousand ties and calls which
women could not understand, and so forth.

But as soon as Miss Laura heard that Pen was unfortunate and unhappy, all her anger straightway
vanished, giving place to the most tender compassion. He was the Pen of old days, the frank
and affectionate, the generous and tender-hearted. She at once took side with Helen against
Dr. Portman when he cried out at the enormity of Pen's transgressions. Debts? What were his
debts? They were a trifle; he had been thrown into expensive society by his uncle's order,
and of course was obliged to live in the same manner as the young gentlemen whose company he
frequented. Disgraced by not getting his degree? The poor boy was ill when he went for the
examinations; he couldn't think of his mathematics and stuff on account of those very debts
which oppressed him; very likely some of the odious tutors and masters were jealous of him,
and had favourites of their own whom they wanted to put over his head. Other people disliked
him and were cruel to him, and were unfair to him, she was very sure.

And so with flushing cheeks and eyes bright with anger this young creature reasoned, and went
up and seized Helen's hand and kissed her in the Doctor's presence; and her looks braved the
Doctor and seemed to ask how he dared to say a word against her darling mother's Pen?

Directly the Doctor was gone, Laura ordered fires to be lighted in Mr. Arthur's rooms, and
his bedding to be aired; and by the time Helen had completed a tender and affectionate letter
to Pen, Laura had her preparations completed, and, smiling fondly, went with her mamma into
Pen's room, which was now ready for him to occupy. Laura also added a postscript to Helen's
letter, in which she called him her dearest friend, and bade him come home instantly and be
happy with his mother and his affectionate Laura.

That night when Mrs. Pendennis was lying sleepless, thinking of Pen, a voice at her side startled
her, saying softly: "Mamma, are you awake?"

It was Laura. "You know, Mamma," this young lady said, "that I have been living with you for
ten years, during which time you have never taken any of my money, and have been treating me
just as if I were a charity girl. Now, this obligation has offended me very much, because I
am proud and do not like to be beholden to people. And as, if I had gone to school, only I
wouldn't, it must have cost me as least fifty pounds a year, it is clear that I owe you fifty
times ten pounds, which I know you have put into the bank at Chatteris for me, and which doesn't
belong to me a bit. Now, to-morrow we will go to Chatteris, and see that nice old Mr. Rowdy,
with the bald head, and ask him for it,--not for his head, but for the five hundred pounds;
and I daresay he will lend you two more, which we will save and pay back, and we will send
the money to Pen, who can pay all his debts without hurting anybody, and then we will live
happy ever after."

What Mrs. Pendennis replied to this speech need not be repeated, but we may be sure that its
terms were those of the deepest gratitude, and that the widow lost no time in writing off to
Pen an account of the noble, the magnificent offer of Laura, filling up her letter with a profusion
of benedictions upon both her children.

As for Pen, after being deserted by the Major, and writing his letter to his mother, he skulked
about London streets for the rest of the day, fancying that everybody was looking at him and
whispering to his neighbour, "That is Pendennis of Boniface, who was plucked yesterday." His
letter to his mother was full of tenderness and remorse: he wept the bitterest tears over it,
and the repentance soothed him to some degree.

On the second day of his London wanderings there came a kind letter from his tutor, containing
many grave and appropriate remarks upon what had befallen him, but strongly urging Pen not
to take his name off the University books, and to retrieve a disaster which everybody knew
was owing to his own carelessness alone, and which he might repair by a month of application.

On the third day there arrived the letter from home which Pen read in his bedroom, and the
result of which was that he fell down on his knees, with his head in the bedclothes, and there
prayed out his heart, and humbled himself; and having gone downstairs and eaten an immense
breakfast, he sallied forth and took his place at the Bull and Mouth, Piccadilly, on the Chatteris
coach for that evening.

And so the Prodigal came home, and the fatted calf was killed for him, and he was made as happy
as two simple women could make him.

For some time he said no power on earth could induce him to go back to Oxbridge again after
his failure there; but one day Laura said to him, with many blushes, that she thought, as some
sort of reparation, or punishment on himself for his idleness, he ought to go back and get
his degree if he could fetch it by doing so; and so back Mr. Pen went.

A plucked man is a dismal being in a university; belonging to no set of men there and owned
by no one. Pen felt himself plucked indeed of all the fine feathers which he had won during
his brilliant years, and rarely appeared out of his college; regularly going to morning chapel
and shutting himself up in his rooms of nights, away from the noise and suppers of the undergraduates.
The men of his years had taken their degrees and were gone. He went into a second examination,
and passed with perfect ease. He was somewhat more easy in his mind when he appeared in his
bachelor's gown, and could cast aside the hated badge of disgrace.

On his way back from Oxbridge he paid a visit to his uncle in London, hoping that gentleman
would accept his present success in place of his past failure, but the old gentleman received
him with very cold looks, and would scarcely give him his forefinger to shake. He called a
second time, but the valet said his master was not at home.

So Pen went back to Fair-Oaks. True, he had retrieved his failure, had won his honours, but
he came back to his home a very different fellow from the bright-faced youth who had gone out
into college life some years before. He no longer laughed, sang, or rollicked about the house
as of old; he had tasted of the fruit of the awful Tree of Life which from the beginning had
tempted all mankind, and which had changed Arthur Pendennis the light-hearted boy into a man.
Young, he is, of course, and still awaiting the development which life's deeper experiences
are to bring, but nevertheless he is not again to taste the joy, the zest, or the enthusiasm
which come to careless boyhood.

Arthur Pendennis is now a competitor among the ranks of men striving after life's prizes, and
this narrative of his boyhood ends.

CAROLINE

Since the time of Cinderella the First there have been many similar instances in real life
of the persecution of youth by family injustice and cruelty, and no case more strikingly similar
than that of Miss Caroline Brandenburg Gann, whose youthful career was one of monotonous hardship
and injustice until the arrival of her fairy prince.

The story is a short one to relate, but to live through the days and months of sixteen unhappy
years seemed an eternal process to the young heart beating high with hopes which must constantly
be stifled, and give place to bitter disappointment.

But to go back for a moment to the time when Louis XVIII. was restored a second time to the
throne of his father, and all the English who had money or leisure rushed over to the Continent.
At that time there lived in a certain boarding-house at Brussels a lady who was called Mrs.
Crabb; and her daughter, a genteel young widow, who bore the name of Mrs. Wellesley McCarty.
Previous to this Mrs. McCarty, who was then Miss Crabb, had run off one day with a young Ensign,
who possessed not a shilling, and who speedily died, leaving his widow without property, but
with a remarkably fine pair of twins, named Rosalind Clancy and Isabella Finigan Wellesley McCarty.

The young widow being left penniless, her mother, who had disowned the runaway couple, was
obliged to become reconciled to her daughter and to share her small income of one hundred and
twenty pounds a year with her. Upon this at the boarding-house in Brussels the two managed
to live. The twins were put out, after the foreign fashion, to nurse, and a village in the
neighbourhood, and the widow and her mother maintained a very good appearance despite their
small income; and it was not long before the Widow McCarty married a young Englishman, James
Gann, Esq.--of the great oil-house of Gann, Blubbery, and Gann,--who was boarding in the same
house with Mrs. Crabb and her daughter. These ladies, who had their full share of common sense,
took care to keep the twins in the background until such time as the Widow McCarty had become
Mrs. Gann. Then on the day after the wedding, in the presence of many friends who had come
to offer their congratulations, a stout nurse, bearing the two chubby little ones, made her
appearance; and these rosy urchins, springing forward, shouted affectionately, "Maman! Maman!"
to the great astonishment and bewilderment of James Gann, who well-nigh fainted at this sudden
paternity so put upon him. However, being a good-humoured, soft-hearted man, he kissed his
lady hurriedly, and vowed that he would take care of the poor little things, whom he would
also have kissed, but the darlings refused his caress with many roars.

Soon after their marriage Mr. and Mrs. James Gann returned to England and occupied a house
in Thames Street, City, until the death of Gann, Sr., when his son, becoming head of the firm,
mounted higher on the social ladder and went to live in the neighbourhood of Putney, where
a neat box, a couple of spare bedrooms, a good cellar, and a smart gig made a real gentleman
of him. About this period, a daughter was born to him, called Caroline Blandenburg Gann, so
named after a large mansion near Hammersmith, and an injured queen who lived there at the time
of the little girl's birth.

At this time Mrs. James Gann sent the twins, Rosalind Clancy and Isabella Finigan Wellesley
McCarty, to a boarding-school for young ladies, and grumbled much at the amount of the bills
which her husband was obliged to pay for them; for, although James discharged them with perfect
good-humour, his lady began to entertain a mean opinion indeed of her pretty young children.
They could expect no fortune, she said, from Mr. Gann, and she wondered that he should think
of bringing them up expensively, when he had a darling child of his own for whom to save all
the money that he could lay by.

Grandmamma, too, doted on the little Caroline Brandenburg, and vowed that she would leave her
three thousand pounds to this dear infant; for in this way does the world show its respect
for that most respectable thing, prosperity, and little Caroline was the daughter of prosperous
James Gann.

Little Caroline, then, had her maid, her airy nursery, her little carriage to drive in, the
promise of her grandmamma's money, and her mamma's undivided affection. Gann, too, loved her
sincerely in his careless good-humoured way; but he determined, notwithstanding, that his step-daughters
should have something handsome at his death, but--but for a great But.

Gann and Blubbery were in the oil line; their profits arose from contracts for lighting a great
number of streets in London; and about this period gas came into use. The firm of Gann and
Blubbery had been so badly managed, I am sorry to say, and so great had been the extravagance
of both partners and their ladies, that they only paid their creditors fourteen-pence halfpenny
in the pound.

When Mrs. Crabb heard of this dreadful accident she at once proclaimed James Gann to be a swindler,
a villain, a disreputable, vulgar man, and made over her money to the Misses Rosalind Clancy
and Isabella Finigan McCarty, leaving poor little Caroline without a cent of legacy. Half of
one thousand five hundred pounds allotted to each twin was to be paid at marriage, the other
half on the death of Mrs. James Gann, who was to enjoy the interest thereof. Thus did the fortunes
of little Caroline alter in a single night! Thus did Cinderella enter upon the period of her
loneliness!

After James Gann's failure his family lived in various uncomfortable ways, until at length
Mrs. Gann opened a lodging-house in a certain back street in the town of Margate, on the door
of which house might be read in gleaming brass the name of MR. GANN. It was the work of a single
smutty servant-maid to clean this brass plate every morning, and to attend to the wants of
Mr. Gann, his family, and lodgers. In this same house Mr. Gann had his office, though if truth
be told he had nothing to do from morning until night. He was very much changed, poor fellow!
He was now a fat, bald-headed man of fifty whose tastes were no longer aristocratic, and who
loved public-house jokes and company.

As for Mrs. Gann, she had changed, too, under the pressure of misfortune. Her chief occupation
was bragging of her former acquaintances, taking medicine, and mending and altering her gowns.
She had a huge taste for cheap finery, loved raffles, tea-parties, and walks on the pier, where
she flaunted herself and daughters as gay as butterflies. She stood upon her rank, did not
fail to tell her lodgers that she was "a gentlewoman," and was mighty sharp with Becky, the
maid, and Carrie, her youngest child.

For the tide of affection had turned now, and the Misses Wellesley McCarty were the darlings
of their mother's heart, as Caroline had been in the early days of Putney prosperity. Mrs.
Gann respected and loved her elder daughters, the stately heiresses of £1500, and scorned poor
Caroline, who was likewise scorned, like Cinderella, by her brace of haughty, thoughtless sisters.
These young women were tall, well-grown, black-browed girls, fond of fun, and having great
health and spirits. They had pink cheeks, white shoulders, and many glossy curls about their
shining foreheads. Such charms cannot fail of having their effect, and it was very lucky for
Caroline that she did not possess them, or she might have been as vain, frivolous, and vulgar
as these young ladies were. As it was, Caroline was pale and thin, with fair hair and neat
grey eyes; nobody thought her a beauty in her moping cotton gown, and while her sisters enjoyed
their pleasures and tea-parties abroad, it was Carrie's usual fate to remain at home and help
the servant in the many duties which were required in Mrs. Gann's establishment. She dressed
her mamma and her sisters, brought her papa his tea in bed, kept the lodgers' bills, bore their
scoldings, and sometimes gave a hand in the kitchen if any extra cookery was required. At two
she made a little toilette for dinner, and was employed on numberless household darnings and
mendings in the long evenings while her sisters giggled over the jingling piano. Mamma lay
on the sofa, and Gann was at the club. A weary lot, in sooth, was yours,--poor little Caroline.
Since the days of your infancy, not one hour of sunshine, no friendship, no cheery playfellows,
no mother's love! Only James Gann, of all the household, had a good-natured look for her, and
a coarse word of kindness, but Caroline did not complain, nor shed any tears. Her misery was
dumb and patient; she felt that she was ill-treated, and had no companion; but was not on that
account envious, only humble and depressed, not desiring so much to resist as to bear injustice,
and hardly venturing to think for herself. This tyranny and humility served her in place of
education and formed her manners, which were wonderfully gentle and calm. It was strange to
see such a person growing up in such a family, and the neighbours spoke of her with much scornful
compassion. "A poor half-witted, thing," they said, "who could not say bo! to a goose." And
I think it is one good test of gentility to be thus looked down on by vulgar people.

I have said that Miss Caroline had no friend in the world except her father, but one friend
she most certainly had, and that was honest Becky, the smutty maid, whose name has been mentioned
before. Present faith finds itself prepared to receive the witness of the men of faith centuries
ago. The attempt to banish Jesus from our world signally failed;
He was a more living and potent force in it after, than before, His
death.

This singular religious experience, character and victory we ascribe to the Jesus of history
through the tradition which preserves for us His religious impression
upon His immediate followers. There are some who lay little stress
upon the events of the past; like Shelley's Skylark, they are "scorners
of the ground." Many and many a tale
had the pair so gone through. I can see them over "Manfrone; or the One-handed Monk," the room
dark, the street silent, the hour ten, the tall, red, lurid candlewick waggling down, the flame
flickering pale upon Miss Caroline's pale face as she read out, and lighting up honest Becky's
goggling eyes, who sat silent, her work in her lap; she had not done a stitch of it for an
hour. As the trapdoor slowly opens, and the scowling Alonzo, bending over the sleeping Imoinda,
draws his pistol, cocks it, looks well if the priming be right, places it then to the sleeper's
ear, and--thunder under-under--down fall the snuffers! Becky has had them in her hand for ten
minutes, afraid to use them. Up starts Caroline and flings the book back into mamma's basket.
It is only that lady returned with her daughters from a tea-party, where they have been enjoying
themselves.

For the sentimental, too, as well as the terrible, Miss Caroline and the cook had a strong
predilection, and had wept their poor eyes out over "Thaddeus of Warsaw" and the "Scottish
Chiefs." Fortified by the examples drawn from those instructive volumes, Becky was firmly convinced
that her young mistress would meet with a great lord some day or other, or be carried off,
like Cinderella, by a brilliant prince, to the mortification of her elder sisters, whom Becky
hated.

When, therefore, a new lodger came, lonely, mysterious, melancholy, elegant, with the romantic
name of George Brandon--when he actually wrote a letter directed to a lord, and Miss Caroline
and Becky together examined the superscription, Becky's eyes were lighted up with a preternatural
look of wondering wisdom; whereas, after an instant, Caroline dropped hers, and blushed and
said, "Nonsense, Becky!"

"Is it nonsense?" said Becky, grinning, and snapping her fingers with a triumphant air; "the
cards come true; I knew they would. Didn't you have a king and queen of hearts three deals
running? What did you dream about last Tuesday, tell me that?"

But Miss Caroline never did tell, for just then her sisters came bouncing down the stairs,
and examined the lodger's letter. Caroline, however, went away musing much upon these points;
and she began to think Mr. Brandon more wonderful and beautiful every day, whereas he was remarkable
for nothing except very black eyes, a sallow face, and a habit of smoking cigars in bed till
noon. His name of George Brandon was only an assumed one. He was really the son of a half-pay
Colonel, of good family, who had been sent to Eton to acquire an education. From Eton he went
to Oxford, took honours there, but ran up bills amounting to two thousand pounds. Then there
came fury on the part of his stern old "governor"; and final payment of the debt, but while
this settlement was pending Master George had contracted many more debts and was glad to fly
to the Continent as tutor to young Lord Cinqbars, and afterwards went into retirement at Margate
until his father's wrath should be appeased. For that reason we find him a member of the Gann
establishment, flirting when occasion seemed to demand it with mother and daughters, and taking
occasional notice of little Caroline, who frequently broiled his cutlets.

Mrs. Gann's other lodger was a fantastic youth, Andrea Fitch, to whom his art, and his beard
and whiskers, were the darlings of his heart. He was a youth of poetic temperament, whose long
pale hair fell over a high polished brow, which looked wonderfully thoughtful; and yet no man
was more guiltless of thinking. He was always putting himself into attitudes, and his stock-in-trade
were various theatrical properties, which when arranged in his apartments on the second floor
made a tremendous show.

The Misses Wellesley McCarty voted this Mr. Fitch an elegant young fellow, and before long
the intimacy between the young people was considerable, for Mr. Fitch insisted upon drawing
the portraits of the whole family.

"I suppose you will do my Carrie next?" said Mr. Gann, one day, expressing his approbation
of a portrait just finished, wherein the Misses McCarty were represented embracing one another.

"Law, sir," exclaimed Miss Linda, "Carrie, with her red hair!--"

"Mr. Fitch might as well paint Becky, our maid!" cried Miss Bella.

"Carrie is quite impossible, Gann," said Mrs. Gann; "she hasn't a gown fit to be seen in. She's
not been at church for thirteen Sundays in consequence."

"And more shame for you, ma'am," said Mr. Gann, who liked his child; "Carrie shall have a gown,
and the best of gowns;" and jingling three and twenty shillings in his pocket, Mr. Gann determined
to spend them all in the purchase of a robe for Carrie. But, alas, the gown never came; half
the money was spent that very evening at the tavern.

"Is that--that young lady your daughter?" asked Mr. Fitch, surprised, for he fancied Carrie
was a humble companion of the family.

"Yes, she is, and a very good daughter, too, sir," answered Mr. Gann. "Fetch and Carrie I call
her, or else Carry-van; she is so useful. Ain't you, Carrie?"

"I'm very glad if I am, Papa," said the young lady, blushing violently.

"Hold your tongue, Miss!" said her mother; "you are, very expensive to us, that you are, and
need not brag about the work you do, and if your sisters and me starve to keep you, and some
other folks" (looking fiercely at Mr. Gann), "I presume you are bound to make some return."

Poor Caroline was obliged to listen to this harangue on her own ill-conduct in silence. As
it was the first lecture Mr. Fitch had heard on the subject, he naturally set down Caroline
for a monster. Was she not idle, sulky, scornful, and a sloven? For these and many more of
her daughter's vices Mrs. Gann vouched, declaring that Caroline's behaviour was hastening her
own death; and she finished by a fainting fit. In the presence of all these charges, there
stood Miss Caroline, dumb, stupid and careless; nay, when the fainting-fit came on, and Mrs.
Gann fell back on the sofa, the unfeeling girl took the opportunity to retire, and never offered
to rub her mamma's hands, to give her the smelling bottle, or to restore her with a glass of water.

Mr. Fitch stood close at hand, for at the time he was painting Mrs. Gann's portrait--and he
was hastily making towards her with his tumbler, when Miss Linda cried out, "Stop! the water
is full of paint!" and straightway burst out laughing. Mrs. Gann jumped up at this, cured suddenly,
and left the room, looking somewhat foolish.

"You don't know Ma," said Miss Linda, still giggling; "she's always fainting."

"Poor dear lady!" said the artist; "I pity her from my inmost soul. Doesn't the himmortal bard
observe how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to have a thankless child? And is it true,
ma'am, that that young woman has been the ruin of her family?"

"Ruin of her fiddlestick!" replied Miss Bella. "Law, Mr. Fitch, you don't know Ma yet; she
is in one of her tantrums."

"What, then, it isn't true!" cried simple-minded Fitch. To which neither of the young ladies
made any answer in words, nor could the little artist comprehend why they looked at each other
and burst out laughing. But he retired pondering on what he had seen and heard, and being a
very soft young fellow, most implicitly believed the accusations of poor dear Mrs. Gann for a time.

Presently, however, those opinions changed, and the change was brought about by watching closely
the trend of domestic affairs in the Gann establishment. After a fortnight of close observation
the artist, though by no means quick of comprehension, began to see that the nightly charges
brought against poor Caroline could not be founded upon truth.

"Let's see," mused he to himself. "Tuesday the old lady said her daughter was bringing her
grey hairs with sorrow to the grave, because the cook had not boiled the potatoes. Wednesday
she said Caroline was an assassin, because she could not find her own thimble. Thursday she
vowed Caroline had no religion, because that old pair of silk stockings were not darned; and
this can't be," reasoned Fitch. "A gal ain't a murderess, because her ma can't find her thimble.
A woman that goes to slap her grown-up daughter on the back, and before company too, for such
a paltry thing as an old pair of stockings, can't be surely speaking the truth." And thus gradually
his first impression against Caroline wore away, and pity took possession of his soul, pity
for the meek little girl, who, though trampled upon, was now springing up to womanhood; and
though pale, freckled, thin, meanly dressed, had a certain charm about her which some people
preferred to the cheap splendours and rude red and white of the Misses McCarty, and which was
calculated to touch the heart of anyone who watched her carefully.

On account of Mr. Brandon's correspondence with the aristocracy that young gentleman was highly
esteemed by the family with whom he lodged for a time. Then, however, he bragged so much, and
assumed such airs of superiority, that he perfectly disgusted Mrs. Gann and the Misses McCarty,
who did not at all like his way of telling them that he was their better. But James Gann looked
up to Mr. Brandon with deepest wonder as a superior being. And poor little Caroline followed
her father's faith and in six weeks after Mr. Brandon's arrival had grown to believe him the
most perfect, polished, agreeable of mankind. Indeed, the poor girl had never seen a gentleman
before, and towards such her gentle heart turned instinctively. Brandon never offended her
by hard words; or insulted her by cruel scorn such as she met with from her mother and sisters;
and so Caroline felt that he was their superior, and as such admired and respected him.

Consequently one day when he condescended to dine with the family at three o'clock, there being
another guest as well, one Mr. Swigby, Caroline felt it to be one of the greatest occasions
of her life, and was fairly trembling with pleasure, when, dinner being half over, she stole
gently into the room and took her ordinary place near her father. I do believe she would have
been starved, but Gann was much too good-natured to allow any difference to be made between
her and her sisters in the matter of food. An old rickety wooden stool was placed for her,
instead of that elegant and comfortable Windsor chair which supported every other person at
table; by the side of the plate stood a curious old battered tin mug bearing the inscription
"Caroline." These, in truth, were poor Caroline's mug and stool, having been appropriated to
her from childhood upwards; and here it was her custom meekly to sit and eat her daily meal.

Caroline's pale face was very red; for she had been in the kitchen helping Becky, and had been
showing her respect for the great Mr. Brandon by cooking in her best manner a certain dish
for which her papa had often praised her. She took her place, blushing violently when she saw
him, and if Mr. Gann had not been making a violent clattering with his knife and fork, it is
possible that he might have heard Miss Caroline's heart thump, which it did violently. In 1911
Congress created the Court of Customs Appeals, consisting of five judges who may review the
decisions of the Board of General Appraisers with respect to the classification and taxation
of imports.

Congress has also provided a system of territorial courts to handle cases arising in the territories
and in the District of Columbia.

Courts-martial for the trial of military and naval offenses have also
been provided for by congressional statute.

B. THE FEDERAL COURTS
IN ACTION

567. JURISDICTION OF THE FEDERAL COURTS.--The Federal courts
exercise limited, rather than general, jurisdiction. That is to say,
they have authority to try only such cases as are specifically placed
within their jurisdiction by the Constitution, or by congressional
statute.

"Come, come, my dear," cried honest Gann, "if she is late, you know why! Our Carrie has been
downstairs making the pudding for her old pappy; and a good pudding she makes, I can tell you!"

Miss Caroline blushed more deeply than ever; Mr. Fitch stared her full in the face; Mrs. Gann
said "Nonsense!" and "Stuff!" very majestically; Mr. Brandon alone interposed in Caroline's
favour; and the words that he said were so kindly, so inspiring to Caroline that she cared
not a straw whatever else might be said about her. "Mamma may say what she pleases to-day,"
thought Caroline. "I am too happy to be made angry by her."

But poor little mistaken Caroline did not know how soon her feelings were to be harassed again
beyond endurance. The dinner had not advanced much further, when Miss Isabella, who had been
examining Caroline curiously for some time, telegraphed across the table to Miss Linda, and
nodded and winked, and pointed to her own neck, on which was a smart necklace of the lightest
blue glass beads finishing in a neat tassel. Linda had a similar ornament of a vermilion colour,
whereas Caroline wore a handsome new collar and a brooch, which looked all the smarter for
the shabby frock over which they were placed. As soon as she saw her sister's signals the poor
little thing blushed deeply again; down went her eyes once more, and her face and neck lighted
up to the colour of Miss Linda's sham cornelian.

"What's the gals giggling and oggling about?" asked Mr. Gann innocently.

"What is it, my darling love?" asked stately Mrs. Gann.

"Why, don't you see, Ma?" said Linda. "Look at Miss Carrie! I'm blessed if she hasn't got on
Becky's collar and brooch, that Sims the pilot gave her!"

The young ladies fell back in uproarious fits of laughter, and laughed all the time that their
mamma was declaring her daughter's conduct unworthy a gentlewoman, and bidding her leave the
room and take off those disgraceful ornaments.

There was no need to tell her; the poor little thing gave one piteous look at her father, who
was whistling, and seemed indeed to think the matter a good joke; and after she had managed
to open the door down she went to the kitchen, and when she reached that humble place of refuge
first pulled off Becky's collar and brooch, and then flung herself into the arms of that honest
maid, where she cried and cried till she brought on the first fit of hysterics that ever she
had had.

This crying could not at first be heard in the parlour, where the company were roaring at the
excellence of the joke, but presently the laughter died away, and the sound of weeping came
from the kitchen below. This the young artist could not bear, but bounced up from his chair
and rushed out of the room, exclaiming, "By Jove, it's too bad!"

From the scene of merriment he rushed forth and out of the house into the dark, wet streets,
fired with one impulse, inspired by one purpose:--to resist the tyranny of Mrs. Gann towards
poor Caroline; to protect the gentle girl from the injustice of which she was the victim. All
his sympathies from that moment were awakened in Caroline's favour.

As for Mr. Brandon, whom Caroline in the depths of her little silly heart had set down for
the wondrous fairy prince who was to deliver her from her present miserable condition, he was
a man to whom opposition acted ever as a spur. Up to this time he had given little or no thought
to the young girl with the pale face and quiet manner, but now he was amused, and his interest
was awakened by the indignation of Mr. Fitch. He was piqued also by the system of indifference
to his charms indulged in by Caroline's older sisters, and determined to revenge himself upon
them for their hardness of heart by devotion to Caroline. As he wrote in a letter that very
day: "I am determined through a third daughter, a family Cinderella, to make her sisters quiver
with envy. I merely mean fun, for Cinderella is but a little child.... I wish I had paper enough
to write you an account of a Gann dinner at which I have just assisted, and of a scene which
there took place; and how Cinderella was dressed out, not by a fairy, but by a charitable kitchen
maid, and was turned out of the room by her indignant mamma for appearing in the maid's finery...."

This, and much more, Mr. Brandon, who at once turned his attention to being excessively kind
and polite to our humble Cinderella. Caroline, being a most romantic little girl, and having
read many novels, depicted Brandon in a fancy costume such as her favourite hero wore, or fancied
herself as the heroine, watching her knight go forth to battle. Silly fancies, no doubt; but
consider the poor girl's age and education; the only instruction she had ever received was
from these tender, kind-hearted, silly books; the only happiness which fate had allowed her
was in this little silent world of fancy. It would be hard to grudge the poor thing her dreams;
and many such did she have, and tell blushingly to honest Becky as they sat by the kitchen
fire, while indignation was growing apace in the breasts of her mother and sisters at the sight
of so much interest centred on so poor an object. And even so did the haughty sisters of Cinderella
the First feel and act.

But Cinderella's kitchen days were fast drawing to an end, even as she, a pale slip of a girl,
was budding into womanhood.

One evening Mrs. Gann and the Misses McCarty had the honour of entertaining Mr. Swigby at tea,
and that gentleman, in return for the courtesy shown him by Mrs. Gann, invited the young ladies
and their mamma to drive with him the next day into the country; for which excursion he had
hired a very smart barouche. The invitation was not declined, and Mr. Fitch, too, was asked,
and accepted with the utmost delight. "Me and Swigby will go on the box," said Gann. "You four
ladies and Mr. Fitch shall go inside. Carrie must go between; but she ain't very big."

"Carrie, indeed, will stop at home!" said her mamma. At this poor Fitch's jaw fell; he had
agreed to accompany the party only for the pleasure of being in the company of little Caroline,
nor could he escape now, having just accepted so eagerly.

"Oh, don't let's have that proud Brandon!" exclaimed the young ladies, in consequence of which
that gentleman was not invited to join the excursion.

The day was bright and sunshiny. Poor Caroline, watching the barouche and its load drive off,
felt that it would have been pleasant to have been a lady for once, and to have driven along
in a carriage with prancing horses. The girl's heart was heavy with disappointment and loneliness
as she stood at the parlour window, watching the vehicle disappear from sight.

Oh, mighty Fate, that over us miserable mortals rulest supreme, with what small means are thy
ends effected! With what scornful ease and mean instruments does it please thee to govern mankind!
Mr. Fitch accompanied the Gann family on their drive to the country; Mr. Brandon remained behind.

Caroline, too, the Cinderella of this little tale, was left at home; and thereby were placed
in the hand of Fate all necessary instruments of revenge to be used in the punishment of Mrs.
Gann and the Misses McCarty for their ill-treatment of our little Cinderella.

The story of Caroline Brandenburg Gann's youth is told. The fairy prince is at hand, and the
short chapter of girlhood and misery is finished.