Praise exercises an all-potent influence, not only upon the feelings, but also upon the intellect;
so that under the influence of that agreeable sensation I straightway felt much cleverer than
before, and thoughts began to rush with extraordinary rapidity through my head. From egotism
we passed insensibly to the theme of love, which seemed inexhaustible. Although our reasonings
might have sounded nonsensical to a listener (so vague and one-sided were they), for ourselves
they had a profound significance. Our minds were so perfectly in harmony that not a chord was
struck in the one without awakening an echo in the other, and in this harmonious striking of
different chords we found the greatest delight. Indeed, we felt as though time and language
were insufficient to express the thoughts which seethed within us.

XXVII. THE BEGINNING OF OUR FRIENDSHIP

From that time forth, a strange, but exceedingly pleasant, relation subsisted between Dimitri
Nechludoff and myself. Before other people he paid me scanty attention, but as soon as ever
we were alone, we would sit down together in some comfortable corner and, forgetful both of
time and of everything around us, fall to reasoning.

We talked of a future life, of art, service, marriage, and education; nor did the idea ever
occur to us that very possibly all we said was shocking nonsense. The reason why it never occurred
to us was that the nonsense which we talked was good, sensible nonsense, and that, so long
as one is young, one can appreciate good nonsense, and believe in it. In youth the powers of
the mind are directed wholly to the future, and that future assumes such various, vivid, and
alluring forms under the influence of hope--hope based, not upon the experience of the past,
but upon an assumed possibility of happiness to come--that such dreams of expected felicity
constitute in themselves the true happiness of that period of our life. How I loved those moments
in our metaphysical discussions (discussions which formed the major portion of our intercourse)
when thoughts came thronging faster and faster, and, succeeding one another at lightning speed,
and growing more and more abstract, at length attained such a pitch of elevation that one felt
powerless to express them, and said something quite different from what one had intended at
first to say! How I liked those moments, too, when, carried higher and higher into the realms
of thought, we suddenly felt that we could grasp its substance no longer and go no further!

At carnival time Nechludoff was so much taken up with one festivity and another that, though
he came to see us several times a day, he never addressed a single word to me. This offended
me so much that once again I found myself thinking him a haughty, disagreeable fellow, and
only awaited an opportunity to show him that I no longer valued his company or felt any particular
affection for him. Accordingly, the first time that he spoke to me after the carnival, I said
that I had lessons to do, and went upstairs, but a quarter of an hour later some one opened
the schoolroom door, and Nechludoff entered.

"Am I disturbing you?" he asked.

"No," I replied, although I had at first intended to say that I had a great deal to do.

"Then why did you run away just now? It is a long while since we had a talk together, and I
have grown so accustomed to these discussions that I feel as though something were wanting."

My anger had quite gone now, and Dimitri stood before me the same good and lovable being as before.

"You know, perhaps, why I ran away?" I said.

"Perhaps I do," he answered, taking a seat near me. "However, though it is possible I know
why, I cannot say it straight out, whereas YOU can."

"Then I will do so. I ran away because I was angry with you--well, not angry, but grieved.
I always have an idea that you despise me for being so young.