It is interesting to see with what a happy instinct all that is of a nature to feed the sentimental
mind is gathered together in Werther: a dreamy and unhappy love, a very vivid feeling for nature,
the religious sense coupled with the spirit of philosophic contemplation, and lastly, to omit
nothing, the world of Ossian, dark, formless, melancholy. Add to this the aspect under which
reality is presented, all is depicted which is least adapted to make it lovable, or rather
all that is most fit to make it hated; see how all external circumstances unite to drive back
the unhappy man into his ideal world; and now we understand that it was quite impossible for
a character thus constituted to save itself, and issue from the circle in which it was enclosed.
The same contrast reappears in the "Torquato Tasso" of the same poet, though the characters
are very different. Even his last romance presents, like his first, this opposition between
the poetic mind and the common sense of practical men, between the ideal and the real, between
the subjective mode and the objective mode of seeing and representing things; it is the same
opposition, I say, but with what a diversity! Even in "Faust" we still find this contrast,
rendered, I admit--as the subject required--much more coarsely on both hands, and materialized.
It would be quite worth while if a psychological explanation were attempted of this character,
personified and specified in four such different ways.

It has been observed further back that a mere disposition to frivolity of mind, to a merry
humor, if a certain fund of the ideal is not joined to it, does not suffice to constitute the
vocation of a satirical poet, though this mistake is frequently made. In the same way a mere
disposition for tender sentiments, softness of heart, and melancholy do not suffice to constitute
a vocation for elegy. I cannot detect the true poetical talent, either on one side or the other;
it wants the essential, I mean the energetic and fruitful principle that ought to enliven the
subject, and produce true beauty. Accordingly the productions of this latter nature, of the
tender nature, do nothing but enervate us; and without refreshing the heart, without occupying
the mind, they are only able to flatter in us the sensuous nature. A constant disposition to
this mode of feeling ends necessarily, in the long run, by weakening the character, and makes
it fall into a state of passivity from which nothing real can issue, either for external or
for internal life. People have, therefore, been quite right to persecute by pitiless raillery
this fatal mania of sentimentality and of tearful melancholy which possessed Germany eighteen
years since, in consequence of certain excellent works that were ill understood and indiscreetly
imitated. People have been right, I say, to combat this perversity, though the indulgence with
which men are disposed to receive the parodies of these elegiac caricatures--that are very
little better themselves--the complaisance shown to bad wit, to heartless satire and spiritless
mirth, show clearly enough that this zeal against false sentimentalism does not issue from
quite a pure source. In the balance of true taste one cannot weigh more than the other, considering
that both here and there is wanting that which forms the aesthetic value of a work of art,
the intimate union of spirit with matter, and the twofold relation of the work with the faculty
of perception as well as with the faculty of the ideal.

People have turned Siegwart ["Siegwart," a novel by J. Mailer, published at Ulm, 1776] and
his convent story into ridicule, and yet the "Travels into the South of France" are admired;
yet both works have an equal claim to be esteemed in certain respects, and as little to be
unreservedly praised in others. A true, though excessive, sensuousness gives value to the former
of these two romances; a lively and sportive humor, a fine wit, recommends the other: but one
totally lacks all sobriety of mind that would befit it, the other lacks all aesthetic dignity.
If you consult experience, one is rather ridiculous; if you think of the ideal, the other is
almost contemptible. Now, as true beauty must of necessity accord both with nature and with
the ideal, it is clear that neither the one nor the other of these two romances could pretend
to pass for a fine work. And notwithstanding all this, it is natural, as I know it by my own
experience, that the romance of Thummel should be read with much pleasure. As a fact it only
wounds those requirements which have their principle in the ideal, and which consequently do
not exist for the greater part of readers; requirements that, even in persons of most delicate
feeling, do not make themselves felt at the moments when we read romances. With regard to the
other needs of the mind, and especially to those of the senses, this book, on the other hand,
affords unusual satisfaction. Accordingly, it must be, and will be so, that this book will
remain justly one of the favorite works of our age, and of all epochs when men only write aesthetic
works to please, and people only read to get pleasure.

But does not poetical literature also offer, even in its classical monuments, some analogous
examples of injuries inflicted or attempted against the ideal and its superior purity? Are
there not some who, by the gross, sensuous nature of their subject, seem to depart strangely
from the spiritualism I here demand of all works of art? If this is permitted to the poet,
the chaste nurseling of the muses, ought it not to be conceded to the novelist, who is only
the half-brother of the poet, and who still touches by so many points? I can the less avoid
this question because there are masterpieces, both in the elegiac and in the satirical kind,
where the authors seek and preach up a nature quite different from that I am discussing in
this essay, and where they seem to defend it, not so much against bad as against good morals.
The natural conclusion would be either that this sort of poem ought to be rejected, or that,
in tracing here the idea of elegiac poetry, we have granted far too much to what is arbitrary.

The question I asked was, whether what was permitted by the poet might not be tolerated in
a prose narrator too? The answer is contained in the question. What is allowed in the poet
proves nothing about what must be allowed in one who is not a poet. This tolerancy in fact
reposes on the very idea which we ought to make to ourselves of the poet, and only on this
idea; what in his case is legitimate freedom, is only a license worthy of contempt as soon
as it no longer takes its source in the ideal, in those high and noble inspirations which make
the poet.

The laws of decency are strangers to innocent nature; the experience of corruption alone has
given birth to them. But when once this experience has been made, and natural innocence has
disappeared from manners, these laws are henceforth sacred laws that man, who has a moral sense,
ought not to infringe upon. They reign in an artificial world with the same right that the
laws of nature reign in the innocence of primitive ages. But by what characteristic is the
poet recognized? Precisely by his silencing in his soul all that recalls an artificial world,
and by causing nature herself to revive in him with her primitive simplicity. The moment he
has done this he is emancipated by this alone from all the laws by which a depraved heart secures
itself against itself. He is pure, he is innocent, and all that is permitted to innocent nature
is equally permitted to him. But you who read him or listen to him, if you have lost your innocence,
and if you are incapable of finding it again, even for a moment, in a purifying contact with
the poet, it is your own fault, and not his: why do not you leave him alone? it is not for
you that he has sung!

Here follows, therefore, in what relates to these kinds of freedoms, the rules that we can
lay down.

Let us remark in the first place that nature only can justify these licenses; whence it follows
that you could not legitimately take them up of your own choice, nor with a determination of
imitating them; the will, in fact, ought always to be directed according to the laws of morality,
and on its part all condescending to the sensuous is absolutely unpardonable. These licenses
must, therefore, above all, be simplicity. But how can we be convinced that they are actually
simple? We shall hold them to be so if we see them accompanied and supported by all the other
circumstances which also have their spring of action in nature; for nature can only be recognized
by the close and strict consistency, by the unity and uniformity of its effects. It is only
a soul that has on all occasions a horror of all kinds of artifice, and which consequently
rejects them even where they would be useful--it is only that soul which we permit to be emancipated
from them when the artificial conventionalities hamper and hinder it. A heart that submits
to all the obligations of nature has alone the right to profit also by the liberties which
it authorizes. All the other feelings of that heart ought consequently to bear the stamp of
nature: it will be true, simple, free, frank, sensible, and straightforward; all disguise,
all cunning, all arbitrary fancy, all egotistical pettiness, will be banished from his character,
and you will see no trace of them in his writings.

Second rule: beautiful nature alone can justify freedoms of this kind; whence it follows that
they ought not to be a mere outbreak of the appetites; for all that proceeds exclusively from
the wants of sensuous nature is contemptible. It is, therefore, from the totality and the fulness
of human nature that these vivid manifestations must also issue. We must find humanity in them.
But how can we judge that they proceed in fact from our whole nature, and not only from an
exclusive and vulgar want of the sensuous nature? For this purpose it is necessary that we
should see--that they should represent to us--this whole of which they form a particular feature.
This disposition of the mind to experience the impressions of the sensuous is in itself an
innocent and an indifferent thing. It does not sit well on a man only because of its being
common to animals with him; it augurs in him the lack of true and perfect humanity. It only
shocks us in the poem because such a work having the pretension to please us, the author consequently
seems to think us capable, us also, of this moral infirmity. But when we see in the man who
has let himself be drawn into it by surprise all the other characteristics that human nature
in general embraces; when we find in the work where these liberties have been taken the expression
of all the realities of human nature, this motive of discontent disappears, and we can enjoy,
without anything changing our joy, this simple expression of a true and beautiful nature. Consequently
this same poet who ventures to allow himself to associate us with feelings so basely human,
ought to know, on the other hand, how to raise us to all that is grand, beautiful, and sublime
in our nature.

We should, therefore, have found there a measure to which we could subject the poet with confidence,
when he trespasses on the ground of decency, and when he does not fear to penetrate as far
as that in order freely to paint nature. His work is common, base, absolutely inexcusable,
from the moment it is frigid, and from the moment it is empty, because that shows a prejudice,
a vulgar necessity, an unhealthy appeal to our appetites. His work, on the other hand, is beautiful
and noble, and we ought to applaud it without any consideration for all the objections of frigid
decency, as soon as we recognize in it simplicity, the alliance of spiritual nature and of
the heart.

Perhaps I shall be told that if we adopt this criterion, most of the recitals of this kind
composed by the French, and the best imitations made of them in Germany, would not perhaps
find their interest in it; and that it might be the same, at least in part, with many of the
productions of our most intellectual and amiable poets, without even excepting his masterpieces.
I should have nothing to reply to this. The sentence after all is anything but new, and I am
only justifying the judgment pronounced long since on this matter by all men of delicate perceptions.
But these same principles which, applied to the works of which I have just spoken, seem perhaps
in too strict a spirit, might also be found too indulgent when applied to some other works.
I do not deny, in fact, that the same reasons which make me hold to be quite inexcusable the
dangerous pictures drawn by the Roman Ovid and the German Ovid, those of Crebillon, of Voltaire,
of Marmontel, who pretends to write moral tales!--of Lacroix, and of many others--that these
same reasons, I say, reconcile me with the elegies of the Roman Propertius and of the German
Propertius, and even with some of the decried productions of Diderot. This is because the former
of those works are only witty, prosaic, and voluptuous, while the others are poetic, human,
and simple.

IDYL.

It remains for me to say a few words about this third kind of sentimental poetry--some few
words and no more, for I propose to speak of it at another time with the developments particularly
demanded by the theme.

This kind of poetry generally presents the idea and description of an innocent and happy humanity.
This innocence and bliss seeming remote from the artificial refinements of fashionable society,
poets have removed the scene of the idyl from crowds of worldly life to the simple shepherd's
cot, and have given it a place in the infancy of humanity before the beginning of culture.
These limitations are evidently accidental; they do not form the object of the idyl, but are
only to be regarded as the most natural means to attain this end. The end is everywhere to
portray man in a state of innocence: which means a state of harmony and peace with himself
and the external world.

But a state such as this is not merely met with before the dawn of civilization; it is also
the state to which civilization aspires, as to its last end, if only it obeys a determined
tendency in its progress. The idea of a similar state, and the belief of the possible reality
of this state, is the only thing that can reconcile man with all the evils to which he is exposed
in the path of civilization; and if this idea were only a chimera, the complaints of those
who accuse civil life and the culture of the intelligence as an evil for which there is no
compensation, and who represent this primitive state of nature that we have renounced as the
real end of humanity--their complaints, I say, would have a perfectly just foundation. It is,
therefore, of infinite importance for the man engaged in the path of civilization to see confirmed
in a sensuous manner the belief that this idea can be accomplished in the world of sense, that
this state of innocence can be realized in it; and as real experience, far from keeping up
this belief, is rather made incessantly to contradict it, poetry comes here, as in many other
cases, in aid of reason, to cause this idea to pass into the condition of an intuitive idea,
and to realize it in a particular fact. No doubt this innocence of pastoral life is also a
poetic idea, and the imagination must already have shown its creative power in that. But the
problem, with this datum, becomes infinitely simpler and easier to solve; and we must not forget
that the elements of these pictures already existed in real life, and that it was only requisite
to gather up the separate traits to form a whole. Under a fine sky, in a primitive society,
when all the relations are still simple, when science is limited to so little, nature is easily
satisfied, and man only turns to savagery when he is tortured by want. All nations that have
a history have a paradise, an age of innocence, a golden age. Nay, more than this, every man
has his paradise, his golden age, which he remembers with more or less enthusiasm, according
as he is more or less poetical. Thus experience itself furnishes sufficient traits to this
picture which the pastoral idyl executes. But this does not prevent the pastoral idyl from
remaining always a beautiful and an encouraging fiction; and poetic genius, in retracing these
pictures, has really worked in favor of the ideal. For, to the man who has once departed from
simple nature, and who has been abandoned to the dangerous guidance of his reason, it is of
the greatest importance to find the laws of nature expressed in a faithful copy, to see their
image in a clear mirror, and to reject all the stains of artificial life. There is, however,
a circumstance which remarkably lessens the aesthetic value of these sorts of poetry. By the
very fact that the idyl is transported to the time that precedes civilization, it also loses
the advantages thereof; and by its nature finds itself in opposition to itself. Thus, in a
theoretical sense, it takes us back at the same time that in a practical sense it leads us
on and ennobles us. Unhappily it places behind us the end towards which it ought to lead us,
and consequently it can only inspire us with the sad feeling of a loss, and not the joyous
feeling of a hope. As these poems can only attain their end by dispensing with all art, and
by simplifying human nature, they have the highest value for the heart, but they are also far
too poor for what concerns the mind, and their uniform circle is too quickly traversed. Accordingly
we can only seek them and love them in moments in which we need calm, and not when our faculties
aspire after movement and exercise. A morbid mind will find its cure in them, a sound soul
will not find its food in them. They cannot vivify, they can only soften. This defect, grounded
in the essence of the pastoral idyll, has not been remedied by the whole art of poets. I know
that this kind of poem is not without admirers, and that there are readers enough who prefer
an Amyntus and a Daphnis to the most splendid masterpieces of the epic or the dramatic muse;
but in them it is less the aesthetical taste than the feeling of an individual want that pronounces
on works of art; and their judgment, by that very fact, could not be taken into consideration
here. The reader who judges with his mind, and whose heart is sensuous, without being blind
to the merit of these poems, will confess that he is rarely affected by them, and that they
tire him most quickly. But they act with so much the more effect in the exact moment of need.
But must the truly beautiful be reduced to await our hours of need? and is it not rather its
office to awaken in our soul the want that it is going to satisfy?

The reproaches I here level against the bucolic idyl cannot be understood of the sentimental.
The simple pastoral, in fact, cannot be deprived of aesthetic value, since this value is already
found in the mere form. To explain myself: every kind of poetry is bound to possess an infinite
ideal value, which alone constitutes it a true poetry; but it can satisfy this condition in
two different ways. It can give us the feeling of the infinite as to form, by representing
the object altogether limited and individualizing it; it can awaken in us the feeling of the
infinite as to matter, in freeing its object from all limits in which it is enclosed, by idealizing
this object; therefore it can have an ideal value either by an absolute representation or by
the representation of an absolute. Simple poetry takes the former road, the other is that of
sentimental poetry. Accordingly the simple poet is not exposed to failure in value so long
as he keeps faithfully to nature, which is always completely circumscribed, that is, is infinite
as regards form. The sentimental poet, on the contrary, by that very fact, that nature only
offers him completely circumscribed objects, finds in it an obstruction when he wishes to give
an absolute value to a particular object. Thus the sentimental poet understands his interests
badly when he goes along the trail of the simple poet, and borrows his objects from him--objects
which by themselves are perfectly indifferent, and which only become poetical by the way in
which they are treated. By this he imposes on himself without any necessity the same limits
that confine the field of the simple poet, without, however, being able to carry out the limitation
properly, or to vie with his rival in absolute definiteness of representation. He ought rather,
therefore, to depart from the simple poet, just in the choice of object; because, the latter
having the advantage of him on the score of form, it is only by the nature of the objects that
he can resume the upper hand.

Applying this to the pastoral idyls of the sentimental poet, we see why these poems, whatever
amount of art and genius be displayed in them, do not fully satisfy the heart or the mind.
An ideal is proposed in it, and, at the same time, the writer keeps to this narrow and poor
medium of pastoral life. Would it not have been better, on the contrary, to choose for the
ideal another frame, or for the pastoral world another kind of picture? These pictures are
just ideal enough for painting to lose its individual truth in them, and, again, just individual
enough for the ideal in them to suffer therefrom. For example, a shepherd of Gessner can neither
charm by the illusion of nature nor by the beauty of imitation; he is too ideal a being for
that, but he does not satisfy us any more as an ideal by the infinity of the thought: he is
a far too limited creature to give us this satisfaction. He will, therefore, please up to a
certain point all classes of readers, without exception, because he seeks to unite the simple
with the sentimental, and he thus gives a commencement of satisfaction to the two opposite
exigencies that may be brought to bear on any particular part of a poem; but the author, in
trying to unite the two points, does not fully satisfy either one or the other exigency, as
you do not find in him either pure nature or the pure ideal; he cannot rank himself as entirely
up to the mark of a stringent critical taste, for taste does not accept anything equivocal
or incomplete in aesthetical matters. It is a strange thing that, in the poet whom I have named,
this equivocal character extends to the language, which floats undecided between poetry and
prose, as if he feared either to depart too far from nature, by speaking rhythmical language,
or if he completely freed himself from rhythm, to lose all poetic flight. Milton gives a higher
satisfaction to the mind, in the magnificent picture of the first human pair, and of the state
of innocence in paradise;--the most beautiful idyl I know of the sentimental kind. Here nature
is noble, inspired, simple, full of breadth, and, at the same time, of depth; it is humanity
in its highest moral value, clothed in the most graceful form.

Thus, even in respect to the idyl, as well as to all kinds of poetry, we must once for all
declare either for individuality or ideality; for to aspire to give satisfaction to both exigencies
is the surest means, unless you have reached the terminus of perfection, to miss both ends.
If the modern poet thinks he feels enough of the Greeks' mind to vie with them, notwithstanding
all the indocility of his matter, on their own ground, namely that of simple poetry, let him
do it exclusively, and place himself apart from all the requirements of the sentimental taste
of his age. No doubt it is very doubtful if he come up to his models; between the original
and the happiest imitation there will always remain a notable distance; but, by taking this
road, he is at all events secure of producing a really poetic work. If, on the other hand,
he feels himself carried to the ideal by the instinct of sentimental poetry, let him decide
to pursue this end fully; let him seek the ideal in its purity, and let him not pause till
he has reached the highest regions without looking behind him to know if the real follows him,
and does not leave him by the way. Let him not lower himself to this wretched expedient of
spoiling the ideal to accommodate himself to the wants of human weakness, and to turn out mind
in order to play more easily with the heart. Let him not take us back to our infancy, to make
us buy, at the cost of the most precious acquisitions of the understanding, a repose that can
only last as long as the slumber of our spiritual faculties; but let him lead us on to emancipation,
and give us this feeling of higher harmony which compensates for all his troubles and secures
the happiness of the victor! Let him prepare as his task an idyl that realizes the pastoral
innocence, even in the children of civilization, and in all the conditions of the most militant
and excited life; of thought enlarged by culture; of the most refined art; of the most delicate
social conventionalities--an idyl, in short, that is made, not to bring back man to Arcadia,
but to lead him to Elysium.

This idyl, as I conceive it, is the idea of humanity definitely reconciled with itself, in
the individual as well as in the whole of society; it is union freely re-established between
inclination and duty; it is nature purified, raised to its highest moral dignity; in short,
it is no less than the ideal of beauty applied to real life. Thus, the character of this idyl
is to reconcile perfectly all the contradictions between the real and the ideal, which formed
the matter of satirical and elegiac poetry, and, setting aside their contradictions, to put
an end to all conflict between the feelings of the soul. Thus, the dominant expression of this
kind of poetry would be calm; but the calm that follows the accomplishment, and not that of
indolence--the calm that comes from the equilibrium re-established between the faculties, and
not from the suspending of their exercise; from the fulness of our strength, and not from our
infirmity; the calm, in short, which is accompanied in the soul by the feeling of an infinite
power. But precisely because idyl thus conceived removes all idea of struggle, it will be infinitely
more difficult than it was in two previously-named kinds of poetry to express movement; yet
this is an indispensable condition, without which poetry can never act on men's souls. The
most perfect unity is required, but unity ought not to wrong variety; the heart must be satisfied,
but without the inspiration ceasing on that account. The solution of this problem is properly
what ought to be given us by the theory of the idyl.

Now, what are the relations of the two poetries to one another, and their relations to the
poetic ideal? Here are the principles we have established.

Nature has granted this favor to the simple poet, to act always as an indivisible unity, to
be at all times identical and perfect, and to represent, in the real world, humanity at its
highest value. In opposition, it has given a powerful faculty to the sentimental poet, or,
rather, it has imprinted an ardent feeling on him; this is to replace out of himself this first
unity that abstraction has destroyed in him, to complete humanity in his person, and to pass
from a limited state to an infinite state. They both propose to represent human nature fully,
or they would not be poets; but the simple poet has always the advantage of sensuous reality
over the sentimental poet, by setting forth as a real fact what the other aspires only to reach.
Every one experiences this in the pleasure he takes in simple poetry.

We there feel that the human faculties are brought into play; no vacuum is felt; we have the
feeling of unity, without distinguishing anything of what we experience; we enjoy both our
spiritual activity and also the fulness of physical life. Very different is the disposition
of mind elicited by the sentimental poet. Here we feel only a vivid aspiration to produce in
us this harmony of which we had in the other case the consciousness and reality; to make of
ourselves a single and same totality; to realize in ourselves the idea of humanity as a complete
expression. Hence it comes that the mind is here all in movement, stretched, hesitating between
contrary feelings; whereas it was before calm and at rest, in harmony with itself, and fully
satisfied.

But if the simple poet has the advantage over the sentimental poet on the score of reality;
if he causes really to live that of which the other can only elicit a vivid instinct, the sentimental
poet, in compensation, has this great advantage over the simple poet: to be in a position to
offer to this instinct a greater object than that given by his rival, and the only one he could
give. All reality, we know, is below the ideal; all that exists has limits, but thought is
infinite. This limitation, to which everything is subject in sensuous reality, is, therefore,
a disadvantage for the simple poet, while the absolute, unconditional freedom of the ideal
profits the sentimental poet. No doubt the former accomplishes his object, but this object
is limited; the second, I admit, does not entirely accomplish his, but his object is infinite.
Here I appeal to experience. We pass pleasantly to real life and things from the frame of mind
in which the simple poet has placed us. On the other hand, the sentimental poet will always
disgust us, for a time, with real life. This is because the infinite character has, in a manner,
enlarged our mind beyond its natural measure, so that nothing it finds in the world of sense
can fill its capacity. We prefer to fall back in contemplation on ourselves, where we find
food for this awakened impulse towards the ideal world; while, in the simple poet, we only
strive to issue out of ourselves, in search of sensuous objects. Sentimental poetry is the
offspring of retirement and science, and invites to it; simple poetry is inspired by the spectacle
of life, and brings back life.

I have styled simple poetry a gift of nature to show that thought has no share in it. It is
a first jet, a happy inspiration, that needs no correction, when it turns out well, and which
cannot be rectified if ill turned out. The entire work of the simple genius is accomplished
by feeling; in that is its strength, and in it are its limits. If, then, he has not felt at
once in a poetic manner--that is, in a perfectly human manner--no art in the world can remedy
this defect. Criticism may help him to see the defect, but can place no beauty in its stead.
Simple genius must draw all from nature; it can do nothing, or almost nothing, by its will;
and it will fulfil the idea of this kind of poetry provided nature acts in it by an inner necessity.
Now, it is true that all which happens by nature is necessary, and all the productions, happy
or not, of the simple genius, which is disassociated from nothing so much as from arbitrary
will, are also imprinted with this character of necessity; momentary constraint is one thing,
and the internal necessity dependent on the totality of things another. Considered as a whole,
nature is independent and infinite; in isolated operations it is poor and limited. The same
distinction holds good in respect to the nature of the poet. The very moment when he is most
happily inspired depends on a preceding instant, and consequently only a conditional necessity
can be attributed to him. But now the problem that the poet ought to solve is to make an individual
state similar to the human whole, and consequently to base it in an absolute and necessary
manner on itself. It is therefore necessary that at the moment of inspiration every trace of
a temporal need should be banished, and that the object itself, however limited, should not
limit the flight of the poet. But it may be conceived that this is only possible in so far
as the poet brings to the object an absolute freedom, an absolute fulness of faculties, and
in so far as he is prepared by an anterior exercise to embrace all things with all his humanity.
Now he cannot acquire this exercise except by the world in which he lives, and of which he
receives the impressions immediately. Thus simple genius is in a state of dependence with regard
to experience, while the sentimental genius is forced from it. We know that the sentimental
genius begins its operation at the place where the other finishes its own: its virtue is to
complete by the elements which it derives from itself a defective object, and to transport
itself by its own strength from a limited state to one of absolute freedom. Thus the simple
poet needs a help from without, while the sentimental poet feeds his genius from his own fund,
and purifies himself by himself. The former requires a picturesque nature, a poetical world,
a simple humanity which casts its eyes around; for he ought to do his work without issuing
from the sensuous sphere. If external aid fails him, if he be surrounded by matter not speaking
to mind, one of two things will happen: either, if the general character of the poet-race is
what prevails in him, he issues from the particular class to which he belongs as a poet, and
becomes sentimental to be at any rate poetic; or, if his particular character as simple poet
has the upper hand, he leaves his species and becomes a common nature, in order to remain at
any rate natural. The former of these two alternatives might represent the case of the principal
poets of the sentimental kind in Roman antiquity and in modern times. Born at another period
of the world, transplanted under another sky, these poets who stir us now by ideas, would have
charmed us by individual truth and simple beauty. The other alternative is the almost unavoidable
quicksand for a poet who, thrown into a vulgar world, cannot resolve to lose sight of nature.

