SELF-DEVELOPMENT AND THE WAY TO POWER

by

L. W. ROGERS

Price 25 Cents

1922

"We may be either the suffering slaves of nature or the happy masters of her laws."

SELF DEVELOPMENT AND THE WAY TO POWER

It is the natural right of every human being to be happy--to escape all the miseries of life.
Happiness is the normal condition, as natural as the landscapes and the seasons. It is unnatural
to suffer and it is only because of our ignorance that we do suffer. Happiness is the product
of wisdom. To attain perfect wisdom, to comprehend fully the purpose of life, to realize completely
the relationship of human beings to each other, is to put an end to all suffering, to escape
every ill and evil that afflicts us. Perfect wisdom is unshadowed joy.

Why do we suffer in life? Because in the scheme of nature we are being forced forward in evolution
and we lack the spiritual illumination that alone can light the way and enable us to move safely
among the obstacles that lie before us. And mommy said no, there's more to it than that and
I can't stand it any longer. We've got to take him to a doctor, I don't even like to look at
him. Daddy said you're tired, you're just letting little things get on your nerves.
 Tomorrow he will be an enemy and we do not know why. A little while
ago we had wealth and all material luxuries. There was a sudden change and now we have only
poverty and misery and yet we seek in vain for a reason why this should be. There was a time
when we had health and strength; but they have both departed and no trace of a reason appears.
Aside from these greater tragedies of life innumerable things of lesser consequence continually
bring to us little miseries and minor heartaches. We most earnestly desire to avoid them but
we never see them until they strike us, until in the darkness of our ignorance we blunder upon
them. The thing we lack is the spiritual illumination that will enable us to look far and wide,
finding the hidden causes of human suffering and revealing the method by which they may be
avoided; and if we can but reach illumination the evolutionary journey can be made both comfortably
and swiftly. It is as though we must pass through a long, dark room filled with furniture promiscuously
scattered about. In the darkness our progress would be slow and painful and our bruises many.
But if we could press a button that would turn on the electric light we could then make the
same journey quickly and with perfect safety and comfort.

The old method of education was to store the mind with as many facts, or supposed facts, as
could be accumulated and to give a certain exterior polish to the personality. The theory was
that when a man was born he was a completed human being and that all that could be done for
him was to load him up with information that would be used with more or less skill, according
to the native ability he happened to be born with. The theosophical idea is that the physical
man, and all that constitutes his life in the physical world, is but a very partial expression
of the self; that in the ego of each there is practically unlimited power and wisdom; that
these may be brought through into expression in the physical world as the physical body and
its invisible counterparts, which together constitute the complex vehicle of the ego's manifestation,
are evolved and adapted to the purpose; and that in exact proportion that conscious effort
is given to such self-development will spiritual illumination be achieved and wisdom attained.
Thus the light that leads to happiness is kindled from within and the evolutionary journey
that all are making may be robbed of its suffering.

Why does death bring misery? Chiefly because it separates us from those we love. But when we
have evolved the faculty of clairvoyance, in our work of self-development, the separation vanishes
and our "dead" friends are as much with us as the living. The only other reason why death brings
grief or fear is because we do not understand it and comprehend the part it plays in human
evolution. But the moment our ignorance gives way to comprehension such fear vanishes and a
serene happiness takes its place.

Why do we have enemies from whose words or acts we suffer? Because in our limited physical
consciousness we do not perceive the unity of all life and realize that our wrong thinking
and doing must react upon us through other people--a situation from which there is no possible
escape except through ceasing to think evil and then patiently awaiting the time when the causes
we have already generated are fully exhausted. When spiritual illumination comes, and we no
longer stumble in the night of ignorance, the last enemy will disappear and we shall make no
more forever.

Why do people suffer from poverty and disease? Only because of our blundering ignorance that
makes their existence possible for us, and because we do not comprehend their meaning and their
lessons, nor know the attitude to assume toward them. Had we but the wisdom to understand why
they come to people, why they are necessary factors in their evolution, they would trouble
us no longer. When nature's lesson is fully learned these mute teachers will vanish.

And so it is with all forms of suffering we experience. They are at once reactions from our
ignorant blunderings and instructors that point out the better way. When we have comprehended
the lessons they teach they are no longer necessary and disappear.

Thus our evolution is going forward and has gone forward in the past. We know that the human
race has passed through a long evolution during which it has acquired five senses by which
knowledge is gained. Rally on the guidon!" Now and again his strident boyish voice varied the appeal,
"Hyar's yer Dov-inger's Rangers! Bally, boys! Rally on the reserve!"

Indeed, despite his stalwart, tall, broad-shouldered frame, he was scarcely more than a boy. His bare head
had flaxen curls like a child's; his pallid, though sunburned face was broad and soft and beardless;
his large blue eyes were languid and spiritless, though now and then as he turned an intent
gaze over the field they flared anew with hope, as if he expected to see rise up from that
desolate expanse, from among the stiffening carcasses of horses and the stark corpses of the
troopers, that gallant squadron wont to follow, so dashing and debonair, wherever the guidons
might mark the way.

But there was naught astir save the darkness slipping down by slow degrees--and perchance under
its cloak, already stealthily afoot, the ghoulish robbers of the dead that haunt the track of battle.
They were the human forerunners of the vulture breed, with even a keener scent for prey, for
as yet the feathered carrion-seekers held aloof; two or three only were descried from the field
hospital, perched on the boughs of a dead tree near the river, presently joined by another, its
splendid sustained flight impeded somewhat by the rain, battling with its big, strong wings
against the downpour of the torrents and the heavy air.

And still through all echoed the cry, "Rally on the guidon! Dovinger's Rangers! Rally on the
reserve!"

The bridge that crossed the river, which was running full and foaming, had been burnt; but a span,
charred and broken, still swung from the central pier. Over toward the dun-tinted west a house
was blazing, fired by some stray bomb, perhaps, or by official design, to hinder the enemy from
utilizing the shelter, and its red rage of destruction bepainted the clouds that hung so low
above the chimneys and dormer-windows. To the east, the woods on the steeps had been shelled,
and a myriad boughs and boles riven and rent, lay in fantastic confusion. Through the mournful
chaos the wind had begun to sweep; it sounded in unison with the
battle clamors, and shrieked and wailed and roared as it surged adown
the defiles.

Now and then there came on the blast the fusillade of dropping shots from the south, where
the skirmish line of one faction engaged the rear-guard of the other, or the pickets fell within
rifle-range. Once the sullen, melancholy boom of distant cannon shook the clouds, and then was
still, and ever and again sounded that tireless cry, "Dovinger's Rangers. Hyar's yer guidon!
Rally, boys! Rally on the guidon! Rally on the reserve!"

The senior surgeon, as the road wound near, stepped down toward it
when the horseman, still holding himself proudly erect, passed by.

"Sergeant," he hailed the guidon, "where is Captain Dovinger?"

The hand mechanically went to the boy's forehead in the usual military salute. "Killed, sir."

"Where are the other officers of the squadron--the junior captain, the lieutenants?"

"Killed, sir."

"What has become of the troopers?"

"Killed, sir,
in the last charge."

There was a pause. Then Dr. Trent broke forth:
"Are you a fool, boy? If your command is annihilated, why do you keep
up this commotion?"

The young fellow looked blank for a moment. Then,
as if he had not reasoned on the catastrophe: "I thought at first
they monght be scattered--some of 'em. But ef--ef--they war dead,
but could once see the guidon, sure 't would call 'em to life. They
couldn't be so dead but they would rally to the guidon! Guide right!"
he shouted suddenly. "Dovinger's Rangers! Rally on the guidon, boys!
Rally on the reserve!"

It was a time that hardened men's hearts. On the other hand, exercise increases power. To
increase the size and strength of muscles we must use them. This is just as true of mental
and moral faculties as it is of the physical body. The only way to make the brain keen and
powerful is to exercise it by original thinking. One way to gain soul powers is to give free
play to the loftiest aspirations of which we are capable, and to do it systematically instead
of at random. We grow to be like the things we think about. Now, the reverse of all this must
be equally true. To give no thought to higher things, to become completely absorbed in material
affairs, is to stifle the soul, to invite spiritual atrophy.

Turning our attention to nature we shall find in the parasite convincing proof of all this.
The parasite, whether plant or animal, is living evidence that to refuse or neglect to use
an organ or faculty results in being deprived of it. The dodder, says Drummond, has roots like
other plants, but when it fixes sucker discs on the branches of neighboring plants and begins
to get its food through them, its roots perish. When it fails to use them it loses them. He
also points to the hermit-crab as an illustration of this great fact in nature, that disuse
means loss, and that to shirk responsibility is the road to degeneration. The hermit-crab was
once equipped with a hard shell and with as good means of locomotion as other crabs. But instead
of courageously following the hardy life of other crustaceans it formed the bad habit of taking
up its residence in the cast-off shells of mollusks. This made life easy and indolent. But
it paid the price of all shirking. In time it lost four legs, while the shell over the vital
portion of its body degenerated to a thin membrane which leaves it practically helpless when
it is out of its captured home. And this is the certain result of all shirking of responsibility.
There may be an apparent temporary gain, but it always means greater loss, either immediate
or remote. So nature punishes inaction with atrophy. Whatever is not used finally ceases to
be. In plain language, apathy, inaction, idleness, uselessness, is the road to degeneration.
On the other hand, aspiration and activity mean growth, development, power.

So we grow, physically, mentally and morally, by activity, by exercise of the organs or the
faculties we desire to possess. It is only by the constant exercise of these things that we
can grow at all. When this great law of nature is understood we see at once how it is that
life is full of trouble; why it is that the whole visible world seems to be designed to keep
us constantly at work physically and mentally, to challenge our resourcefulness in improving
our physical, social and political conditions, to continually try our patience and to forever
test our courage. It is the way of development. It is the price of progress.

The universe is a training school for evolving intelligence--a vast gymnasium for the development
of moral fibre. We become mentally clever by playing at the game of life. We match our courage
against its adversities and acquire fearlessness. We try our optimism against its disappointments
and learn cheerfulness. We pit our patience against its failures and gain persistence. We are
torn from the pinnacle of ambition by opponents and learn toleration of others. We fall from
the heights of vanity and pride, and learn to be modest and humble. We encounter pain and sorrow
and learn sympathy with suffering. It is only by such experiences that we can grow to rounded
measure. It is only in an environment thus adapted to our spiritual development that we can
evolve the latent powers within us.

Such is the universe in which we find ourselves and from it there is no escape. No man can
avoid life--not even the foolish one who, when the difficulties before him appear for the moment
overwhelming, tries to escape them by suicide. A man cannot die. He can only choose how he
will live. He may either helplessly drift through the world suffering from all the ills and
evils that make so many unhappy or he may choose the method of conscious evolution that alone
makes life truly successful. We may be either the suffering slaves of nature or the happy masters
of her laws.

Now, all powers possessed by any human being, no matter how exalted his position in evolution,
or how sublime his spiritual power, are latent in all human beings and can, in time, be developed
and brought into action. Of course there is no magic rule by which the ignoramus can instantly
become wise or by which a brutal man can be at once transformed into a saint. It may require
scores of incarnations to accomplish a work so great, but when a man reaches the point in his
evolution where he begins to comprehend the purpose of life, and to evolve the will to put
forth his energies in co-operation with nature, his rise to wisdom and power may be swift indeed.
But this transformation from the darkness of ignorance to spiritual illumination, from helplessness
"in the fell clutch of circumstance" to power over nature, must be brought about by his own
efforts, for it is a process of evolution--of forcing the latent to become the active. Therefore
one must resolve to take oneself in hand for definite and systematic self-development. Nobody
else can do the work for us. Certain moral qualities must be gained before there can be spiritual
illumination and genuine wisdom and such qualities, or virtues, have to be evolved by the laws
under which all growth occurs. It is just as impossible to acquire a moral quality by reading
about its desirability as to evolve muscular strength by watching the performance of a group
of athletes. To gain muscular strength one must take part in the physical activities that produce
it. He must live the athletic life. To win spiritual strength and supremacy he must live the
spiritual life. There is no other way. He must first learn what mental and moral qualities
are essential, and how to gain them, and then set earnestly about the work of acquiring them.

The first thing necessary is to get a clear understanding of the fact that the physical body
is not the self but only a vehicle or instrument through which the self is being manifested
in the visible world. The body is as much your instrument as the hand is, or as your pen is.
It is a thing which you, the self, use and a clear conception of this fact--a feeling that
this is the fact--is the first step toward that absolute control of the physical body that
lays the foundation for success in conscious evolution. When we feel that in managing the physical
body we are controlling something that is not ourself we are fairly started on the right road.

Now, there are three things that a person must possess to be successful in self-development.
If he has not these three qualifications he will make but little progress; but, fortunately,
any lacking quality can be evolved and if one does not possess these three necessities his
first work is to create them. These three things are an ardent desire, an iron will and an
alert intelligence. Why are these three qualifications essential to success and what purpose
do they serve?

Desire is nature's motor power--the propulsive force that pushes everything forward in its
evolution. It is desire that stimulates to action. Desire drives the animal into the activities
that evolve its physical body and sharpen its intelligence. If it had no desire it would lie
inert and perish. But the desire for food, for drink, for association with its kind, impel
it to action, and the result is the evolution of strength, skill and intelligence in proportion
to the intensity of its desires. To gratify these desires it will accept battle no matter how
great may be the odds against it and will unhesitatingly risk life itself in the combat. Desire
not only induces the activity that develops physical strength and beauty, but also has its
finer effects. Hunger compels the animal not only to seek food, but to pit its cunning against
that of its prey. Driven forward by desire it develops, among other qualities, strength, courage,
patience, endurance, intelligence.

Desire plays the same role with man at his higher stage of evolution. It stimulates him to
action; and always as his activity satisfies his original desire a new one replaces the old
and lures him on to renewed exertion. The average young man beginning his business career,
desires only a comfortable cottage. But when that is attained he wants a mansion. He soon tires
of the mansion and wants a palace. Then he wants several--at the seaside, in the city, and
on the mountains. At first he is satisfied with a horse; then he demands an automobile, and
finally a steam yacht. He sets out as a youth to earn a livelihood and welcomes a small salary.
But the desire for money pushes him into business for himself and he works tirelessly for a
competence. He feels that a small fortune should satisfy anybody but when he gets it he wants
to be a millionaire. If he succeeds in that he then desires to become a multi-millionaire.

Whether the desire is for wealth, or for fame, or for power, the same result follows--when
the desire is satisfied a greater one takes its place and spurs the ambitious one to still
further exertion. He grasps the prize he believes to contain complete satisfaction only to
discover that while he was pursuing it desire had grown beyond it, and so the goal he would
attain is always far ahead of him. Thus are we tricked and apparently mocked by nature until
we finally awake to the fact that all the objects of desire--the fine raiment, the jewels,
the palaces, the wealth, the power, are but vain and empty things; and that the real reward
for all our efforts to secure them is not these objects at all but the new powers we have evolved
in getting them; powers that we did not before possess and which we should not have evolved
but for nature's great propulsive force--desire. The man who accumulates a fortune by many
years of persistent effort in organizing and developing a business enterprise, by careful planning
and deep thinking, may naturally enough look upon the fortune he will possess for a few years
before it passes on to others, as his reward. But the truth is that it is a very transient
and perishable and worthless thing compared to the new powers that were unconsciously evolved
in getting it--powers that will be retained by the man and be brought into use in future incarnations.

Desire, then, plays a most important role in human evolution. It awakens, stimulates, propels.
What wind is to the ship, what steam is to the locomotive, desire is to the human being.

It has been written in a great book, "Kill out desire," and elsewhere it is written, "Resist
not evil." We may find, in similar exalted pronouncements, truths that are very useful to disciples
but which might be confusing and misleading to the man of the world if he attempted to literally
apply them. Perhaps for the average mortal "kill out desire" might be interpreted "transmute
desire." Without desire man would be in a deathlike and dangerous condition--a condition in
which further progress would be impossible. But by transmuting the lower desires into the higher
he moves steadily forward and upward without losing the motive power that urges him forever onward.

To transmute desire, to continually replace the lower with the higher, really is killing desire
out but it is doing it by the slow and safe evolutionary process. As to crushing it suddenly,
that is simply impossible; but substitution may work wonders. Suppose, for example, that a
young man is a gambler and his parents are much distressed about it. The common and foolish
course is to lecture him on the sin of gambling and to tearfully urge him to associate only
with very proper young men. But the young gambler is not in the least interested in that sort
of a life, which appears to him to be a kind of living death, and such entreaty does not move
him. His parents would do better by looking more closely into the case. Why is he a gambler?
He desires money. He seeks excitement. He wants to live in an atmosphere of intense life and
activity. Very well. These desires are quite right in themselves. It is useless to try to crush
them. It is nonsense to argue that he does not want these things. Clearly enough he does want
them and that is precisely why he gambles. Then do not attempt the impossibility of killing
the desire but change the objects of his desires. Say to him: "You desire money and a life
full of turbulence and excitement. Well, you can get all that in a better and a legitimate
way and have the respect of your friends besides. You can go into politics. That is a field
within the pale of the law and in it you can have scope for all the energy and activity and
intensity of life you long for, with all the element of chance which you find so attractive."
And when the young man has had his fling there and tires of it then something else can be attempted.
But to try to crush desire and curb the outrushing life is both foolish and impossible. We
can only direct it.

There are, of course, certain gross desires that must be gotten rid of by the most direct and
least objectionable method, and when one really desires to be free from a given vice or moral
weakness and sets earnestly and intelligently about it his release is not so difficult as the
complete tyranny of most vices would lead one to suppose. There is a process by which any of
us may be free if we will take the trouble to patiently put it into practice. This method will
apply to any desire from which we wish to be released. For example, let us take the person
who has a settled desire for alcoholic stimulants but really wishes to be rid of it forever.
Many people who are thus afflicted to the point where they occasionally become intoxicated
feel, when they recover their normal condition, that no price would be too great to pay for
freedom from this humiliating habit. As a rule such a man tries to close his eyes to his shame
and forget it, promising himself that he will be stronger when the temptation again assails
him. But it is just this putting it aside, this casting it out of his mind, that perpetuates
his weakness. He instinctively shrinks from dwelling upon the thought of whither he is drifting.
So he puts the unpleasant subject aside altogether and when the inner desire asserts itself
again he finds himself precisely as helpless as before.

Now, his certain method of escape from this tyranny of desire is to turn his mind resolutely
to an examination of the whole question. Let him look the facts in the face, however humiliating
they may be. He should call his imagination to his assistance. It should be used to picture
to himself his future if he does not succeed in breaking up the unfortunate slavery of the
desire nature. He should think of the fact that as he grows older the situation grows worse.
He should picture himself as the helpless, repulsive sot, with feeble body and weakening mind,
and reflect upon the humiliation he must endure, the poverty he must face, and the physical
and mental pain he must bear in the future if he now fails to break the desire ties that bind
him. This creates in him a feeling of repulsion toward the cause of it all; and if he continues
to think daily upon this hideous picture of what he is slowly drifting toward--if he daily
regards it all with a feeling of slight repulsion--then even within a month or two he will
find that his desire for drink is slowly fading out.

This is as true of all other desires that enslave us. The desire for alcoholic stimulants merely
illustrates the principle involved. Any desire from which one wishes to be free may be escaped
by the same method. But one who would free himself from the desire-nature should not make the
mistake of creating a feeling of intense hostility toward the thing he seeks to escape; for
hatred is also a tie. He should merely reach a position of complete indifference. He should
think of it not with settled hostility, but with slight repulsion; and if he does that daily,
mentally dwelling upon the pain and humiliation it causes, he will find the ties loosening,
the desire weakening.

Desire is a force that may be beneficial or detrimental, according to its use. As we may eradicate
a desire so may we create a desire. How, then, may one who seeks the highest self-development
use desire, this propulsive force of nature, to help himself forward? He should desire spiritual
progress most earnestly, for without such desire he cannot succeed. Therefore if the aspirant
does not have the ardent desire for spiritual illumination he must create it. To accomplish
this let him again call imagination to his assistance. Let him picture himself as having his
power for usefulness many times multiplied by occult development. He should think of himself
as possessing the inner sight that enables him to understand the difficulties of others and
to comprehend their sorrows. He should daily think of the fact that this would so broaden and
quicken his sympathies that he would be enormously more useful in the world than he can now
possibly be and that he could become a source of happiness to thousands. Let him reflect that
as he gets farther along in occult development and in unselfishness and spirituality he may
have the inestimable privilege of coming into contact with some of the exalted intelligences
that watch over and assist the struggling aspirants on their upward way. He should daily recall
the fact that he is now moving forward toward a freer, richer, more joyous life than he has
yet known and that every effort brings him nearer to its realization. Thus dwelling on the
subject in its various aspects he creates the ardent desire that serves to propel him forward.

If he feels that these things make an ideal a little too high for him at present he may reach
that point by degrees. He may at first dwell in thought upon the personal satisfaction that
would come from the possession of astral sight. Let him reflect upon what it would mean to
be conscious of the invisible world; to have all its wonders laid open before him; to be able
to consciously meet the so-called dead, including his own friends and relatives; to be able
to have the positive personal proof that we survive the death of the physical body; to be able
to become one of the "invisible helpers" of the world; to have available the priceless advantages
of the astral region and to bring the consciousness of all this into the physical life. That
is certainly something worth all the time and effort required to attain it. Thus thinking constantly
of the widened life and added powers it would confer, the desire to move forward in self-development
will be greatly stimulated. But the student should always keep it in mind that the real purpose
of acquiring new powers is to increase his capacity for service to the race, and that he who
falls short of that ideal walks upon dangerous ground.

The second requisite is a firm will. It should not be forgotten that an unusual and difficult
thing is being attempted in which a person of weak will cannot possibly hope to succeed. Even
in the ordinary life of the world considerable will power is essential to success. To succeed
in business, to become expert in a profession, or to completely master an art, requires strong
will, determination, perseverance. The difficulties in occult development are still greater
and, while it is true that any degree of effort is well worth while, the weaklings will not
go far. Only those with the indomitable will that knows neither surrender nor compromise may
hope for a large measure of success. Once the will is thoroughly aroused and brought into action
every hindrance in the way will be swept aside.

Mighty, indeed, is this force when aroused. But a person may be easily deceived about his will.
He is likely to think that his will is much stronger than it really is. He may say to himself,
"Oh, yes, I would go through anything for the sake of the higher life and spiritual illumination."
But that is no guarantee that after a few months of monotonous work he may not abandon it unless
he adopts the wise plan of strengthening his will as he moves forward. Let him begin this by
testing his present strength of will, but let him not be discouraged by the result. He should
remember that whatever he lacks in will power he can evolve by proper effort.

To find out whether he really has much strength of will a person may begin to observe to what
extent he permits his daily plans to be modified, or entirely changed, by the things that run
counter to his will. Does he hold steadfastly to his purpose or does he weakly surrender to
small obstacles? Has he the will power to even begin the day as he has planned it? The evening
before he decides that he will rise at six o'clock the next morning. He knows there are certain
excellent reasons why he should do so and he retires with the matter fully decided. It is positively
settled that at exactly six o'clock the day's program shall begin. But when the clock strikes
that hour the next morning he feels strongly disinclined to obey the summons. It involves some
bodily discomfort to rise at that moment and he concludes that, after all, perhaps he was a
bit hasty the evening before in fixing upon that hour! Whereupon he reconsiders the matter
and makes it seven; and when that time arrives he generously extends it to eight o'clock. The
hour, of course, is unimportant. But whatever may have been the hour that was previously determined
upon the keeping of that determination is of the greatest importance and the failure to put
the resolution into effect is evidence of the possession of a weak will.

Now all this proves that such persons have very little real will power, for they permit the
desire for trifling bodily comfort to set their plans aside. Such persons are still slaves
to the physical body and weakly permit it to upset carefully outlined programs. They are not
yet ready for good work in occult development, where real success can come only to those who
have steadfast strength of purpose.

People who fail to assert the will and bring the body into complete subjection probably little
realize what a price they pay for a trifling physical pleasure; for until we voluntarily take
the right course we have not escaped the evolutionary necessity of compulsion and may reasonably
expect sooner or later to be thrown into an environment that will apply the stimulus we still
need to arouse the will. It may be unpleasant while it is occurring, but what better fortune
could befall an indolent man than to find himself in circumstances where his poverty or other
necessity compels him to subordinate bodily comfort to the reign of the will? Nature provides
the lessons we require. We may wisely co-operate with her and thus escape the sting. But so
long as we need the lesson we may be quite sure that it awaits us.

All the business activities of the world are developing the will. Through them will and desire
work together in evolving latent powers. Desire arouses will power. A man desires wealth and
the desire plunges him into business activities and stimulates the will by which he overcomes
all the difficulties that lie in his way. Ardent desire for an education arouses the will of
the student and the awakened will triumphs over poverty and all other barriers between him
and the coveted diploma. If a man stands at a lower point in evolution where he has not the
ambition for intellectual culture nor for fame nor for wealth, but only the desire for shelter
and food, still that primitive desire forces him into action; and while his will power will
be evolved only in proportion to the strength of the desire that prompts him, it must nevertheless
grow. Instead of rising at a certain hour because the will decrees it he may rise only because
he knows his livelihood depends upon it. But he is learning the same lesson--the overcoming
of the inertia of the physical body--albeit it is compulsory instead of voluntary. But all
this is unconscious evolution. It is the long, slow, painful process. It is the only way possible
for those who are not wise enough to co-operate with nature in her evolutionary work and thus
rise above the necessity of compulsion.

How, then, may we develop the will when it is so weak that we are still the slaves of nature
instead of the masters of destiny? Will power, like any other faculty, may be cultivated and
made strong. To do this one may plan in advance what he will do under certain circumstances
and then carry out the program without evasion or hesitation when the time arrives. His forethought
will enable him to do this if he does not undertake things too difficult at first. Let him
resolve to do at a certain hour some small thing which, in the ordinary course of his duties,
he sees is necessary but unpleasant; and then firmly resolve in advance that exactly at the
appointed time he will do it. Thus fortified before the trial comes he will probably go successfully
through with it. After once deciding upon the time there should be no postponement and not
an instant's delay when the moment arrives.

One of the things we have to learn is to overcome the inertia of the physical body and many
people are not really awake on the physical plane because they have not done so. To a certain
extent they are "dead" within the physical body for it is a condition much nearer death than
that supposed death of one who no longer has the physical body. The inert mass of physical
matter in which such people are functioning leaves them only half alive until they have aroused
themselves from its domination. They remind one of the lines:

     "Life is a mystery, death is a doubt,
      And some folks are dead
      While they're walking about!"

This inertia of the physical body that so often renders people nearly useless is very largely
a matter of habit and can be overcome to a surprising degree by simply using a little will-power.
Everybody is familiar with the fact that it is sometimes much easier to think and act than
at other times. But perhaps it is not so well known that the dull periods can invariably be
overcome by an effort of the will and the physical body be made to do its proper work. An actor
or lecturer after months of continuous work may find the brain and body growing tired and dull.
He may feel when going before his audience that he has not an idea nor the wit to express it
were someone else to furnish it. Yet by an effort of the will he can quickly overcome the condition
and change from stupidity to mental alertness and intensity of thought. The self is never tired.
It is only the physical body that grows weary. It is true that it has its limitations and must
not be overtaxed and driven beyond endurance as a tired horse is sometimes cruelly urged forward
with whip and spur. Judgment must always be used in determining one's capacity for work. But
that which is to be done should never be done draggingly, with the inertia of the physical
body marring the work. We should be fully awake instead of "dead" while we "are walking about."
If a person resolves to be the master of the body he may soon acquire the power to arouse it
to activity and alertness during all his waking hours, very much as one may acquire the habit
of keen observation and be conscious of what is occurring in his vicinity instead of being
carelessly unconscious of the major portion of what is going on immediately about him.

This matter of giving attention to the things that may properly engage the mind, and of using
the will to arouse and control it, is of very great importance. Is it not what we call "paying
attention" that makes the connection between the ego and the objective world? Giving attention
is a process of consciousness. The person who fails in attention misses the purpose of life
and throws away valuable time and opportunity. To give attention is to be alive and awake and
in a condition to make the most of limited physical life. Yet many people cannot give sustained
attention to an ordinary conversation nor direct the mind with sufficient precision to state
a simple fact without wandering aimlessly about in the effort, bringing in various incidental
matters until the original subject, instead of being made clear, is obscured in a maze of unimportant
details or lost sight of altogether.

Such habits of mind should be put resolutely aside by one who would hasten self-development.
The attention should be fixed deliberately upon the subject in hand, whatever it may be, and
nothing should be permitted to break the connection between that and the mind. Whether it is
a conversation or a book, or a manual task, or a problem being silently worked out intellectually,
it should have undivided attention until the mind is ready for something else.

Perhaps few of us give to any subject the close attention which alone can prove its own effectiveness
and demonstrate the fact that there goes with such steadily sustained attention a subtle power
of extended, or accentuated, consciousness. When ten minutes is given to a certain subject
and other thoughts are constantly intruding, so that when the ten minutes have passed only
five minutes have actually been devoted to the subject, the result is by no means a half of
what would have been accomplished had the whole of the ten minutes been given to uninterrupted
attention. The time thus spent in wavering attention is practically without effect. The connection
between mind and subject has not been complete. Mind and subject were, so to say, out of focus.
Attention must be sustained to the point where it becomes concentration. The mind must be used
as a sun-glass can be used. Hold the glass between sun and paper, out of focus, for an hour
and nothing will happen. A yellow circle of light falls on the paper and that is all. But bring
it into perfect focus, concentrating the rays to the finest possible point, and the paper turns
brown and finally bursts into the fire that will consume it. They are the same rays that were
previously ineffective. Concentration produced results.

The mind must be brought under such complete control of the will that it can be manipulated
like a search-light, turned in this direction or that, or flung full upon some obscure subject
and held steadily there till it illuminates every detail of it, as the search-light sends a
dazzling ray through space and shows every rock and tree on a hillside far away through the
darkness of the night.

The third necessity is keen intelligence. The force of desire, directed by the will, must be
supplemented by an alert mind. There is a popular notion that good motives are sufficient in
themselves and that when one has the desire to attain spiritual illumination, plus the will
to achieve, nothing more is needed but purity of purpose. But this is a misconception. It is
true that the mystic makes devotion the vital thing in his spiritual growth; and it is also
true that the three paths of action, knowledge and devotion blend and become one at a higher
stage. But while there are methods of development in which intellect is not at first made a
chief factor it can by no means be ignored in the long-run; nor are we now considering those
methods. A good intellect, therefore, is a necessary part of the equipment.

Good motives play a most important part, indeed, in occult progress. They safeguard the aspirant
on his upward way. Without pure motives, without a large measure of unselfishness, the greatest
dangers would encompass him. "Why, I didn't mean you so much," she faltered, perturbed by this
sudden charge of the enemy. "I meant the practice."

"Oh, I know that I'm a sinner in more ways 'n one; but I didn't know that you were a lady-preacher."

"You
mean that it is none of my business----"

"You ought to be so glad of that," he retorted.

She maintained a silence that might have suggested a degree of offended pride, and she was truly
humiliated that her vaunted hazel eyes had so signally failed to work their wonted charm. As
they strolled back together up the steep path to the hotel he seemed either unobservant or
uncaring, so impassive were his manners, and she was aware that her
demonstration had resulted in giving him information which he could
not otherwise have gained.

Later, she was nettled to notice that he had utilized it in prosaic fashion, for that night
no lights flared late from the casino.

The gamesters, informed that rumors were a-wing, had betaken themselves elsewhere. A small smoking-room
in the hotel proper seemed less obnoxious to suspicion in the depleted condition of the guest-list,
since autumn was now approaching. After eleven o'clock the coterie would scarcely be subject
to interruption, and there they gathered as the hour waxed late. The cards were duly dealt,
the draw was on, when suddenly the door opened and old Mr. Whitmel, his favorite meerschaum
in his hand and a sheaf of newly arrived journals, entered with the evident intention of a
prolonged stay. A "standpatter" seemed hardly so assured as before he encountered the dim,
surprised gaze, but the old clergyman was esteemed a good sort, and he ventured on a reminder:

"You
have been here before, haven't you, Mr. Whitmel? Saw a deal of this sort of thing in the army!" And
he rattled the chips significantly.

"Used to see that sort of thing in the army?

Yes, yes, indeed--more than I wanted to see--very much more!"

Colonel Duval took schooling much amiss. He turned up his florid face with its auburn mustachios
and Burnside whiskers from its bending over the cards and showed a broad arch of glittering
white teeth in an ungenial laugh.

"Remember, Mr. Whitmel, at that fight we had in the hills not far from the Ocoee, how you rebuked
two artillerymen for swearing? Something was wrong with the vent-hole of the piece, and one
of the gunners asked what business you had with their language; and
you said, 'I am a minister of the Lord,' and the fellow gave it back
very patly, 'I ain't carin' ef you was a minister of state!' Then
you said, 'No, you would doubtless swear in the presence of an angel.'
And the fellow with the sponge-staff declared, 'Say, Mister, ef you
are that, you are an angel off your feed certain'--you were worn to
skin and bone then--'an' the rations of manna must be ez skimpy in
heaven ez the rations o' bacon down here in Dixie.' Ha, ha, ha!"

Mr.
Whitmel had taken a seat in an easy-chair; he had struck a match and
was composedly kindling his pipe. "I felt nearer a higher communion
that day than often since," he said.

The coterie of gentlemen looked
at one another in disconsolate uncertainty, and one turned his cards
face downward and laid them resignedly on the table.
Or one's childhood home can be recalled and the imagination made to reconstruct it. The house
being complete the landscape can be reproduced, with the hills, trees and roads. Repeated practice
at "seeing mentally" is of the greatest value in occult development.

While the aspirant is thus working to improve the three essential qualifications of desire,
will and intelligence--to intensify his desire to possess powers for the helping of others,
to strengthen the will to get such powers, and to steadily improve the intellect--he should
also be giving most earnest attention to meditation, for it is through this practice that the
most remarkable results may be produced in the transformation of his bodies, visible and invisible,
through which the ego manifests itself in the physical world. In the degree that these are
organized and made sensitive and responsive they cease to be limitations of consciousness.
Such sensitiveness and responsiveness may be brought about by meditation, together with proper
attention to the purification of the physical and astral bodies; for purity and sensitiveness
go together.

Meditation is a subject so very important to the aspirant that specific instructions should
guide him. The average person, used to the turbulent life of occidental civilization, will
find it a sufficiently difficult matter to control the mind, and to finally acquire the power
to direct it as he desires, even with all the conditions in his favor. The serene hours of
morning are the most favorable of the twenty-four for meditation. Regularity has a magic of
its own and the hour should be the same each morning. To be alone in surroundings as quiet
as possible is another essential. The most desirable time for meditation is soon after awakening
in the morning. Before turning the mind to any of the business affairs of the day let the aspirant
sit calmly down and mediate upon any wholesome thought, like patience, courage or compassion,
keeping the mind steadily upon the subject for five minutes.

Two very important things are being accomplished by such meditation. First, we are getting
control of the mind and learning to direct it where and how we choose; and, second, we are
attracting and building into the bodies we possess certain grades of imponderable matter that
will make thinking and acting along these lines easier and easier for us until they are established
habits and we actually become in daily life patient, courageous and compassionate. Whatever
qualities or virtues we desire to possess may be gained through the art of meditation and the
effort to live up to the ideal dwelt upon daily by the mind.

While it is absolutely true that any human being can make of himself that which he desires
to be--can literally raise himself to any ideal he is capable of conceiving--it must not be
supposed that it can be done in a short time and by intermittent effort. We sometimes hear
it said that all we need do is to realize that all power is within us, when, presto! we are
the thing we would be! It is quite true that we must realize their existence before we can
call the latent powers into expression; but the work of arousing the latent into the active
is a process of growth, of actual evolutionary change. The physical body as it is now is not
sensitive enough to respond to subtle vibrations. Its brain is not capable of receiving and
registering the delicate vibrations sent outward by the ego, and the task of changing it so
that it can do so is not a trifling or easy one. But every effort produces its effect and to
the persistent and patient devotee of self-development the final result is certain. But it
is not a matter of miraculous accomplishment. It is a process of inner growth. There are, it
is quite true, cases in which people who have entered upon this method of self-development
have, in a short time, attained spiritual illumination, becoming fully conscious of the invisible
world and its inhabitants while awake in the physical body; extending the horizon of consciousness
to include both worlds, and coming into possession of the higher clairvoyance that enables
one to trace past causes and modify impending effects. But such people are those who have given
so much attention to self-development in past lives that they have now but little more to do
in order to come into full possession of occult powers. Sometimes it requires little more than
the turning of their attention to the matter. Becoming a member of the Theosophical Society
or seriously taking up theosophical studies is sometimes the final step that leads to the opening
of the inner sight.

But how can one know to what point he may have advanced in the past and where he now stands?
How may we know whether there is but a little work ahead or a great deal? We cannot know; nor
is it important to know. The person who should take up the task merely because he thinks there
is little to do would certainly fail. The very fact that he would not venture upon the undertaking
if he thought the task a difficult one is evidence that he has not the qualifications necessary
for the success of the occult student. Unless he is filled with a longing to possess greater
power to be used in the service of humanity, and fired with an enthusiasm that would hesitate
at no difficulties, he has not yet reached the point in his evolution where he awaits only
the final steps that will make him a disciple. But even the absence of the keen desire for
spiritual progress, which is the best evidence of the probability of success, should not deter
anybody from entering upon the systematic study of theosophy and devoting to it all the time
and energy he can; nor should the thought that many years might pass without producing any
very remarkable results lead him to conclude that the undertaking would not be a profitable
one. The time will come with each human being when he will step out of the great throng that
drifts with the tide and enter upon the course of conscious evolution, assisting nature instead
of ignoring her beneficent plan; and since it is but a question of time the sooner a beginning
is made the better, for the sooner will suffering cease. 

I was as well pleased as a wig could be with the appearance of things in and around the house
I was to inhabit. It was in a village about thirty miles from Boston, and was like an English
country gentleman's house. A wide hall passed through the middle of it, with a grand staircase.
From the doors at either end of the hall ran rows of elm trees. One led to the high road, the
other up a gentle hill, on the top of which was a pretty burying ground with a path through
it leading to a small church.

The Squire had a black man whom he called his boy, and who was, in
fact, his slave, but whom he treated like a friend and brother.

Some
years after, when slavery was abolished in Massachusetts, the Squire
called Cato to him, and said, "Cato, you are no longer my slave; you
are free." It is true that efforts toward
the evolution of such powers may be enormously aided by teachers, but such instruction can
not be bought, and the offer to furnish it for money is the best evidence of its worthlessness.
Those who teach this ancient wisdom select their own pupils from the morally fit, and tuition
can be paid only in devotion to truth and service to humanity. That is the only road that leads
to instruction worth having, and until the aspirant is firmly upon that sound moral ground
he is much better off without powers, the selfish use of which would lead to certain disaster.

But how shall the pupil find the teacher? He need not find him, at first, so far as the limited
consciousness is concerned. Long before he knows anything of it in his waking hours he may
be receiving instruction while he is out of the physical body during the hours of sleep. The
teacher finds the pupil long before the pupil suspects that the teacher exists; and since it
is the pupil who has the limited consciousness it is quite natural that it should be so. Thus
it is inevitable that all who enter upon the way that leads to spiritual illumination must
long remain ignorant of the fact that any teachers are interested in them or that anybody is
giving the slightest attention to them. Naturally enough one cannot know until the moment arrives
when his brain has become sufficiently sensitive to retain a memory of at least a fragment
of his superphysical experiences.

But what leads to the selection of the pupil? His earnestness, his unselfishness, his devotion,
his spiritual aspirations. There is an old occult maxim to the effect that when the pupil is
ready the Master is waiting. They have need of many more than are ready to be taught. Those
who lead and enlighten watch eagerly for all who will qualify themselves to enter upon the
upward way. Every human being gets exactly what he fits himself to receive. He cannot possibly
be overlooked. By his spiritual aspiration each lights the lamp in the window of his soul and
to the watchers from the heights that light against the background of the overwhelming materiality
of our times must be as the sun in a cloudless sky. Other things come later but these simpler
things, to realize the necessity for conscious evolution, to comprehend the method of soul
development, to take full control of the mind and the physical body, to resolutely curb the
grosser desires and to give free rein to the higher aspirations are the first infant steps
in the self-development that leads to illumination. Then we begin to discover that this very
desire for greater spiritual power is generating a force that carries us forward and upward.
We soon begin to observe actual progress. The brain becomes clearer, the intellect keener.
Our sphere of influence grows wider, our friendships become warmer. Aspiration lifts us into
a new and radiant life, and the wondrous powers of the soul begin to become a conscious possession. "Always
stretchin' his neck an' lookin' up an' away--when he mought git out by looking down." And
the simile was so apt that it stayed in his mind--looking up and away!
Of all dull inventions, in his estimation the art of printing exceeded.
 It is not by the
outward acquirement of facts that such men become wise and great. It is by developing the soul
from within until it illuminates the brain with that flood of light called genius.

And when, through the strife and storm, we finally reach the tranquility of the inner peace
we shall comprehend the great fact that life really is joy when lived in the possession of
spiritual power and in perfect harmony with the laws of the universe. With even these first
steps in occult achievement the aspirant enters upon a higher and more satisfactory life than
he has ever known. Literally he becomes a new man. Gradually the old desires and impulses fade
away and new and nobler aspirations take their place. He has learned obedience to law only
to find that obedience was the road to conquest. He has risen above the gross and sensuous
by the power of conscious evolution; and, looking back upon what he has been with neither regret
nor apology, he comprehends that significant thought of Tennyson: On stepping stones of their
dead selves men rise to higher things.

