§ 28. This question may sometimes be decided by considering the capacity of the persons addressed.
A greater grasp of mind is required for the ready comprehension of thoughts expressed in the
direct manner, where the sentences are anywise intricate. To recollect a number of preliminaries
stated in elucidation of a coming idea, and to apply them all to the formation of it when suggested,
demands a good memory and considerable power of concentration. To one possessing these, the
direct method will mostly seem the best; while to one deficient in them it will seem the worst.
Just as it may cost a strong man less effort to carry a hundred-weight from place to place
at once, than by a stone at a time; so, to an active mind it may be easier to bear along all
the qualifications of an idea and at once rightly form it when named, than to first imperfectly
conceive such idea and then carry back to it, one by one, the details and limitations afterwards
mentioned. While conversely, as for a boy, the only possible mode of transferring a hundred-weight,
is that of taking it in portions; so, for a weak mind, the only possible mode of forming a
compound conception may be that of building it up by carrying separately its several parts.

§ 29. That the indirect method--the method of conveying the meaning by a series of approximations--is
best fitted for the uncultivated, may indeed be inferred from their habitual use of it. The
form of expression adopted by the savage, as in "Water, give me," is the simplest type of the
approximate arrangement. In pleonasms, which are comparatively prevalent among the uneducated,
the same essential structure is seen; as, for instance, in--"The men, they were there." Again,
the old possessive case--"The king, his crown," conforms to the like order of thought. Moreover,
the fact that the indirect mode is called the natural one, implies that it is the one spontaneously
employed by the common people: that is--the one easiest for undisciplined minds.

§ 30. There are many cases, however, in which neither the direct nor the indirect structure
is the best; but where an intermediate structure is preferable to both. When the number of
circumstances and qualifications to be included in the sentence is great, the most judicious
course is neither to enumerate them all before introducing the idea to which they belong, nor
to put this idea first and let it be remodeled to agree with the particulars afterwards mentioned;
but to do a little of each. Take a case. It is desirable to avoid so extremely indirect an
arrangement as the following:--"We came to our journey's end, at last, with no small difficulty
after much fatigue, through deep roads, and bad weather." Yet to transform this into an entirely
direct sentence would not produce a satisfactory effect; as witness:--"At last, with no small
difficulty, after much fatigue, through deep roads, and bad weather, we came to our journey's end."

§ 31. Dr. Whately, from whom we quote the first of these two arrangements,' proposes this construction:--"At
last, after much fatigue, through deep roads and bad weather, we came, with no small difficulty,
to our journey's end." Here it will be observed that by introducing the words "we came" a little
earlier in the sentence, the labour of carrying forward so many particulars is diminished,
and the subsequent qualification "with no small difficulty" entails an addition to the thought
that is very easily made. But a further improvement may be produced by introducing the words
"we came" still earlier; especially if at the same time the qualifications be rearranged in
conformity with the principle already explained, that the more abstract elements of the thought
should come before the more concrete. This reads with comparative smoothness; that is, with
less hindrance from suspensions and reconstructions of thought--with less mental effort.

§ 32. Before dismissing this branch of our subject, it should be further remarked, that even
when addressing the most vigorous intellects, the direct style is unfit for communicating ideas
of a complex or abstract character. So long as the mind has not much to do, it may be well
able to grasp all the preparatory clauses of a sentence, and to use them effectively; but if
some subtlety in the argument absorb the attention--if every faculty be strained in endeavouring
to catch the speaker's or writer's drift, it may happen that the mind, unable to carry on both
processes at once, will break down, and allow the elements of the thought to lapse into confusion.

iv. The Principle of Economy applied to Figures.

§ 33. Turning now to consider figures of speech, we may equally discern the same general law
of effect. Underlying all the rules given for the choice and right use of them, we shall find
the same fundamental requirement--economy of attention. It is indeed chiefly because they so
well subserve this requirement, that figures of speech are employed. To bring the mind more
easily to the desired conception, is in many cases solely, and in all cases mainly, their object.

§ 34. Let us begin with the figure called Synecdoche. The advantage sometimes gained by putting
a part for the whole, is due to the more convenient, or more accurate, presentation of the
idea. If, instead of saying "a fleet of ten ships," we say "a fleet of ten sail," the picture
of a group of vessels at sea is more readily suggested; and is so because the sails constitute
the most conspicuous parts of vessels so circumstanced: whereas the word ships would very likely
remind us of vessels in dock. Again, to say, "All hands to the pumps," is better than to say,
"All men to the pumps," as it suggests the men in the special attitude intended, and so saves
effort. Bringing "gray hairs with sorrow to the grave," is another expression, the effect of
which has the same cause.

§ 35. The occasional increase of force produced by Metonymy may be similarly accounted for.
"The low morality of the bar," is a phrase both more brief and significant than the literal
one it stands for. A belief in the ultimate supremacy of intelligence over brute force, is
conveyed in a more concrete, and therefore more realizable form, if we substitute the pen and
the sword for the two abstract terms. To say, "Beware of drinking!" is less effective than
to say, "Beware of the bottle!" and is so, clearly because it calls up a less specific image.

§ 36. The Simile is in many cases used chiefly with a view to ornament, but whenever it increases
the force of a passage, it does so by being an economy. Here in an instance: "The illusion
that great men and great events came oftener in early times than now, is partly due to historical
perspective. As in a range of equidistant columns, the furthest off look the closest; so, the
conspicuous objects of the past seem more thickly clustered the more remote they are."

§ 37. To construct by a process of literal explanation, the thought thus conveyed would take
many sentences, and the first elements of the picture would become faint while the imagination
was busy in adding the others. But by the help of a comparison all effort is saved; the picture
is instantly realized, and its full effect produced.

§ 38. Of the position of the Simile, it needs only to remark, that what has been said respecting
the order of the adjective and substantive, predicate and subject, principal and subordinate
propositions, &c., is applicable here. As whatever qualifies should precede whatever is qualified,
force will generally be gained by placing the simile before the object to which it is applied.
That this arrangement is the best, may be seen in the following passage from the 'Lady of the
Lake';

    "As wreath of snow, on mountain breast,
     Slides from the rock that gave it rest,
     Poor Ellen glided from her stay,
     And at the monarch's feet she lay."

Inverting these couplets will be found to diminish the effect considerably. There are cases,
however, even where the simile is a simple one, in which it may with advantage be placed last,
as in these lines from Alexander Smith's 'Life Drama':

    "I see the future stretch
     All dark and barren as a rainy sea."

The reason for this seems to be, that so abstract an idea as that attaching to the word "future,"
does not present itself to the mind in any definite form, and hence the subsequent arrival
at the simile entails no reconstruction of the thought.

§ 39. Such, however, are not the only cases in which this order is the most forcible. As the
advantage of putting the simile before the object depends on its being carried forward in the
mind to assist in forming an image of the object, it must happen that if, from length or complexity,
it cannot be so carried forward, the advantage is not gained.

§ 40. Here, from the lapse of time and accumulation of circumstances, the first part of the
comparison is forgotten before its application is reached, and requires re-reading. Had the
main idea been first mentioned, less effort would have been required to retain it, and to modify
the conception of it into harmony with the comparison, than to remember the comparison, and
refer back to its successive features for help in forming the final image.

§ 41. The superiority of the Metaphor to the Simile is ascribed by Dr. Whately to the fact
that "all men are more gratified at catching the resemblance for themselves, than in having
it pointed out to them." But after what has been said, the great economy it achieves will seem
the more probable cause. Lear's exclamation--

    "Ingratitude! thou marble-hearted fiend,"

would lose part of its effect were it changed into--

    "Ingratitude! thou fiend with heart like marble;"

and the loss would result partly from the position of the simile and partly from the extra
number of words required. When the comparison is an involved one, the greater force of the
metaphor, consequent on its greater brevity, becomes much more conspicuous. If, drawing an
analogy between mental and physical phenomena, we say, "As, in passing through the crystal,
beams of white light are decomposed into the colours of the rainbow; so, in traversing the
soul of the poet, the colourless rays of truth are transformed into brightly tinted poetry";
it is clear that in receiving the double set of words expressing the two halves of the comparison,
and in carrying the one half to the other, considerable attention is absorbed.

§ 42. How much is conveyed in a few words by the help of the Metaphor, and how vivid the effect
consequently produced, may be abundantly exemplified. From 'A Life Drama' may be quoted the
phrase--

    "I spear'd him with a jest,"

as a fine instance among the many which that poem contains.

This last expression is remarkable for the distinctness with which it realizes the features
of the scene: bringing the mind, as it were, by a bound to the desired conception.

§ 43. But a limit is put to the advantageous use of the Metaphor, by the condition that it
must be sufficiently simple to be understood from a hint. Evidently, if there be any obscurity
in the meaning or application of it, no economy of attention will be gained; but rather the
reverse. Hence, when the comparison is complex, it is usual to have recourse to the Simile.
There is, however, a species of figure, sometimes classed under Allegory, but which might,
perhaps, be better called Compound Metaphor, that enables us to retain the brevity of the metaphorical
form even where the analogy is intricate. This is done by indicating the application of the
figure at the outset, and then leaving the mind to continue the parallel.' Emerson has employed
it with great effect in the first of his I Lectures on the Times':--"The main interest which
any aspects of the Times can have for us is the great spirit which gazes through them, the
light which they can shed on the wonderful questions, What are we, and Whither we tend? We
do not wish to be deceived. Here we drift, like white sail across the wild ocean, now bright
on the wave, now darkling in the trough of the sea; but from what port did we sail? Who knows?
Or to what port are we bound? Who knows? There is no one to tell us but such poor weather-tossed
mariners as ourselves, whom we speak as we pass, or who have hoisted some signal, or floated
to us some letter in a bottle from far. But what know they more than we? They also found themselves
on this wondrous sea. No; from the older sailors nothing. Over all their speaking trumpets
the gray sea and the loud winds answer, Not in us; not in Time."

§ 44. The division of the Simile from the Metaphor is by no means a definite one. Between the
one extreme in which the two elements of the comparison are detailed at full length and the
analogy pointed out, and the other extreme in which the comparison is implied instead of stated,
come intermediate forms, in which the comparison is partly stated and partly implied. For instance:--"Astonished
at the performances of the English plow, the Hindoos paint it, set it up, and worship it; thus
turning a tool into an idol: linguists do the same with language." There is an evident advantage
in leaving the reader or hearer to complete the figure. And generally these intermediate forms
are good in proportion as they do this; provided the mode of completing it be obvious.

§ 45. Passing over much that may be said of like purport upon Hyperbole, Personification, Apostrophe,
&c., let us close our remarks upon construction by a typical example. The general principle
which has been enunciated is, that other things equal, the force of all verbal forms and arrangements
is great, in proportion as the time and mental effort they demand from the recipient is small.
The corollaries from this general principle have been severally illustrated; and it has been
shown that the relative goodness of any two modes of expressing an idea, may be determined
by observing which requires the shortest process of thought for its comprehension. But though
conformity in particular points has been exemplified, no cases of complete conformity have
yet been quoted. It is indeed difficult to find them; for the English idiom does not commonly
permit the order which theory dictates. A few, however, occur in Ossian.

§ 46. Except in the position of the verb in the first two similes, the theoretically best arrangement
is fully carried out in each of these sentences. The simile comes before the qualified image,
the adjectives before the substantives, the predicate and copula before the subject, and their
respective complements before them. That the passage is open to the charge of being bombastic
proves nothing; or rather, proves our case. For what is bombast but a force of expression too
great for the magnitude of the ideas embodied? All that may rightly be inferred is, that only
in very rare cases, and then only to produce a climax, should all the conditions of effective
expression be fulfilled.

v. Suggestion as a Means of Economy.

§ 47. Passing on to a more complex application of the doctrine with which we set out, it must
now be remarked, that not only in the structure of sentences, and the use of figures of speech,
may economy of the recipient's mental energy be assigned as the cause of force; but that in
the choice and arrangement of the minor images, out of which some large thought is to be built
up, we may trace the same condition to effect. To select from the sentiment, scene, or event
described those typical elements which carry many others along with them; and so, by saying
a few things but suggesting

many, to abridge the description; is the secret of producing a vivid impression. An extract
from Tennyson's 'Mariana' will well illustrate this:

    "All day within the dreamy house,
     The door upon the hinges creaked,
     The blue fly sung i' the pane; the mouse
     Behind the mouldering wainscot shrieked,
     Or from the crevice peered about."

§ 48. The several circumstances here specified bring with them many appropriate associations.
Our attention is rarely drawn by the buzzing of a fly in the window, save when everything is
still. While the inmates are moving about the house, mice usually keep silence; and it is only
when extreme quietness reigns that they peep from their retreats. Hence each of the facts mentioned,
presupposing numerous others, calls up these with more or less distinctness; and revives the
feeling of dull solitude with which they are connected in our experience. Were all these facts
detailed instead of suggested, the attention would be so frittered away that little impression
of dreariness would be produced. Similarly in other cases. Whatever the nature of the thought
to be conveyed, this skilful selection of a few particulars which imply the rest, is the key
to success. In the choice of component ideas, as in the choice of expressions, the aim must
be to convey the greatest quantity of thoughts with the smallest quantity of words.

§ 49. The same principle may in some cases be advantageously carried yet further, by indirectly
suggesting some entirely distinct thought in addition to the one expressed. Thus, if we say,
"The head of a good classic is as full of ancient myths, as that of a servant-girl of ghost
stories"; it is manifest that besides the fact asserted, there is an implied opinion respecting
the small value of classical knowledge: and as this implied opinion is recognized much sooner
than it can be put into words, there is gain in omitting it. In other cases, again, great effect
is produced by an overt omission; provided the nature of the idea left out is obvious. A good
instance of this occurs in 'Heroes and Heroworship.' After describing the way in which Burns
was sacrificed to the idle curiosity of Lion-hunters--people who came not out of sympathy,
but merely to see him--people who sought a little amusement, and who got their amusement while
"the Hero's life went for it!" But--!--"

vi. The Effect of Poetry explained.

