Scarce had they been fairly started in their cowed progress when Chum was off at a tangent,
deserting his six charges and bearing down with express train speed on a stray wether that
had paused in his escape to nibble at a line of early peas in the truck garden.

At sight of the approaching collie the sheep flung up its head and began again to  run. But
the dog was in front of it, whichever way the panic-stricken  animal turned;--in every direction
but one. And in that direction fled the fugitive. Nor did it stop in its headlong flight until
it was alongside the six which Chum had first "turned".

Pausing only long enough to round up one or two sheep which were breaking loose from the bunch
Chum was off again in headlong chase of still another and another and another stray.

Link Ferris, in blank incredulity, stood gaping at the picture before him--staring at the tireless
swiftness of his dog in turning back and rounding up a scattered flock which Ferris himself
could not have bunched in twenty times the space of minutes. Chum, he noted, did not touch
one of the foolish beasts. His bark and his zigzag dashes served the purpose, without the aid
of teeth or of actual contact.

Presently, as the dumbfounded man gazed, the last stray was added to the milling, bleating
bunch, and Chum was serenely trotting to and fro, driving back such of the sheep as sought
to break loose from the huddle. Terrified and trembling, but mastered, the flock cowered motionless.
The work was done.

As in a dream Link tumbled toward the prisoners. His mind functioning subconsciously, he took
up his interrupted task of driving them to pasture. The moment he succeeded in getting them
into motion they broke again. And again, like a furry whirlwind, Chum was encircling them;
chasing the strays into place. He saw, without being told, the course his master was taking,
and he drove his charges accordingly.

Thus, in far less time and in better order than ever before, the flock reached the  rickety
gateway of the stone-strewn sheep pasture and scuttled jostlingly  in through it.

Link shut the gate after them. Then, still in a daze, he turned on the dog.

"Chum," he said confusedly, "it don't make sense to me, not even yet. I don't get the hang
of it. But I know this much: I know you got ten times the sense what I'VE got. Where you got
it an' how you got it the good Lord only knows. But you've got it. I--I was figgerin' on lickin'
you 'most to death, a few minutes back. Chum. Honest, I was. I'm clean 'shamed to look you
in the face when I think of it. Say! Do me a favor, Chum. If ever I lift hand to lick you,
jes' bite me and give me hydrophoby. For I'll sure be deservin' it. Now come on home!"

He patted the silken head of the jubilant dog as he talked, rumpling the soft ears and stroking
the long, blazed muzzle. He was sick at heart at memory of his recent murderous rage at this
wonder-comrade of his.

Chum was exultantly happy. He had had a most exhilarating ten minutes. The jolliest bit of
fun he could remember in all his two years of life. The sight of those queer sheep--yes, and
the scent of them, especially the scent--had done queer things to his brain; had aroused a
million sleeping ancestral memories.

He had understood perfectly well his master's order that he leave them alone. And he had been
disappointed by it. He himself had not known clearly what it was he would have liked to do
to them. But he had known he and they ought to have some sort of relationship. And then at
the gesture and the snarled command of "Go get them!" some closed door in Chum's  mind had
swung wide, and, acting  on an instinct he himself did not understand, he had hurled himself
into the gay task of rounding up the flock.

So, for a thousand generations on the Scottish hills, had Chum's ancestors earned their right
to live. And so through successive generations had they imbued their progeny with that accomplishment
until it had become a primal instinct. Even as the unbroken pointer of the best type knows
by instinct the rudiments of his work in the field so will many a collie take up sheep herding
by ancestral training.

There had been nothing wonderful in Chum's exploit. Hundreds of untrained collies have done
the same thing on their first sight of sheep. The craving to chase and slay sheep is a mere
perversion of this olden instinct; just as the disorderly "flushing" and scattering of bird
coveys is a perversion of the pointer or setter instinct. Chum, luckily for himself and for
his master's flock, chanced to run true to form in this matter of heredity, instead of inheriting
his tendency in the form of a taste for sheep murder.

The first collie, back in prehistoric days, was the first dog with the wit to know his master's
sheep apart from all other sheep. Perhaps that is the best, if least scientific, theory of
the collie's origin.

But to Link Ferris's unsophisticated eyes the achievement was all but supernatural, and it
doubled his love for the dog.

That afternoon, by way of experiment, Ferris took Chum along when he went to drive the sheep
back from pasture to the fold. By the time he and the dog were within a hundred yards of the
pasture gate Chum began to dance, from sheer anticipation; mincing sidewise on the tips of
his toes in true collie fashion,  and varying the dance by little rushes forward.

Link opened the crazy gate. Waiting for no further encouragement the dog sped into the broad
field and among the grazing sheep that were distributed unevenly over the entire area of the lot.

Ordinarily--unless the sheep were ready to come home--it was a matter of ten or fifteen minutes
each evening for Link to collect them and start them on their way. To-day, in less than three
minutes, Chum had the whole flock herded and trotting through the opening, to the lane outside.

Nor, this time, did the sheep flee from him in the same panic dread as in the morning. They
seemed to have learned--if indeed a sheep can ever learn anything--that Chum was their driver,
not their enemy.

From the fold Link as usual went to the woodlot where his five head of lean milch cattle were
at graze. Three of the cows were waiting at the bars for him, but one heifer and a new-dry
Holstein were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the second-growth timber.

The afternoon was hot; it had been a hot day. Link was tired. He dreaded the labor of exploring
ten acres of undergrowth for his two missing cattle. An inspiration came to him. Pointing to
the three stolidly waiting cows at the bars he waved his arm in the general direction of the
lot and called on Chum.

"Go find 'em! Bring 'em in!"

Almost before the words were spoken Ferris regretted them. Welcoming smiles, eager greetings,
grateful words, blessed me as unfailingly as the sunlight and dew the earth. Every hour of toil
brought its own rich reward. These were Confederate soldiers. God had permitted me to work
for the holy cause.

This was enough to flood my whole being with content and deepest gratitude.

Next to Commodore Maury one of my most faithful friends was Dr. Little, of Richmond. He was
surgeon of the Soldiers' Rest, and also attended the sick soldiers
at many private houses in the city and at some of the larger hospitals.

Small

in stature, in extremely delicate health, he was yet a giant as far as skill and work were concerned.
An earnest Christian, a polished gentleman, of quiet and unassuming yet elegant manners, interesting
in conversation, a true, firm friend, an unflinching patriot, what more could be added to
indicate an almost perfect character?

His care and watchfulness, combined with rare skill,--directed by the All-merciful Father,--saved
the life of my little boy, who was brought to death's door by an attack of typhoid fever during
the fall of 1861.

Meantime, as the months rolled on, it became evident that the victory at Manassas could not
be considered as a criterion of future success. Everywhere there was fighting. Varying fortune
attended the Confederate arms. Unvarying glory, unsurpassed, magnificent bravery so dazzled the
eyes of the nation that none saw or admitted defeat anywhere. Yet
valuable territory had been surrendered. You can lop off an hour a day of my work if I c'n send you reg'lar for the critters.
That ought to be worth the price of your keep, by itself. Now if I c'n learn you how to milk
an' maybe how to mow--well, 'twouldn't be a hull lot queerer'n the stunts you done to-day!"

It was perhaps a week later that Link Ferris received his quarterly check from the Paterson
Vegetable Market. These checks hitherto had been the brightest spots in Link's routine. Not
only did the money for his hard-raised farm products mean a replenishing of the always scant
larder and an easing of the chronic fiscal strain between himself and the Hampton general store's
proprietor, but sometimes enough spare cash was left over to allow Ferris to get very satisfactorily
drunk.

Since Chum's advent, the old gnawing of loneliness had not goaded Link to the Hampton tavern.
As a consequence, he had a dollar or two more on hand than was usual at such times. This wealth
was swelled still further by the fact that a boost in vegetable prices had fattened his quarterly
check beyond its wonted size.

All this and his long abstinence seemed to call for a real celebration. And Link looked forward
with a thrill of merry anticipation to the coming of night.

As soon as he could clear away his evening chores and swallow some supper he fared forth to
the village. This was going to be one of those nights to date time from. Not a miserable half-jag,
stopped in mid-career by lack of funds and of credit--a nipped-in-the-bud debauch, such as
so often had sent him home cranky and unsatisfied and railing against poverty. No, this was
going to be the real thing--a record performance, even for these pre-prohibition times.

Ferris fed the collie and shut him into the kitchen, pending his own return from Hampton. If
Link were going to become blissfully and helplessly drunk, as he had every hope of being, someone
might take advantage of his condition to steal his precious dog. Therefore Chum was best left
safe at home. This Link explained very carefully to the interestedly listening collie. And
Chum, with head and brush a-droop, walked meekly into the kitchen at his master's behest.

Link set off for the village, happy in the feeling that his home was so well guarded and that
he would find a loving friend waiting to welcome him on his return. What with ready money and
a real friend and the prospect of getting whole-souledly drunk the world was not such a rotten
place to live in after all!

As a rule, on these occasions, Ferris first went to the Hampton store. There he was wont to
cash his check, pay his longstanding bill, order his new supplies--and then, with a free heart,
sally forth to the Hampton tavern. But to-night, having money in his pocket apart from the
check, he decided to pay a preliminary call at the tavern, just by way of warming up, before
going on to the store.

There were few people in the barroom at so early an hour of the evening and on so early an
evening of the week. Link nodded affably to one or two men he knew and bade them line up at
the bar with him. After the second drink he prepared to leave. To the tavern's proprietor,
who was mildly surprised at the brevity of his call, Ferris explained that he was going across
to the store to get his check cashed and that he would be back later.

Whereat the proprietor kindly offered to save Link the journey by cashing the check for him;
a suggestion Ferris gladly accepted. He passed the indorsed check across the bar and received
for it a comfortably large wad of wilted greenbacks which he proceeded to intern with tender
care in an inside pocket of his vest, where he moored them with a safety-pin. Then he ordered
another drink.

But to this new order there was an instant demurrer. Two strangers, who had been drinking at
a corner table, bore down upon Link right lovingly; and recalled themselves to his memory as
companions of his on a quite forgotten debauch of a year or two back.

Link did not at all remember either of the two. But then he often failed to recall people he
had met on a spree, and he did not like to hurt these cordial revelers' feelings by disclaiming
knowledge of them. Especially when they told him merrily that, for this evening at least, his
money was made of wood and that he must be their guest.

Never before had he met with such wholesouled hospitality. One drink followed another with
gratifying speed. Once or twice Ferris made halfhearted proffers to do some of the buying.
But such hints seemed to hurt his hosts' feelings so cruelly that he forbore at last, and suffered
himself to drink entirely at their expense.

They were much the nicest men Link had ever met. They flattered him. They laughed uproariously
at his every witticism. They had a genius for noting when his glass was empty. They listened
with astonished admiration to his boastful recital of Chum's cleverness. One of them, who,
it seemed, was an expert in dog lore, told him how to teach the collie to shake hands and to
lie down and to "speak." They were magnificent men, in every way. Link was ashamed to have
forgotten his earlier meetings with such paragons.

But the call of duty never quite dies into silence. And finally Link remembered he  had still
his store bill to pay and his supplies to order. So he announced that he must go. The store,
he knew, closed at nine. He looked up at the barroom clock. But its face was hazy and it seemed
to have a great many hands. There was no use trying to learn the hour from so dissolute a timepiece.

His two friends persuaded him to have one more drink. Then they volunteered to go across to
the store with him. He left the tavern, with one of the two walking on either side of him.
He was glad to be in the center of the trio; for, as the night air struck him, he became unaccountably
dizzy. His friends' willing arms were a grand support to his wavering legs.

On the unlighted threshold of the tavern Link stumbled heavily over something--something that
had been lying there and that sprang eagerly toward him as he debouched from the doorway. The
reason he stumbled over it was that the creature, which had bounded so rapturously toward him,
had come to a sharp halt at noting his condition. Thus, Ferris stumbled over it; and would
have fallen but for the aid of his friends.

The single village street was pitch black. Not a light was to be seen. This puzzled Link; who
had no means of knowing that the time was close on midnight. He started toward the store. At
least that was the direction he planned to take. But when, at the end of five minutes, he found
he was outside the village and on a narrow road that bordered the lake, he saw his friends
had mistaken the way. He stopped abruptly and told them so.

One of them laughed; as if Link had said something funny. The other did something quickly with
one foot and one arm. Ferris's legs went from under him. The jar of his fall shook from him
a fraction of his drunkenness, and it gave him enough sense to realize that the man who had
laughed was trying to unfasten the pinned inner pocket of the fallen man's vest.

Now for years that pocket had been the secret repository of Link Ferris's sparse wealth. The
intruder's touch awakened him to a drowsy sense of peril. He thrust aside the fumbling hand
and made a herculean effort to rise.

At this show of resistance his two comrades, as by concerted signal, threw themselves upon
him. With a yell of angry fright Link collapsed to earth under the dual impact.

CHAPTER II.

The Battle

He felt one of the men pinion his waving arms, while the other crouched on his legs and proceeded
to unpin the money pocket. Ferris struggled for an instant in futile fury, trying to shout
for help. The call was strangled in his throat. But the help came to him, none the less.

Scarce three seconds had passed since the attempt to rob him had set Link into action and had
wrung from him that yell of consternation.

But in answer came a swirling patter of feet on the road, a snarl like a wolf's, a  shape that
catapulted through the dark. Sixty pounds of fur-swathed dynamic muscle smote athwart the shoulders
of the man who was unfastening the cash pocket's pin.

The impact hurled the fellow clean off his crouching balance and sent him sprawling, face downward,
his outflung hands splashing in the margin of the lake. Before he could roll over or so much
as stir, a set of white fangs met in his shoulder-flesh. And he testified to his injury by
an eldritch screech of pain and terror that echoed far across the water.

His companion, rallying from the momentary shock, left Ferris and charged at the prostrate
thief's assailant. But Chum met him, with a fierce eagerness, more than half way.

A true collie--thanks to his strain of wolf bloodfights as does no other dog. What he lacks
in stubborn determination he atones for by swiftness and by his uncanny brain power.

A bulldog, for example, would have flown to his master's relief quite as readily as did Chum.
But a bulldog would have secured the first convenient hold and would have hung on to that hold,
whether it were at his victim's throat or only on the slack of his trousers--until someone
should hammer him into senselessness.

Chum--collie-fashion--was everywhere at once, using his brain far more than his flying jaws.
Finding the grip in his foe's shoulder did not prevent the man from twisting round to grapple
him, the collie shifted that grip with lightning speed, and with one of his gleaming eyeteeth
slashed his opponent's halfturned cheek from eye to chin. Then he bored straight for the jugular.

It was at this crisis that he sensed, rather  than saw, the other man rushing  at him. Chum
left his fallen antagonist and whirled about to face the new enemy. As he was still turning,
he sprang far to one side, in bare time to elude a swinging kick aimed at his head.

Then, before the thief could recover the balance endangered by so mighty a kick, the collie
had whirled in and sunk his teeth deep in the man's calf. The bitten man let out a roar of
pain, and smote wildly at the dog's face with both swinging fists.

Chum leaped back out of range, and then, with the same bewildering speed, flashed in again
and buried his curved fangs in the nearest of the two flailing forearms.

The first victim of the collie's attack was scrambling to his feet. So was Link Ferris. Sobered
enough to recognize his beloved dog, he also saw the newrisen thief catch up a broken fence
rail, brandish it aloft and charge upon the collie, who was still battling merrily with the
second man.

To Link it seemed that nothing could save Chum from a backbreaking blow from the huge club.
Instinctively he ran at the wielder of the formidable weapon. Staggering and sick and two-thirds
drunk, Ferris, nevertheless, made valiant effort to save the dog that was fighting so gallantly
for him.

His lurching rush carried him across the narrow road and to the lake edge, barely in time to
intercept the swinging sweep of the fence rail. It caught him glancingly across the side. And
its force carried him clean off his none-too-steady feet. Down went Ferris--down and backward.
His body plunged noisily into the water.

Chum had wheeled to face the rail's brandisher. But at sight of his master's sudden immersion
in the lake, he quitted the fray. At top speed the dog cleared the bank and jumped down into
the water in pursuit of Ferris.

It evidently dawned on both men at once that there had been a good deal of noise, for what
was to have been a silent and decorous holdup. Also that a raging collie is not a pleasant
foe. The racket might well draw interference from outside. The dog was overhard to kill, and
his bites were murderous. The game had ceased to be worth the candle. By common impulse the
pair took to their heels.

Link Ferris, head down in the cold water, was strangling in his maudlin efforts to right himself.
He dug both hands into the lake-bottom mud and strove to gain the surface. But the effort was
too much for him. A second frantic heave had better results. And vaguely he knew why.

For Chum had managed to get a firm hold on the shoulder of his master's coat--twelve inches
under water--and had braced himself with all his wiry strength for a tug which should lift
Ferris to the surface.

This added leverage barely made Link's own struggle a success. The half-drowned man regained
his footing. Floundering waist-deep in water, he clambered up the steeply shelving bank to
shore. There at the road's edge he lay, gasping and sputtering and fighting for breath.

Chum had been pulled under and out of his depth by Link's exertions. Now, coming to the surface,
he swam to shore and trotted up the bank to the road. Absurdly lank and small, with his soaking
coat plastered close to his slim body, he stood over his prostrate master.

The dog's quick glare up and down the road told him his foes were gone. His incredible sense
of hearing registered the far-off pad-pad-pad of fast-retreating human feet, and showed him
the course the two men were taking. He would have liked to give chase. It had been a good fight--lively
and exciting withal--and Chum wished he might carry it into the enemies' own country.

But his god was lying helpless at his feet and making queer sounds of distress. The dog's place
was here. The joy of battle must be foregone.

Solicitously Chum leaned over Ferris and sought to lick the sufferer's face. As he did so his
supersensitive nostrils were smitten by an odor which caused the collie to shrink back in visible
disgust. The sickly, pungent smell of whisky on Ferris's labored breath nauseated Chum. He
stood, head recoiled, looking down at Link in bewilderment.

There were many things, this night, which Chum did not understand. First of all, he had been
grieved and offended that Ferris should have locked him in the kitchen instead of taking him
along as usual on his evening stroll. It had been lonely in the unlighted kitchen. Link had
not ordered the dog to stay there. He had simply shut Chum in and left him.

So, tiring at last of solitude, the collie had leaped lightly out of the nearest window. The
window had been open. Its thin mosquito net covering had not served in the least as a deterrent
to the departing Chum.

To pick up his master's trail--and to hold to it even when it merged with a score of others
at the edge of the village--had been absurdly simple. The trail had led to a house with closed
doors. So, after circling the tavern to find if his master had gone out by any other exit,
Chum had curled himself  patiently on the doorstep and had waited for Link to emerge.

Several people had come in and out while he lay there. But all of them had shut the door too
soon for him to slip inside.

At last Ferris had appeared between his two new friends. Chum had been friskily happy to see
his long-absent god again. He had sprung forward to greet Link. Then, his odd collie sense
had told him that for some reason this staggering and hiccuping creature was not the master
whom he knew and loved. This man was strangely different from the Link Ferris whom Chum knew.

Puzzled, the dog had halted and had stood irresolute. As he stood there, Ferris had stumbled
heavily over him, hurting the collie's ribs and his tender flesh; and had meandered on without
so much as a word or a look for his pet.

Chum, still irresolute and bewildered, had followed at a distance the swaying progress of the
trio, until Link's yell and the attack had brought him in furious haste to Ferris's rescue.

Link presently recovered enough of his breath to enable him to move. The ducking in icy water
had cleared his bemused brain. Approximately sober, he got to his feet and stood swaying and
dazed. As he rose, his groping hand closed over something cold and hard that had fallen to
the ground beside him. And he recognized it. So he picked it up and stuck it into his pocket.

It was a pint flask of whisky--one he had received as a farewell gift from his two friends
as the three had left the tavern. It had been an easy gift for the men to make. For they were
confidently certain of recovering it a few minutes later when they should go through their
victim's clothes. Dawning intelligence told Link he had not come through the adventure very
badly, after all--thanks to Chum. Ferris well understood now why the thieves had picked acquaintance
with him at sight of his money, and why they had gotten him drunk.

The memory of what he had escaped gave him a new qualm of nausea. The loss of his cash would
have meant suspended credit at the store and the leanest three months he had ever known.

But soon the joy in his triumph wiped out this thought.

The native North Jersey mountaineer has a peculiar vein of cunning which makes him morbidly
eager to get the best of anyone at all--even if the victory brings him nothing worth while.

Link Ferris had had an evening of limitless liquor. He still had a pint of whisky to take home.
And it had cost him not a cent, except for his first two rounds of drinks.

He had had his spree. He still had all his check money. And he had a flask of whisky. True,
he had been roughly handled. And he had had a ducking in the lake. But those were his sole
liabilities. They were insignificant by comparison to his assets.

He grinned in smug self-gratulation. Then his eye fell on Chum, standing ten feet away, looking
uncertainly at him.

Chum! To Chum he owed it all! He owed the dog his money, perhaps his very life. Yes--as he
rehearsed the struggle to get out of the lake--he owed the collie his life as well as his victory
over the holdup men. To Chum!

A great wave of love and gratitude surged up in Ferris. He had a sloppily idiotic yearning
to throw his arms about the dog's furry neck and kiss him. But he  steadied himself and chirped
to the collie to come nearer. Slowly, with queer reluctance, Chum obeyed.

"Listen," mumbled Link incoherently, "I saved you from dying from a bust leg and hunger the
night I fust met you, Chummie. An' tonight you squared the bill by saving me from drownin'.
But I'm still a whole lot in your debt, friend. I owe you for all the cash in my pocket an'--an'
for a pint of the Stuff that Killed Father--an'--an' maybe for a beatin' that might of killed
me. Chum, I guess God did a real day's work when He built you. I--I--Let it go at that. Only
I ain't forgettin'. Nor yet I ain't li'ble to forget. Come on home. I'm a-gittin' the chatters!"

He had been stroking the oddly unresponsive dog's head as he spoke. Now, for the first time,
Link realized that the night was cool, that his drenched clothes were like ice on him, and
that the cold and the shock reaction were giving him a sharp congestive chill. Walking fast
to restore circulation to his numbed body he made off for his distant farmhouse, Chum pattering
along at his heels.

The rapid walk set him into a glow. But by the time he had reached home and had stripped off
his wet clothes and swathed himself in a rough blanket, his racked nerves reasserted themselves.
He craved a drink--a number of drinks--to restore his wonted poise. Lighting the kitchen lamp,
he set the whisky bottle on the table and put a thick tumbler alongside it. Chum was lying
at his master's feet. In front of Ferris was a pint of good cheer. The lamplight made the kitchen
bright and cozy. Link felt a sense of utter well-being pervade him.

This was home--this was the real thing. Three successive and man-size drinks of whisky presently
made it seem more and more the real thing. They made all things seem possible, and most things
highly desirable. Link wanted to sing. And after two additional drinks he gratified this taste
by lifting his voice in a hiccup-punctuated ditty addressed to one Jenny, whom the singer exhorted
to wait till the clouds rolled by.

He was following this appeal by a rural lyric which recited in somewhat wearisome tonal monotony
the adventures of a Little Black Bull that came Over the Mountain, when he observed that Chum
was no longer lying at his feet. Indeed, the dog was in a far corner of the room, pressed close
to the closed outer door, and with crest and ruff a-droop.

Puzzled by his pet's defection, Link imperiously commanded Chum to return to his former place.
The collie, in most unwilling obedience, turned about and came slowly toward the drinker.

Every line of Chum's splendid body told of reluctance to approach his master. The deep-set,
dark eyes were eloquent of a frightened disgust. He looked at Ferris as at some loathely stranger.
The glad light of loyalty, which always had transfigured his visage when Link called to him,
was woefully lacking. Drunk as he was Ferris could not help noticing the change. And he marveled
at it.

"Whasser matter?" he demanded truculently. "What ails yer? C'm here, I'm tellin' you!"

He stretched out his hand in rough caress to the slowly approaching collie. Chum shrank back
from the touch as a child from a dose of castor oil. There was no fear now in his aspect. Only
disgust and a poignant unhappiness.

And, all suddenly, Link Ferris understood.

He himself did not know how the knowledge came to him. A canine psychologist might perhaps
have told him that there is always an occult telepathy between the mind of a thoroughbred dog
and its master, a power which gives them a glimpse into each other's processes of thought.
But there was no such psychologist there to explain the thing. Nor did Link need it explained.
It was enough for him that he knew.

He knew, as by revelation, that his adoring dog now shunned him because Link was drunk.

From the first, Chum's look of utter worship and his eagerly happy obedience had been a joy
to Link. The subtly complete change in his worshiper's demeanor jarred sharply on the man's
raw nerves. He felt vaguely unclean--shamed.

The contempt of such of his pious human neighbors as had passed him in the road during his
sprees had affected Link not at all. Nor now could he understand the queer feeling of humiliation
that swept over him at sight of the horrified repugnance in the eyes of this mere brute beast.
It roused him to a gust of hot vexation.

"Shamed of me, are you?" he grunted fiercely. "A dirty four-legged critter's 'shamed of a he-man,
hey? Well, we'll lick that out of you, dam' soon!"

Lurching to his feet, he snatched up a broom handle. He waved it menacingly over the dog. Chum
gave back not an inch. Under the threat of a beating he stood his ground, his brave eyes steadfast,
and, lurking in their mystic depths, that same glint of sorrowful wonder and disgust.

Up whirled the broomstick. But when it fell it did not smite athwart the shoulders of the sorrowing
dog. Instead, it clattered harmlessly to the board floor. And to the floor also slumped Link
Ferris, his nerve all gone, his heart soggy with sudden remorse.

To his knees thudded the man, close beside the collie. From Link's throat were bursting great
strangled sobs which tortured his whole body and made his speech a tangled jumble that was
not pretty to hear.

"Chum!" he wailed brokenly, clutching the dog's huge ruff in both shaky hands. "Chum, old friend!
Gawd forgive me! You saved me from drowndin' an' from goin' broke, this night! You been the
only friend that ever cared a hang if I was alive or dead! An'--an' I was goin' to lick you!
I was goin' to lambaste you. Because I was a beastlier beast than YOU be. I was goin' to do
it because you was so much better than me that you was made sick by my bein' a hawg. An' I
was mad at you fer it. I'm--oh, I'm shameder than you are! Chum! Honest to Gawd, I am! Won't
you make friends again? PLEASE, Chum!"

Now, of course, this was a most ridiculous and maudlin way to talk. Moreover, no man belongs
on his knees beside a dog, even though the man be a sot and the dog a thoroughbred. In his
calmer moments  Link Ferris would have known this. A high-bred collie, too, has no use for
sloppy emotion, but shuns its exhibition well-nigh as disgustedly as he shuns a drunkard.

Yet, for some illogical reason, Chum did not seek to withdraw his aristocratic self from the
shivering clutch of the repentant souse. Instead, the expression of misery  and repugnance
fled as if by magic from his brooding eyes. Into them in its place leaped a light of keen solicitude.
He pressed closer to the swayingly kneeling  man, and with upthrust muzzle sought to kiss the
blubbering face.

The whisky reek was as strong as ever. But something in Chum's soul was stronger. He seemed
to know that the maudlin Unknown had vanished, and that his dear master was back again--his
dear master who was in grievous trouble and who must be comforted.

Wherefore, the sickening liquor fumes no longer held him aloof from Link. Just as the icy lake
had not deterred him from springing into the water after his drowning god, although, like most
collies, Chum hated to swim.

Link, through his own nervous collapse, recognized the instant change in Chum's demeanor, and
read it aright. It strengthened the old bond between himself and the dog. It somehow gave him
a less scornful opinion of himself.

Presently he got to his feet, and with the collie at his side went back to the table, where
stood the threeparts-empty flask. His face working, Link opened the window and poured what
was left of the whisky out on the ground. There was nothing dramatic about his action. Rather
it was tinged by very visible regret. Turning back to Chum, he said sheepishly:

"There it goes. An' I ain't sayin' I'm tickled at wastin' such good stuff. But--somehow I guess
we've come to a showdown, Chum; you an' me. If I stick to booze, I'm li'ble to see you looking
at me that queer way an' sidlin' away from me all the time; till maybe at last you'd get plumb
sick of me for keeps, an' light out. An'--I'd rather have YOU than the booze, since I can't
have both of you. Bein' only a dawg and never havin' tasted good red liquor, you can't know
what a big bouquet I'm a-throwin' at you when I say that, neither. I--Oh, let's call it a day
and go to sleep."

Next morning, in the course of nature, Link Ferris worked with a splitting headache. He carried
it and a bad taste in his mouth, for the best part of the day.

But it was the last drink headache which marred his labor, all that long and happy summer.
His work showed the results of the change. So did the meager hill farm. So did Link's system
and his pocketbook.

