Since there is between man and animals a relationship and a psychical identity, as well as
a genetic continuity of evolution, it is impossible to deny that there is also in some degree
a like continuity in the products and acts of the consciousness, the emotions, and the intelligence.
This is asserted or admitted even by those who do not like to hear of the genetic continuity
of evolution, nor is there now any school of thought which impugns such a truth. If this be
true, as it undoubtedly is, and since we are treating of the genesis of myth in its earliest
beginning, we will endeavour, with daring prompted by the theory of evolution, to discover
if the first germ of these representations may not have already existed in the animal kingdom
before it was evolved in man in the fetishtic and anthropomorphic form. This is an arduous
but necessary inquiry, to which I am impelled by the doctrine of evolution, as it is properly
understood, as well as by the universal logic of nature.

If I were to consider myth as it has ultimately been developed in man, it would be a strange
and absurd attempt to trace out any points of resemblance with animals, who are altogether
devoid of the logical faculty which leads to such development. But if, on the contrary, we
endeavour to trace the earliest, spontaneous, and direct elements of myth as a product of animal
emotions and implicit intelligence, such research becomes not only legitimate but necessary;
since the instrument is the same, the effects ought also to be the same.

We have already said that the fact has been observed and generally admitted that the primary
origin of myth in its essential elements consists in the personification or animation of all
extrinsic phenomena, as well as of the dreams, illusions, and hallucinations which are intrinsic.
It is agreed that this animation is not the reflex and deliberate act of man, but that it is
the spontaneous and immediate act of the human intelligence in its elementary consciousness
and emotions. It must therefore be evident that this vague and continual animation of things
ought to be found also in animals, especially in those of the higher types, in whom consciousness,
the emotions, and the intelligence are implicitly identical with those of man. Consequently,
that which is at first sight absurd becomes obvious and natural, and the fact is only strange
and inexplicable to those who have not carefully considered it.

We must, however, declare that this primary fact is not irreducible, and that science ought
not to be content to stop there, but should endeavour to explain and resolve it into its elements,
so as to be able to say we have reached the point at which the genesis of myth really begins.
This aim can only be attained by the decomposition by analysis of the primitive fact. Since
intelligence in its essential elements, and in its innate and implicit exercise, appears to
be the same in man and in animals, it is necessary to reduce the analysis of animal nature
to a primary psychical fact, in order to see whether by this fact, which is identical also
in man, the generating element of myth is really revealed.

I propose to show that this research will reveal truths hitherto unattained, and explain the
general law, not merely of the extrinsic process of science and of myth, but also of civilization.

Starting from this wide basis, we must trace, step by step, the dawn, development, and gradual
disappearance of myth. Since it is our business to consider science as well as myth, and their
respective relations in the evolution common to both, we must, as briefly as possible in the
present work, pause to consider these two factors of the human mind, observing the beginnings,
conditions, and modes in which the one arose and gradually disappeared, while the other advanced
and triumphed. We must not only regard the progress and transformation of religions, but also
of science, as it is revealed in the philosophic systems of every age, in the partial or complete
discoveries of genius, and in the great and stupendous achievements of modern experimental
science. It would require a long treatise to fill so wide a field, which we must restrict to
the limits of a few pages. Since our readers are now generally acquainted with the course pursued
by human thought, and with the progress of peoples, but few landmarks or formulas are necessary
to enable them to clear away obscurity and estimate facts at their just value, so as to understand
what civilization and science have to do with the evolution of myth, and of science itself.

A great corollary also ensues from studies undertaken with the aid of sociology, that is, the
genesis, form, and gradual evolution of human societies. These vary in character, in attitude,
in power, form and duration, with the different characters of races, and thus fulfil in various
ways the cycle of myth and science of which they are capable. It would indeed be difficult
to attain to a clear and adequate conception of the universal evolution of myth and science,
but for the existence of a privileged race distinguished for its psychical and organic power,
which from its beginning until now, although subject to many partial eclipses, has on the whole
maintained its position in the world so as to present to us the long historical drama of its
evolutions. Other races, peoples, or tribes have disappeared in the struggle for existence,
or have remained essentially incapable of further progress even in a relatively inferior degree,
so as to afford no aid in following the successive development of myth and science; while the
Aryan family, a race to which I believe that the Semitic originally belonged,[6] furnishes
the unbroken sequence of events and the stages of such complex evolution. Nor certainly is
there any signs of the disappearance of this race, since every day its intellectual and territorial
achievements, added to the instruments of a powerful material civilization, invigorate its
strength and presage its indefinite duration in forms we are not able to foresee, unless indeed
fatal astral or telluric catastrophes should hinder its progress or bring it to an end.

If we compare this race with itself at different epochs, and in the many different peoples
into which it was severed, and if at the same time we confront it with the types of other peoples
at various stages, from the rudest to the most civilized, it becomes possible to form a clear
conception of the genesis and successive evolution of myth and science of which the human race
is capable, and in this way we may understand the general law which governs such evolutions.
This study also teaches us that humanity, whether we agree with monogenists or poligenists,
is physically and psychically in all respects the same in its essential elements; in all peoples
without distinction, as ethnography teaches us, the origin and genesis of myth, the implicit
exercise of reason and its development, are, at all events up to a given point, absolutely
identical. All start from the same manifestations and mythical creations, and these are afterwards
developed according to the logical or scientific canons of thought, which are applied to their
classification. Both among fetish-worshippers and polytheists there was a tendency towards
monotheism, although sometimes it could only be discerned in a vague and confused manner.

If myth is, as I have said, to be considered from another point of view, as the spontaneous
effect of the intelligence, and a necessary function, relatively to the primary act from which
it begins, it might appear that myth would never cease to be, and that humanity, even as it
is represented by the elect and enduring race, must always remain in this original illusion;
so that every man would have to begin again for himself in his own peculiar cycle of myth.
But history shows that this is not the case, and that the mythic faculty gradually wanes and
becomes weaker, even if it does not altogether cease to exist, a result which would not occur
if myth were a necessary function of the intelligence.

I shall presently reply to such an objection; in the meanwhile, regarding the question superficially,
I need only say that if the mythic faculty diminishes in one direction, and with respect to
some forms and their corresponding substance, it has certainly not ceased to appear in another,
exerting itself, as we shall see, in other forms and other substance. The common people, both
urban and rural, do for the most part adhere to primitive and very ancient superstitions, as
every one may know from his own experience, as well as from the writings of well known authors
of nearly all the civilized nations of Europe. In fact, every man in the early period of his
life constructs a heaven for himself, as those who study the ways of children are aware, and
this has given rise to a new science of infantine psychology, set forth in the writings of
Taine, Darwin, Perez, and others.

We also propose to show that the scientific faculty, which gathers strength and is developed
from the mythical faculty, is in the first instance identical and confounded with it, but that
science corrects and controls the primitive function, just as reason corrects and explains
the errors and illusions of the senses; so that the truly rational man issues, like the foetus
from its embryonic covering, out of its primitive mythical covering into the light of truth.

Every one must perceive that the study of the origin of myths has an important bearing on the
clear and positive knowledge of mankind. In modern times biological science, such as ethnography
and anthropology, have not only thrown much light on the genesis of organic bodies, of animals
and of man, but they have afforded very important aid to psychological research, on account
of the close connection between psychology and the general physical laws of the world. The
mythical faculty in man, and its results, have received much light from these sciences, since
the modifications induced in individuals and in peoples by many natural causes, organic or
climatological, are based upon their physiological conditions. In the first chapters of Herbert
Spencer's book on Sociology, there is a masterly investigation into the changes produced by
climate, with its accidents and organic products, on the peculiar temperament of different
peoples and races, and we must refer our readers to his admirable summary.

We avail ourselves of the aid afforded by all these branches of science in order to comprehend
the true nature of man, and the place which he really occupies in the animal creation. Man
should be estimated as all other products and phenomena of nature are estimated, according
to his absolute value, divested, as in the case of all other physical and organic sciences,
of preconceived ideas or prejudices in favour of the supernatural. He should be studied as
in physics we study bodies and the laws which govern them, or as the laws of their motions
and combinations are studied in chemistry, allowance always being made for their reciprocal
relations, and for their appearance as a whole. For if there be in the universe a distinction
of modes, there is no absolute separation of laws and phenomena.

The various branches of science are only subjective necessities, consequent on the successive
and gradual order of our comprehension of things; they are classifications of method, with
no special reference to the undivided personality of nature. All are parts of the whole, and
so also the whole is revealed in its several parts. They come to be in thought, as well as
in reality, reciprocal conditions of each other; and he who is able to solve the problem of
the world correctly in a simple movement of an atom, would be able to explain all laws and
all phenomena, since every thing may ultimately be reduced to this movement. It is precisely
this which has been attained by certain laws, so that the study of man must not be dissociated
from this conception. It is necessary to regard him as a product of the forces of nature, with
which he has certain properties in common. Although man may appear to be a special and peculiar
subject, yet he is connected with the universal system in which he lives by the elements, phenomena,
and forces of which he consists.

It must not be supposed, as it is asserted with ever-increasing clamour, that such a method
and theory can ever destroy the civilized basis of society, and the morality and dignity with
which it should be informed, as if we were again reducing man to the condition of a beast.
Such an outcry is in itself a plain and striking proof that we have not yet emerged from the
mythical age of thought, since it is precisely a mythical belief which prompts this angry protest
against the noble and independent research after truth.

It is impossible that the results of positive and rational science should in any way destroy
the necessary conditions of civilized life and of the high standard of goodness which should
form, elevate, and bring it to perfection. We must, however, remember that it was not rational
science, nor the ethics of law, which established the a priori rules of a just and free society,
but the necessities of society itself led to the a posteriori formulation of laws. Theoretic
science subsequently explained these laws, and perfected their form and organism, infusing
into them a nobler purpose; but it was the necessities of nature which first dictated the balance,
system, and harmony of the alliances and associations of materials and phenomena as they now
exist, which rendered possible the first nucleus of human society, and which, in course of
time, brought the component parts into definite relations with each other. It was subsequently
the reflex and fitting work of thought to raise upon the foundation laid by nature a rational
system of society, and then to bring its rules and forms to perfection.

Hence it follows that it was not man, nor some extrinsic mythical power which arbitrarily dictated
the code of private and social life, but this presented itself to man as a spontaneous result
of the world's law, relatively to the conditions possible for social life. For if, as in fact
is the case, and as the progress of knowledge and, of human civilization will abundantly show,
the true and eternal laws which make society possible, and consequently its standard of righteousness,
are innate and genuine results of universal laws, it is impossible for science to destroy the
inevitable order of things, and to reduce mankind to a hideous chaos.

It must be allowed that great truths, not fully understood by incapable preachers, who sometimes
from ignoble motives foment the turbid instincts of the ignorant multitude, may bring about,
as they have done of old, grave evils and even crimes in some places and for a short time.
But there is no one so foolish or so ignorant of history as to believe that all things happen
in the best possible way, and in a logical sequence. Such evils do not invalidate or destroy
the force of our assertion that social order is derived from and is based upon the order of
nature. Although savage passions, excited by an imperfect understanding of the truth, do from
time to time cause the overthrow of given societies, and arouse the horror and alarm of pessimist
votaries of myth, nature is not thereby overcome; she still triumphs, and restores the order
which has been interrupted, so far as the instinct of conservatism and the hereditary impulse
to that special form of association to which each people are accustomed are opposed to the
revolutionary spirit, and in this way the balance which has been disturbed is re-established.

When men, having brought their intellectual, and consequently their moral sense to perfection,
are enabled to understand this natural order of laws and social facts, divested of extrinsic
mythical beliefs, they will find in it so much reciprocal benefit, and will have such a deep
sense of their personal dignity, since they are intellectually their own artificers, that they
will be able to understand how the highest good has ensued and will ensue from the sacrifices
or achievements made by a few for the benefit of all. We are undoubtedly still a long way from
such happy conditions, either socially or as individuals, but every day brings them nearer,
and it is to this end that our civilization plainly tends, in spite of all the complaints,
the fears, and sometimes even the malevolence of men.

As I have already said, the study of the beginnings and of, the anthropological conditions
of the various myths is necessary to enable us to understand their psychical phenomena, together
with the hidden laws of the exercise of thought. The learned and illustrious Ribot has justly
said that psychology, dissociated from physiology and cognate sciences, is extinct, and that
in order to bring it to life it is necessary to follow the progress and methods of all other
contemporary sciences.[7] The genesis of myth, its development, the specification and integration
of its beliefs, as well as the several intrinsic and extrinsic sources whence it proceeds,
will assign to it a clearer place among the obscure recesses of psychical facts; they will
reveal to us the connection between the facts of consciousness and their antecedents, between
the world and our normal and abnormal physiological conditions; they will show what a complex
drama is performed by the action and reaction between ourselves and the things within us, and
also will declare the nature of the laws which govern the various and manifold creation of
forms, imaginations, and ideas, and the artificial world of phantasms derived from these. In
this way myth will appear to be not merely due to the direct animation of things, varying in
our waking state with the nature of the exciting cause; but it also arises from the normal
images and illusions of dreams, and from the morbid hallucinations of madness, both subjectively
in the case of the person affected by them, and objectively for those who observe the extrinsic
effects in gesture and speech, and the whole bearing of the sufferer.

Every one must admit that all these phenomena, and the beliefs which arise from them, must
tend to make the observation of psychical life more easy, just as morbid psychical phenomena
often explain the natural action of such life under normal conditions. These phenomena, so
closely connected with physiological disturbances which are beyond the control of our personal
will, will inform us of the biological relations between consciousness and thought on the one
side, and our organism on the other.

The mythical faculty, as we shall see in the following chapters, combined with physiological
excitements, both normal and abnormal, generally assumes constant forms in the various and
manifold world of its creation; constant forms which conversely also reveal those of the scientific
faculty. In this way the development, composition, and integration of a myth, into which others
are fused by assimilation, may be said to explain to us the mode in which systems of philosophy
are constituted, and to manifest to us in a fanciful way the underlying mode in which human
thought is exercised.

Nor do the effects and importance of these studies end here; they are also the necessary foundation
of true and rational sociology. In fact, the relations of the individual to the world, the
manifold conditions caused by the relations of persons to each other, the constitution of all
social order, and the various modifications of that order; all these are resolved into the
primitive thought, and into the emotional impulses of mythical prejudices and fancies, and
in these they have also their natural sanction, and the cardinal point on which they rest and
revolve. There is no society, however rude and primitive, in which all these relations, both
to the individual and to society at large, are not apparent, and these are based on superstitious
and mythical beliefs. Take the Tasmanians, for example, one of the peoples which has recently
become extinct, and regarded as one of the most debased in the social scale, and we have in
a small compass a picture of the acts and beliefs to be found in their embryonic association.

In every society, however rudimentary, these are held to be important facts: the birth of individuals,
which is their entrance into the society itself, and into the possession of its privileges;
marriages, funerals, reciprocal obedience between persons and classes, or to the chief; public
assemblies, and the existence of powers equal or superior to living men.

Among the Tasmanians, the placenta was religiously venerated, and they carefully buried it,
lest it should be injured or devoured by animals. If the mother died in childbirth her offspring
was buried alive with her. When a man attained puberty, he was bound to submit to certain ceremonies,
some of them painful, and dictated by phallic superstitions. Funeral rites were simple: the
corpse was either burnt, with howls and superstitious functions, or it was placed in the hollow
trunk of a tree in a sitting position, with the chin supported by the knees, as was the custom
with Peruvian mummies; and the belief in another world prompted them to place the weapons and
utensils used, during life beside the corpse. Sometimes a wooden lance, with fragments of human
bones affixed to it, was placed below the tumulus, as a defence for the dead during his long
sleep. "Bez krovi (without blood)," laconically answered the count.

His word to prince Eugene had been: Burn the capital rather than deliver it to the enemy; to Ermilof:
I do not see why you take so much pains to defend Moscow at any price;
if the enemy occupies the city he will find nothing that could serve
him.

The treasures which belong to the crown and all that is of some value have already been removed;
also, with few exceptions, the treasures of the churches, the ornaments of gold and silver,
the most important archives of the state, all have been taken to a place of safety. Many of
the well-to-do have already taken away what is precious. There remain in Moscow only 50 thousand
persons in the most miserable conditions who have no other asylum.

This was what he said on September 13, and on the same day he wrote to the emperor that all had
been sent away.

But this was not true; there still remained 10 thousand wounded--of
whom the majority would perish in case of a conflagration; there remained
an immense stock of provisions, flour and alcoholic liquor, which
would fall into the hands of the enemy; there was still the arsenal
in the Kremlin containing 150 cannon, 60 thousand rifles, 160 thousand
cartridges and a great deal of sulphur and saltpeter.

During the night from the 14th. to the 15th. Rostopchine developed a great activity, though he
could save only some miraculous images left in the churches, and destroy some magazines.

The inhabitants suddenly aroused from their security went to the barriers of the city and obstructed
the streets with vehicles; to remove what still remained in Moscow the means of transportation
and the time allowed for this purpose were insufficient.

Those who remained had nothing to lose and were glad to take revenge on the rich by burning
and pillaging their mansions.
On the 14th. the criminals in the prisons, with one-half of their
heads shaved, were set at liberty that they might participate in the
burning and pillaging.

Before leaving Moscow Rostopchine uncovered
his head and said to his son, "Salute Moscow for the last time; in
half an hour it will be on fire."

Quite a literature has developed
on the question: who has burned Moscow? The documents which Popof
has examined leave no doubt concerning Rostopchine's part in regard
to its conflagration. But, after all, it was caused by those who had
a right to do it, those who, beginning at Smolensk, burned their villages,
their hamlets, even their ripening or ripened harvest, after the Russian
army had passed and the enemy came in sight.
Some remains of circular buildings and concentric compartments, discovered by Field and others,
had reference to their feasts, assemblies, and dances. Among their cosmic myths, Milligan has
preserved one relating to the double stars which perhaps refers to the invention of fire.

From this cursory view of the conditions of society in its simplest form, and among the most
savage peoples, and of the mythical beliefs which prevailed under such conditions, it clearly
appears how myth, dating from the first beginnings of human association, has regarded, invested,
sanctioned, and generated all special acts and relations, and the whole social order, both
private and public. The exercise of thought in primitive times not only consisted of mythical
beliefs and associations, but this same condition of thought reacted on all the phenomena of
nature, and on all social facts. For if, as we have already observed, more rational empirical
notions, and a certain rude form of scientific faculty made its appearance amid those mythical
ideas which were still persistent, its various forms were not animated, sustained, and preserved
by myth. Hence it is evident that the basis of the genesis of sociology as a whole consists
in myth, which sanctions its acts and establishes their relations to each other. The immense
importance of these studies, even for the right understanding of the laws and historical evolution
which guide and govern sociology, is evident from this fact.

It must not be supposed that such a vast and profound incarnation of myth in social facts is
peculiar to the primitive ages; it persists and is maintained in all the historical phases
of civilization, even of the higher races, although sometimes in a dormant form. Even in our
days, any one who considers our modes of society, the organism, customs, ceremonies, and manifold
and complex institutions of modern life, will readily see that religious influences and their
rites initiate, sanction, and accompany every individual and social fact, although civil and
religious societies are becoming ever more distinct.

Since, therefore, myth is a constant form of sociology, completely invests it, and accompanies
and animates its transmutations down to our days, everyone must recognize the necessity of
this study in order to understand and explain the true history of thought and of sociology.

The energy, the power, the physical and intellectual worth of a people are revealed as a whole
in its mythical products, whether in the quality and greatness of their beliefs, in the greater
or less definiteness of their system, or in their development into more rational notions; and
from the complex whole we can estimate the worth of their civilization. So that, where other
extrinsic testimony is wanting, the study of these primitive creations will reveal to us their
psychological worth. This is the origin of the comparative psychology of peoples, a most fruitful
science, which not only teaches us to rank the various families of peoples according to their
relative value, but it is of great use in making man acquainted with himself, and with psychology
in general.

In fact, modern psychology can only advance by means of observation and experiment, which constitute
it one of the natural sciences; and this is abundantly proved by the modern English schools,
and the experimental school in Germany. Yet observation of the states of consciousness taken
alone is defective, unless it is enlarged by the comparative examination of a greater number
of subjects; nor must ethnical peculiarities be passed over, and it is precisely these which
are included in the comparative psychology of peoples. The large amount of results, their infinite
variety, and at the same time a certain uniformity in their modes of beginning, of their development,
and of their place in the universe, give a splendid illustration of the innate exercise of
human thought; the likenesses as well as the contrasts are instructive as to its real nature.

The comparative psychology of peoples, studied from this point of view, certainly does not
include the whole of psychological science, which requires other instruments and other modes
of experience, but it is a great help as a foundation. We believe that the study of myth, which
throws so much light on comparative psychology, is likewise of use for the special psychology
of man, since this can only arise from individual and ethnical observation, and from experiment,
dissociated from every hindrance, and from metaphysical prejudice. And if by our humble essay
we can throw any light on this noble science, we shall be abundantly rewarded.

CHAPTER II.

ANIMAL SENSATION AND PERCEPTION.

All animals communicate with each other and with the external world through their senses, and
by means of their perception, both internal and external, they possess knowledge and apprehension
of one another. In the vast organic series of the animal kingdom, some are better provided
than others with methods, instruments, and apparatus fit for effecting such communication.
The senses of relation are not found in the same degree in all animals, nor when such senses
are the same in number are they endowed with equal intensity, acuteness, and precision. But
the fundamental fact remains the same in all cases; they communicate with themselves and with
the external world through their senses.

We must now inquire what value the external object of perception, considered in itself, has
for the animal, what character it has and assumes with respect to his inner sense in the act
of perception or apprehension. Man, and especially man in our days, after so many ages of reflection,
and through the influence of contemporary science, is so far removed from the primitive and
simple exercise of his psychical life, that he finds it difficult to picture to himself the
ancient and spontaneous conditions under which his senses communicated with the world and with
himself. And therefore, without further consideration, he thinks and believes that in primeval
times everything took place in the same way as it does at present, and, which is a still greater
error, as it takes place in the lower animals.

This identification of the complex machinery of human perception with that of animals must
not be regarded as an absurd paradox, since, as we have shown in an earlier work, they were
originally and in themselves the same.[8] By pursuing an easy mode of observation, divested
of prejudice, we may revert to that primeval state of human nature, and may also comprehend
with truth and certainty the condition of animals. For the animal nature has not ceased to
exist in man, and it may be discerned by those who care to look for it; and careful study,
with the constant aid of observation and experiment, will reveal to us the hidden life of sensation
and intelligence in the lower animals.

There is a continual self-consciousness in all animals; it is inseparable from all their internal
and external acts, from every fact, passion, and emotion; and this is clear and obvious. This
fundamental and persistent self-consciousness--persistent in dreams, and even in the calmest
sleep, which is always accompanied by a vague sensation--is the consciousness of a living subject,
active, impressionable, exercising his will, capable of emotions and passions. It is not the
consciousness of an inert thing, passive, dead, or extrinsic; for animal life consists in sensation
of greater or less intensity, but always of sensation. Consequently, such a consciousness signifies
for the animal a constant apprehension of an active faculty exercised intrinsically in himself,
and it makes his life into a mobile drama, of which he is implicitly conscious, of acts and
emotions, of impulses, desires, and suspicions.

This inward form of emotional life and psychical and organic action, into which the whole value
of personal existence is resolved, may be said to invest and modify all the animal's active
relations to the external world, which it vivifies and modifies according to its own image.
The subsequent act of doubling the faculties which takes place in man does not occur in the
animal; a process which modifies through the intellect the spontaneous and primitive act. Consequently,
the active and inward sense which is peculiar to the animal is renewed in him by the external
things and phenomena of nature which stimulate and excite him.

Two kinds of things present themselves to his perception: other animals, of whatever species,
and the inanimate objects of the world. As far as the other animals are concerned, which are
obvious to his perception, it is perfectly evident that upon these he will project his whole
internal life of consciousness and emotions, and will feel their identity with himself by his
implicit and intuitive judgment. And in fact, the movements, sounds, gestures, and forms of
other animals necessarily cause this sense of inward psychical identity, whence arises the
implicit notion of an animated and personal subject. Any one who observes, however superficially,
the conduct of animals to each other when they first meet, cannot doubt this truth for an instant.

Although the external form and character of the animal perceived are important factors of the
implicit notion of an animated personal subject, this belief is even more due to the animal's
inward consciousness of himself as a living subject which is reflected in the extrinsic form
of the other and is identified with it. The spontaneous and personal psychical effort does
not decompose the object perceived into its proper elements by means of reflex attention, but
it is immediately projected on those phenomena which assume a form analogous to the sentient
subject.

The fact of this law must never be forgotten in the analysis of animal intelligence and sensation.
All those who do not keep clearly in view the real and genuine character of the sentient and
intelligent faculty in animals are liable to error.

In addition to the perceptions we have mentioned, animals have a perception of inanimate things,
that is, of various bodies and phenomena of nature. Although the form, motion, and gestures
of an analogous and personal subject are wanting in these cases, so that they do not cause
extrinsically the same implicit idea, neither do they remain, as with a cultivated and rational
man, things and qualities of independent existence, disconnected with the life of the animal
which perceives them, exerting no intentional efficacy, and governed by necessary laws by means
of which they act and exist.

A cultivated and rational man, by the reflex and calm examination of things, can correctly
distinguish these two classes of subjects and phenomena, and cannot as a rule be deceived as
to their real and relative value with respect to them and to himself. But when he forgets his
primary intellectual condition, and does not perfectly understand the permanent condition of
animals, he believes that their faculties are identical, and that things, qualities, and phenomena
present the same appearance to the human and the animal perception. Yet the actual nature of
the thing, so far as it is estimated by our perception as an object different from ourselves
and from any other animal, cannot be so apprehended by animals which lack the analytical faculty
in the perennial flow of their perceptions; the actual and inanimate thing is presented to
them only by the intrinsic, peculiar, personal, and psychical quality of the animal itself.

If form, and characteristic and deliberate action, are wanting to the substances and phenomena
of inanimate nature, qualities which more readily arouse in animals the idea of a subject resembling
and analogous to themselves, yet there always remains the apprehension of some sort of form
in which--not distinguished from the others by reflex action--the inward faculty of sensation
and emotion is repeated and impersonated by the perceiving animal. Thus every form, every object,
every external phenomenon becomes vivified and animated by the intrinsic consciousness and
personal psychical faculty of the animal itself. Every object, fact, and phenomenon of nature
will not merely appear to him as the real object which it is, but he will necessarily perceive
it as a living and deliberating power, capable of affecting him agreeably or injuriously.

Every one is aware of the jealous, suspicious nature of animals, and that they are not only
inquisitive about other animals, but about every material object which they see unexpectedly,
which moves in an unusual way, or which interferes with or injures them.

It must have been often observed how they turn against any object which has chanced to hurt
them, or which has annoyed them by regular and repeated motions, how they start at the sudden
appearance or oscillation of some unlooked-for thing, at an unusual light, a colour, a stone,
a plant, at the fluttering of branches, of clothes, or weathercocks, at the rush of water,
at the slightest movement or sound in the twilight, or in the darkness of night. They look
about, and consider all things and phenomena as subjects actuated by will, and as having an
immediate influence on their lives, either beneficent or injurious.

Undoubtedly they do, as a rule, by means of their implicit judgment, distinguish animals as
of a different type from other objects, but they transfuse into everything their own personality
and their intrinsic consciousness. This is the case with the whole animal kingdom, at least
with those whose internal emotion can be gathered from their external movements and gestures.

An animal is sometimes aware that an enemy which may lie in wait for and destroy him has approached
the neighbourhood of his haunts, or at any rate may interfere with the freedom of his ordinary
life, and he withdraws as far as he can from this new peril or injury, and seeks to defend
himself from the malice of his enemy by special arts. In this case, the external subject or
thing is what his own objective sense conceives it to be, and his inward perception corresponds
to an actual cosmic reality.

Suppose that instead of this, the neighbourhood of a fierce fire, or violent rain and hail,
or a stormy wind, or some other natural phenomenon, surprises or injures such creatures; these
facts do not affect them as if they were merely occurrences in accordance with cosmic laws,
for such a simple conception of things is not grasped by them. Such phenomena of nature are
regarded by animals as living subjects, actuated by a concrete and deliberate purpose of ill-will
towards them. Any one who has observed animals as I have done for many years, both in a wild
and domestic state, and under every variety of conditions and circumstances, will readily admit
the fact.

This truth, which clearly appears from an accurate analysis of facts, and from experiments,
can also be demonstrated by the arguments of reason. Since animals have no conception of the
purely cosmic reality of the phenomena and laws which constitute nature, it follows that such
a reality must appear to their inner consciousness in its various effects as a subject vaguely
identical with their own psychical nature. Hence they regard nature as if she were inspired
with the same life, will, and purpose, as those which they themselves exercise, and of which
they have an immediate and intrinsic consciousness.

It is true that after long experience animals become accustomed to regard as harmless the phenomena,
objects, and forces by which they were at first sympathetically excited and terrified. Of this
we have innumerable examples both among wild and domestic animals; but although suspicion and
anxiety are subdued by habit and experience, yet these objects and phenomena are not thereby
transformed into pure and simple realities. In the same way, if they are at first frightened
by the sight and companionship of some other species or object, habit and experience gradually
calm their fears and suspicions, and the association or neighbourhood may even become agreeable
to them. I have often observed that different species, both when at liberty and in confinement,
are affected by the most lively surprise and perturbation when some new phenomenon has startled
them; they act as if it were really a living and insidious subject, and then they gradually
become calm and quiet, and regard it as some indifferent or beneficent power.

I must adduce some observations and experiments from the many I have made on this subject.
It may be objected that if animals in their spontaneous perception personify the object in
question, they would give signs of this fact with respect to all the objects with which they
come in contact, and among which they live, and yet they remain indifferent to many of them,
which is a proof that they distinguish the animate from the inanimate. In fact it cannot be
disputed that a vast number of the phenomena and objects of nature are regarded by animals
with indifference; they are perceived by them, but it does not appear that they suppose these
things to be endowed with life. It is, however, necessary in the first place to distinguish
two modes and stages in this animation of things, one of which we may term static, and the
other dynamic. In the first instance, the sentient subject remains tranquil at the very moment
when he vivifies the phenomenon or the thing perceived; while the act is accomplished with
so much animating force, and with an implicit and fugitive consciousness, it exerts no immediate
and sudden influence on the perceiving animal, and consequently he gives no external signs
of the personifying character of his perception. In the second instance, which we have termed
dynamic, that is, when the phenomenon or object has a direct and sudden effect on the animal
himself, he expresses by his movements; gestures, cries, and other signs, how instantaneously
he considers and feels the object in question to be alive, for he behaves in exactly the same
way towards real animals.

Animals are accustomed to show such indifference towards numerous objects that it might be
supposed that they have an accurate conception of what is inanimate; but this arises from habit,
from long experience, and partly also from the hereditary disposition of the organism towards
this habit. But if the object should act in any unusual way, then the animating process which,
as we have just said, was rendered static by its habitual exercise, again becomes dynamic,
and the special and permanent character of the act is at once revealed. We have experience
of this fact in ourselves, although we are now capable of immediately distinguishing between
the animate and the inanimate, and man alone has, or can have, a rational conception of what
are really cosmic objects or things. Yet if we suddenly and unexpectedly see some object move
in a strange way, which we know from experience to be inanimate, the innate inclination to
personify it takes effect, and for a moment we are amazed, as if the phenomenon were produced
by deliberate power proper to itself.

I have kept various kinds of animals for several years, in order to observe them and try experiments
at my convenience. I have suddenly inserted an unfamiliar object in the various cages in which
I have kept birds, rabbits, moles, and other animals. At first sight the animal is always surprised,
timid, curious, or suspicious, and often retreats from it. By degrees his confidence returns,
and after keeping out of the way for some time, he becomes accustomed to it, and resumes his
usual habits. If then, by a simple arrangement of strings already prepared, I move the object
to and fro, without showing myself, the animal scuttles about and is much less easily reconciled
to its appearance. I have tried this experiment with various animals, and the result is almost
always the same.

In the cage of a very tame thrush, I made a movable bottom to his feeding trough, so arranged
that by suddenly pulling a cord, the food which it contained could be raised or lowered. When
everything remained stationary in its place the thrush ate with lively readiness, but as soon
as I raised the food he nearly always flew off in alarm. When the experiment had been often
repeated, he did not like to come near the feeding trough, and--which is a still stronger proof
that he imagined the food itself to be endowed with life--he often refused to approach, or
only approached in fear the sopped bread which was placed outside the trough. I tried the same
experiment with other birds, and nearly always with the same result.

On another occasion I repeatedly waved a white handkerchief before a spirited horse, bringing
it close to his eyes; at first he looked at it suspiciously and shied a little, but without
being much discomposed, and I continued the experiment until he became accustomed to its ordinary
appearance. One day I and a friend went out driving with this horse, and I directed a man,
while we were passing at a moderate pace, to wave the same handkerchief, attached to a stick,
in such a way that his person on the other side of the hedge was invisible. The horse was scared
and shied violently, and even in the stable he could not see the handkerchief without trembling,
and it was difficult to reconcile him to the sight of it. I repeated the experiment with slight
variations on other horses, and the issue was always more or less the same.

Again, I placed a scarecrow or bogey in a parti-coloured dress in the spacious kennel of a
hound while he was absent from it. When the dog wished to return to his kennel, he drew back
at the sight of it, and barked for a long while. After going backwards and forwards, snuffing
suspiciously, he decided to enter, but he remained on the threshold of the kennel, anxiously
inspecting the bogey. In a few days, however, he became accustomed to it, and was indifferent
to its presence. I ought to add that I had taught him on the first day, by punishment and admonition,
that he must not destroy the bogey. One day when the dog was lying down I violently moved the
puppet's arms by a cord, and he jumped up and ran barking out of the kennel, soon returning
to bark as he had done at first. Finally, he again became accustomed to it, but whenever I
repeated the movement with greater violence, it took a long while for him to become reconciled
to it.

I put into a room various kinds of wild birds, which had been taken in nets after they were
full grown. The window, which looked upon a garden, was unglazed, and closed by a wire netting,
through which the outer air entered and was constantly renewed. I placed in the middle of the
room a pot containing a shrub of some size, on which the birds used to perch. Since they had
been reared in the open air they were certainly accustomed to the wind, and to the way in which
it moves trees and branches, so that they were not alarmed by a phenomenon which they recognized
from experience. I fastened a cord to the head of the shrub which I passed through a hole in
the door, making another to look through, and in this way I moved it to and fro as the wind
might have done. One day when there was a high wind which could be heard in the room, and when
the current of air through the window was perceptible, I tried the experiment when the conditions
of resemblance were perfect. And yet when the violent movement and oscillation of the shrub
was combined with the noise of the wind, the frightened birds all fluttered about, and after
repeating the movement, and then allowing it to subside, they kept away from the shrub and
did not dare to settle on it.

At another time, aided by an ingenious young friend, I constructed a toy windmill, of which
the vanes were moved by weights. I placed this toy in a cage, so arranged that its motions
could be regulated from the outside, and I put into the cage a sparrow, which had been taken
from the nest, and which consequently had no experience of the external world. Much patience
was needed, since the toy required careful adjustment and was easily thrown out of gear, but
I managed it at last. The sparrow pecked at the little mill as soon as he was put into the
cage, and he grew up accustomed to its motions. I then took the sparrow out of the cage and
put in a finch, which had also been taken from the nest, but was reared far from such a machine,
and he was frightened and did not reconcile himself to it for some time. I exchanged this bird
for a goldfinch which had been caught after he was full grown, and his alarm at the little
mill was so great that he did not dare to move.

In a ground floor room which I used as my study, I hung an old sheet, which reached to the
ground, on a long spear inserted in a heavy wooden disk; I surmounted it with a ragged hunting
cap, and so arranged the sheet as to give it some resemblance to the human form. When my dog
came in as usual, he looked suspiciously at the object, snuffing about and gradually approaching
to walk round and observe it. At last he was satisfied, and curled himself up by the skirts
of the bogey, where I had placed the mat on which he was accustomed to lie when he was with
me. One evening when the moon shone doubtfully and there was just light enough to distinguish
the outline of things, I carried the shapeless bogey into the garden near my room, and placed
it among some shrubs and bushes. I went back to the house and called my dog, who followed me
quietly until he reached the spot from which he could see the bogey distinctly enough for him
to recognize its identity with the one with which he was already familiar. As soon as he saw
the apparition he stood still, growling furiously; he began to bark, and when I encouraged
him to come on, he turned round and ran back to the house. I shut up the dog in another room,
brought back the bogey to its former place, and threw a strong light upon it before recalling
the dog. At the first sight of the bogey the dog paused suspiciously for an instant, but when
I sat down to the table as usual, he hesitated a little and after snuffing at it went back
to his couch.

I have made similar experiments with dogs, rabbits, birds, and other animals. I took long wooden
poles, and put them inside their cages or hutches in such a way that the animals got to know
and feel reconciled to the sight of them. After some days had elapsed, I contrived, while screened
from sight, to take the poles from their usual place and to make them touch and annoy the animals
with more or less violence, thus causing them to flutter or scamper about and to shrink away,
as if from the touch of a living person, although they were unable, as I have said, to see
me or my hand. Those which were least agitated sprang forward with little leaps and looked
about them, doubtful and excited. I might go on to describe many other experiments made with
the same object, and always with the same result, but these are enough to show that I went
to work cautiously and conscientiously, that the spontaneous and innate personification of
the objects perceived by animals is clearly apparent, and also how we may account for their
indifference to those to which they become accustomed.

Among animals the necessity of finding food is the great and unfailing stimulus towards the
exercise of their vital functions; food which may, as we all know, be vegetable, animal, or
a combination of both kinds. It is evident that in the case of carnivorous animals the object
which satisfies this desire is a living subject, of which it is necessary to become possessed
by arts, wiles, sometimes by a fierce and cruel conflict. In these cases, animals are in constant
communication with an animal world resembling their own, and the objective reality is for the
most part resolved into living subjects, endowed with consciousness and will. But neither is
the vegetable food of herbivorous, frugivorous, and graminivorous animals regarded by them,
as it is by us, as a material and unconscious satisfaction of their wants; these grasses, grains,
and leaves appear to animals to be living powers which it is necessary to conquer, animated
subjects endowed with life, but for the most part inoffensive, and which, unlike the living
prey of carnivora, offer no resistance.

Observe the way in which an herbivorous or graminivorous animal becomes excited and angry when
the branch or the ear of corn obstinately adheres to the ground, or offers any other difficulty
to his immediate desire of obtaining food; he acts like one who has to do with a resisting
power. Observe how, when they are quietly stripping the bough, picking out the grains, or eating
the grass, they become suspicious, or fly away if there should be any unusual movement in the
bough, the ears of corn, or the grass. In one way or another their food is regarded as a subject
endowed with sympathetic and deliberate consciousness. And every one must have observed that
animals at play act towards inanimate objects as if they were conscious and endowed with will.

Every object of animal perception is therefore felt, or implicitly assumed, to be a living,
conscious, acting subject. This is due to the external reflection and projection of the intrinsic
and sentient faculty, and therefore--since an animal has not the duplex faculty of deliberate
and reflex attention--he cannot attain to the conception of simple external reality, of cosmic
things and phenomena. Every object, every phenomenon is for him a deliberating power, a living
subject, in which consciousness and will act as they do in himself. There are undoubtedly in
the vast series of beings which compose the order of nature, and which he is able to perceive,
degrees, differences, and varieties of energy, power, and efficacy with respect to himself
and to the normal exercise of his life. But he transfuses into all, in proportion to the effects
which result from them, his own nature, and modifies them in accordance with the intrinsic
form of his consciousness, his emotions, and his instincts.

The external world appears to animals to be a great and mighty movement and congeries of living,
conscious, deliberating beings, and the value of the phenomenon or thing is great in proportion
to its effect on the animal itself. The objective and simple reality, as it appears to man,
has no existence for animals; from the nature of their intelligence they cannot attain to any
explicit conception of it, so that this reality is resolved and modified into their own image.
The eternal and infinite flux, by which all things come and go in obedience to laws which are
permanent and enduring, appears to animals to be a vast and confused dramatic company in which
the subjects, with or without organic form, are always active, working in and through themselves,
with benign or malignant, pleasing or hurtful influence. It is for this reason, and this reason
only, that their life of consciousness and of relation is so deeply seated and so readily excited.
Nor do animals ever believe themselves to be alone among inanimate things; even when not surrounded
by allied or different species, they have the sense of living amid the manifold forms of conscious
and deliberating life which the world contains.

This constant and deliberate animation of all the objects and phenomena of nature is spontaneous
and necessary owing to the psychical and organic constitution of the animal kingdom, and it
resolves itself into a universal personification of the phenomena themselves. In fact, the
animal's intrinsic psychical personality is infused and transformed into each of them with
more or less intensity and vigour; the phenomena are perceived by each individual just as far
as he assimilates them, and he is constantly assimilating himself to them. His communication
with the external world is in proportion with its internal reflection on himself, and he understands
just as much as his own nature enables him to grasp.

A careful consideration therefore shows that the conditions of animal knowledge consist in
endowing the phenomena and objects of nature with consciousness and will. I think that this
truth will prove a certain guide and beacon in the interpretation of the origin of myth and
science in man.

CHAPTER III.

HUMAN SENSATION AND PERCEPTION.

In man, as it has been clearly proved, sensations and perceptions occur both physiologically
and psychically just as they do in animals. If science and the rational process of the interpretation
of things have their origin and are evolved in us by the duplication of our faculties, such
a function, which is due to this duplication, is very slowly developed and exercised, and in
its origin, as an effort of the intelligence, it does not differ from that of animals.

It is true that the internal act of the higher faculty of reflection has hardly taken place
before man unconsciously enters on a new and vast apprenticeship, which soon distinguishes
him from and exalts him above the animal kingdom; science has already put forth its first germ.
But the reasoning and simply animal faculties were so mingled, that for a long while they were
confounded together in their effects and results, as well as in their natural methods. We must
therefore begin by considering the nature of this primitive human perception, in some degree
identical with that of animals, so that they may be estimated to be of equal value, at any
rate in their first results and arts.

The vivid self-consciousness, inseparable at all times from every act, passion, and emotion,
actuates man and animals alike; he has this consciousness in common with all other animals,
and especially with those superior orders which are nearest to himself. The further perception
of extrinsic things and phenomena occurs after the same manner and in accordance with the same
physiological and psychical laws. By the intrinsic law of animal nature, as it is adapted to
his cosmic environment, we see the cause and necessity of the transfusion and projection of
himself into everything which he perceives; whence it follows that he regards these things
as living, conscious, and deliberating subjects; and this is also the case with man, who animates
and endows with life all which surrounds him and which he perceives.

In fact, in man's spontaneous and immediate perception and apprehension of any object or external
phenomenon, especially in early life, the innate effects are instantaneous, and correspond
with the real constitution of the function; analysis and reflex attention necessarily and slowly
succeed to this primitive animal act in the course of human development. Consequently the true
character and value of its effect on the perception are the same in man and animals.

If in this psychical and organic fact of perception, man is at first absolutely in the conditions
of animals, identical effects must be produced; and this was originally the case, as far as
man himself and external things were concerned. The powerful self-consciousness which actuates
man and animals alike is projected on the objects or phenomena perceived, and they see them
transformed into living, deliberating subjects. In this way the world and all which it contains
appears to be a congeries of beings, actuated by will and consciousness, and powerful for good
or evil, and in practice they seek to modify, to encourage, or to avoid such influence. The
ultimate effect of this action, assumed to be intentional in all and each of these subjects,
will be their personification, either vaguely or definitely, but always as a power active for
good or ill.

If we trace back the memories of historic and civilized peoples into the twilight of their
origin, at a time when they were still barbarous, and little removed from their primitive savage
conditions, we shall find, the further we go back, the more vivid, general, and multiform will
the mythological interpretation and conception of the world and its various phenomena appear
to be; everything was personified by these primitive peoples in a way common to the animal
and human consciousness alike.

Of this the testimony remaining in the most ancient verses of the first Veda is a sufficient
proof. At the epoch of their composition the human race had made some relative progress in
morals and civilization; yet we find that psychical human life was transfused and projected
into everything: man personified each phenomenon and force of nature in accordance with his
own image.

For example, fire in general was personified and identified with humanity in Agni; even the
shape taken by the flames, all which was required to light the fire, the whole process of the
sacrifice, even the doors of the altar-railing, the prayer and oblation to the god.[9]

We also learn from the solemn and ancient songs of the Rig-Veda that all terrestrial, meteorological,
and celestial phenomena were more or less vaguely personified. These facts recur in all the
earliest recollections of civilized peoples. If we turn from these to observe the savage races
of modern times, and the most barbarous tribes still extant in continents and isles far removed
from culture and science, we shall again find the same beliefs. The range of absurd personifications,
degenerating into the most trivial and varied forms of fetish worship, becomes wider, and its
influence deeper, in proportion to the rude and barbarous condition of the tribe or stock in
which they appear.

Even among ourselves, in the midst of the most civilized European nations of modern times,
how much mythology still lingers in the lower classes, both in cities and the country. It flourishes
in proportion to the ignorance and want of culture of the people, as those know who have really
studied the intellectual conditions of all classes in our time.[10]

In the child just beginning to walk, to move freely, and to talk, and even at a later age,
in cases in which the reflective faculty is weak, and when it approximates more to the psychical
and organic conditions of animals, such a projection of self and personification of surrounding
objects is evident to all. For this reason a child transforms all which it seizes or plays
with into a person or animal, and when alone with them it talks, shouts, and laughs, as if
such objects could really feel, act, and obey; in short, as if they were real persons or animals.
So strong is the childish instinct, or, as I might say, the law of its being to project and
transfuse itself into objects, that it is apt to speak of itself in the third person. A child
seldom says, "I will," or "I am hungry," but "Louis wants," "Louis is hungry," or whatever
his name may be. This phenomenon reappears in the second childhood of old age, when the power
of reflection is weakened, and there is a reversion to the primitive animal condition. The
same phenomenon also occurs in idiots, in whom there is a morbid defect of reflective power.

This fact of the personification of the objects of perception is therefore evident and constant
in the primitive man of civilized races, in the barbarous condition of modern savages, in the
ignorant multitude, and in children--intellectual conditions which approach most closely to
the condition of animals--and conversely it is plain that it belongs in the highest degree
to the intellectual life of animals, and that myth, into which such a personification and animation
of things must be resolved, has its original and innate necessity in animal life. We think
that this is a new scientific fact, which throws much light on the history of human thought.
They suppose it to be simply the effect of psychological laws as far as man is concerned, whereas
we have shown that it forms, in the ultimate causes by which it is produced, the very essence
of animal perception. They ascribe it to man as a rational hypothesis to explain the primitive
order of things, whereas it is a spontaneous and primary intuition of the animal intelligence.

Alger, although he is also mistaken as to the true causes of myth in general, expresses himself
better when he asserts that the brain of a savage is always dominated by the idea that all
objects whatsoever have a soul precisely similar to that of man. The custom of burning and
burying various things with the dead body was, he thinks, in many cases prompted by the belief
that every such object had its manes.[12]

In fact, the innate psychical and organic constitution of the intelligence, both animal and
human, is such that it spontaneously and necessarily projects itself into every object of nature
and perception, animating and personifying it by this special law, and not by a reflective
hypothesis, such as would be the conscious and deliberate solution of a given problem. Such
a solution cannot be made by animals, since as we have shown they are without the faculty of
making a deliberate research into any subject; nor can it be effected by the primitive man,
in whom the reasoning faculty with which he is endowed is still undeveloped.

The real origin of reflection is not to be found in what may be called the mythical creation
of nature, which is the necessary result of the spontaneity of the intelligence, both in man
and animals; it is developed after long duration of barbarism and ignorance. M'Lennan and others
have shown how the era of reflection and hypothesis begins in the evolution of human intelligence.
Sekesa, an intelligent Kaffir, said to Arbrousset,[13] "For twelve years I have shepherded
my flock. It was dark, and I sat down upon a rock and asked myself such questions as these,
sad questions, since I was unable to answer them. Who made the stars? What supports them? Do
the waters never grow weary of flowing from morning to evening, from evening to morning, and
where do they find rest? Whence come the clouds, which pass and re-pass, and dissolve in rain?
Who sends them? Our diviners certainly do not send rain, since they have no means of making
it, nor do I see them with my eyes going up to heaven to seek it. I cannot see the wind, and
know not what it is. Who guides and causes it to blow, to rage, and overwhelm us? Nor do I
know how the corn grows. Yesterday there was not a blade of grass in my field, and to-day it
is green; who gave to the earth the wisdom and power to bring forth?" Again, there is a passage
in the Rig-Veda, in which it is said, "Where do the fixed stars of heaven which we see by night
go by day?"

It is in this intellectual condition that ignorant and savage man really begins the spontaneous
yet reflective research into the causes of things, and it is in this condition only that he
hypothetically interprets the order of phenomena through myths, which have then become secondary,
and are no longer primitive. The true origin of the primitive myth which animates and personifies
the universe is not to be found in this condition; its origin is of much earlier date in the
history of man, and indeed it has its roots, as we have shown, in animal life.

Certainly when we compare the two intellectual periods, there is a wide difference between
the age in which Sekesa could be perplexed by such inquiries, and that of more primitive peoples,
which still believe without question in the soul and informing spirit or shade of stones, sticks,
weapons, food, water, springs--in short, of every object and phenomenon. This is still the
case with the Algonquins, the Fijians, the Karens, the Caribbees, the negroes of Guinea, the
New Zealanders, the Tongusians, the Greenlanders, the Esthonians, the Australians, the Peruvians,
and a host of other savage and barbarous peoples. They not only animate and personify material
objects, but even diseases and their remedies.

The incubus, for example, termed Mara in Northern mythology, was the spirit which tormented
sleepers. This is the Mar of the German proverb: Dich hat greitten der Mar. The word is derived
from Mar, a horse, and becomes nightmare in English, Cauchemar in French, [Greek: Ephialtês]
in Greek, meaning one which rides upon another. So with epilepsy, which signifies the act of
being seized by any one; it was, like all nervous diseases, held to be a sacred evil, and those
afflicted by it were supposed to be possessed. Insanity was regarded in the same way, as we
see in the Bible where Saul's melancholy is said to be an evil spirit sent from God. A furious
madman was supposed to have been carried off by a demon, and in Persia the insane were said
to be God's fools. In Tahiti they were called Eatooa, that is, possessed by a divine spirit;
and in the Sandwich Isles they were worshipped as men into whom a divinity had entered. In
German the plica polonica is called Alpzopf, or hobgoblin's tail. All nations believed that
the malign beings which animated diseases could, like men, be propitiated by ceremonies and
incantations. The Redskins are always in fear of the assaults of evil spirits, and have recourse
to incantations, and to the most absurd sacerdotal rites, or to the influence of their manitu,
in order to be safe. Their devotions and sacrifices are prompted by fear rather than by gratitude.

Tanner mentions, in his "Narrative of a Captivity among the Indians," that he once heard a
convalescent patient reproved for his imprudence in exposing himself to the air, since his
shade had not altogether come back to abide within him. For this purpose, and in conformity
with such ideas, when the sorcerer Malgaco wishes to cure a sick man, he makes a hole in a
tomb to let out the spirit, which he then takes in his cap, and constrains it to enter the
patient's head. The process of disease is supposed to be a struggle between the sick person
and the evil spirit of sickness. The Greek-word, prophylakê signifies the arrangements of outposts.
Agonia is the hottest moment of conflict, and krisis the decisive day of battle, as we see
in Polybius, liii., c. 89. Medicine was from the earliest times confounded with magic, which
is only the primitive form of the conception of nature. The Aryan rulers in India in ancient
times believed that the savage races were autochthonic workers of magic who were able to assume
any form they pleased.[14] The negro priests of fetish worship believe that they can pronounce
on the disease without seeing the patient, by the aid of his garments or of anything which
belongs to him.[15] The superstition of the evil eye recurs in Vedic India, as well as among
many other peoples. In the Rig-Veda the wife is exhorted not to look upon her husband with
an evil eye. There was the same belief among the ancient Greeks, and it is also found in the
oculus fascinus of the Romans, and the German böses Auge. The early German Rito, or fever,
was a spirit (Alb) which rode upon the sick man. A passage in the Rig-Veda states that demons
assume the form of an owl, cock, wolf, etc.[16] Such was the primitive attitude of the transfusion
of individual psychical life into things, and consequently of general metamorphosis. Kuhn identifies
the Greek verb [Greek: iaomai] with the Sanscrit yavayami, to avert, and in the Rig-Veda this
verb is used in connection with amivä, disease; so that it was necessary to drive away the
demon, as the cause of sickness. A physician, according to the meaning of the old Sanscrit
word, was the exorciser of disease, the man who fought with its demon. We find the practice
of incantations as a remedy for disease in use among the ancient Greeks, the Romans, and all
European nations, as well as among savages in other parts of the world.

The objects and phenomena obvious to perception are therefore supposed by primitive man, as
well as by animals, to be conscious subjects in virtue of their constitution, and of the innate
character of sensation and intelligence. So that the universal personification of the things
and phenomena of nature, either vaguely, or in an animal form, is a fundamental and necessary
fact, both in animals and in man; it is a spontaneous effect of the psychical faculty in its
relations to the world. At the conclusion of his performance re-appears in evening dress-coat.
Applause.) Thank you very much.

But although Farmer HODGE is a very good fellow, I think SANDIE MACBAWBEE is even better.
With your permission, I will appear as SANDIE MACBAWBEE. (Disappears under table, and re-appears
in Highland Costume. Cheers.) Dinna fash yourselves! Ma gracious! It's ma opinion that you'll
just hear a wee bit about Home Rule for Bonnie Scotland. Well, ye ken--(Airs his opinions upon
his chosen subject in broad Scotch. After a quarter of an hour he re-appears, and receives the usual
applause.) Thank you from the bottom of my heart. And now as I have shown you Scotland and England,
I think you would be pleased with a glimpse of London. (Cheers.) You all like London, do you
not? (Applause.) With your kind permission, I will re-appear as a noted character in the great
tragic comedy of the world's Metropolis. (Dives down and comes up as a Costermonger. Prolonged
applause.) What cheer! (Laughter.) Well, you blokes what are you
grinning at?

I am a chickaleary cove, that's what I am. But I know what would knock you! You would like to 'ear
about 'Ome Rule. Eh? What cheer! 'Ere goes. (Reveals his Home-Rule scheme with a Cockney twang
and dialect. Then disappears and re-appears in his customary evening dress.) Thank you most
earnestly. (Loud cheers.) And now I am afraid I must bid you good-bye. But before leaving, I
must confess to you that I have never had the honour of appearing before a juster, more intelligent,
and more appreciative audience. [Bows and exit.

Voices. Encore! Encore! Encore!

Mr. Gladstone (returning). I am deeply touched by this sign of public confidence. I would willingly
continue my character illustrations indefinitely, but, unfortunately, I am required in another
part of the country to repeat the same performances. I have only just time to catch my special
train. Thank you again and again.

[Exit hurriedly, after kissing his hand. The Footmen reappear, and take away the large box.
Applause, and Curtain.

There, my dear Mr. Punch, is the rough idea. I feel sure it could be carried through with the
greatest possible advantage.

Believe me, yours most truly, AN EARNEST PATRIOT.

* * * * *

THE QUEEN OF MAN-O'ER-BOARD.

A NOVEL IN LITTLE FROM A
DRAMA IN FULL.

CHAPTER I.--LADY VIOLET MALVERN AT HOME.

It was a
gorgeous entertainment, consisting chiefly of recitations and the
"Intermezzo." Lady VIOLET MALVERN was the life and soul of the party.
But there were lesser lights in a Baron FINOT, an old diplomatist,
and a Major GARRETT, an officer in retreat. Then came ARMAND SEVARRO.
He was an adventurer, and a friend of Baron FINOT, and had a solitary
anecdote.

"I am going to be married to a young lady of the name of
DOROTHY BLAIR, but cannot reveal the secret, because her mother is
not well enough to hear the news."

Then ARMAND met Lady VIOLET.

"I
dreamed years ago of going to the City of Manoa to find its queen. We have seen that all things are necessarily personified by animals,
for if they meet with any material obstacle, they do not ascribe the sudden impediment to the
impenetrability of matter, or to superior force, but rather to an intentional opposition to
their aim or progress. We often see that animals not only exert mechanical force to break through
or destroy the material barriers intended to keep them in confinement, but they act in such
a way as to show rage and fury towards a hostile and malevolent subject.

To return to our example; if an animal vivifies and animates some special plant specially presented
to him, he does not go beyond this vivifying act; when he goes on his way, and no longer perceives
the concrete phenomenon, the animation at the same time disappears and ceases. Man, however,
by means of the classifying faculty we have noticed, after repeatedly perceiving various plants
similar or analogous to the first, is able by spontaneous reflection, and by the automatic
exercise of his intelligence, to refer them to a single type, and in this way the specific
idea of a tree is evolved in his mind and fixed in his memory. The same thing gradually takes
place with respect to flowers, animals, springs, rivers, and the like. These ideal types are
not wholly wanting even among the most barbarous peoples, in the most concrete and dissimilar
languages, since without them any language would be impossible.

The same intrinsic and innate necessity which, both in man and animals, automatically effects
the animation and personification of consciousness and will in the case of external objects
and phenomena, also impels man to vivify and personify the specific types which he has gradually
formed, and they take an objective place in his memory as the objects of nature do in the case
of animals. In this way man does not, like animals, merely vivify the special oak or chestnut
tree presented to him in a concrete form at a given moment, but he vivifies in the same way
the psychical type of trees, of flowers, etc., which has been evolved in his mind, just as
he vivifies the type of suffering, of disease, of death, of healing, or of any other force.

For this reason the process of necessary and spontaneous personification is at first two-fold;
namely, the personification of individual and external objects and phenomena, and that of their
specific inward types, whether of the objects themselves or of their sensations and emotions.
It must be observed that at this early stage of man's history, specific types, or the classification
of things, were not ordered and determined with scientific precision; they were undefined and
confused, running more or less into each other, so as to be easily lost, or constantly diverging
more widely. This internal movement of images and undefined conceptions was a stimulus to active
and mobile life, and an abundant source of vivid or obscure myths, and of the sentiments corresponding
to them.

These specific primordial types were openly referred to external phenomena, and were based
upon the life of nature, since rational or scientific ideas had not yet made their appearance,
or only very sparsely. In any case, the reality of these types and their animation are facts,
as all the earliest records attest, whether among civilized or savage races.

The personification of specific types, which are in general the most obvious--those, namely,
which refer to animals, vegetables, minerals, and meteors, things useful or injurious to man--is
the origin of the subsequent belief in fetishes, genii, demons, and spirits, and these led
to the vivification of the whole of nature, her laws, customs, and forces. Man's personification
of himself, his projection of himself as a living being into external things, was the result
of reflection. In fact, the impersonation of the winds took place in very early times, since
they most frequently and universally excited the attention and anxiety of man and animals,
whether beneficially or otherwise, and by their mechanical action, their whistling and other
sounds, they readily struck the mobile fancy of primitive men, and also of savage and ignorant
peoples in our day.

Just as the act of respiration is a faint wind which goes on whether in sleep or wakefulness,
and only ceases with death, so it was with the phenomenon of nature which attracted their attention,
and it was invested by them with life. Since the winds of nature had already been animated
and personified by a spontaneous act, so our inmost being was certainly first considered as
material, and impersonated as breath and air.

This appears from the roots and words of all languages; the Hebrew nephesh, nshâmâh, ruach--soul
or spirit--are all derived from the idea of breathing. The Greek word [Greek: anemos], the
Latin word animus, signify breathing, wind, soul, and spirit. In the Sanscrit âtman we have
the successive meanings which show the evolution of the myth: breathing, vital soul, intelligence,
and then the individual, the ego. In Polynesia we find the same process of things. To think,
which in the Aryan tongues comes from the root c'i, and originally meant to collect, to comprehend,
in German, begreifen, becomes in the Polynesian language, to talk in the belly. If, for example,
the primitive man personifies a stream of water which he has seen to issue from a fissure of
the rocks, and ascribes to it voluntary and intentional motion, he also animates the image
which reappears in his sphere of thought, and conceives it to have a real existence. He does
not merely believe it to be a psychical and what may be called a photographic repetition of
the thing, but rather to have an actual, concrete existence. Thus, among all ancient peoples,
and among many which are still in the condition of savages, the shadow of a man's body is held
to be substantial with it, and, as it were, his inmost essence, and for this reason the spirits
of the dead were in several languages called shades.

Doubtless it is difficult for us to picture to ourselves the psychical conditions of primitive
men, at a time when the objects of perception and the apprehension of things were presented
by an effort of memory to the mind as if they were actual and living things, yet such conditions
are not hypothetical but really existed, as any one may ascertain for himself who is able to
realize that primitive state of the mind, and we have said enough to show that such was its
necessary condition.

The fact becomes more intelligible when we consider man, and especially the uneducated man,
under the exciting influence of any passion, and how at such times he will, even when alone,
gesticulate, speak aloud, and reply to internal questions which he imagines to be put to him
by absent persons, against whom he is at the moment infuriated. The images of these persons
and things are as it were present and in agitation within him; and these images, in the fervour
of emotion and under the stimulus of excitement, appear to be actually alive, although only
presented to the inward psychical consciousness.

In the natural man, in whom the intellectual powers were very slowly developed, the animation
and personification effected by his mind and consciousness were threefold: first, of the objects
themselves as they really existed, then of the idea or image corresponding to them in the memory,
and lastly of the specific types of these objects and images. There was within him a vast and
continuous drama, of which we are no longer conscious, or only retain a faint and distant echo,
but which is partly revealed by a consideration of the primitive value of words and of their
roots in all languages. The meaning of these, which is now for the most part lost and unintelligible,
always expressed a material and concrete fact, or some gesture. This is true of classic tongues,
as is well known to all educated people, and it recurs in the speech of all savage and barbarous
races.

Ia rau is used to express all in the Marquesas Isles. Rau signifies leaves, so that the term
implies something as numerous as the leaves of a tree. Rau is also now used for sound, an expression
which includes in itself the conception of all, but which originally signified a fact, a real
and concrete phenomenon, and it was felt as such in the ancient speech in which it was used
in this sense. So again in Tahiti huru, ten, originally signified hairs; rima, five, was at
first used for hand; riri, anger, literally means, he shouts. Uku in the Marquesas Isles means,
to lower the head, and is now used for to enter a house. Rùku, which had the same original
meaning in New Zealand, now expresses the act of diving. The Polynesian word toro at first
indicated anything in the position of a hand with extended fingers, whence comes the Tahitian
term for an ox, puaátoro, stretching pig, in allusion to the way in which an ox carries his
head. Toó (Marquesas), to put forward the hand, is now used for to take. Tongo (Marquesas),
to grope with extended arms, leads to potongo tongo, darkness. In New Zealand, wairua, in Tahiti
varua, signifies soul or spirit, from vai, to remain in a recumbent position, and rua, two;
that is, to be in two places, since they believed that in sickness or in dreams the soul left
the body.[18] Throughout Polynesia moe also signifies a recumbent position or to sleep, and
in Tahiti moe pipiti signifies a double sleep or dream, from moe, to sleep, and piti, two.
In New Zealand, moenaku means, to try to grasp something during sleep; from naku, to take in
the fingers.

We can understand something of the mysterious exercise of human intelligence in its earliest
development from this habit of symbolizing and presenting in an outward form an abstract conception,
thus giving a concrete meaning and material expression to the external fact. We see how everything
assumed a concrete, living form, and can better understand the conditions we have established
as necessary in the early days of the development of human life. This attitude of the intelligence
has been often stated before, but in an incomplete way; the primitive and the subsequent myths
have been confounded together, and it has been supposed that myth was of exclusively human
origin, whereas it has its roots lower down in the vast animal kingdom. We hope, therefore,
that it will be granted that we have given the true and full exposition of myth.

Anthropomorphism, and the personification of the things and phenomena of nature, of their images
and specific types, were the great source whence issued superstitions, mythologies, and religions,
and also, as we shall presently see, the scientific errors to be found among all the families
of the human race.

For the development of myth, which is in itself always a human personification of natural objects
and phenomena in some form or other, the first and necessary foundation consists, as we have
abundantly shown, in the conscious and deliberate vivification of objects by the perception
and apprehension of animals. And since this is a condition of animal perception, it is also
the foundation of all human life, and of the spontaneous and innate exercise of the intelligence.
In fact, man, by a two-fold process, raises above his animal nature a world of images, ideas,
and conceptions from the types he has formed of various phenomena, and his attitude towards
this internal world does not differ from his attitude towards that which is external. He personifies
the images, ideas, and conceptions by transforming them into living subjects, just as he had
originally personified cosmic objects and phenomena.

In myths, since they owe their origin to the reflex power which is gradually organized and
developed, man carries on this faculty of personification which had already been exerted in
him as an animal. But the object of myth became two-fold just as the animal nature became duplex
in man, whether as a special image of special conception, or as an intellectual definition
of the specific type already formed. The myths are, therefore, from their very nature, either
special, that is, derived from the psychical duplication of a personified image; or they are
specific, and are derived, as we are about to explain, from the personification of a type.

The deliberate intention to be beneficent or malign, useful or injurious, which is ascribed
to any external object, thus transforming it into an intelligent subject, is the first and
simplest stage of myth, and the innate form of its genesis. In this case, it is always special,
extrinsic, and concrete, and belongs implicitly to the animal kingdom, although more or less
vividly in proportion to the mental and physical evolution of the species. It is for the same
reason also proper to man, in whose case it first appears in the indefinite multiplication
of fetishes, whatever may be the object venerated, and whatever the form, aspect, and character
ascribed to it. This constitutes the primordial impulses, both of religious consciousness and
of the spontaneous solution of the problems of the world among all peoples.

While the animation of special objects by animals generates actual myths, yet it only occurs
in the acts of momentary and transient perception; they are born and die, they arise and are
dissolved in the very act of production, and they neither have nor can have retrospective or
future influence on the animal. The world, its laws and phenomena, form for him one universal
and persistent myth, so far as he feels himself constrained to vivify and transform them into
subjects actuated by will. This consequently is the constant and normal condition of his conscious
life with relation to things, and it leads to nothing further; his mental attitude with respect
to myth does not vary from his physical attitude towards the atmosphere, the food and water
which nourish and sustain him, and the exercise of his functions are in conformity with it,
as though it were his natural and necessary element.

Man, on the contrary, since he has acquired the power of reflection, which enables him to reconsider
past intuitions by an effort of memory, as well as the psychical image which corresponds to
them, is not content with this normal and fugitive effect of apprehending the personified object
presented to him. The psychical image of his actual perception, which he has ascertained from
experience to be beneficent or malignant, or which has been interpreted as such by his fancy,
recurs to the mind even when it is absent and remote, and it recurs in the vivid and personified
form in which it was first perceived.

Hence come the following psychical facts. On the one side the actual object which he has assumed
to be invested with the faculty of will still remains to exert the same external influence;
on the other, its personified image is also present to his mind, so that he can regard it with
the vivid quickness of the fancy, and invest it, by its manifold relations to other and various
phenomena, with efficacy, force, and mysterious purposes. It follows from this inward action
and emotion that while in the case of animals the beneficent or malignant object is only invested
with life at the moment of perception, and has no more efficacy after its disappearance, man
on the contrary retains the same personified object in his memory, and recalls it at pleasure,
so that its special efficacy persists, and it continues to be the object of hopes and fears
either in the past or in the future. In a word, the natural myth of animals is transformed
by man into a fetish, whether this object or its corresponding image in his mind be superstitiously
regarded as good or evil, pleasing or terrible.

This was the source of primitive, confused, and inorganic fetishism among all peoples; namely,
that they ascribed intentional and conscious life to a host of natural objects and phenomena.
Hence came the fears, the adoration, the guardianship of, or abhorrence for some given species
of stones, plants, animals, some strange forms or unusual natural object. The subsequent adoration
of idols and images, all sorts of talismans, the virtue of relics, dreams, incantations, and
exorcisms, had the same origin and were all due to this primitive genesis of the fetish, the
internal duplication of the external animation and personification of objects.

It is evident that fetishism in its earliest and most primitive form was always inspired by
special objects, since the external perception of animals and of man is special and concrete.
But we have seen how our intelligence, by a spontaneous and innate process, was led to form
types from the immense variety of special things and phenomena, and these types are the specific
forms of such things as are alike, analogous, or identical. We have also seen that by the same
necessity of the psychical faculty, which is not inconsistent with the fundamental process
of animal intelligence, man animates and personifies these specific types, just as he had animated
the special perceptions whence they were generated in his mind.[19]

The second form of myth next occurs, if considered as it exists in man, but the third form
of myth, if regarded in his solidarity with the animal kingdom. Instead of investing the special
fetish of a given object with superstitious fear, he now adores or fears all objects of the
same species, or which, in the imperfect classification of primitive times, he believes to
be of the same species. Thus, to give a common example, if some particular viper or other form
of snake is the first form of fetish, in the second stage the whole species of vipers, and
of the snakes which resemble them, is regarded with the same dread. He next supposes all the
snakes which he comes across to emanate from a single power, manifesting itself in this shape
in various times and places. In the same way, according to the natural evolution of this law,
the individual, concrete plant will no longer be the fetish or object of myth, but all those
of the same species, or which nearly resemble it. It will no longer be a given spring, but
all springs, no longer one particular grove, cave, or mountain, but all groves, caves, and
mountains; in a word, the species will be substituted for the individual, the type for the
fact.[20]

In this second stage to which myth spontaneously attained, it must be observed that all fetishes
could not be reduced to a specific or typical image, since in nature, and in ages and conditions
when the intelligence was still rude and uncultured, all phenomena or objects could not assume
a specific form, but were still regarded as individuals. In this class are the sun, the moon,
certain stars and constellations, as well as some other natural phenomena, volcanoes, hot springs,
and the like; since these were unique within the range of country inhabited by the savage hordes,
they could not become specific. Hence, while all other objects and their respective fetishes
followed the natural evolution into a specific type, and through these into the simplest form
of polytheism, the special fetish which referred to unique things or phenomena remained special,
although it was modified, as we shall see, so as to harmonize with the aspect commonly assumed
by other typical images.

It must be observed that we have gradually ascended from the special to the specific fetish,
and to types which are resolved by the intelligence into more ideal and less concrete images;
precisely because they are ideal and less bound to the form they had before, they are incarnated
in an anthropomorphic and anthropopathic form. Released from the necessity of regarding them
in a vague form, or one different from that of man, the image becomes more human, and that
not only as before in consciousness and purpose, but also in aspect and structure.

In fact, in this stage man does not merely infuse his spiritual essence into these types, but
likewise his corporeal form, whence we have the true, human image of myth. This may be seen
in the various primitive Olympuses of all historic races as well as among savage peoples, only
varying in the splendour of their imagery. They consist in the transformation of the earlier
fetish into an intelligent, corporeal person, and result from the formation and personification
of types.

Beginning with the mysterious conception of some particular spring as a malignant or beneficent
fetish which, although personified, still retains its concrete form, the classifying action
of the intelligence gradually constructs, from its points of resemblance to other springs,
a generic type which includes them all. This typical conception, personified in its turn, next
represents a unique power, of which all the individual and accidental springs are only manifestations.
Thus it is clear that man, in the personification of this type or specific conception, is no
longer bound to the actual form of the special object which first represented it, but he may
be said to mould a more indefinite and plastic substance into which he can with spontaneous
or facile art incarnate his whole person. Hence this substance will assume an anthropomorphic
form, and will issue, not in a mysterious being of extrinsic and indefinite form, but in a
person with human features, obvious to human senses.

It was thus, when the fetish attained to a specific type, that mythical anthropomorphism was
generated, and polytheism, properly so-called; a polytheism which represents in its figures
and images the humanization and personification of specific types. These afterwards diverge
into specifications which vary with the number of phenomena that are united in a single idea
or conception. The first polytheistic Olympus consisted of natural types, and at a much later
period they became moral or abstract, in accordance with the spontaneous evolution of the intelligence
itself.

It was in fact in this way that all the specific myths of the general phenomena of nature had
their origin, and in our Aryan race we can, starting from the Rig-Veda, follow their splendid
development among Græco-Latins, Celts, Germans, and Slavs; it may also be traced in the memory
and historic evolution of other races, and with less distinctness among those which are barbarous
and savage.[21]

To take some example which may throw light upon our theory of the evolution of myth, let us
consider that of Holda in the German Pantheon, since it is a generic type of the special primitive
fetishes of sources, already in process of formation before the dispersion of the Aryan tribes.
Mannhardt (Deutsche Mythologie) has shown what was the primitive form of the conception of
Holda and of the Nornas, that is, of the phenomenal appearances of water; Holda, the lady of
waters, first watched over the heavenly sources, and then, by a subsequent interweaving of
myths and duplication of images, she kept and guarded the souls of new-born infants. This early
conception by progressive specification gave birth to those of the Nornas, of Valkuria, Undine,
and others. The primitive fetish, or fetishes of waters out of which the specific type, afterwards
personified, was evolved and formed, were at first so bound to the concrete form of the phenomenon,
that although animated, it could not assume a human aspect and form. But when the specific
type which ideally represented the power manifested in all the various modes of special phenomena
was evolved, then man was released from the concrete and individual forms of the fetish, and
readily moulded it in his own corporeal as well as in his moral image. So Holda, changed from
a heavenly to an earthly deity, was transformed into the goddess of wells and lakes, and assumed
a perfectly human and even artistic form. She loved to bathe at noon-day, and was often seen
to issue from the water and then plunge anew into the waves, appearing as a very fair and lovely
woman.

Again, we know that in the gradual mythical evolution which found its climax in Apollo, the
animation of this type, so fruitful in special instances, extended even to the form of his
arms, his bow and arrows, and to the place of his habitation at Delphos. He was armed, according
to Schwartz, with the rainbow and with thunderbolts, and Delphos was esteemed to be the centre
and navel of the world.

These mythical ideas have their special reproduction in the mythology of the Finns. (Castren.)
The god Ukko with his great bow of fire sends forth trees as darts against his enemies; while
fighting, he stands erect upon a cloud, called the umbilicus of heaven. Thus we see that the
process of myth is similar, even in different races.

By the primitive personification of the special fetishes whence he was evolved, the Indra of
Vedic India is shepherd of the herd of heavenly kine. Vritra, a three-headed monster in the
form of a serpent, steals away the herd and hides it in his cave. Indra pursues the robber,
enters the cave with fury, overwhelms the monster with his thunderbolt, and leads back the
kine to heaven, their milk sprinkling the earth. This myth gradually assumed in the Vedic hymns
more splendid and artistic forms, and more amazing personifications. The original motive of
the myth, as it has been interpreted even by Indian commentators, was the storm with all its
alternations which bursts forth with more terrific violence in hot climates. The luminous clouds
which bring rain are the purple kine whom a black-demon tries to steal; the fruitfulness of
the earth depends on the issue of the contest, and the thunderbolt disperses the cloud, which
falls on the earth in rain, while Indra, that is, the blue sky, appears in his splendour.[22]

It may be clearly seen from these examples how the specific myth was gradually developed. We
have said that in addition to the myth which referred to types constructed from special and
manifold suggestions, alike or analogous in extrinsic circumstances, others were formed from
definite natural objects, in their relations to men and to their acquaintance with cosmic facts
in those very early times. These, however, although definite, assumed anthropomorphic forms,
like those which were specific. The cause of this identity of construction is to be found in
the influence exerted upon them by the earlier myths. By a necessary equilibrium and spontaneous
symmetry of mental creations, these were also modified by the gradual formation of contemporary
images. In this way the solar myths were elaborated and developed among the Aryan peoples and
other races; their aspects became much more anthropomorphic and anthropopathic in proportion
as the typical myths assumed a human form.

The primitive myths of the secondary form were at first grouped round physical and external
phenomena, because these were originally the most obvious to man. But the specific moral types
had their origin by reaction, and by a more strictly intellectual process, and these were personified
in the same way, although in this second stage they were not so numerous. Yet their appearance
and creation were inevitable, since the same faculty and classifying process had to be carried
out in the intellectual and moral order as in that which was extrinsic and cosmic; since the
mind and consciousness and intrinsic faculty of the intelligence are identical. And when once
these ultimate types were formed, the same necessity impelled their animation and personification
in anthropomorphic images. Of this we have abundant instances in all the traditions of nearly
all the peoples of the world.

CHAPTER IV.

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM.

In the preceding chapters we have considered and, as we hope, demonstrated the origin and genesis
of myth in general, an origin and genesis which had their first impulses and causes in the
animal kingdom as a whole, since these beginnings were the necessary result of the psychical
exercise of the perception and intelligence. We next discovered in man, as he issued from a
simply animal condition and attained the power of reflection, the origin of the special myth
or fetish, which was a higher evolution of that which is proper to animals; hence the origin
of the specific myth was altogether anthropomorphic, whether physical or moral; and hence came
also the development and ramification of all mythologies, and of universal polytheism.

It may be seen from the reality and truth of this theory how much mistaken those men are who
hold, owing to their religious prejudices or to their systems of logic and history, that monotheism
was the first intuition of man, or at any rate of the privileged races. This is altogether
impossible, since such an opinion is opposed to the genuine development of the intelligence,
to its primitive constitution and progress, and to the essential solidarity of human and animal
nature.

In the case of animals as well as of man the implicit act and psychical process of communication
between the world and themselves consist in the individual and concrete animation of the thing
or phenomenon perceived; whence they are resolved into conscious subjects, acting with a given
purpose; the difference in man's case, due to his power of reflection, consists in the fact
that he ascribes to the fetish distinct mental characteristics, regarding it as a subject,
actuated by will, and invested with an external form. Hence it is impossible that man should
have had any primitive intuition of a perfectly rational and universal Idea, since his intelligence
is so constituted that it is slowly developed from the animal condition into a humanity which
is mythically reflex, and he rises from the single to the specific, from phenomena to the type
which more or less exactly corresponds to them.

We are convinced that by these researches, we have eradicated the previous misconception, which
cannot be revived or maintained except with the weapons of sophism, and by defying evidence
and the very nature of things.

While man has risen from the individual myth to that which is specific, infusing anthropomorphic
life into the whole of nature, and into his own sensations, emotions, and conceptions, he has
pursued an art virtually the same as that whence science is generated. The instrument, both
with respect to the formation of myths and to the formulation of science, is in fact identical,
and the process also is the same. Science, like myth, observes, analyzes, and classifies observations,
and gradually rises to a conception of the specific type, and hence to a unity which becomes
ever more complete and universal.

In the composition and mythical animation of the world, whether by special personifications
or by those which are typical, and by the sensations corresponding to them, man makes a fanciful
classification of phenomena, he observes and studies their beneficial or injurious effects
on himself, and in this empirical way is able to estimate their value. On the other hand, he
rises in the social scale by means of his superstitious and religious feelings, which act as
a stimulus and symbol, so far as he subjects his animal and perverse instincts to the deliberate
precepts which he imagines to be expressed by these myths.

In so far as the empirical observation of things is irrational, and obedience is paid to the
fanciful precepts of oracles, it is not the result of an explicit moral law, yet there is on
the one side some knowledge of the qualities, habits, and periods of things, and on the other
a civil and human order which is gradually formed and developed. In fact, in the case of the
higher historical races it is important to make a more explicit and accurate study of the fetish
religion, that is, of the mythical animation of any special phenomenon or thing. Although the
scope of such religion is superstitious veneration, or abject fear, yet it is impossible that
it should not induce a more precise and less confused notion of the relative condition of things.
In this way observation becomes more accurate, and the intrinsic use of the thing is often
recognized. By the gradual exercise of such analysis in the case of all or most phenomena,
man obtains a clearer knowledge of his environment.

While a juster estimate of the empiric value of special objects is obtained in this manner,
the subsequent, though sometimes mistaken classification of their specific types enables the
mind to arrange his knowledge of natural things in a more synthetic and orderly way, and by
such classification man is always tending towards a more universal unity: he places the general
forms of phenomena in an ideal harmony, which fancifully symbolizes their laws.

In the succeeding chapters we shall see how this process is accomplished, and how it leads
up to the explicit exercise of the reason. A more definite empiric knowledge, and the harmonious
classification of specific types with a view to unity, are a proof of a relatively greater
improvement, both in civilization and morality. This is abundantly shown in all those peoples
who have attained to an altogether anthropomorphic polytheism, either among the Aryans, prior
to their dispersion, in the Vedic period in India, among the Celts, Græco-Latins, Germans,
Slavs, or in the Finnish races, Mongols, Chinese, Assyrians, Egyptians, Mexicans, and Peruvians,
as well as among the barbarous peoples of modern times.

The imagination, the faculty which creates and excites phantasms in man, is not, as is erroneously
supposed, the primary source of myths, but only that which in a secondary degree elaborates
and perfects their spontaneous forms; and precisely because it is near akin to this primordial
mythical faculty, it goes on to organize and classify these polytheistic myths. By a moral
and necessary development an approximation is made, if not to truth itself, at any rate to
its symbols; whence reason is afterwards more easily infused into myth on the one side, and
on the other it is resolved into rational ideas and cosmic laws. It was in this way that poets
perfected myth in its influence on virtue and civilization, and by them it was directed into
the paths of science and of truth.

As Dr. Zeller has well said in his lecture on the development of monotheism in Greece herself,
the great Greek poets were her first thinkers, her sages, as they were afterwards called. They
sang of Zeus, and exalted him as the defender of righteousness, the representative of moral
order. Archilocus says that Zeus weighs and measures all the actions of good and evil men,
as well as those of animals. He is, said Terpandros somewhat later, the source and ruler of
all things. According to Simonides of Amorgos, the principle of all created things rests with
him, and he rules the universe by his will. Thus, as time went on, Zeus became, in the general
conception, the personification of the world's government, which was delivered from the fatality
of destiny and from the promptings of caprice. Destiny which, according to the early mythical
representation, it was impossible to escape, is resolved into the will of Zeus, and the other
gods which were at first supposed to be able to oppose him, become his faithful ministers.
Such is the teaching of Solon and of Epicharmos. "Be assured that nothing escapes the eyes
of the divinity; God watches over us, and to him nothing is impossible."

This impulse of the imaginative faculty combined with the process of reason is most plainly
seen in the conceptions of the three great poets of the fifth century, Pindar, Æschylus, and
Sophocles. In the words of Pindar: "All things depend on God alone; all which befalls mortals,
whether it be good or evil fortune, is due to Zeus: he can draw light from darkness, and can
veil the sweet light of day in obscurity. No human action escapes him: happiness is found only
in the way which leads to him; virtue and wisdom flow from him alone."

We find the same order and manner of thought in Æschylus, although he remained faithful to
the polytheistic creed, which indeed confirms the truth of our theory. The moral law was gradually
developed and purified by this long succession of poets, and it clearly appears from Æschylus
and his successors how man reaps that which he has sown: he whose heart and hands are pure
lives his life unmolested, while guilt sooner or later brings its own punishment with it. The
Erynnyes rule the fates of men, and may be said to sap the vital forces of the guilty; they
cleave to them, excite and stimulate them to madness until death comes. The ancient and mysterious
mythical tradition of the strife between the old gods and the new was astutely used by Æschylus
to teach us how the terrible vengeance of the Eumenides gradually gave place to a gentler and
more humane law; just as the primitive despotism of Zeus was gradually transformed into a providential
and moral rule of the universe.

Sophocles attained to a higher degree of perfection in the paths of gentleness. No ancient
poet has spoken more nobly of the Deity, although his language is altogether polytheistic.
He shows the highest reverence to the gods, whose power and laws rule all human life. On them
all things depend, both good and evil, nor could any one violate with impunity the eternal
order of things. No act or thought escapes the gods; they are the source of wisdom and happiness.
Man must meekly comply with their precepts, and must offer up his pains and sorrows to Zeus.

These utterances of the ancient poets never go beyond the range of polytheism, yet they show
how far intrinsic morality and truth were developed, even by the imaginative and mythical faculty
of the human mind, during the gradual historical evolution of the race. The plurality of gods
appears to be the manifestation of the divine principle; their action on the world lost almost
all trace of arbitrary power and of their former versatility and caprice. The superstition
of polytheism remained, but it had an inward tendency to more rational conceptions and principles.

From this brief notice, as well as from the remarks which preceded it, it appears how the evolution
of myth, from its beginning and in its historic course, led to a more perfect, although empiric
acquaintance with the world, and with the moral principles and civilization of peoples. The
logical faculty by which the development is gradually effected is the same by which from another
point of view science becomes possible.

We have clearly demonstrated the indisputable fact that the absolute condition of intrinsic
animal perception, and consequently of the primary perception of man, was the animation and
vivification of the things and phenomena perceived. This primary acquaintance with things depended
on their spontaneous resolution into active and personal subjects. Nor could it be otherwise.
Although the scientific idea or notion of objective reality in itself could not be grasped
by simple animal intelligence, the impression of the thing perceived was necessarily that of
a subjectivity resembling that of the observer, not indeed in outward form and figure but in
intrinsic power, whatever might be the extrinsic form and figure of the object or phenomenon.

The original condition of animals, and of man himself in his primordial life and consciousness,
is and was the intrinsic personification of the things perceived: from this source the human
intellect slowly and with difficulty attained to science, by virtue of that psychical reduplication
which has been so often mentioned.

The motive or subject of myth may be external, cosmic, or it may be internal, intellectual,
and moral, but in each case the cause and faculty at work are the same. Just as the primary
condition of observation, and consequently the motive principle of science, consists in the
primitive exercise of the intelligence, which leads to empirical and rational knowledge, so
myth and science have a common origin in the immediate transformation of natural objects and
phenomena into living subjects, and they flow from the same deep source. The object in view
is different, but their constructive faculty is the same, and they are, up to a certain point
in their long historic course, evolved in the same way. Science, therefore, from one point
of view, is the gradual exhaustion and dissolution of myth into the objects which are scientifically
investigated, and this will appear more clearly in the sequel.

The series of various phenomena, whether of light, of meteors, of water, of vegetable and animal
forms, which were the first subjects of myths, became so interwoven as finally to be represented
in an anthropomorphic personality, and were thus gradually lost and evaporated in the ideal
symbol. As time went on, by the exercise of the intelligence, and by the aid of the observations
and collateral experiments naturally connected with them, man ended where he had begun; released
from myth, he only recognized the facts and laws of the world. This clearly shows, not only
the formation of myths, but the process of evolution by which they pass into science, in which
they find their termination.

If, however, myth and science have the same origin, and start from a common fact, a fundamental
principle is necessary, and an internal human act, which is at once the cause and genesis both
of myth and science. And although the source is one, myth and science vary in their aspects
and effects, and have different fields of historic activity, so that it is necessary to trace
the cause of this diversity in their progress and results, to enable us to make a scientific
definition of the nature of myth and science, their respective sources and objects.

If on the one side we continually see the birth of fresh myths, which ramify into many fertile
sources of superstitions, of religions, of poetry and æstheticism; on the other side we see
almost simultaneously a more or less distinct and lively manifestation of the scientific faculty,
although still in an empirical form. They are like two streams which issue from the same source
and take a parallel course, sometimes mingling their waters, only to separate anew, and then
again to become united as they fall by a wide mouth into the sea.

In this manner we have ascertained the actual origin of science and of myth, and have entered
on a field perhaps never before attempted nor contemplated; we have established a firm basis
for such researches, and, which is perhaps still more important, have shown the continuity
of the mythical faculty between man and the animal kingdom. We have ascertained this fact,
in its cosmic necessities, both physiological and psychical, but without considering the faculty
on which it depends; we have still to decompose the elements of which it consists, and to consider
their nature and number.

This inquiry forms the chief problem we have to solve, and it is precisely what we have endeavoured
to state in this chapter. In the necessary order of things the fact has its physiological and
cosmic conditions in man; it is therefore necessarily internal and psychical, and it is accomplished
by the special and intrinsic exercise of the intelligence. We shall be convinced of this truth
if we only consider that science and myth have a common origin.

It is evident that there are great difficulties in such an inquiry; for, putting aside other
extrinsic difficulties, we have to reduce to a single act or fact the origin of the two vast
worlds of myth and science; it is needful to gauge the inmost psychical faculty of the intelligence,
and to discover the continuous yet rapid and delicate process of its exercise.

If we are able to attain our object and to tear away the veil which conceals this mysterious
act, we shall have a noble recompense in the laborious path on which we have entered, inasmuch
as we shall reveal one of the most important laws of life, of the exercise of reflex intelligence
and of the genesis of science. Yet we are very sensible how far we are from being equal to
the enormous difficulties of this inquiry.

CHAPTER V.

THE ANIMAL AND HUMAN EXERCISE OF THE INTELLECT IN THE PERCEPTION OF THINGS.

Apprehension is the act, both in animals and in man, by which the spontaneous and immediate
animation of things and of phenomena is accomplished. It is therefore necessary to pause and
consider this act, since it is, even in man, the source and foundation of the origin of myth,
and in it we shall find the causes, elements, and action by which such a genesis is effected.
This fact is so evident that the necessity of making such an inquiry might almost be taken
for granted, since the truth can be ascertained in no other way.

In the case of animal perception, which we have already considered, the external perception
of an object is composed of three elements: the phenomenon perceived, the living subject with
which this phenomenon is animated, and the vague yet real power involved in the life thus infused
into it by the animal. Supposing any other animal to be the object perceived, these three elements
are self-evident; since the phenomenon perceived in a given form causes the immediate assumption
that it is a subject, actuated by a purpose of offence or defence, and hence follows the apprehension
of a power capable of affecting him, which has in this case a real existence. Phenomenon, subject,
effective power, follow in a rapid and inevitable sequence, and are instantly combined in the
integral image formed of the object apprehended by the senses.

In fact, an animal which fights with another, which seizes on his food as a prey, or which
is in dread of some enemy or unfamiliar object, recognizes either the species or the individual
from its external form, and constitutes it into an animated subject, and ultimately into an
actively offensive or defensive power, or into one which satisfies his appetites. Such a fact,
and such elements of the fact, recur in the whole animal kingdom, even among those which only
apprehend external things by the sense of touch. As we ascend higher in the scale of animals
to those who possess other senses and a more elaborate organism, we find the same fact in a
more perfect and distinct form.

Those animals which, since they are without the sense of sight, have no perception of distance,
wait until their prey touches their antennæ, mouths, or claws, and yet the same distinct act
is accomplished in these three specified elements. They would not lie in wait for their prey,
unless they had already formed a conception of its possible image, consisting of a form, subject,
and effective force, combined in a single intuition. When this external prey is presented to
the senses, the phenomenon, subject, and effective power arise in rapid succession, and are
united in one unique consciousness. This truth appears from the animal's efforts not to let
his prey escape destruction.

From the reciprocal apprehension of animals, these three elements which constitute it may be
clearly seen. Although such a truth, precisely because it is evident, may appear simple to
those who seek truth from the clouds, or by means of logical or tortuous artifice, yet such
are the characteristics of true science. For the new facts which she interprets and classifies
appear old as soon as they are understood, although they have never before been explained. 

This time the pontooneers had to accomplish their difficult task in the darkness. The men, shaking
from cold and starving, could not work any more. The venerable General Eble, who was not young
as they were and had not taken rest as they had, suffered more than they did, but he had the
moral superiority and spoke to them, appealing to their devotedness, told them of the certain disaster
which would annihilate the whole army if they did not repair the bridges; and his address made
a deep impression. With supreme self-denial they went to work again. General Lauriston, who
had been sent by the emperor to learn the cause of the new accident, pressed Eble's hand and, shedding
tears, said to him: For God's sake, hasten! Without showing impatience, Eble, who generally
had the roughness of a strong and proud soul, answered with kindness: You see what we are
doing, and he turned to his men to encourage, to direct them, and
notwithstanding his age--he was 54 years old--he plunged into that
icy water, which those young men were hardly able to endure (and this
fact is stated by all the historians whose works I have read).

At 6 o'clock in the morning (November 27th.) this second accident had been repaired, the artillery
train could pass again.

The bridge to the right--for infantry--did not have to endure the same kind of shaking up as
the other bridge, and did not for one moment get out of order. If the stragglers and fugitives had
obeyed all could have crossed during the night from November 26th. to November 27th. But the
attraction of some barns, some straw to lie on, some eatables found at Studianka, had retained
a good many on this side of the river. The swamps surrounding the Beresina were frozen, which was
a great advantage, enabling the people to walk over them.

On these frozen swamps had been lighted thousands of fires, and 10 thousand or 15 thousand individuals
had established themselves around them and did not want to leave. Soon they should bitterly regret
the loss of a precious opportunity.

In the morning, on November 27th., Napoleon crossed the Beresina, together with all who were attached
to his headquarters, and selected for his new headquarters the little village Zawnicky, on the other
side of the Beresina. In front of him was the corps of Oudinot. All
day long he was on horseback personally to hasten the passage of detachments
of the army, somewhat over 5 thousand men under arms. Toward the end
of the day the first corps arrived, under Davout, who since Krasnoe
had again commanded the rear guard.

In fact, the faculty of perception cannot be exercised in any other way, nor can it consist
of any other elements. In nature, the sensible qualities of things are all resolved into general
and special phenomena, appearances, and extrinsic forms, as far as animal and human intuition,
and the character of the subject which perceives and feels them, are concerned; and they are
perceived just so far as we and as animals are able to communicate by means of our senses with
the world and with ourselves. A phenomenon and an intrinsic form signify, at the moment of
perception, the thing, the object which the conditions of our senses enable us to perceive,
and the intrinsic power of this phenomenon implies a cause. Natural phenomena and beings are
thus reciprocally linked together as causes and effects, an effect becoming in its turn the
cause of a subsequent fact; that is, when we consider things in themselves, and not relatively
to the animal or man who apprehends them.

If, therefore, there are in animal consciousness and intelligence three elements of apprehension,
afterwards fused into a single fact, it follows that the extrinsic relations of beings and
forces are subjectively reciprocal; there is the given form of a phenomenon, and, intrinsically,
it consists of an active power, eternally at work, since there is no being nor form which stands
still and is not reproduced in the infinite evolution of the universe.

Since, to the percipient, the extrinsic form, whatever it may be, remains the same as that
which was first presented to him, the phenomenon is bounded by his faculty of perception, followed
by the immediate and implicit assumption of a subject, and consequently of a possible and indefinite
causality. This internal and psychical process of the animal corresponds with the actual condition
of things, as they appear and really are; a correspondence which is in itself a powerful confirmation
of the truth.

Since an animal is devoid of the explicit and reflex process of the intellect, it has not and
cannot have any conception of the thing in itself, the intrinsic essence of the phenomenon,
nor yet of the objective and cosmic cause; because it animates the phenomenon with its own
personality, which has assumed the external form of this phenomenon, it is conscious of a cause,
like itself, transfused into the object in question. We have shown that phenomena affect animals
in this way, and that they are conscious of being in a world of living subjects, constantly
actuated by the deliberate purpose of influencing them.

The faculty and elements of apprehension are precisely similar in man and animals, since extrinsic
things present the same appearance to both alike, and the perceptive power acts in the same
way. We cannot, indeed, go back to our first beginnings, and it is difficult for those who
are not accustomed to such researches to discover the primitive facts of their own being, which
have been so much modified by exercise and the intrinsic use of reflection for many ages; yet
some certain signs remain, nor would it be now impossible to reproduce them. No one can doubt
that man also began to communicate with the world and with himself by his perception of a phenomenon,
of some extrinsic quality or form. From this he directly apprehended the thing and its cause.
No intelligent person can believe that man had any direct intuition of the thing in itself,
independently of the extrinsic phenomenon by which it was presented to his perceptions: he
could not by the sudden apprehension of all natural objects intuitively grasp the Idea. This
will be more fully shown in the following chapter.

In accordance with this statement, man, who still retains his animal nature, has exercised
the same faculty of apprehension by the synthetic process of the three elements which compose
it in the case of animals; he attains therefore to the same results, that is, he animates the
object of perception, and considers it as an efficient cause. This identical faculty of perception
in man and animals was only differentiated when the reflex power of man subsequently enabled
him to regard objects, as we do now, as inanimate, and subject to the universal laws of nature.

Even now, after all our scientific attainments, we are not wholly free from the former innate
illusion; we often act towards things as if we lived in the early days of our race, and continue
that primitive process of personification in the case of certain objects.

We have shown what was the origin of the fetish and of myth, and how it arose from the impersonation
of all natural objects and phenomena, which are transformed into living subjects. This shows
that the faculty, elements, and results of the apprehension are identical in man and animals.
If man created the fetish which in process of differentiation generated all kinds of myths,
he, like animals, was directly and implicitly conscious of the living subject, and in it of
an active cause. Although in man the fetish retains its personality in his memory, and becomes
the cause of hopes and fears throughout his life, while its effect on the animal is only transitory,
and at the actual moment of perception; yet this does not invalidate the truth of the principle,
nor prove that their impulses and genesis are not identical. Thus the analysis of the faculty
of apprehension confirms and explains the proof before given of the origin of myths, and explains
their causes.

We have all, however unaccustomed to give account of our acts and functions, found ourselves
in circumstances which produced the momentary personification of natural objects. The sight
of some extraordinary phenomenon produces a vague sense of some one acting with a given purpose,
and hence of an actual fetish. A man will sometimes address the things which surround him,
and act towards them as if they possessed consciousness and will. Children, who are still without
experience and reflection, will often invest external objects with solidity.

A child, as soon as it can guide its own motions, will grasp anything which is pliant and yielding
as firmly as if it were solid, thus implicitly judging the thing from its appearance. In the
same way, a child confidently relies on any support, however weak and insufficient it may be,
arguing as usual from the appearance to the thing itself. Nor must it be said that experience
is necessary to correct these errors. The implicit faculty of apprehension is prior to experience,
which only becomes possible by means of this faculty. The elements of this faculty unconsciously
fulfil and pursue their office in the child, aided by the reflex motions which are cerebro-spinal
and peripheral, as they have been produced and organized in the species by evolution; but they,
as well as these reflex physiological motions, are prior to the same temporary experience.[23]

Thus the new-born infant sucks the milk which serves for its nourishment from its mother's
breast; it is impossible in this case that such a class of elements should not be spontaneously
developed; the child feels the nipple and adapts its mouth and mode of breathing to it, while
pressing the breast with its hands to express the milk. If much in this operation might be
ascribed to reflex movements, yet in association with them, supplementing and rendering them
possible, there is an implicit perception of the external phenomenon through the sense of touch,
and he becomes conscious of the object, and of its causative power; such power consisting in
this case of its capacity to satisfy his wants. In short, all animals, man included, in every
act of communication with the world, exercise this faculty by means of the three elements which
constitute it. If we consider the actions of infants, and still more of all young animals,
this truth will be vividly displayed.

In common speech, even to this day, all men, both learned and unlearned, speak of inanimate
things as if they had consciousness and intelligence. While this mode of expression bears witness
to the extremely early origin of the general personification of natural objects, it also shows
that even now our intelligence is not emancipated from such a habit, and our speech unconsciously
retains the old custom. Thus we call weather good and bad, the wind mad (pazzo) or furious,
the sea treacherous, the waters insidious; a stone is obstinate, if we cannot easily move it,
and we inveigh against all kinds of material obstacles as if they could hear us. We call the
season inconstant or deceitful, the sun melancholy and unwilling to shine, and we say that
the sky threatens snow. We say that some plants are consumed by heat, that some soils are indomitable,
that well cultivated ground is no longer wild, that in a good season the whole landscape smiles
and leaps for joy. A river is called malevolent, and a lake swallows up men; the earth is thirsty
and sucks up moisture, and plants fear the cold. The people of Pistoja say that some olive
trees will not feel a thrashing, that they are afraid of many things, and that they live on,
despising the course of years. Again, they say that olive trees are not afraid of the pruning
knife, and that they rejoice in its use by a skilled hand. Thousands of such expressions might
be adduced, and we refer our readers to Giuliani's work, "Linguaggio vivente toscano."

Nor do we only ascribe our own feelings to inanimate things, but we also invest them with the
forms and members of the human body. We speak of the head, shoulder, back, or foot of a mountain,
of an arm of the sea, a tongue of land, the mouth of a sea-port, of a cave, or crater. So again
we ascribe teeth to mountains, a front (fronte, forehead) to a house; there is the eye-brow
(ciglio) of a ditch, the eye of heaven, a vein of metal, the entrails of a mountain. The Alps
are bald or bare, the soil is wrinkled, objects are sinister or the reverse (sinistra, destra),[24]
and a mountain is gigantic ox dwarfish.

In like manner we ascribe our own functions to nature. The river eats into the land; the whirlpool
swallows all which is thrown into it, and the wind whistles, howls and moans; the torrent murmurs,
the sun is born and dies, the heavens frown, the fields smile. This habit is also transferred
to moral questions; and we speak of the heart of the question, the leading idea, the body of
doctrines, the members of a philosophic system; we infuse new blood into thought. Truth becomes
palpable, a theme is eviscerated, thought is lame, science is childish. History speaks clearly;
there is an embryo of knowledge, a vacillating science; the infancy, youth, maturity, and death
of a theory; morality is crass, the spirit meagre or acute; the mind adapts itself, logic is
maimed; there is a conflict of ideas, the inspiration of science, truncated thoughts. Again
we talk of the head of the mob, of the foot of the altar or the throne, of the heart of the
riot, of the body of an army, of a phalanx, of trampling under foot, duty, decency, and justice.

From these examples, and indeed we might say from the whole of speech, especially if we go
back to the primitive value of words and to their roots, it appears to what a vast extent man
originally projected himself, his consciousness, emotions, and purposes into inanimate things;
and how, even under the historical conditions of civilization, he still personifies the world,
and ascribes to it the forms of his own body and limbs.

Again, we have plainly shown that man, by the intrinsic reduplication of his psychical faculty,
spontaneously retains and personifies the inward phantasm generated by such a projection of
special natural objects on his perception. In the genesis of such fetishes, and also when,
by an effort of will, he recalls them to his mind, this faculty with its constituent elements
is brought into action. In fact, when the image is recalled to the mind, it is represented
like the external phenomenon; and consequently it involves and generates the thing of which
the phenomenon is the external vest, that is, its causative power; and in this way the objective
process of its formation is inwardly reproduced. Since the cosmic reality is thus ideally reproduced,
the inward substance of the fetish assumes a really efficacious power, whether in its extrinsic
form, or in its intrinsic image, and in this way primitive superstitions had their source.

In the case of savage and primitive man the inward image of the fetish without its bodily presence
is, owing to the process already described, not merely valid as a real entity, but it becomes
a mysterious apparition in the sphere of fancy, in a way analogous to our belief in the reality
of things seen in a dream or in moments of hallucination. This appears in the history of all
peoples past and present, whence it is certain that primitive man not only formed personifications
of external objects and of his own emotions, but also of their images, as they were retained
in his memory. In both cases the sequence of the three elements of apprehension, the phenomenon,
subject, and cause, is due to the same unique faculty; in a word, the inward perception is
identical in its genesis and laws with that which is external.

These are not the only results which follow from the exercise of this faculty. By the spontaneous
classifying action of our intelligence we rise from the perception of special and individual
objects and phenomena to their various types, and hence to an inward and ideal world of specific
representations, as if these were causative powers, informing the multitude of analogous and
similar phenomena in which they are manifested. These specific types, which are more strongly
present to the fancy in the primitive exercise of the intelligence, also become personified,
and they generate what is called polytheism in all its forms, varying according to the races,
times, places, and respective conditions of morality and civilization in which they are found.

The same psychical faculty and the same elements are necessary for the personification of such
types or idols. The three elements appear in their proper sequence even in the amorphous phantasms
which these types first shadow forth, and which are subsequently perfected and embodied in
human form. For the consciousness of the external form always exists in the first vague and
nebulous conception of the phantasm which gradually appears and formulates itself in the vivid
imagination; and hence follows the phenomenal vest, which, as usual, generates the corresponding
subject, informed with a causative power. This process clearly shows, and in fact constitutes,
the essence of myth.

Since the types vary very much, and are indeed unstable from their very nature, constantly
becoming formed and again decomposed, the primitive mythologies of all people are in like manner
very various, indefinite, and subject to constant change.

It appears in the Vedic mythology, and also in that of the ancient Greeks and Latins, how often
the typical myths of Agni, Varuna, Indra, Asvini, and Maruti; and again, of Zeus, Here, Athene,
and the rest, are changed and reconstituted. This shows how the same human faculty, the same
elements which constitute the perception and primitive personification of external phenomena,
are those also of the specific and intrinsic phenomena. Just as man, in the primitive conditions
of his existence, by the psychical and physiological law of his perception, which he has in
common with animals, transformed the world and its phenomena into subjects endowed with conscious
life; so by his psychical faculty of reduplication he personified the mental images of these
same subjects as fetishes and myths; and subsequently invested them with more distinctly human
forms, and also with specific types of humanity. The same faculty and conditions of animal
perception afterwards become the true and only causes of the superstitions, mythologies, and
religions of mankind. The law of continuity is unbroken, and this is a certain confirmation
of the truth.

This faculty, inward function, and process of mythical and symbolic facts led in course of
time to the evolution and beginning of knowledge, which is first empirical and then rational.
Therefore, we must repeat, the extrinsic and intrinsic perception, the specification of types,
and their modification into a unity which was always becoming more comprehensive, are the conditions
and method of science itself, which is only developed by means of this faculty. Hence the elements
and intrinsic logical form of science are identical with those through which mythical representations
and the inward life of the human intelligence are developed.[25]

Besides, as we have before remarked, the empirical knowledge of things begins and is perfected
in the superstitions of fetishes and myths. Ideas are modified and become purer as they converge
into types, and the principle and method at once become more rational. Either in the faculty
of perception and in its elements, or in the inward classification of specific forms, or again
in the more perfect empirical knowledge of phenomena, the progress of myth and science go on
together, and they are not only developed in a parallel direction, but the form becomes the
covering, involucre, matrix, or, as I might say, the cotyledons, by means of which the latter
is developed and nourished. Even in more rational science this faculty, and these elements,
necessarily recur, since in every human conception we find the material aspect, or its mental
image, the thing and its cause, and, as we shall see, some mythical personality is insensibly
identified with it.

The act which produces myth is therefore the same from which science proceeds, so that their
original source is identical. The same process which constitutes the fetish and myth also constitutes
science in its conditions and form, and here we find the unique fact which generates them both;
science, like myth, would be impossible without apprehension, without the individuation of
ideas, and the classification and specification of types.

Before going further I must briefly recapitulate the order of ideas and facts which we have
observed, so that the process may be as strictly logical as it is practical. Since, in the
elements of apprehension, perception is absolutely identical in man and animals, its primitive
effects in animating natural phenomena are the same. But man, by means of his reduplicative
faculty, retains a mental image of the personified subject which is only transitory in the
case of animals, and it thus becomes an inward fetish, by the same law, and consisting of the
same elements as that which is only extrinsic. These phantasms are, moreover, personified by
the classifying process of types, they are transformed into human images, and arranged in a
hierarchy, and to this the various religions and mythologies of the world owe their origin.
Since such a process is also the condition and form of knowledge, the source of myth and science
is fundamentally the same, for they are generated by the same psychical fact. It is in this
way that the progress of human intelligence was developed in the course of ages; its attitude
varies in various races, but the impulses, the faculty, and its elements are identical. I do
not think that this unique fact in which myth and science have their source has been observed
before; still less has any one defined the limits of human intelligence, and recognized in
the simple acts of animals the formal and absolute conditions of human science, and the origin
of myth.

If I am not deluded by a prejudice in favour of my own researches, this theory is a contribution
to truth. It is confirmed by the solidarity which it establishes between the acts and laws
of the psychical human faculty, and that of animals which necessarily preceded it. No science
can be constituted without such solidarity; this great truth was felt and, after their manner,
demonstrated by scholastic philosophers, or, as it was afterwards scientifically expressed
by the genius of Leibnitz: Natura non facit saltum!

CHAPTER VI.

THE INTRINSIC LAW OF THE FACULTY OF APPREHENSION.

We have now carefully considered the acts and dynamic activity of human thought. We have seen
in what animal and human perception consists, and how it acts; how the subjects developed in
our imagination are gradually united in specific forms or types, and are arranged in a system,
whence follow the first symbolic representations of science. But our task is not yet accomplished,
since much more is needed to display all that this fact involves, so that we may fully understand
the inward evolution of myth and science in history and in our race, and not merely in the
individual man.

The faculty and its effects, which could primarily be reduced to this unique and indivisible
fact, do not exclusively belong to primordial ages, but go on through all time, our own included,
while assuming divers forms and fresh aspects as the faculty of the intellect becomes more
developed. It is an indisputable truth that the influence of myth on thought and fancy, a survival
from prehistoric ages, still prevails among the common people both in town and country, among
those who are uncultivated, and even in the higher classes conventionally called good society.

It is more difficult to trace the occasional existence of the same influence among those who
think rationally and investigate the laws of the universe while acquainted with the earlier
mythical process; and yet, as we shall show, the greatest and most able men are not unfettered
by it. Myth has hitherto been regarded as a secondary and fanciful product of the psychical
human faculty, due to extrinsic impulses, rather than as the primitive and intrinsic necessity
of the intelligence--a necessity which has its roots in animal intelligence itself; and the
unique fact which generates both myth and science has not been ascertained. If this fact and
law had been discovered before, we should have more readily understood religions, philosophic
systems, and the successive forms of science, and pure reason would have made more rapid progress.
Our theory, besides giving a rational explanation of the different forms assumed by thought
in the course of its historic evolution, will, I hope, also account for many psychological
phenomena which have hitherto been imperfectly understood, such as dreams, hallucinations,
the aberrations of insanity, and the like. The primitive fact and its effects reappear in these
conditions, and this influence is persistent and enters into all our acts, conscious or unconscious,
voluntary or involuntary.

It follows from the innate necessity of the perception that objects and their extrinsic and
intrinsic causes are resolved into living subjects, and are classified in a hierarchy of specific
types, which are accepted by the primitive and ignorant mind as the universal mythical forms.[26]
But the necessities of human speech, which is however involved in mythical representations,
from the very beginning essentially reflex, require other terms than those of individual and
specific animations. It is clear that the simple personifying faculty of the intellect sufficed
in its earliest emotions, but that after the slow development of psychical reduplication, and
the enlargement of languages and ideas, it no longer satisfied the logical requirements of
the mind.

Consequently, explicit,--that is, rational--singular, and specific ideas gradually arose and
assumed a definite form; they were interwoven and fused into these individual and specific
types, and thus obtained a place in the thoughts and language of primitive man. The gradual
intrusion of specific rational ideas is natural to the human mind, since it is logically progressive,
and the fact may be observed by those who watch the mental growth of children, and of ignorant
and untaught adults.

While the mythical intelligence continues as before to give its habitual mythical interpretation
of many natural phenomena, the use is gradually acquired of special and generic symbols which
express special and specific ideas, and these no longer include a personification of the individual
thing or idea. Without this intrusion of rational ideas any progress would be impossible, as
well as the power of expressing all which time and education present to the mind, and gradually
enable it to comprehend; the fanciful image is fused in a rational conception, which is, however,
not yet definite and explicit.

What are commonly termed abstract ideas arise from this necessity, as the result of the perfection
and development of speech, but these were not at first abstract, although they made use of
the abstract idea. Unconscious abstraction is certainly one of the primary acts of the intelligence,
since abstraction follows from the consideration of a part or of some parts of a whole, which
are themselves presented as a whole to the perception. But this primitive abstraction was so
far a concrete fact for the perception, in that each act of the apprehension constituted a
phenomenon of which the apparent character was abstracted from the other parts which formed
a whole, and was transformed into a living subject, as we have already shown at length. The
really explicit abstraction, to which man only attained after many ages, consisting in the
simple representation of a quality or part of a thing, could not at that time be effected,
although special and specific ideas gradually found their way into thought and speech. All
the terms for form and relation in primitive speech, and also among modern savages, confirm
this assertion, as linguists are aware; the form and relation now expressing an abstract reference
to actions and passions in the verbs, nouns, and adverbs, originally referred to a concrete object.

Three modes or degrees of abstract representations occur in the progressive exercise of the
intellectual faculty; these, combined with the special apprehensions of the individual memory,
and with imaginative types, constitute the life of human thought, and are the conditions by
which we attain to rational knowledge. While the specific mythical type may take the place
of the general type in the logical exercise of thought, and may suffice for an imaginative
comprehension of the system of the world, the abstract conception intervenes in the daily necessity
for communication between these general mythical types, and serves to cement them together,
thus rendering the commerce of ideas among men and in the human mind more easy.

The abstract conceptions which are formed in this way may be divided into three classes--physical,
moral, and intellectual. To begin with the first; it is impossible for human speech to point
out and define a subject or phenomenon in the series to which it belongs by resemblance, identity,
or analogy, unless there is already in the mind a conception which includes the general qualities,
or quality proper to the series of similar phenomena; this is essentially an abstract type,
but it primarily assumes a concrete form. I cannot say that anything is white or heavy, until
by repetitions of the same sensation I have been able to combine in a single conception the
sensations diffused over an infinite number of objects. The genesis of these conceptions is
found in the comparative explicit judgment which depends on the memory for the necessary conditions
of its formation.

The typical and abstract idea of white has not merely a nominal value, as it is asserted in
some schools of thought, for an empty term could express no idea, whereas this idea is perfectly
clear. Neither is it a real thing, but rather an ideal reality, not a pure abstraction of the
spirit, extracted, so to speak, from the material substance. The conception of whiteness formed
by the comparative judgment is limited by the perception of the concrete, external fact perceived
as one special quality among all other qualities in nature, and it is therefore a physiological
fact of inward consciousness.

In the abstract idea of white or whiteness we do not only picture to ourselves a quality common
to many things, but by this term, and by the idea which corresponds to it, the same sensation
is actually present to our inward intuition, or the same quality of the sensation which was
previously generated by our external senses in a concrete form. Although, therefore, the idea
is generic, the sensation itself is represented to the mind in the form of a concrete perception.
It is not concrete in the sense of belonging to a special object or definite form, as it is
presented to the outward perception, but only so far as there is actually an inward and physiological
sensation of whiteness, which the word recalls to the memory. There can be no mental confusion
with the quality of red, or of any colour, when I speak or think of what is white.

When I speak or think of any object as white, I and others perfectly understand what is meant,
and a representation of this quality is instantly formed in our minds, in the generic type
which was gradually constituted by primitive man by the combination of numerous special sensations,
obvious to the sight, and subsequently expressed in speech.

In order that the word which corresponds to the quality may have a given sense, it is necessary
to perceive the form of the concrete sensation which gave rise to it; for although the representation
is indefinite or generic, that is, not obvious to the external senses, yet it is not physiologically
distinct from the sensation of the quality described; the perception of that quality is present
by the aid of memory to the inner consciousness.

It is therefore evident that the physiological elements of consciousness are actually contained
in so-called abstract ideas, although it is sometimes asserted that they are purely spiritual
and intellectual acts, remote from every physiological process of fact and sense. An actual
physiological fact (colour in this instance) corresponds to the idea in the nervous centres,
and reproduces the sensation due to the perception of special objects, whose physical quality
of whiteness we have perceived, and this sensation makes part of the abstract, or rather indefinite
conception.

In fact, all which is not actually present to the mind--and the present is an infinitesimal
fraction of knowledge--is reproduced by the memory, and this is effected by the molecular movements
of the human brain, and by what may be called the ethereal modifications which took place when
the sensations, perceptions, and acts first occurred. If the cells vibrate, and the organs
of the brain are affected by the recollection of past ideas and acts, just as when they actually
occurred (and this appears from Schiff's experiences as to the increase of the brain in heat
and volume during dreams), this vibration will be still more marked when any quality which
affects our senses is reproduced in the mind.

The particular form of the quality as it appears in a definite object is certainly wanting
in the abstract conception; it remains in the first stage of pure sensation, like a spontaneous
act of observation, and it is transformed into apprehension by the mental faculty. But the
inward consciousness of the quality is actual, psychical, and physical. The abstract conception
is a psychical symbol composed of idea and consciousness, or rather of act and consciousness;
both are fused into a logical conception of indefinite form, yet consisting of real elements,
that is, of cerebral motions and of sensations.

Estimated according to its genuine value, therefore, an abstract conception may be divided
into three classes--physical, moral, and intellectual. Whiteness and colours in general, levity
and weight, hardness, sound, and the like qualities, are all abstract types which belong to
the physical class. Goodness, virtue, love, hatred, and anger must be assigned to the moral
class; and equality, identity, number, and quantity, etc., to the intellectual class. Such
abstract conceptions, without which human speech would be impossible, did not in the case of
primitive man take the explicit and reflex form in which they are presented by mature science,
and it is expedient to inquire what character they really assumed in the spontaneous exercise
of thought and speech.

There is certainly a difference between the mythical and specific types and the intrinsic value
of these abstract conceptions. The former served for the causative interpretation of the living
system of the world, and had a superstitious influence on the moral and social progress of
mankind; the latter were merely the instrument of thought and speech, and were in spontaneous
and daily use. But in spite of this difference, there was no radical and substantial diversity
in the genesis of such conceptions, and the fundamental elements of perception were common
to both. While the form varied, the primitive law and genesis remained the same.

We have shown that the perception of the phenomenon, as it affects the inner and external consciousness,
necessarily involves the form of the subject, and the causative power which animates that form,
and this becomes the intellectual source of special and specific myths. These myths, whether
they are derived from physical or moral phenomena, are subsequently so completely impersonated
as to be resolved into a perfectly human form. In the case of the abstract conceptions necessary
in speech, such anthropomorphism does not generally occur; yet we see that sensation and a
physiological genesis are inseparable from an abstract conception. Without such sensation of
the phenomenon these conceptions would be unintelligible to the percipient himself and to others.
In direct sensation, the phenomenon is external, and when it is reproduced in the mind the
same cerebral motions to which that sensation was due are repeated.

It is an absolute law, not only of the human mind but of animal intelligence, that the phenomenon
should generate the implicit idea of a thing and cause, and the necessity of this psychical
law is also apparent in the abstract conception of some given quality. If the effect is not
identical, it is at any rate analogous. Primitive man did not take whiteness, for example,
considered in itself, to be an active subject, like the specific natural myths which we have
mentioned, but he regarded it as something which had a real existence, and he might under certain
circumstances invest it with deliberate power.

If we have fully grasped this deep faculty of the mind, and the spontaneous animation of all
phenomena, both external and internal, it will not be difficult to understand the reappearance
of the same law in abstract conceptions. The sensation of the quality, and consequently of
the phenomenon, is reproduced, and the phenomenon generates the implicit idea of a subject,
and therefore of a possible cause in given circumstances. If such a law did not produce upon
man the mythical personification of his primitive abstract conceptions, at any rate it involved
a belief in the objective reality of these conceptions, which were implicitly held to possess
an independent existence.

Among prehistoric and savage races, who were ignorant of the laws and nature of cosmic forces,
the greater or less weight of a thing did not involve any examination of the mass of a phenomenon,
its distance, and the general laws of gravity; this differential weight was itself believed
to be a thing which acted, and sometimes deliberately, acted in different ways on the different
objects which they were comparing at the moment. In other words, gravity was regarded as something
which existed independently of the bodies in which its properties were manifested.

This estimate of gravity, as an abstract quality or property, might be repeated of all other
physical properties, as well as of those abstract conceptions which are moral and intellectual.
Goodness came to be considered as a type, varying indeed in different peoples, according to
their race, and their local, moral, and civil conditions, but as a type which corresponded
to the mutual relations of men, and to their superstitions and religious beliefs as to the
nature of things.

In this case also the abstract conception of the good, the fitting, the useful, which constantly
recur in popular speech are regarded, not as mythical powers personified in a human form, but
as having a real existence in nature, as something extrinsic to the person or thing in which
they are manifested, and as acting upon them as a living and causative power. The same may
be said of all other abstract conceptions. Hence, in addition to the formation of cosmic, moral,
and intellectual myths, fashioned after the pattern of humanity, logical conceptions arose
in the mind, necessary for the exercise of human speech and for a man's converse with himself,
and these were regarded as having a real existence, manifested in things and persons and in
the system of nature. These entities have their origin in the same faculty as the others; in
every conception presented to the mind and reproducing the primitive sensation or emotion,
the external or internal phenomenon implicitly generates the subject, and with this the cause.
These abstract conceptions did not and do not result in the anthropomorphism of phenomena or
ideas, but are transformed into entities which have a real existence.

We must also observe the mobility and interchangeableness of these fetishes, myths, and imaginary
entities in the primitive times of the human race, and even in later ages; at one time the
fetish acts as a myth, at another the myth has a logical existence. Of this there are many
proofs in the traditions of ancient peoples, in the intellectual life of modern savages, and
in that of the civilized nations to which we ourselves belong. The historic development does
not always follow the regular course we have just described, although these are, in a strictly
logical sense, the necessary stages of intellectual evolution. Historically they are often
jostled and confounded together by the lively susceptibility and alacrity of the imagination
of primitive man, and it is precisely this characteristic which makes these marvellous ages
so fertile in fanciful creations, and also in scientific intuitions.

Any one who is sufficiently acquainted with the ancient literature of civilized peoples, and
with the legends of those which are rude and savage; any one who has reflected on the spontaneous
value of words and conceptions in modern speech, must often have observed how myth assumed
the form of a logical conception as time went on; and conversely how the logical entity assumed
the form of a myth, and how interchangeable they are. It is well known that the myths have
been so far adapted to the necessities of speech as to be transmuted into verbs; libare from
liber, which perhaps came in its turn from liba, a propitiatory cake, while Libra was the genius
who in mythological ages presided over fruitfulness and plenty. So again juvare, from the root
jov, after it had already been used for the anthropomorphic Jove. We find in Plautus the verb
summanare, from the god Summanus, the nocturnal sky. Not only verbs but adjectives were derived
in common speech from the mythical names of gods; from Genius, a multiform and universal power
in ancient Latin mythology, we have genialis and hence the expressions genialis lectus, genialis
homo, genialis hiems, and poets and philosophers apply the same epithet even to the elements
and the stars. On the other hand, Virtue, Faith, Piety, and other like moral conceptions, first
regarded as real, yet impersonal entities, were transformed into a perfect myth, and into human
forms worthy of divine worship.

Even in our own time, and not only among the uneducated people but among men of high culture--when
they do not pause to consider the real value of words in the familiarity of daily conversation--any
one who seeks for the direct meaning of the terms he uses will admit the truth of what I say.
We constantly ascribe a real existence to abstract conceptions and qualities, treating them
as subjects which have a substantial being, and which act for the most part with deliberate
purpose, although they are not transformed as in the case of myths into human shapes.

In abstract, intellectual conceptions, such as those of equality, distance, number, and the
like, the same faculty and the same elements are at work as in those which express physical
and moral qualities. These conceptions, which as civilization advances ultimately become mere
intellectual symbols necessary for logical speech, are at first formed by the actual comparison
of things, and therefore by the aid of the senses. Even if we were to assert with some schools
of thought that they were formed a priori in the mind, sensation would still be necessary as
the occasion of displaying them. When such conceptions are expressed in words there is a physiological
recurrence to the mind of what may be termed the shadow of previous sensations or perceptions,
which are united in an intellectual type to give rise to such conceptions. And in the appearance
of this phenomenal basis, thought unconsciously fulfils the fundamental law of assuming, or
I might say of actually feeling, the reality of the subject.

It must be remembered that in speaking of these entities created by the intellect, I refer
to the primitive ages of human thought, or to the notions of ignorant people, and also to the
spontaneous language of educated men, who in ordinary conversation do not pause to consider
the simple and logical value of their expressions. We are only giving the natural history of
the intelligence, which necessarily excludes the analytic and refining processes of rational
science. An educated man will, for example, say or write that identity is a most important
principle of logic as well as that of contradiction, although he is perfectly aware that such
expressions only imply an abstract form of cognition; he follows the natural and primitive
process of the intellect, and for the moment expresses these conceptions as if they were real
entities in the organism of science and of the world. Any one may find a proof of this fact
in himself, if he will consider the ideas immediately at work in his mind at the moment of
expressing similar conceptions. And if this is true of those who pursue a rational course of
thought, it is true in a still more imaginative and mythical sense at the dawn of intellectual
life, both among modern savages and in the case of the ignorant common people.

Let us briefly sum up the truth we have sought to establish. Special fetishes first had their
origin by the innate exercise and historical development of the human intelligence, by the
necessary conditions of the perception, and of subsequent apprehension; these were only the
animation of each external or internal phenomenon, as it occurred, and this was the primitive
origin of myth, both in man and animals. In the case of animals the fetish or special myth
is transitory, appearing and disappearing in accordance with his actual perceptions; while
in man there is a persistent image of the fetish in his mind, to which he timidly ascribes
the same power as to the thing itself. The specific types of these fetishes naturally arise
from the mental combination of images, emotions, and ideas into a whole, and these impersonations
generate the various forms of anthropomorphic polytheism. As the synthetic mental process goes
on, these varied forms of polytheism are gradually united in one general but still anthropomorphic
form, which is commonly called monotheism.

In addition to these spontaneous and anthropomorphic myths, which serve for the fanciful explanation
of the system of the world, and the moral ideas of social and individual life, other myths
arise which are not anthropomorphic, but which ascribe a substantial existence to abstract
conceptions of physical, moral, or intellectual matters; conceptions necessary for the formulation
of human speech. For although primitive languages, of which we have some examples remaining
in the language of savage peoples, are almost inconceivably concrete, yet speech is impossible
without expressions of form, or abstract conceptions which are moulded and adapted to that
intuition of the relations of things which is always taking place in the mind.[27] The mythical
human form does not indeed appear in these conceptions, but a substantial entity is involved
in them which sometimes, as we have seen, may even assume the aspect of a complete myth.

A careful analysis of the process of our intelligence has shown that this habitual personification
of the phenomenon or abstract conception is due to the innate faculty of perception, since
the appearance of any phenomenon necessarily produces the idea of a subject actuated by deliberate
purpose; this law is equally constant in the case of animals, in whom, however, it does not
issue in a rational conception. The objection of ourselves into nature, the personification
of its phenomena and myths in general, are common to all, while they take a more fanciful form
in the case of primitive man; they are the constant and necessary result of the perception
of external and internal phenomena. This personification includes moral and intellectual as
well as physical phenomena, and it always proceeds in the same way, from special phenomena
to specific types, and hence to abstract perceptions.

In this way we have established the important fact that the primitive personification of every
external or internal phenomenon, the origin of all myths, religions, and superstitions, is
accomplished by the same necessary psychical and physical law as that which produces sensation.
That is, men, as well as animals, begin by thinking and feeling in a mythical way, owing to
the intrinsic constitution of their intellectual life; and while animals never emerge from
these psychical conditions, men are gradually emancipated from them, as they become able to
think more rationally, thus finding redemption, truth, and liberty by means of science.

We now propose to unite in a single conception this necessity of our intellect, at once the
product and the cause of perception, and of the spontaneous vivification of phenomena; since
the law may be expressed in a compendious form.

Both in physical, moral, and intellectual myths, and in the substantial entity infused into
abstract conceptions, the external or internal phenomenon immediately generates the idea of
a subject, since it is a fundamental law of our mind to entify (entificare) every object of
our perception, emotion, or consciousness. If any one should object to this neologism, in spite
of its adequate expression of the original function of the intelligence, we reply that the
use and necessity of the verb identify have been accepted in the neo-Latin tongues, and therefore
entify, which has the same root and form, can hardly be rejected, since it, like the former,
signifies an actual process of thought. We therefore adopt the word without scruple, since
new words have often been coined before when they were required to express new conceptions
and theories.

The primitive and constant act of all animals, including man, when external or internal sensation
has opened to them the immense field of nature, is that of entifying the object of sensation,
or, in a word, all phenomena. Such entification is the result of spontaneous necessity, by
the law of the intrinsic faculty of perception; it is not the result of reflection, but it
is immediate, innate, and inevitable. It is an eternal law of the evolution of the intelligence,
like all those which rule the order of the world.

We do not only proclaim in this fact a law of psychological importance, but also the origin
of myths, and in a certain sense of science, since myth is developed by the same methods as
science. These two streams flow from one and the same source, since the entification of phenomena
is proper both to myth and science; the former entifies sensations, and the latter ideas, since
science by reversion to law and rational conception finally attains to the primitive entity.
And finally, if an imaginative idea of a cause is active in myth from the first, the conception
of a cause is equally necessary to science. It is her business to explain the reason of things,
and in what they rationally consist:

  "Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas."

CHAPTER VII.

THE HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF MYTH AND SCIENCE.

In the foregoing pages we have reached the primordial fact of our psychical and physical nature,
in which, as it appears to us, both myth and science have their origin. After first considering
the animal kingdom as a whole, we have seen that the interaction between external phenomena
and the consciousness of an organism results in the spontaneous vivification of the phenomenon
in question, so that the origin of the mythical representation of nature is found in the innate
faculty of animal perception.

Nor could it be otherwise. The internal activity and intrinsic sense of conscious and deliberate
life which inspires animals and men, while the latter are still ignorant of the rational order
of things, is necessarily reflected both in the external objects of perception and in the internal
emotions, as if they were operating causes independent of the will of the percipient. It is
impossible for an animal, which is unable by voluntary observation to make, any analytic distinction
between the subject and the object, and their respective effects, to consider such phenomena
as mechanical entities, subject to necessary and eternal laws. The animal therefore accepts
the idea suggested by his spontaneous and subjective nature, that these phenomena are alive.
Grass, fruits, plants, water, the movement of material bodies, ordinary and extraordinary meteors,
all are implicitly apprehended by him as subjects endowed with will and purpose after the manner
of mankind. Nor can the living subjectivity of the phenomenon ever be gauged by the animal
in whom the deliberate power of reflection is wanting. His life is consequently passed in a
world of living subjects, not of phenomena and laws which mechanically act together; it is,
so to speak, a permanent metaphor.

Man himself, so far as his animal nature is concerned, acts in the same way, and although he
subsequently attains to the exercise of reasoning powers in virtue of the psychical reduplication
of himself, the primitive faculty persists, and hence comes the mythical creation of a peculiar
world of conceptions which give rise to all superstitions, mythologies, and religions. This
is also the process of science itself, as far as the classifying method and intrinsic logical
form are concerned. The historical source of the two great streams of the intellect, the mythical
and the scientific, is found in the primitive act of entifying the phenomenon presented to
the senses.

We must briefly describe the evolution of these two mythical and scientific faculties of the
mind; we must investigate the mode and cause of their divergence from a common source, through
what transformations they pass, in order to see in what way the one is gradually dried up,
while the other increases in volume and force. The reader must forgive us if we use some repetition
in developing a subject on which we have already touched, since without such repetition the
present historical explanation would be obscure.

The first stage of knowledge consists in the observation of the things which surround us, and
this first stage, which is necessary also in science, is the common property of animals. Their
observation of themselves and of external things is psychologically and physiologically the
same as that of man, and in both cases there is a subjective animation of the phenomena themselves.
The primitive source of science in its observation of phenomena was the same as that of myth
and of the special fetish; without such observation it would have had no existence.

In immediate succession to this primitive fact, which is common to the whole animal kingdom,
there arose--if we consider the general process without the limitations of circumstances, places,
time, and a thousand accidents--two kinds of faculties which were identical in form, although
they had different effects, and produced opposite results. For in the case of mythical entification
the tendency to impersonation was always increasing and becoming more distinctly zoomorphic
and anthropomorphic, and in this form it was crystallized or mummified, while science on the
other hand was always enlarging its sphere and dissipating the first mythical form of its conception,
until nothing was left but a purely rational idea.

When this evolution takes place in peoples and races which are incapable of improvement, or
have a limited capacity for advanced civilization, the faculty of myth remains in the ascendant;
and as past and present history shows, mythical stagnation and intellectual barrenness may
follow, until intellectual development is arrested and even destroyed. If on the other hand
the evolution takes place in peoples and races capable of indefinite civilization, myth gradually
disappears and science shines forth victoriously.

Even in historical and civilized races the two cycles go on together, since while robust intellects
throw off as they advance the mythical shell in which they were first inclosed, the ignorant
masses continue their devotions to fetishes and myths, which they can infuse even into the
grandest religious teaching. They perhaps might also perish, crystallized in their miserable
superstitions, unless, in virtue of the race to which they belong, the nobler minds were gradually
to succeed in illuminating and raising them into a purer atmosphere. In our Aryan race, and
in our own country we have all seen the ideas of Christianity transformed into the earlier
fetishes and pagan myths; the saints are merely substituted for the gods and demi-gods, for
the deities of groves, of the sea and of war, as they are found in ancient mythology. The legends
of the saints and of Christ himself are grafted on similar legends of the ancient religions
of Greece and Rome, and Paradise has assumed the appearance and form of Olympus. The paintings
still extant in the catacombs of Rome, which mark the transformation of the old into the new
religion, speak plainly enough by their symbols and figures.

Myth is logically identical with the scientific process in its intrinsic character; starting
from a vague subjectivity which gradually assumes a human shape, the first intellectual vitality
is lost, unless it is revived by a higher impulse. Science, on the other hand, which begins
in myth, gradually divests this subjectivity of its anthropomorphic character, until pure reason
is attained, and with this the power of indefinite progress.

The theory which has hitherto been generally accepted by mythologists, even by those who profess
Comte's great principle of historical evolution, is that man began with special fetishes, that
these were combined in comprehensive types to form polytheistic hierarchies, and hence he rose
by an analogous process to a more or less vague conception of monotheism.

This theory, true as to the principal forms which myth successively assumes, is not accurate
with respect to the stages of development, and it is also erroneous in some particulars of
the actual history of the various mythologies of different peoples.

In the early chapters of this work we have briefly touched on such a development, and the reader
must pardon us for returning to the subject, now that we have to give an historical account
of the process of evolution. In fact, the fetish, in the general sense of the term, is not
the first form of myth which is revealed in the dawn of human life. In order to estimate its
positive value, it is necessary to analyze such a conception with greater accuracy, and then
to verify it historically with the help of the science of ethnology.

The first manifestations of mythical ideas must be considered in man as an animal; that is,
as the result of his spontaneous intercourse with the world, independently of the psychical
faculty peculiar to himself, after he had acquired by subsequent evolution of mind and body
the faculty and habit of reflection. This first stage does not involve any definite fetish,
that is, an immediate belief in a special object which exerts its influence on the human soul,
even when it is remote and unseen: such a fetish is a secondary stage in human development.
The first mythical representations of animals, and of man, so far as his animal nature is concerned,
are not confined to fixed objects, which can be retained in the mind as operative under all
circumstances; they are indefinite, and diffused through all the phenomena which are successively
perceived and vivified. The unseen wind which rises and falls, the moving cloud, the flash
of lightning and roar of thunder, the dawn, the rushing torrent--when any of these things are
perceived by animals and primitive men, they are endowed with subjective life and are supposed
to act with deliberate purpose; and this is the first form of myth. But when they are not present
(I here speak of the animal nature of man) they do not remain in the mind as persistent beings
to which the tribute of worship inspired by hope or fear must be paid; these and other phenomena
only inspire such sentiments when they are actually present.

It is no vain distinction which I mate between the first vague and intermittent form of myth
suggested by phenomena actually present, and that of the first stage of fetish: this distinction
marks the difference between the mythical representation of animals and the classifying and
reflective process peculiar to man.

Comte was the first to remark, quite incidentally, that animals might sometimes attain to the
idea of a fetish; Darwin gave the instance of a dog which was scared by the movement of an
open umbrella in a meadow, although he remained quiet when it was unshaken by the wind; and
Herbert Spencer, partly accepting these ideas, adduces two somewhat similar instances of the
behaviour of dogs. It seems to us that these great men are mistaken on the one hand in assuming
that the first essential origin of myth is not to be found in the animal kingdom, and on the
other in supposing that these facts have only an accidental value, and that animals only occasionally
acquire a vague consciousness of the fetish.

Those readers who have gone with us so far will perceive that these were not mere accidents
of rare occurrence in animal life, but that they are the necessary effect of mythical representation
in its first stage, although they cannot in any way be supposed to be produced by fetishism,
properly so called. For if the dog were frightened and agitated by the movement of the umbrella,
or ran away, as Herbert Spencer tells us, from the stick which had hurt him while he was playing
with it, it was because an unusual movement or pain produced by an object to which habit had
rendered him indifferent, aroused in the animal the congenital sense of the intentional subjectivity
of phenomena, and this is really the first stage of myth, and not of its subsequent form of
fetishism.

I must therefore repeat that the first form of myth which spontaneously arises in man as an
animal, is the vague but intentional subjectivity of the phenomena presented to his senses.
This subjectivity is sometimes quiescent and implicit, and sometimes active, in which case
it may arouse the fear of evil, or the hope of physical pleasures.

As in man the reflex power slowly and gradually grows--although at first in an exclusively
empirical form--so he slowly and gradually accepts the first form of fetishism, which consists
in the permanent and fixed individuation of a phenomenon or object of nature, as a power which
he reflectively believes to be the artificer of good or evil.

In this stage it is no longer the phenomenon actually present which arouses the apprehension
of an intentional subjectivity, while its image and efficacy disappear with the sensible object;
the phenomenon, or the inanimate or animate form, is reflectively retained by the memory, in
which it appears as a malignant or benignant power. In a word, the first stage of fetishism,
which is the second form of the evolution of myth, is the universal and primitive sense of
myth in nature, which man alone is capable of applying permanently to some given phenomenon,
such as wind, rain, and the like, or lakes, volcanoes, and rocks, and these remain fixed in
the mind as powers of good or evil. In the earlier stage of myth the scene is constantly changing,
while in the latter, certain objects or phenomena remain fixed in the memory, exciting the
same emotions whether they are present or absent, and to this consciousness we may trace the
dawn of worship.

Ethnography affords plain proofs of the fetishism which preceded the civilization of many peoples,
and among those which still remain in the stage of fetishism we can trace the primitive form
of a vague impersonation of natural objects and phenomena.[28]

As we have already seen, every animal and unfamiliar object is in this first stage of fetishism
regarded as the external covering of a spiritual power which has assumed what is believed to
be the primordial form of the fetish; this fetish takes the place of the natural phenomenon,
and is believed to be capable of exercising a direct subjectivity which is vague but perfectly
real.

We pass from this first form of fetish to the second, namely to the veneration of objects,
animals, plants, and the like, in which an extrinsic power is supposed to be incarnated. Many
ages elapsed before man attained to this second stage of fetishism, since it was necessarily
preceded by a further and reflex elaboration of myth, namely, the genesis of a belief in spirits.

Herbert Spencer and Tylor are among the writers who have given a masterly description of this
phase of the human intellect, and history and ethnography have confirmed the accuracy of their
researches and conclusions. The shadow cast by a man's own body, the reflection of images in
the water, natural echoes, the reappearance of images of the departed in dreams, the general
instinct which leads man to vivify all he sees, produced what may be called the reduplication
of man in himself, and the savage's primitive theory of the human soul. Originally this soul
was multiplied into all these natural phenomena, but it was afterwards distributed by the mythical
faculty into three, four, five, or more powers, personifying the spirits. This belief in a
multiplicity of souls in man is not only still extant among more or less rude peoples of the
present day in Asia, Europe, Africa, America, and Polynesia, but it is also the foundation
of the belief of more civilized nations on the subject, including our own Aryan race. Birch
and others observe that the Egyptians ascribed four spirits to man--Ba, Akba, Ka, and Khaba.
The Romans give three:

  "Bis duo sunt homines, manes, caro, spiritus, umbra."

The same belief is found among nearly all savages. The Fijians distinguish between the spirit
which is buried with the dead man and that more ethereal spirit which is reflected in the water
and lingers near the place where he died. The Malagasy believe in three souls, the Algonquin
in two, the Dakotan in three, the native of Orissa in four.

Since a fetish, strictly so called, is the incarnation of a power in some given object, it
must be preceded by this rude belief in spirits and shades. Such a complex elaboration takes
time, since it involves a previous creation of powers, spirits or the shades of men; these
lead to the belief in independent spirits of various origin, which people the heavens and all
parts of the world. Hence arose the belief in transmigration, the necessary prelude to the
theory of the incarnation, which was ultimately constituted by fetishism. The comparative study
of languages shows that including the Aryan and Semitic races, the belief in spirits was developed
in all peoples, and in all of them we also find a belief in the transmigration of souls.

The transmigration of the human soul was first believed to take place in the body of a new-born
child, since at the moment of death the soul of the dying person entered into the foetus. The
Algonquins buried the corpses of their children by the wayside, so that their souls might easily
enter into the bodies of the pregnant women who passed that way. Some of the North American
tribes believed that the mother saw in a dream the dead relation who was to imprint his likeness
on her unborn child. At Calabar, when the mother who has lost a child gives birth to another,
she believes that the dead child is restored to her. The natives of New Guinea believe that
a son who greatly resembles his dead father has inherited his soul. Among the Yorubas the new-born
child is greeted with the words: "Thou hast returned at last!" The same ideas prevail among
the Lapps and Tartars, as well as among the negroes of the West Coast of Africa. Among the
aborigines of Australia the belief is widely diffused that those who die as black return as
white men.

Primitive and ignorant peoples perceive no precise distinction between man and brutes, so that,
as Tylor observes, they readily accept the belief of the transmigration of the human soul into
an animal, and then into inanimate objects, and this belief culminates in the incarnation of
the true fetish. Among some of the North American tribes the spirits of the dead are supposed
to pass into bears. An Eskimo widow refused to eat seal's flesh because she supposed that her
husband's soul had migrated into that animal. Others have imagined that the souls of the dead
passed into birds, beetles, and other insects, according to their social rank when still alive.
Some African tribes believe that the dead migrate into certain species of apes.

By pursuing this theory, as we shall presently show more fully, the transition was easy to
the incarnation of a spirit, whether that of a man or of some other being, into any object
whatever, which was thereby invested with beneficent or malignant power. It is easy to show
that in this second stage of fetishism, which some have believed to be the primitive form of
myth, there would be no further progress in the mythical elaboration of spirits, their mode
of life, their influence and possible transmigrations. This elaboration is indeed a product
of the mythical faculty, but in a rational order; it is a logical process, mythical in substance,
but purely reflective in form. For which reason it was impossible for animals to attain to
this stage.

Some peoples remained in this phase of belief, while others advanced to the ulterior and polytheistic
form. This may also be divided into two classes; those who classify and ultimately reduce fetishes
into a more general conception, and those whose conception takes an anthropomorphic form. Let
us examine the genesis of both classes.

When the popular belief in spirits had free development, the number of spirits and powers was
countless, as many examples show. To give a single instance--the Australians hold that there
is an innumerable multitude of spirits; the heavens, the earth, every nook, grove, bush, spring,
crag, and stone are peopled with them. In the same way, some American tribes suppose the visible
and invisible world to be filled with good and evil spirits; so do the Khonds, the Negroes
of New Guinea, and, as Castren tells us, the Turanian tribes of Asia and Europe. Consequently,
fetishes, which are the incarnation of these spirits in some object, animate or inanimate,
natural or artificial, are innumerable, since primitive man and modern savages have created
such fetishes, either at their own pleasure or with the aid of their priests, magicians, and
sorcerers.

Man's co-ordinating faculty, in those races which are capable of progressive evolution, does
not stop short at this inorganic disintegration of things; he begins a process of classification
and, at the same time, of reduction, by which the numerous fetishes are, by their natural points
of likeness and unlikeness in character and form, reduced to types and classes, which, as we
have already shown, comprise in themselves the qualities of all the particular objects of the
same species which are diffused throughout nature.

By this spontaneous process of human thought, due to the innate power of reasoning, man has
gradually reduced the chaos of special fetishes to a tolerably systematic order, and he then
goes on to more precise simplification. Let us try to trace in this historic fact the classifying
process at the moment when the first form of polytheism succeeds to irregular and anarchical
fetishism.

In the Samoan islands, a local god is wont to appear in the form of an owl, and the accidental
discovery of a dead owl would be deplored, and its body would be buried with solemn rites.
The death of this particular bird does not, however, imply the death of the god himself, since
the people believe him to be incarnated in the whole species. In this fact we see that a special
fetish is developed into a specific form; thus a permanent type is evolved from special appearances.

Acosta has handed down to us another belief of the comparatively civilized Peruvians, which
recalls the primitive genesis of their mythical ideas. He says that the shepherds used to adore
various stars, to which they assigned the names of animals; stars which protected men against
the respective animals after whom they were called. They held the general belief that all animals
whatever had a representative in heaven, which watched over their reproduction, and of which
they were, so to speak, the essence. This affords another example of the more general extension
and classification, and, at the same time, of the reduction of the original multitude of fetishes.

Some of the North American Indians asserted that every species of animal had an elder brother,
who was the origin of all the individuals of the species. They said, for example, that the
beaver, which was the elder brother of this species of rodents, was as large as one of their
cabins. Others supposed that all kinds of animals had their type in the world of souls, a manitu,
which kept guard over them. Ralston, in his "Songs of the Russian People," tells us that Buyan,
the island paradise of Russian mythology, contains a serpent older than all others, a larger
raven, a finer queen bee, and so of all other animals. Morgan, in his work upon the Iroquois,
observes that they believe in a spirit or god of every species of trees and plants.

From these beliefs and facts, drawn from different peoples and different parts of the world,
we can understand how a vague and inorganic fetishism gradually became classified into types
which constitute the first phase of polytheism. The logical effort which transformed the manifold
beliefs into types goes on, but from their vague and indefinite nature, not only the power,
but also the extrinsic form of man is easily infused into them, so that they are invested with
human faculties and sensations, and also with the anthropomorphic form and countenance of which
we have spoken elsewhere. In fact, when the special fetishes which are naturally alike are
united in a single type, the object, animal, or phenomenon which corresponds to it in this
early stage of polytheism is no longer perceived, but a numen is evolved from this type, which
has not only human power, but a human form; and hence follow the specific idols of serpents,
birds, and all natural phenomena, in which the primitive fetish has been incarnated.[29]

In this second stage of polytheism, anthropomorphism appears in an external form, and the specific
type is transformed into the idol which represents and dominates over it, inspiring the commission
of beneficent or hurtful acts. Of this it is unnecessary to adduce examples, since all the
mythologies which have reached this polytheistic stage are anthropomorphic, and in these the
specific type, which serves as the first step to polytheism, subsequently becomes a completely
human idol.

After this anthropomorphic classification has been reached by logical elaboration, a new field
is opened for the reduction of special types into those which are more general, as had been
previously the case in the early stages of myth. By continually concentrating, and at the same
time by enlarging the value of the conception, it is united in a single form which constitutes
the dawn and genesis of monotheism. This methodical process, which is characteristic of human
thought, may be traced in all peoples which have really attained to the monotheistic idea,
in the Aryan and Semitic races, in China, Japan, and Egypt, in Peru and Mexico; the belief
may also be obscurely traced in an inchoate form among savage and inferior tribes, as, for
example, among the Indians of Central and North America, and among some of the inhabitants
of Africa and barbarous Asia.

While this conception took a more or less definite form among the more advanced peoples, the
earlier and debased myths maintained their ground, and still continue to do so. Of this we
have examples in Europe itself, and among its more civilized peoples which have been transplanted
elsewhere; for while in one direction a capacity for classification leads to a purer monotheistic
conception, and even to rational science, the great majority of the common people, and even
of those of higher culture, still hold many ideas which are polytheistic and anthropomorphic,
and some which really belong to the debased stage of fetishism and vulgar superstition.

Other causes contribute to produce the natural and intrinsic concurrence of the several stages
of myth which are found existing together in the life of a people. Such, for example, is the
conquest effected by a more civilized nation over another race, inferior by nature or retarded
by other circumstances. The mythical ideas of the conquered people remain, and are even diffused
through the lower classes of the conquering race; or they are ingrafted by a synthetic and
assimilating process, so as to modify other mythical and religious beliefs. This compound of
various stages and various beliefs also occurs through the moral and intellectual diffusion
of dogma, without the acquisition of really new matter. Manifest proofs of these various stages
of myth, co-existent together, may be traced in the development of the Vedic ideas among the
earlier aboriginal nations, and conversely; as in the case of the Aztecs and Incas in Mexico
and Peru, whose earlier beliefs were mixed with those of their conquerors. The same thing may
be observed in the development of Judaism during the Babylonish captivity, in the biblical
and messianic doctrines which were grafted on pagan beliefs, and in the teaching of Islam,
as it was adopted in the East and among the black races of Africa.

We must make allowance for these extrinsic accidents if we are to describe correctly the natural
course and logical evolution of myth. Even with respect to the special evolution of myth in
a separate people, unmixed with others, while it is normal in what may be termed its general
form and categorical phases, yet like all natural objects and phenomena, and much more in all
which concerns the human mind, there are variations in its forms, and it attains its ends by
many ways.

If we take a wider view of the general and reciprocal influences of ethnic myths; as respects
the historic results of mythologies, we shall see that if every race evolved its sphere of
myth in accordance with the canons laid down by us, their effect upon each other would work
together for a common result more quickly than when each is taken apart. The reader must allow
me to make my meaning clear by the following passage from my work on the "Dottrina razionale
del Progresso," which I published in 1863, in the "Politecnico," Milan, on the fusion of the
monotheistic conception of the Semitic race with the beliefs of Greece and Rome at the dawn
of Christianity:--

"Christianity was originally based on the absolute idea of the divine first Principle, to which
one portion of the Semitic race had attained by intellectual evolution, and by the acumen of
the great men who brought this idea to perfection. Either because of their clearer consciousness,
or from their environment and the physical circumstances of the race, the Semitic people passed
from the primitive ideas of mythology to the conception of the absolute and infinite Being,
while other races still adhered to altogether fanciful and anthropomorphic ideas of this Being.
Our race had an Olympus, like the others, and throughout its history this Olympus was always
assuming new forms, although a human conception was the basis of its religious ideas. The Chinese
and Semitic races were the first to rise to the conception of an absolute first principle,
but in both cases the conception was more or less unfruitful.

"The gradual transition from consciousness to conception, from the fact to the idea, from the
idol to the law, from the symbol to the thought, from the finite to the infinite, is the characteristic
and essential course taken by the human mind. But, practically, this process is more gradual
or more rapid, is retarded or advanced, attains its aim or stops short in its first rudiments,
according to the race in which it occurs. So it was that, as we have just said, the Chinese
and Semitic races were the first to reach the final goal of this psychological progress; other
peoples, such as the Aryans and their offshoots, savages and partially civilized races, remained
in the early stages of this dialectic scale. Undoubtedly, in our own race, the early religious
conceptions which constituted a simple worship of nature in various forms were constantly becoming
of purer character, and they were not only exalted in their spiritual quality, but in the Greek
and Roman religions they attained to something like scientific precision. Yet even in these
higher aspirations the race did not surrender its mythical faculty, to which it was impelled
by its physical and psychological constitution, and the pure conception was unconsciously overshadowed
by symbolic ideas. We can plainly see how far this symbolism, peculiar to the race, obscured
the minds of Plato and Aristotle, and of almost all the subsequent philosophers. In the Semitic
and Chinese races this inner symbolism of the mind, with reference to the interpretation of
nature, was less tenacious, intense, and productive, and they soon freed themselves from their
mental bonds in order to rise to the conception of the absolute Being, distinct from the world.
When this idea had been grasped by rude and popular intuition, men of the highest intellectual
power perfected the still confused conception, and founded upon it science, civil and political
institutions, and national customs.

"The idea of Christianity arose in the midst of the Semitic people through him whose name it
bears, and who perfected the religious idea of his nation. This idea, in its Semitic simplicity,
consisted in a belief in the existence of one, eternal, infinite God, the immediate creator
of all things; it included the tradition of man's loss of his original felicity, and the promise
of a restoration of all peoples, and of the Israelites in particular, to their former condition
of earthly happiness. Christ appeared, and while he upheld the Mosaic law and its original
idea, he declared himself to be the promised deliverer, sent of God; the Son of God, which
among the Semitic people was the term applied to their prophets. His moral teaching gave a
more perfect form to the old law, and by his example he afforded a model of human virtue worthy
of all veneration; the germs of a marvellous civilization were to be found in his moral and
partially new teaching. The same doctrine had been, to some extent, inculcated by the Jewish
teachers, and the schools of Hillel and Gamaliel were certainly not morally inferior to his
own, as we learn from the tradition of the Talmud, and from some passages in the Acts of the
Apostles. The origin, development, and teaching of primitive Christianity were therefore essentially
Semitic, since it had its origin in a people of that race, and in a man of that people. Yet
the Semitic race did not become Christian; and, after so many ages have elapsed, it still rejects
Christianity. It was the Aryan race, to which we Europeans belong, which adopted this teaching
and became essentially Christian, although this race is psychologically the most idolatrous
of the world, as far as the æsthetic idol--not the common fetish--is concerned. Let us inquire
into the cause of this remarkable fact.

"As soon as the teaching of Christ was adopted by those familiar with Aryan civilization and
opinions, an idea repugnant to Semitic conceptions, and still unintelligible to that race,
was evolved from it--I mean the idea that the human Christ, the Son of God, was God himself.
The Semite holds that God is so far exalted above all creation, so great and eternal in comparison
with the littleness of the world and of man, that God incarnate is not merely a blasphemy but
an unmeaning and absurd phrase. Such a dogma was therefore energetically repudiated, and the
Semitic race submitted to persecution and dispersal rather than accept it. This is the real
reason why Christianity has not been received and will never be received by the Semitic race.
When Mahomet reorganized and perfected the Arab creed, he preserved intact the Semitic principle
of the absolute and incommunicable nature of God: the Semitic religion has ever held that there
is one God, and his prophet.

"On the other hand, Christianity was rapidly diffused among the Greek and Latin peoples, and
in all parts of Europe inhabited by our race: even savages and barbarians accepted more or
less frankly a doctrine rejected by the Semites in whom it had its origin. Many and various
causes have been assigned for this rapid diffusion of the new doctrine, and the old Greek and
Latin fathers ascribed it to the fact that men's minds had been naturally and providentially
prepared for it. It was attributed by others to the miseries and sufferings of the slave population,
and of the poor, who found a sweet illusion and comfort in the Christian hope of a world beyond
the grave. Some, again, suggest the omnipotent will of a tyrant, or the extreme ignorance of
the common and barbarous people. Although all these causes had a partial effect, they were
secondary and accidental. The true and unique cause lay deeper, in the intellectual constitution
of the race to which Christianity was preached; just as physiological characteristics are reproduced
in the species until they become permanent, so do intellectual inclinations become engrained
in the nature.

"We have said that our race is æsthetically more mythological than all others. If we consider
the religious teaching of various Aryan peoples, from the most primitive Vedic idolatry to
the successive religions of Brahma and Zend, of the Celts, Greeks, Latins, Germans, and Slavs,
we shall see how widely they differ from the religious conceptions and ideas of other races.
The vein of fanciful creations is inexhaustible, and there is a wealth of symbolic combinations
and a profusion of celestial and semi-celestial dramas. The intrinsic habit of forming mythical
representations of nature is due to a more vivid sense of her power, to a rapid succession
of images, and to a constant projection of the observer's own personality into phenomena. This
peculiar characteristic of our race is never wholly overcome, and to it is added a proud self-consciousness,
an energy of thought and action, a constant aspiration after grand achievements, and a haughty
contempt for all other nations.

"The very name of Aryan, transmitted in a modified form to all successive generations, denotes
dominion and valour; the Brahmanic cosmogony, and the epithet of apes, given to all other races
in the epic of Valmiki, bear witness to the same fact; it is shown in the slavery imposed on
conquered peoples, in the hatred of foreigners felt by all the Hellenic tribes; in the omnipotence
of Rome, the haughtiness of the Germanic orders; in the feudal system, in the Crusades; and
finally, in the modern sense of our superiority to all other existing races. The quickness
of perception, and the facile projection of human personality into natural objects, led to
the manifold creations of Olympus, and this was an æsthetic obstacle to any nearer approach
to the pure and absolute conception of God, while the innate pride of race was a hindrance
to our humiliation in the dust before God. The Semites declared that man was created in the
image of God, and we created God in our own image; while conscious of the power of the numina
we confronted them boldly, and were ready to resist them. The Indian legends, and those of
the Hellenes, the Scandinavians, and the whole Aryan race, are full of conflicts between gods
and men. The demi-gods must be remembered, showing that the Aryans believed themselves to be
sufficiently noble and great for the gods to love them, and to intermarry with them. Thus the
Aryan made himself into a God, and often took a glorious place in Olympus, while he declared
that God was made man.

"We might imagine that the doctrine of God incarnate would be as repugnant to the ideas, feelings,
and intellect of the Aryan as it was to the Semitic race. But the anthropomorphic side of Christianity
was readily embraced by the former as a mythical and æsthetic conception, and indeed it was
they who made a metaphorical expression into an essential dogma: the pride natural to the Aryan
race made them eager to accept a religion which placed man in a still higher Olympus: a belief
in Christ was rapidly diffused, not as God but as the Man-God. These are the true reasons,
not only for the rapid spread of Christianity in Europe, but also for the philosophic systems
of the Platonists and Alexandrines which preceded it. Although Philo was a Hebrew, and probably
knew nothing of Christ, he attained by means of Hellenism to the idea of the Man-God; the Platonic
Word, which was merely the projection of God into human reason, was accepted for the same reason
as the Christian dogma of the Word made man.

"Let us see what new principles, what higher morality and civilization were added by the diffusion
of Christianity to those principles which were the spontaneous product of the race. We must
first consider what part the pagan gods, as they were regarded by educated men, played in the
history of the European race, with respect to the individual and to the commonwealth. The pagan
Olympus, considered as a whole, and without reference to the various forms which it assumed
in different peoples, was not essentially distinct from human society. Although the gods formed
a higher order of immortal beings, they were mixed up with men in a thousand ways in practical
life, and conformed to the ways of humanity; they were constantly occupied in doing good or
ill to mortals; they were warmly interested in the disputes of men, taking part in the conflicts
of persons, cities, and peoples; special divinities watched over men from the cradle to the
grave, and they were loved or hated by the gods by reason of their family and race. In short,
the heavenly and earthly communities were so intermixed that the gods were only superior and
immortal men.

"The people were accustomed to consider their deities as ever present, distinct from, and yet
inseparably joined with them; so that the individual, the country, the tribes, were ever governed,
guarded, favoured, or opposed by special and peculiar gods. Olympus had a history, since the
acts of the gods took place in time and were coincident with the history of nations, so that
every event in heaven corresponded with one on earth; the idea of divine justice was exemplified
in that of men, and both were perfected together. Among pagans of the Aryan race there was
a perpetual and repeated alliance between men and gods made in the image of man. This action
of the gods both for good and evil became in its turn the rule of life for the ignorant multitude,
and they acted in conformity with the supposed will and actions of the gods; the divine will
was, however, nothing but an a priori religious conception of an idol representing the forces
of nature or some moral or religious idea. The moral perfection of nations, as time went on,
also perfected the supreme justice of Olympus, and the moral worth of the gods increased as
men became better. So that it was not the original theological idea, but man himself, who made
heaven more perfect, and the gods morally better and more just.

"The explicit power of mental reasoning and of science was added to this spontaneous evolution
of the religious idea, so far as the improved morality of the race perfected the heavenly justice
which was its own creation. The pagan Olympus was gradually simplified by sages and philosophers;
the illicit passions of the gods were set aside, and it was transformed into a providential
government of individuals and of society, much more remote from direct contact with men. The
conception of the immortal gods included one supreme power, formative, protecting or avenging,
and this conception bordered on the Semitic idea of the absolute Being, although without quite
attaining to it. God was confounded with the order of things, his laws were those of the universe,
by which he was also bound, and the righteous man lived in conformity with these laws. When
Christianity began, pagan rationalism had arrived at the idea of a spiritual and directing
power, organically identical with the universe. It was neither the Olympus of the common people,
nor the Semitic Jehovah, but rather the conscious and inevitable order of nature. Although,
either as an Olympus or as a dogma, the deity was confounded with men or constrained them to
follow a more rational rule of life, yet paganism clearly distinguished the gods from men in
their concrete personality, and the action of humanity was therefore distinct from that of
the deity.

"When Christianity began, the peoples of the Aryan race in Europe, or at least those of more
advanced civilization, had constituted for themselves a heavenly Pantheon, which contained
nearly all the primitive deities, but in a more human form and exercising a juster rule over
the world, while at the same time they were regarded as quite distinct from the society of
men. Although there was in this multiplicity of divine forms an hierarchical order of different
ranks, there was no general conception to include the destinies of the whole human race, and
to manifest by its unity its providential and historical development. Each people believed
in their own special destiny, which should either raise them to greater glory and power or
bring them to a speedy and inevitable end; but there was no common fate, no common prosperity
nor disaster. Rome had, as far as possible, united these various peoples by the idea of her
power, by the inforcement of her laws, and by the benefits of her citizenship, yet the Roman
unity was external, and did not spring from the intimate sense of a common lineage. While the
nations were so closely united to Rome by brute force, the subject peoples were agitated by
a desire for their ancient independence and self-government. Some of these pagan multitudes
advanced in civilization through their education in the learning of the Romans, and in morality
through their spontaneous activity, but they did not possess any deep sense of a general providence,
and heaven and earth continued to be under the sway of an incomprehensible fate.

"If we now turn to consider the mental conditions of educated men at that time, we shall see
that they transformed the Olympus of personal and concrete gods into symbols of the forces
of nature, and that they had risen to a purer conception of the deity by making it agree with
the progress of reason; but this deity was so remote from earth as to have scarcely anything
to do with the government of the world. According to the teaching of the Stoics, which was
very generally diffused, man was supposed to be so far left to himself that he was the creator
of his own virtue, and had to struggle, not only against nature and his fellow-man, but against
fate, the underlying essence of every cosmic form and motion. If this pagan rationalism gave
rise to great theoretic morality, and produced amazing examples of private and public virtue,
it had little effect on the multitudes, nor did it contain any guiding principle for the historical
life of humanity as a whole.

"Christianity proclaimed the spiritual unity of God, the unity of the race, the brotherhood
of all peoples, the redemption of the world, and consequently a providential influence on mankind.
Christianity taught that God himself was made man, and lived among men. Such teaching was offered
to the people as a truth of consciousness rather than of dogma, although it was afterwards
preserved in a theological form by the preaching of Paul, and the pagan mind was more affected
by sentiment than by reason. The unity of God was associated in their æsthetic imagination
with the earlier conception of the supreme Zeus, which now took a more Semitic form, and Olympus
was gloriously transformed into a company of elect Christians and holy fathers of the new faith.
A confused sentiment as to the mystic union of peoples, who became brothers in Christ, had
a powerful effect on the imagination and the heart, since they had already learned to regard
the world as the creation of one eternal Being. In the ardour of proselytism and of the diffusion
of the new creed, they hailed the historical transformation of the earthly endeavour after
temporal acquisitions and pleasures into a providential preparation for the heavenly kingdom.

"In Christ, the incarnation of the supreme God, they beheld the apotheosis of man, so acceptable
to the Aryan race, since he thus became the absolute ruler of the world and its fates. Ideas
and sentiments, of which the Semitic mind was incapable, and which were opposed to their historical
and intellectual development, moved and satisfied the Aryan mind, and became associated as
far as possible with the dogma and belief to which the race had attained in their pagan civilization.
Thus heaven, dogma, and Christian rites assumed from the first a pagan form; and while the
original idols were repudiated in the zeal for new principles, their common likeness was maintained
by the imaginative power of the race.

"In this way Christianity became popular, and the Semitic idea was invested with pagan forms,
in order to carry on the gradual and more intimate spiritual transformation which is not yet
terminated. Its teaching was at first decidedly rejected and opposed by cultivated minds, accustomed
as the Greeks were with few exceptions to use their reason. Among philosophers, the popular
belief in a personal Olympus had disappeared, and a more rational study of mankind did not
allow them to understand or comprehend a dogma which re-established anthropomorphism under
another aspect, so that this new and impious superstition became the object of persecution.
These were, however, mere exceptions, an anticipation of the opposition of reason to mythical
ideas, which became more vigorous in every successive age, until the time arrived when reason,
educated by a long course of exercise, was able to renew the effort with greater authority
and success. The common people gradually became Christian, and so also did educated men, who
thus added the authority of the schools to a teaching accepted by the feelings and innate inclination
of the race, and hence followed the theological development of Christian dogma.

"These new principles and beliefs, eventually accepted by all the nations of Europe, both barbarous
and civilized, not only brought to perfection the religious intuition characteristic of the
morality and civilization of the race, but they produced a new and renovating power in historical
and social life. This fresh virtue consisted in the belief in a power consubstantially divine
and human. Although the pagan gods were human in their extrinsic and intrinsic form, only differing
from mortals by their mighty privileges, yet they were personally distinct from men, and while
the acts of Olympus mingled with those of earth, they had an habitation and destinies apart.
But by the new dogma, the one God who was a Spirit took on him the substance of man and was
united with humanity as a whole, according to the Pauline interpretation, which was generally
accepted by our race. The divine nature was continually imparted to man, the body and members
in which the divine spirit was incarnated, since the Church or mystical community of Christians
was the temple of God. Through this lively sense of the divine incarnation, the Christian avatar
with which the race had been acquainted under other forms, God was no longer essentially distinguished
from mankind in the form of a number of concrete beings, but was spiritually infused into men
and acted through them. The Christian as man felt himself to be a participator with God himself
by a mystic intercourse. Since, therefore, the human faculty was historically identical with
the divine, and shared in the spiritual work which was to effect the redemption of society,
this new and Christian civilization added daring, confidence, and virtue to the natural energy
of the race.

"Not many years elapsed before men ceased to contemplate the immediate end of the world predicted
by the first apostles and the Apocalypse; they looked forward to a more distant future, and
except in the case of some particular sects, they applied the prophecies which referred to
the first generation of Christians to the future history of the race. It was therefore Christianity
which introduced into the consciousness of our Aryan peoples the principles of a divine historic
power acting on the social economy of mankind, and in this way the natural dignity and enterprising
pride of the race was increased. Through this fresh religious intuition and spiritual exaltation,
the purity and moral sweetness of the Semitic Nazarene became the law of society, and the church
organization gradually assimilated everything to itself, and received divine worship in the
person of the supreme Pontiff, who continued for many ages to be the temporal ruler of consciences,
of public institutions, and of civilization. Strange daring in a race which from its early
beginnings down to our own days has been always true to its own character, and in one form
or other has displayed vigour, energy, ambition, transforming power, and great designs.

"This remarkable process could only go on in and through those peoples whose vigour and pride
equalled their physical strength; to whom it is death to sit still, and life to be always busy,
to transform all things to their own image, to dominate over all--over God by the intellect,
over the world by science, over other races by force of arms. After the anthropomorphic form
was given to natural phenomena, which is done to some extent by all races, the gods were made
in the image of man; full of æsthetic imagination, of grand and vigorous conceptions, they
modified and transformed the truth of the Semitic idea, to suit their own genius and imagination,
and in this way they produced the wonderful fabric of Christian civilization and of Catholicism.
They alone accepted a teaching which infused new spirit into social life and produced the rule
of religion over the world, and the race still stands alone in the maintenance of its beliefs,
to which science has added the powerful simplicity of the Semitic idea, and their vigorous
influence has perpetuated and perfected human progress upon earth.[30] The Aryan race attained
to the Semitic conception in its purity and cosmic reality by the process of reason, and only
because it was endowed with all the civilizing and moral qualities which were acquired in so
many ages of moral and intellectual energy, has the old conception been so vigorous and productive.

"The Semitic race, on the other hand, adhered to their old faith, rejected Christianity, as
it had been formulated by the Aryans, and had little influence on the world. The Israelites,
indeed, dispersed among other nations, retained the idea of the one spiritual God in all its
purity, and civilization would have been much indebted to them for this rational idea of God
if they had more clearly understood its scientific bearing and the nature of man; many of them
are indeed justly entitled to fame in every department of science. But taken by themselves
and as a people, they had little effect on civilization, since they lacked the energy of purpose,
courage, mental superiority, and imagination, which create a durable and powerful civilization.

"The Arabs, aroused for a time by Mahometan fanaticism, overran great part of Europe, Asia,
and Africa, but without influencing civilization. While in possession of a great and productive
idea, they remained a sterile and nomad people, or founded unproductive dynasties. For the
Semitic race, the interval between God and man, and consequently between God and civilization,
was and is infinite, impassable. The Arabs possessed nothing but the devastating force of proselytism
to fertilize their minds and social relations; and, with the exception of architecture, geography,
and cognate sciences, they were for the most part only the transmitters of the science of others.
We, on the contrary, filled up the gulf by placing the Man-God between God and man, and civilization
has a power and vigour which has never flagged, and which, now that dogma is transformed into
reason, will not flag while the world lasts."[31]

This extract from a work published many years ago, seems to me to confirm the theory of myths
which I have explained; it shows how they are ultimately fused into a simple form, in conformity
with the ideas of civilized society, and it will also throw light on what is to follow.

If we consider the primitive genesis and evolution of myth, confirmed by all the facts of history
and ethnography, it will appear that although the matter on which thought was exercised was
mythical and fanciful, the form and organizing method were the same as those of science. It
is, in fact, a scientific process to observe, spontaneously at first, and then deliberately,
the points of likeness and unlikeness between special objects of perception; we must rise from
the particular to the general, from the individual to the species, thus ever enlarging the
circle of observation, in order to arrive at types, laws, and ultimate unity, or at least a
unity supposed to be ultimate, to which everything is reduced. So that the mythical faculty
of thought was scientific in its logical form, and was exercised in the same way as the scientific
faculty.

But science does not merely consist in the systematic arrangement of facts in which it begins,
nor in their combination into general and comprehensive laws; the sequence of causes and effects
must also be understood, and it is not enough to classify the fact without explaining its genesis
and cause. I was told that the Duke of WESTMINSTER had "left the Leger at Goodwood," which is
simply absurd, as I not only saw it run for at Doncaster myself, but it is ridiculous to insinuate
that the Duke went there, put the Leger in his pocket--(as if a Nobleman ever kept books)--walked
off quietly to Goodwood and left it there deliberately!

I conclude it can only be an expression coined to discount--(another ledger term)--the victory
of La Flèche,--to which not half enough attention has been drawn,
solely (in my opinion) because La Flèche is of the gentler sex, and
men don't like the "horse of the year" to be a mare.

I still maintain she was unlucky to lose the Derby, as she won the Oaks two days later in two seconds
quicker time:--(which is an anachronism--as if you win once out of twice--how can it be two
seconds?)

There was good sport at Yarmouth last week, though owing to the rain the course must have been on
the soft (roe) side,--by the way you can get them now in bottles, and very good they are. I am
glad to see that staunch supporter of the turf, Lord ELTHAM, winning races again--as his horses have
been much out of form lately, at least so I am told, but I was not aware that horses were
in a "form" at all, unless being "schooled" over hurdles.

I shall have a word or two to say on the Cesarewitch shortly--having had some private information
calculated to break a ROTHSCHILD if followed--but for the moment will content myself with scanning
the programme of the Leicester and Manchester Meetings.

There are two races which seem perhaps worth picking up--one at each place; and, while giving
my selection for the Leicestershire race in the usual verse, I will just mention that I should
have given Lord DUNRAVEN's Inverness for the Manchester race, but
that I see his Lordship has sent it to America--rather foolish, now
that winter is coming on; but perhaps he has another, and may be doing
a kindness to some poor American Cousin!

St. Angelo might win this race without an Inverness, though I presume he will appear in some sort
of clothing.

Yours devotedly, LADY GAY.

LEICESTERSHIRE ROYAL HANDICAP SELECTION.

On seeing an awkward, three-cornered affair, Which I heard was a racer
from Fingal, And hearing him roaring, and whistling an air, I said,
he'll be beaten by Windgall.

P.S.--This is awful; but what a horse to have to rhyme to!

* * * * *

"SHUT UP!" AT BARMOUTH!--Mr. GLADSTONE having made up his mind not to utter another syllable during
his holiday, selects as an appropriate resting-place, a charming sea-side spot where he stops
himself, and where there is a "Bar" before the "mouth."

* * * * *

* * * * *

* * * * *

VERY ENTERTAINING.

Dear MR. PUNCH,--So much is done by
the organisers of the Primrose League in the shape of amusements for
the people, that it seems strange "the other side" should not follow
suit. Without having decided political opinions, I like both the Government
and Her Majesty's Opposition to be on equal terms. Hence my suggestion.
I see that, a few days ago, Mr. GLADSTONE, in speaking to an audience
at Barmouth, made the following remarks. He said--He belonged to almost
every part of the country. A Scotchman by blood, born in Lancashire,
and resident in London, he had become closely attached to Wales by
marriage, and had now become too old to get rid of that inclination.
Surely these admissions conjure up the possibility of a really excellent
entertainment. To show you what I mean, I jot down, in dramatic form,
my notion of the manner in which the PREMIER's excellent idea should
be worked out:--

SCENE--A large hall, with a platform. On the platform,
Committee and Chairman. In front of the Chairman, large table, with
cloth reaching to the floor. Water-bottle, and tumbler, and lamp.

Chairman.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have great pleasure in announcing that the
Right Hon. W.E. GLADSTONE (cheers), will give his entertainment entitled
"The Man of Many Characters" almost immediately. The PREMIER's train
is a little late, but--ah, here come his fore-runners. In this phase, the fetishes are, according to
our theory, in the second stage. The Greeks and Romans, and indeed almost all other peoples,
knew no other way of kindling a fire, and in the sacred rites of the Peruvians the task was
assigned to the Incas at the annual festival of fire. The wood of the oak was used in Germany,
on account of the red colour of its bark, which led to the supposition that the god of fire
was concealed in it. Tan is called lohe, or flame, in Germany. This primitive mode of kindling
a fire was known to the Aryans before their dispersion, and friction with this object was equivalent
to the birth of the fire-god, constraining him to come down to earth from the air, from thunder,
etc.; indeed fire was also called düta, the messenger between heaven and earth. The question
arose who had drawn fire from heaven, and developed it in the arani. A resemblance was also
traced between the instruments for kindling fire and the organs of generation, a reciprocal
interchange of various myths, as we have before observed. Agni is concealed in arani, like
the embryo in the womb (Rig-Veda). Thus pramantha is the masculine instrument, arani the feminine,
and the act of uniting them is copulation.

Agni had disappeared from earth and was concealed in a cavern, whence it was drawn by a divine
person; that is, fire had disappeared and was concealed within the arani, whence it was extracted
by the pramantha and bestowed upon man. Mâtariçvan, the divine deliverer, is therefore only
the personification of the male organ.

In virtue of the idea that the soul is a spark, and that the production of fire resembles generation,
Bhrigu, lightning, is a creator. The son of Bhrigu marries the daughter of Manu, and they have
a son who at his birth breaks his mother's thigh, and therefore takes the name of Aurva (from
uru a thigh). This is only the lightning which rends the clouds asunder.

Many Græco-Latin myths, beginning with that of Prometheus must be referred to Mâtariçvan and
to the Bhrigu, and we can trace in the name of Prometheus the equivalent of a Sanscrit form
prâmathyus, one who obtains fire by friction. Prometheus is, in fact, the ravisher of celestial
fire (a phase of the polytheistic myth in a perfectly human form); he is a divine pramantha.
It is Prometheus who in one version of the myth cleaves open the head of Zeus, and causes Athene,
the goddess who uses the lightning as her spear, to issue from it. The Greeks afterwards carried
on the evolution of myth in its transition from the physical to the moral phenomenon, and,
forgetful of his origin, they made Prometheus into a seer. As Bhrigu, he created man of earth
and water, and breathed into him the spark of life. Villemarqué tells us that in Celtic antiquity
there was an analogous myth, as we might naturally expect, since the Celts belong to the Aryan
stock; Gwenn-Aran (albus superus) was a supernatural being which issued like lightning from
a cloud.

The more thoughtful Greeks did not limit the Promethean myth to the idol and to anthropomorphic
fancies, but it passed into a moral conception, and we have a proof of this transition in Æschylus.

In fact, as Silvestro Centofonti observes in a lecture on the characteristics of Greek literature,
the grand figure of the Æschylean Prometheus is a poetic personification of Thought, and of
its mysterious fates in the sphere of life as a whole. First, in its eternal existence, as
a primitive and organic force in the system of the world; then in the order of human things,
fettered by the bonds of civilization, and subject to the necessities, lusts, and evils which
constantly, arise from the union of soul and matter in unsatisfied mortals. Thought is itself
the source of tormenting cares in this earthly slavery, yet the sense of power makes it invincible,
firm in its purpose to endure all sufferings, to be superior to all events; assured of future
freedom, and always on the way to achieve it by reverting to the grandeur of its innate perfection;
finally attaining to this happy state, by shaking off all the enslaving bonds and anxious cares
of the kingdom of Zeus, and by obtaining a perfect life through the inspirations of wisdom,
when the revolutions of the heavens should fill the earth with divine power, and restore the
happiness of primeval times. It is evident that in this stupendous tragedy Æschylus is leading
us to the truth in a threefold sense: æsthetic, morally political, and cosmic. The supreme
idea which sums up the whole value of the composition is perhaps that of an inevitable reciprocity
of action and reaction between mind and effective force, between the primitive providence of
nature and the subsequent laws of art, both in the civilization of mankind and in the order
and life of the universe.

In this way the evolution of the special myth was transformed into poetry by the interweaving,
collection, and fusion with other myths, and in the minds of a higher order it was resolved
into an allegory or symbol of the forces of nature, into providential laws or a moral conception.

This law of progressive transformation also occurs in the successive modifications of the special
meaning of words, so far as they indicate not only the thing itself, but the image which gave
rise to the primitive roots. For a long while, those who heard the word were not only conscious
of the object which it represented, but of its image, which thus became a source of æsthetic
enjoyment to them. As time went on, this image was no longer reproduced, and the bare indication
remained, until the word gradually lost all material representation, and became an algebraical
sign, which merely recalled the object in question to the mind.

When, for example, we now use the word (coltello), coulter, the instrument indicated by this
phonetic sign immediately recurs to the mind and nothing else; the intelligence would see no
impropriety in the use of some other sign if it were generally intelligible. But in the times
of primitive speech, the inventors of this rude instrument were conscious of the material image
which gave rise to it, and they were likewise conscious of all the cognate images which diverged
from the same root, and in this way a brief but vivid drama was presented to the imagination.

If we examine this word with Pictet and others, we shall find that the name of the plough comes
from the Sanscrit krt, krnt, kart, to cleave or divide. Hence krntatra, a plough or dividing
instrument. The root krt subsequently became kut or kutt, to which we must refer kûta, kûtaka,
the body of the plough. This root krt, kart, is found in many European languages in the general
sense of cutting or breaking, as in the old Slav word kratiti, to cut off. It is also applied
to labour and its instruments: kartóti, to plough over again, karta, a line or furrow, and
in the Vedic Sanscrit, karta, a ditch or hole. Hence the Latin culter a saw, cultellus, a coulter,
and the Sanscrit kartari, a coulter. The Slav words for the mole which burrows in the earth
are connected with the root krt, or the Slav krat. In very remote times, men not only understood
the object indicated in the word for a coulter, but they were sensible of the image of the
primitive krt and its affixes, which were likewise derived from the primitive images, and with
these they included the cognate images of the several derivatives from the root. In these days
the word coulter and the Sanscrit kartari are simply signs or phonetic notations, insignificant
in themselves, and everything else has disappeared. But in primitive times an image animated
the word, which by the necessary faculty of perception so often described was transformed into
a kind of subject which effected the action indicated by the root. As this personality gradually
faded away, the actual representation of the image was lost, and even its remote echo finally
vanished, while the phonetic notation remained, devoid of life and memory, and without the
recurrence of cognate images which strengthened the original idea by association. All words
undergo the like evolution, and this may be called the mythical evolution of speech.

Thus the Sanscrit word for daughter is duhitar; in Persian it is dôchtar, in Greek [Greek:
Thugatêr], in Gothic dauhtar, in German Tochter. The word is derived from the root duh, to
milk, since this was the girl's business in a pastoral family. The sign still remains, but
it has lost its meaning, since the image and the drama have vanished. This analysis applies
to all languages, and it may also be traced in the words for numbers. The number five, for
example, among the Aryans and in many other tongues, signifies hand. This is the case in Thibet,
in Siam, and cognate languages, in the Indian Archipelago and in the whole of Oceania, in Africa,
and in many of the American peoples and tribes, where it is the origin of the decimal system.
In Homer we find the verb [Greek: pempazein], to count in fives, and then for counting in general;
in Lapland lokket, and in Finland lukea, to count, is derived from lokke, ten; and the Bambarese
adang, to count, is the origin of tank, ten.

When the numerical idea of five was first grasped, the conception was altogether material,
and was expressed by the image of the five-fingered hand. In the mind of the earliest rude
calculators, the number five was presented to them as a material hand, and the word involved
a real image, of which they became conscious in uttering it. The number and the hand were consequently
fused together in their respective images, and signified something actually combined together,
which effected in a material form the genesis of this numerical representation. But the material
entity gradually disappeared, the image faded and was divested of its personality, and only
the phonetic notation five remained, which no longer recalls a hand, the origin of the several
numerals, nor words connected with it. It is now a mere sign, apart from any rational idea.
The same may be said of the other numerals.

We give these few examples, which apply to all words, since they all follow the same course,
beginning with the real and primitive image, subjectively effecting their peculiar meaning.
Hence we see how the intrinsic law of myth is evolved in every human act in diverse ways, but
always with the same results.

In fact, before articulate speech, for which man was adapted by his organs and physiological
conditions, was formulated into words for things and words for shape, man like animals thought
in images; he associated and dissociated, he composed and decomposed, he moved and removed
images, which sufficed for all individual and immediate operations of his mind. The relations
of things were felt, or rather seen through his inward representation of them as in a picture,
expressing in a material form the respective positions of figures and objects which, since
they are remote from him, can only be expressed by such words as nearer, lower or higher, faint
or clear, by more vivid or paler tints, such as we see in a running stream, in the forms of
clouds, in the reciprocal relations of all objects represented in painting.

In order to understand the primeval process of thought by means of images, it is necessary
to conceive such a picture as living and mobile, and constantly forming a fresh combination
of parts. Animals have not, and primeval man had not, the phonetic signs or words which give
an individual character to the images, and so represent them that by combining these images
in an articulate form, thought may be represented by signs; and in and through these a universal
and objective mode of exercising the intellectual faculty of reasoning has been created.

Speech can, by means of reflex memory, produce at will the particular images already classified
in the mind, and this makes the process of reasoning possible; since such a process becomes
more easy by the use of signs to which the attention can revert. The relative size of objects,
and the like qualities, which are at first regarded as so many different intuitions in space,
are defined by words or gestures, and are thus subjected to comparative analogy; but in the
early stages of language these relations were presented in an extrinsic form by phonetic signs,
and became images which in some sort represented one particular state of consciousness with
respect to the two things compared. Galton, speaking of the Damaras, tells us that they find
great difficulty in counting more than five, since they have not another hand with which to
grasp the fingers which represent the units. When they lose any of their cattle, they do not
discover the loss by the diminution of the number, but by missing a familiar object. If two
packets of tobacco are given to them as the regulation price of a sheep, they will be altogether
at a loss to understand the receipt of four packets in exchange for two sheep. Such examples
might be multiplied to any extent.

We repeat that when not endowed with speech, or some analogous means, animals and man think
in images, and the relations between these images are observed in the simultaneousness and
succession of their real differences; these images are combined, associated, and compared by
the development of reflex power, and hence arises the estimate of their concrete relations.
Of this we have another proof, observed by Romanes in a lecture on the intelligence of animals,
and confirmed by myself, in the condition of deaf-mutes before they are educated, in whose
case the extrinsic sign and figure takes the place of the phonetic and articulate sign. Where
speech is wanting, it is still possible to follow a conscious and imaginative process of reasoning,
but not to rise to the higher abstract ideas which may be generated by such reasoning. The
thought of deaf-mutes always assumes the most concrete form, and one who was educated late
in life informed Romanes that he had always before thought in images. I know no instance of
a deaf-mute who has independently attained to an advanced intellectual stage, or who has been
able without education to form any conception of a supernatural world. R.S. Smith asserts that
one of his deaf-mute pupils believed, before his education, that the Bible had been printed
in the heavens by a printing press of enormous power; and Graham Bell speaks of a deaf-mute
who supposed that people went to church to do honour to the clergyman. In short, the intellectual
condition of uneducated deaf-mutes is on a level with that of animals, as far as the possibility
of forming abstract ideas is concerned, and they think in images. There is a well-known instance
in the deplorable condition of Laura Bridgman, who from the time she was two years old, was
deaf and dumb, blind, and even without the sense of taste, so that the sense of touch was all
that remained. By persevering and tender instruction, she attained to an intellectual condition
which was relatively high. A careful study of her case showed that she had been altogether
without intuitive knowledge of causes, of the absolute, and of God. Howe doubts whether she
had any idea of space and time, but this was not absolutely proved, since as far as distance
was concerned, she seemed to estimate it, by muscular sensation. Everything showed that she
thought in images. Although without any sensation of light or sound, she made certain noises
in her throat to indicate different people when she was conscious of their presence or when
she thought of them, so that she was naturally impelled to express every thought or sensation,
not externally perceived, by a sign; and this shows the tendency of every idea and image towards
an extrinsic form. She often conversed with herself, generally making signs with one hand and
replying with the other. It was evident that a muscular sign or the motion of the fingers was
substituted for the phonetic signs of speech, and in this way ideas and images received their
necessarily extrinsic form. The image was embodied in a muscular act and motion, and in this
way thought had its concrete representation. The same results would, as far as we know, be
obtained from others in the same unhappy conditions as Laura Bridgman.

It is therefore clear that primitive language was only a vocal and individual sign of material
images, and it was for a long while restricted to these concrete limits. Since the vocal signs
of the relations of things are less easily expressed, these relations were at first set forth
by gestures, by a movement of the whole person, and especially of the hands and face. This
preliminary action is helped by the imitative faculty with which children and uncultured peoples
are more especially endowed, of which we have also instances in the higher animals nearest
to man. The negroes imitate the gestures, clothing, and customs of white men in the most extraordinary
and grotesque manner, and so do the natives of New Zealand. The Kamschatkans have a great power
of imitating other men and animals, and this is also the case with the inhabitants of Vancouver.
Herndon was astonished by the mimic arts of the Brazilian Indians, and Wilkes made the same
observation on the Patagonians. This faculty is still more apparent in the lower races. Many
travellers have spoken of the extraordinary tendency to imitation among the Fuegians; and,
according to Monat, the Andaman islanders are not less disposed to mimicry and imitation. Mitchell
states that the Australians possess the same power.

This fact also applies to the languages of extremely rude and savage peoples. Some American
Indians, for instance, help out their sentences and make them intelligible by contortion of
their features and other gesticulations, and the same observation was made by Schweinwurth
of an African tribe. The language of the Bosjesmanns requires so many signs to make the meaning
of their words intelligible that it cannot be understood in the dark. These facts partly explain
the natural genesis of human languages.

We have learned from our earlier observations that phenomena appear to the perceptive faculty
of primitive man as subjects endowed with power. The subjectivity of these phenomena, their
intrinsic conditions and actions are fused into speech, which is their living and conscious
symbol; and it is clear that the evolution of language from the concrete to the symbolical,
and hence to the simple sign of the object, divested of its original power, is analogous to
that of myth.

This law of evolution also applies to the art of writing, which is at first only the precise
copy of the image; it is next transformed into an analogous symbol, and then into an alphabetical
sign, which serves as the simple expression of the conception, divested of its originally representative
faculty. Hence it is apparent that the evolution of myth conforms to the general law of the
evolution of human thought, of all its products and arts in their manifold ramifications. From
the image, the informing subject, from the conception and the myth, the necessary cycle is
accomplished in regular phases, wherever the ethnic temperament and capacity and extrinsic
circumstances permit it, until the rational idea is reached, the sign or cipher which becomes
the powerful instrument of the exercise and generalization of thought. In order to show the
efficacy of the mythical and scientific faculty of thought comprised in the systems of ancient
and modern philosophy, and its slow progress towards positive and rational science, we will
adduce an instance from the people in whom such an evolution was accomplished, aided by all
the civilized peoples in reciprocal communication with them. Let us see how this faculty was
manifested in the Greeks at a time when they first attempted to reduce the earlier and scanty
knowledge of nature to a system.

In Greece the historical course of this faculty ramified into two classes of research, which
were at that time objective, the Ionic and the Pythagorean schools. In the former, the phenomenon
and nature were assumed to be the direct object of knowledge, while in the latter the object
in view was the idea and harmony of things. Influenced by earlier and popular traditions, a
mythical and philosophic system arose in the Ionic school, which was exclusively devoted to
physical speculations. In Lower Italy, on the contrary, and in colonies which were for the
most part Doric, a science was constituted which, although it included physics and natural
phenomena, did not only consider their material value, but sought to extract from their laws
and harmony a criterion of good and evil. Ritter observes that the intimate connection between
the Pythagorean philosophy and lyrical music--of which the origin was sought as a clue to explain
the world--shows how far this philosophy was consonant with Doric thought. This historic process
is quite natural, since the speculations of philosophy are first directed to physical phenomena,
as they are displayed in inward and in external life, and then rise to the consideration of
specific types, in a word, to the general and the universal.

Throughout this philosophical evolution the consideration is mainly from the objective point
of view, and this is in conformity with the intellectual evolution of reason, since the mind
is first occupied with the knowledge of things. In accordance with tradition and the logic
of things, Ionic speculation was developed before the Doric. The Eleatic school followed from
the two former, although its development was contemporary with the more perfect stage of these,
and its influence upon them was to some extent reactionary.

Thales taught that everything was derived from one unique principle, namely water. The ancients
believed that the land was separated from the water by a primitive and mythical process, a
belief which had its source in the appearance of aqueous and meteorological phenomena; so that
the teaching of Thales followed the earliest popular traditions, of which we find traces in
the Indies, in Egypt, in the book of Genesis, and in many legends diffused through the world
even in modern times. He said that everything was nourished by moisture, from which heat itself
was derived, and that moisture was the seed of all things; that water is the origin of this
moisture, and since all things are derived from it it is the primitive principle of the world.
We see how much this theory is concerned with natural phenomena in their life, nutrition, and
birth by means of seed. He regarded the world as a living being, which had been evolved from
an imperfect germ of moisture. This mode of animating the world, which consists in tracing
the development of a germ already in existence, reappears in other parts of his philosophy.
He saw life in the appearance of death, and held the loadstone and yellow amber to be animate
bodies, declaring generally that the world is alive, and filled with demons and genii.[32]

We trace the basis of these ideas in traditions prior to Thales, declaring the world to be
a living being, and that everything was derived from a primitive condition of germs. The same
opinion was held by Hippo, by Diogenes of Apollonia, by Heraclitus, and by Anaxagoras. Aristotle
states that the theory of development by germs was extremely ancient in his time. The other
philosophers of the Ionic and successive schools mingled these fanciful ideas with the systematic
arrangement of their theories as to the origin and constitution of the world, so that it is
unnecessary to refer to them, since the method and conceptions are identical.

It is evident from this sketch that while thought gradually evolved a more rational system
of general knowledge, the earlier idols and primitive mythical interpretations were not abandoned,
although they assumed a larger and more scientific form. Thales and others assigned a mechanical
origin to things, such as water, fire, or the like, which was contrary to anthropomorphic ideas;
yet they still regarded the world as a living being, developed and perfected by the same laws
and functions as all plants and animals, and they peopled it with genii and demons, thus handing
on the earliest and rudest traditions of the race.

While the scientific faculty was gathering strength and leading the way to a more rational
consideration of the world and natural phenomena, really advancing beyond the earlier ideas
which had been almost wholly mythical, myth was still the matrix of thought, although its envelopment
was partly rent asunder and was becoming transparent. From this brief notice of the Ionic philosophy,
sufficient for our purpose, let us return to the Pythagorean school, in which, although the
faculty at work is essentially objective, there is a closer consideration of the analogies
between thought and the world, and the ground is more often retraced, so that theory assumes
a more intellectual form.

The Pythagoreans represented the origin of the world as the union of the two opposite principles
of the illimitable and the limited, of the equal and the unequal. Yet they conceive this to
be a primitive union, since they formulated the supreme principle as equal--unequal (Arist.
Met. xii. 7.) They held the infinite to be the place of the one. There was an attraction between
the two principles, which was termed the act of breathing; hence the void entered into the
world and separated things from each other. Thus their conception of the world was that of
a concourse of opposite principles. They represented its limits as a unity and as the true
beginning of multiplicity. They regarded the development of the world as a process of life
regulated by the primitive principles contained in the world; its breath or life depended on
the breaking forth of the infinite void in Uranus, and the time which is termed the interval
of all nature penetrates at once and with the breath into the world. All therefore emanates
from one, and all is at the same time governed by one supreme power. Number is everything,
and is the essence of things, but the triad includes all number, since it contains the beginning,
middle, and end. Everything is derived from the primitive one and from the principal number;
and since this number in breathing its vital evolution into the void is divided into many units,
everything is derived from the multiplicity of these units or numbers.

Since, by his idea of the source of universal order, Pythagoras partly accepted the theocosmic
monad as the final and necessary root of all life, and of all that is knowable, he could not
fail to see the convertibility of the unit into the Being. But if the unit must always precede
the manifold, there is a first unit from which all the others proceed; if this first and eternal
unit is at the same time the absolute being, it follows that number and the world have a common
origin and a common essence, and that the intrinsic causes and possible combinations of number
are virtually accomplished in the development of the world, and these causes and combinations
are ideal forms of this development. The monad is developed by these laws through all the generative
processes of nature, while at the same time it remains eternal in the system of the universe;
so that things not only have their origin and essence, their place and time according to numerical
causes, but each is in effect a number as far as its individual properties and the universal
process of cosmic life are concerned. The reason of the number must depend upon the substance,
by the configurations of which it is defined, divided, added, and multiplied, and to this geometry
is added, which measures all things in relation to themselves and others. He came as a living
man into a dead world, and by inculcating a living idea of God and proclaiming the divine Fatherhood
gave a new direction and inner elevation to the expectations of His age, showing the true design
of God's revelation and the real meaning of the prophetic utterances of the past. To interpret
the kingdom wholly from an eschatological point of view would involve a failure to apprehend
the spiritual greatness of the personality with which we are dealing.[26] (2) This view virtually
makes Christ a false prophet. For, as a matter of fact, the sudden and catastrophic coming of the
kingdom as predicted by the Hebrew apocalyptics did not take place. On the contrary the kingdom
of God came not as the Jews expected in a sudden descent from the
clouds, but in the slow and progressive domination of God over the
souls and social relationships of mankind.

In view of the whole spirit of Jesus, His conception of God, and His relation to human life,
as well as the attitude of St. Paul to the Parousia, it is critically unsound to deny that Jesus
believed in the presence of the kingdom in a real sense during His lifetime.[27]

2. If this conception of the kingdom of God be correct we may now proceed to regard it under
three aspects, Present, Progressive, and Future--as a Gift immediately bestowed by Jesus, as
a Task to be worked out by man in the history of the world, and as a Hope to be consummated by
God in the future.

{136}

(1) The Kingdom as a Present Reality.--After what has been already said it will not be necessary
to dwell upon this aspect. It might be supported by direct sayings
of our Lord.[28] But the whole tenor and atmosphere of the Gospels,
the uniqueness of Christ's personality, His claim to heal disease
and forgive sin, as well as the conditions of entrance, imply clearly
that in Jesus' own view the kingdom was an actual fact inaugurated
by Him and obtaining its meaning and power from His own person and
influence. In this first rational classification of science by the Greeks,
both on its physical and its ideal side, thought sometimes issues in the simple contemplation
of manifold nature, while it still continues mythical in its fundamental conceptions and spiritual
corollaries; myth, however, instead of being altogether anthropomorphic, begins to become scientific.

I must here be allowed to quote a hymn in the Rig-Veda, which was historically earlier than
the primitive philosophy of Greece, but which reveals the same tendency, the same mythical
and scientific teaching in its interpretation of the world.

It is evident that in this hymn, the expression of the moment when human thought was partly
freed from the earlier anthropomorphic ideas, the scientific faculty which attempts a rational
explanation of the world is shown; and although this is an isolated inspiration of the prophet,
yet it shadows forth the conclusions to which the primitive Hellenic speculation came when
it was deliberately exerted to solve the problem of creation. In fact, there is here an intimation
of the waters, of the void or deep abyss, as the beginnings of the world; of the breath of
the One, the hidden germ of things developed by means of heat; of productive powers as a lower,
and energy as a higher form of nature; of conceptions found in the Ionic, the Pythagorean,
and the Eleatic philosophies, which all converge into the one. All belong to the same Aryan race.

The Vedic composition represents in Dyâvâprthivî the close connection between the two divinities,
Heaven and Earth, the one considered as the active and creative principle, the other as that
which is passive and fertilized; the same ideas, more or less worked out, underlie not only
the first philosophies, but successive theories and systems. The worship of water, of fire,
and of air involved their personification, and they then became exciting principles, in accordance
with the law of evolution which we have laid down. In the Rig-Veda, as well as in the Zendavesta,
the waters are collectively invoked by their special name âpas, and they are termed the mothers,
the divine, which contain the amrta or ambrosia, and all healing powers. In Agni and its Vedic
transformations we clearly trace the worship of fire, and its cosmic value. The Vedic worship
of the air is Vâyu, from va, to breathe, who is associated with the higher gods, and especially
with Indra, ruler of the atmosphere: next comes Rudra, the god of storms, accompanied by the
Maruti, the winds; and in the Zendavesta the air is invoked as an element. Hence we see that
a more rational conception of the genesis of the world succeeds to these earlier representations
and personifications of the elements; representations which in another form endure throughout
the course of human thought.

It is now necessary to consider the other period of the mythical and scientific evolution which
had its definitive conclusion in Plato and Aristotle, teachers who even now to some extent
influence the two great currents of speculative science. For us, however, it is more important
to consider the Platonic teaching as that in which the mythical evolution of the earlier representations
has full and clear expression; while in the Aristotelian philosophy an element of dissolution
is already at work which throws some light on the illusions of the Platonic school.

We must bear in mind that the spontaneous and even the reflective intellectual faculty gradually
assimilated special and independent myths into comprehensive types, which referred to all natural
objects. Next, the incarnation of spirits produced the earliest forms of polytheism, and these
were slowly classified into more concentric circles, and finally into a single hierarchical
system. Owing to the attitude and ethnic temperament of the Greeks, the glorious anthropomorphism
of their Olympus arose in a more vivid form than elsewhere, and it was impersonated in the
all-powerful and all-seeing Zeus, ruler of the world, of gods and men. This process, modified
in a thousand ways, was carried on in all races. Hence it resulted that every object had a
type, its god; everything was typically individuated in an anthropomorphic entity in such a
way that there arose a natural dualism between the phenomena, facts, and cosmic orders on the
one side, and on the other the hierarchy of gods who represented them and over whom they presided.
The Hellenic philosophies prior to Plato, both physical and intellectual, and also the psychological
morality of Socrates, had already accomplished the first evolution of this typical stage of
universal polytheism, substituting for anthropomorphic representations physical and intellectual
principles and powers. Thought was educated in its inward exercise, as well as in the observation
of facts and ideal representations. But--and this constituted the first evolution of anthropomorphism
in general--these powers all expressed the thing in its general and phenomenal form; it was
endowed with merely zoomorphic force, and the world was regarded as physiologically living.

Plato, impelled by the foregoing evolution, and by the large and exquisitely æsthetic character
of his genius, accomplished the second and altogether intellectual stage of evolution by inverting
the problem; he affirmed that the final and intrinsic result of the exercise of thought was
its earlier and eternal essence, extrinsic and objective. The types which were first fetishes
and then polytheistic were transformed into the physical and intellectual principles of the
world, divested of all mythical and extrinsic form as far as their material organization was
concerned. Plato held that such types were really ideal, as in fact they had unconsciously
been from the first; that is, that it was simply a logical conception of species and genera
which is natural to human thought; a conception necessary for the spontaneous as well as for
the reflex and scientific processes of thought. From the type, the specific idea, the generalization
into the idea of each special object was easy, since each object has its psychical representation
in the mind. Special and specific ideas were then arranged in a certain order, and those which
are more general in a concentric and systematic classification; this had been also the case
in the earlier polytheistic system, since the process of the intelligence naturally arranges
all its representations. But he did not stop here, nor indeed was it possible for him to do so.

We know that the intelligence does not only understand objects, but their relations to each
other, by means of its comparative faculty; these relations were, as in the case of animals,
at first intuitively perceived by direct observation and the alternate and reciprocal motion
of the images, and they were first presented to the imagination and then embodied in speech.
We have said in the foregoing chapters that in primitive thought these relations involved an
active entity, and were in a word entified. Plato, pursuing his intellectual process of reasoning,
and the reciprocal properties of ideas, noted the ideality of these relations so far as they
are a psychical representation, and hence he was constrained by the unconscious evolution of
thought to affirm that an idea was present in every relation, and thus the great, the little,
the less, the more, had their ideal representatives in the general construction of his theory.
But man is not only an intellectual, but an active, sentient, living being, tending to an object
as an individual and a social subject. So that he not only attains to the understanding of
ideal truth, but also of the good and the beautiful. According to Plato, the Good and the Beautiful
must also necessarily be Ideas of a general character, like those which embrace all ideal relations
whatever. Since they are universal, and due to the innate impulse of thought towards concentric
ascension, they must rank as the sum and apex of ideas, so that the Good is emphatically the
Idea, or God. On turning to the world of sensations, or of particular objects, ideas are the
eternal model (paradigm) according to which things are made; these are the images (idoli) of
which the others are the imperfect copies (mimesi). The world of sense is itself only a symbol,
an allegory, a figure. As in the sensible world there is a scale of beings from the lowest
to the most perfect, that is to the material universe, so in the sphere of intellect, the type
of the world, ideas are combined together by higher ideas, and these again by others still
higher, and so on to the apex, the ultimate, supreme, omnipotent Idea, the Good which includes
and sums up the whole.

Plato holds that matter is not the body, but that which may become the body by the plastic
action of the idea, as Weber well expresses it; matter considered in itself is the indefinite
(apeiron), the indefinable (aoriston), and the amorphous, and it is co-eternal with ideas,
and inert; from the union of ideas and matter the cosmos had its origin, the image of the invisible
deity, God in power, the living organism (Zoon), possessing a body, sense, a definite object,
a soul. The body of the universe has the form of a sphere, the most beautiful which can be
conceived; the circle described in revolving is also the most perfect motion.

The stars first had their source in the Idea of Good; first the fixed stars, then the planets,
then the earth, created deities; the earth produced organized beings, beginning with man, the
crowning work and object of all the rest; the fruits of the earth were made to nourish him,
and animals were made to become the abode of fallen souls. Man, the microcosm, is reason within
a soul, which is in its turn contained in a body. The whole body is organized with a view to
this reason. The head, the seat of reason, is round because this is the most perfect form.
The breast is the seat of generous passions, while the bestial appetites are found in the belly
and intestines.

The human soul, like the soul of the world, contains immortal and mortal elements; the intelligence
or reason, and sensuality. The immortality of the soul is also proved by the memory. The subsequent
union of life and matter in the production of the universe is the work of an intermediate,
equivocal being, the demiurgos. Thus Plato opposes the eternity of the intelligence to Ionic
materialism, and the eternity of matter to the monistic theory of the Eleatics.

In the genesis of nature we again find the synthetic conception of the elements, which he estimates
to be four; to which geometrical forms correspond, and the world was finally organized after
its human type. He divides the soul into several distinct and independent powers, which are
ever revolving between life and death: they inhabit the stars and depend upon them, since the
soul which has been righteous on earth will be happy after death in the star to which it was
originally destined; but those who on earth only desire here bodily pleasures will wander as
shades round the tombs, or will migrate into the bodies of various animals. He constitutes
the stars into contingent and sensible gods: they have beautiful and immortal bodies of a round
form, and are made of fire. He asserts poetic inspiration and madness to be the result of demoniac
possession, and says with Socrates that those who deny demoniac powers are themselves demoniacs.

We see from this account the mythical origin of all that concerns the organization and genesis
of the world, the destinies and nature of the soul, since these are sublimated myths; the elements
are first regarded as deities, and the world is made in the image of man, and considered to
be alive; the stars and the earth are endowed with life and intelligence; the fate of souls
before and after death, their recollection of a prior existence, their transmigrations and
wanderings around the tombs, demoniac possession in inspiration and madness, are all very ancient
mythical representations, which form a great part of the theoretical and spiritual cosmogony
of savages in all times and places. We have seen that not only relatively civilized peoples,
but those which are quite savage divide souls into distinct parts: throughout Africa, America,
and Asia, there is a belief in the transmigration of souls into animals, plants, and other
objects. The Tasmanians believed that their souls would ascend to the stars and abide there;
and all savages hold the demoniac possession of inspired persons, of madmen, and of the sick,
which has led to what may be called a diabolic pathology. The general conception of the world
as a living animal, with all the tendencies ascribed to it by Plato, is only the primeval fact
of the animation and personification of phenomena applied to the general idea of the universe.
Hence it is easy to see how much of Plato's physics and psychology are due to the necessary
and historic course of myth, and to the schools into which myth had been modified before his time.

We must dwell more particularly on his theory of ideas, since in this the advance made by Plato
in the evolution of myth really consists, and it marks a very definite stage which had and
still has a powerful influence on subsequent and modern thought.

We have already shown how, by the logical power of thought, this phase in the ideal evolution
of myth was reached, and we have traced it in an inchoate form in various rude peoples, as
well as in its ultimate modification in Plato. In his writings it takes the form of a complete,
vast, and organic theory. The logical conceptions and representative ideas, idols peculiar
to the mind, which were at first involved in fetishtic and anthropomorphic images, are now
divested of their earlier wrappings, and are classified as the intellectual ideas which they
really are, and which they have become by the innate and reflex exercise of human thought.
But on account of the faculty which ever governs our immediate perception of internal and external
things they could not in Plato's time, nor indeed in that of many subsequent philosophers,
remain as simple intellectual signs of the process of reason. This faculty influenced these
conceptions, these psychical forms, whether particular, specific, or general, and they became
living subjects, like phenomena, objects, shades, images in dreams, normal and abnormal hallucinations.
Thus the Ideas in Plato became, reflectively and theoretically, entities with an intrinsic
existence, eternal, divine, and absolute essences. But the fetish, the anthropomorphic idol,
was not only regarded as a living but as a causative subject; the same power was likewise infused
into the Ideas, and they were held to be causes of particular things, of which they were the
earlier and eternal type. Thus the myth in the Platonic Ideas became scientific, but it continued
to be a myth; the substance varied, but the form was the same. The objective phenomena of the
world had first been personified, or their fanciful images were assumed to be objective; now
the world of reason was personified, and mythology became intellectual instead of cosmic.

Those who opposed Plato's theory of ideas said that he realized abstractions, or personified
ideas; but no one, as I think, perceived the natural process which led him to do so, nor explained
the faculty by which he was necessarily influenced. Plato's theory was only an ultimate phase
of the evolution of the vague and primitive animation of the world, which had passed through
fetishism, polytheism, and the worship of the elements of nature, and had reached the entification
and subjectivity of ideas, which was also attained by natural science, after passing through
its mythical envelopment. We have noted the causes, which in the case of the earlier philosophers
happened to be objective, while they were in Plato's case subjective, owing to the character
and temperament of his mind; both conduced to the development and æsthetic splendour of this
teaching among the Greeks. The teaching of Plato, which had more or less influence on all the
earlier civilized peoples, of his own and subsequent times, and which was also involved in
the mythical representations of later savages, assumed an aspect which varied with the special
history, the ethnic temperament, the geographical and extrinsic conditions of different peoples;
but considered in itself, it is always the same, and is the necessary result of the evolution
of myth and of thought. Since the evolution of myth leads to the gradual genesis of science,
which becomes more rational as myth is transformed from the material to the ideal, ideas are
substituted for myths, and laws, as Vico well observes, for the canons of poetry.

This noble and more rational theory of eternal and causative Ideas resembles anthropomorphic
polytheism in concentrating into one supreme Idea the intellectual Zeus, the Being of beings,
according to another mythical and scientific representation by Aristotle, and it was afterwards
combined with the Semitic idea of the Absolute. This was fused with the Logos, the Platonic
demiurgos of Messianic ideas, and afterwards produced the universal philosophy and religion
of Catholicism, which dominated and still dominates over thought with vigorous tenacity, and
extends into all the civilized world inhabited by European races. We do not only trace the
same thought, modified, classified, and perfected in the Fourth Gospel, in the Councils, the
Fathers, and the schoolmen, but also in independent philosophies. In our own time it has assumed
new forms, derived from the rapid progress made in cosmic and experimental sciences, even in
those which are apparently the most rationalizing. It is manifest in Hegel, Fichte, and Schelling,
nor is it difficult to trace it in the latest and artificial theories of the schools of Schopenhauer
and Hartmann. In all these cases the entification of logical conceptions is evident; in all
there is an arbitrary personification of a conception or of a fundamental Idea.

In order fully to understand the evolution of thought in myth and science, it is necessary
to consider the other schools which arose in Greece, prior to, and contemporaneously with,
Plato, as we shall thus obtain a more comprehensive idea of the course of such a development.
In addition to the natural and partly ideal schools, the Ionic, the Eleatic, the Pythagorean
and the Platonic, there arose those of Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus, which might be
called mechanical, and that of Aristotle, which takes a middle course between the idea and
the fact, between the dynamic and the mechanical explanation of the universe.

In an intellectual people like the Greeks there arose, in addition to the speculative theories
already mentioned, other opinions which were derived from minds singularly free from mythical
ideas; the world was considered as a concourse of independent atoms; its genesis thus became
more conformable with abstract mathematical calculation, effected by this combination of simple
bodies and the evolution of elements. This was what Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus undertook
to teach, passing beyond the natural and ideal myths, in order to take their stand on the movement
of isolated parts as the maker of the universe. Hence followed the theory of atoms, and the
mechanical construction of the world, of bodies and souls, their continual composition and
decomposition. Since, however, these were mere speculations, not supported by experimental
methods and adequate instruments, mythical forms were confounded with the mechanical explanation
of the world, such as the altogether anthropomorphic conception of gods who were dissolved
and formed again; the sensible effluvium from images, an effluvium which revealed the ancient
belief in the normal and abnormal personification of imaginary forms, and of ideas. Yet the
character of this teaching was progressive and rational in comparison with the mythical and
ideal theory of Plato, and with the schools and religions which emanated from him, even up
to our time, and thought was strongly stimulated in its opposition to the continuance of myth.

The influence of this school was confirmed by the Aristotelian teaching; if on the one side
Aristotle inclined towards the mythical entities of Plato, and the old zoomorphic conception
of the world, on the other his theory of perception and of ideas, his amazing observations
in physiology and anatomy, and his natural classification of the animal kingdom, induced a
positive tendency of thought, an a posteriori method of observation, which awakened the intelligence
and predisposed it to a more rational and scientific evolution. His geocentric ideas of cosmogony,
his logical forms, the human architecture of the world, his conception of the Being who was
the end and cause of motion in all things, were indeed obstinately maintained by the philosophy
of Catholics and schoolmen, and served as an obstacle to the real progress of science; but
on the other hand, his general method of observing nature, the discoveries which he made, and
the tendency of his researches, as well as the importance he assigned to consciousness in the
formation of ideas, did much to foster independent inquiry in the history of human thought;
and coupled with the earlier mechanical schools, he prepared the way for the evolution of modern
science. This is not the place for tracing the simultaneous course of the evolution of the
ideal and mechanical schools during the ages which separate us from their origin; and while
the influence of the one gradually waned, the other gained strength, although in a sporadic
way, first among privileged minds, and then more generally.

It necessarily happened that as the evolution of thought went on, impelled by its early tendencies,
both mechanical and positive, the ideal system was also modified, and gave place to sounder
and truer theories. This great fact, the ultimate evolution of our own time, was effected on
the one side by psychological analysis, and on the other by the direct and experimental observation
of nature. Setting aside the gradual preparation which led up to this point, we can consider
Descartes and Galileo as the representatives of these two great factors; since the one by the
analysis of thought, the other by natural experiments, overthrew the mythical ideas, although
without being aware that the achievement would produce such grand results.

The Platonic Ideas were objective to the mind, and independent of it, since they were regarded
as a divine, concrete, absolute world in themselves. The earlier evolution of myth and science
relied upon this and were resolved into it. But we know that the process of thought is continuous
in historic races, and that myth is gradually divested of its personality and assumes a more
intellectual form in the mind. Thus the material Idea passed into an intellectual conception;
that which first appeared in an objective and extrinsic form became subjective and intrinsic,
a transition which was effected by the nominalists. This gave rise to a cognition which was
altogether psychological; at first reality was wholly objective, and the ideas were only a
sublime intellectual myth, but now the objective world disappeared, and the intellect which
formulated the conception was the only real thing. With contagious fear a-shiver, They flock like
Panurge's poor sheep, O Pan! What, what shall the merest of manhood quicken In geese gregarious,
panic-stricken Like frighted fish in the river.

You sneer at the shame of them, Poster-Pan, Poltroons of the pigeon-liver. Your placards gibbet
them, Poster-Pan, Who crowd like curs in the cowardly crush, Who flock like sheep in the brainless
rush With fear or greed a-shiver.

You are half a beast, O new god
Pan! To him the teaching of Spinoza and Kant was really due, as well as the English
schools which had so much to do with the destruction of the earlier mythical edifice of ideas.

But, as I have already observed, if this great rational progress were important on the one
side, on the other it produced a more spiritualized form of myth, namely the subjective, which
became still more powerful in the philosophy of Kant. While some thinkers sought to resolve
and dissolve the objective myth, they did it in such a way as to add strength to the subjective
form of myth and science, for which Descartes had prepared the way; the theory of Spinoza and
of the German school in general fundamentally consists in the substitution of entified forms
and dialectics of the mind for the earlier objective forms of ideas. A great error was rectified,
and the former phase of the intellectual evolution of myth disappeared, in favour of another
which, although still erroneous, was more rational and independent.

The subjective and still mythical representations, either of the mind or of external objects,
were afterwards reduced to true science by positive and experimental methods, aided by instruments,
and confirmed by the discoveries of Galileo and of his disciples throughout the civilized world.
He was in modern times another great factor of the dissolution of myth, so far as it is definitive.
Nature was made subordinate to weight and measure, and to their mathematical and mechanical
proportions in various phenomena; these were deduced from experiment and the use of instruments,
the factors which in the hands of Galileo and his great successors in all civilized nations,
destroyed and are still destroying the old mythical conception of the world. In astronomy they
overthrew the catholic tenet of the geocentric constitution of the heavens; they shattered
the spheres in which they were confined, opened infinite space, and peopled it with an infinite
number of stars, and in the attraction of gravity they discovered the universal law of motion
in the firmament. Thus all the mythical representations of the system of the world, whether
Aristotelian, Ptolemaic, or Biblical, vanished for ever, and the great zoomorphic body of the
universe was dissolved; to be replaced by worlds circulating in infinite space, subject to
the laws of number and of geometry.

Measure, weight, and proportion were applied to all celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and
physics, chemistry, and all the organic sciences became the manifestation of facts, of observed
and calculated laws, arranged in a natural order, and in this way an immense advance was made
in all branches of science. The history of mankind, first regarded as the arbitrary arrangement
of a superior being, as it was formulated in the teaching of Judaism and Christianity, had
its own laws in the facts of which it consisted, and thus the mythical conception which endowed
it with personal life was dissolved. The origin of things was explained by this method of observation,
and by these positive conceptions; the records which had hitherto been regarded as a divine,
extrinsic revelation came to be considered as simple documents, in which truth was to be separated
from the myth which obscured and encompassed it. So by degrees, from fact to fact, from analysis
to analysis, by observation, experiment, and decomposition, the rational, mechanical explanation
arose and gathered strength. The generation of things, the variety of phenomena and their order,
were derived from the primitive chemical atom, and from the various changes of form and rapidity
of motion to which they are subjected. The old conception of atoms, which had never been forgotten,
and which had unconsciously swayed and influenced the minds of men, reappears; but it reappears
transformed by observation, by weight and measure and experiment, and it has become a science
instead of a simple speculation. The atomistic evolution of the ancients, accepted by one school
of speculative thought, which sought to overthrow the mythical representation of the world,
was only an isolated anticipation of a few philosophers; it has now become a scientific evolution,
common to all modern civilization. The theory of descent, transformation, and the general evolution
of species, followed as a necessary corollary and immediate result of the dissolution of Plato's
mythical conception of specific ideas, and of all the generic but material personifications
with which nature had been peopled. When such conceptions of the ideal world were dissipated,
those of the actual world of nature soon followed, and this de-personification of natural,
mythical species in the vast organic kingdom is one of the most splendid intellectual achievements
of the age.

This victory of the natural sciences has reacted on those which are psychological, and on the
theory of the mind, and has subjected them to the necessities and form of this new phase of
the evolution of thought. The subjective had been substituted for the objective myth and had
created the forms of mind, its logical laws and intrinsic process, the objective synthesis
of the world, and it was now influenced by the stupendous discoveries and analyses of other
sciences, so that psychology was in its turn transformed into a science, not only of observation,
but of experiment. Measure, weight, numerical proportion, in short the experimental method,
took possession of the facts, acts, and processes of the mind, as of every other object and
subject of nature. In addition to the great names of modern psychologists in England, we may
mention among other experimental psychologists in Germany, Fechner, Wundt, Lotze, Helmholtz,
Weber, Kammler, etc.; illustrious men in France and elsewhere might also be cited to show what
progress has been made and is about to be made in this field. The destruction of myth and of
the subjective myths of psychology is always going on, and a positive science of mental phenomena
has arisen, like that of natural phenomena. The ultimate phase of myth is so near its end that
it has been possible to create a psychology implying the absence of a soul. The scientific
faculty has now indeed a complete ascendency over the mythical representation with which it
was originally coeval.

Yet we do not mean to say that myth is extinct. In the case of the great majority of the human
race, a small and elect portion excepted, myth and all the superstitions which proceed from
it persist in an ideal, cosmic, spiritual, or religious form, and these are only slowly disappearing
among the common people, and even among the educated classes. Owing to the primordial and innate
necessity which it is so difficult to overcome, science itself still nourishes myths within
its pale, although unconsciously and in their most rational form. Within our own recollection
the imponderable was a tenet of physics, and this was indeed, in spite of all the enlightenment
of science, a mythical entification of forces. The same mythical entifications were found in
physiology, in chemistry, in nearly all the sciences. Undoubtedly these scientific myths had
no anthropomorphic value, yet they are notwithstanding truly mythical entifications, inasmuch
as they virtually personify laws, or mere modes of motion.

Ether, according to our present conception of it, differing in its laws and influences from
the atoms which constitute the world, and working among and above them, is perhaps only a grand
myth like that of the imponderable, which has been exploded; that is, it is held to be a material
entity, while it may be only another modification of the elementary matter in a state differing
from the three already known to us; some of Crooke's late experiments on one condition of extremely
gaseous matter leads to this assumption. The divided forces of matter, and the dualism which
still survives, are also mythical conceptions. Although so much progress has been made in a
rational direction, and truth is widely diffused, yet the old mythical instinct constantly
reappears in some form or other. I must be permitted to say that this is an evident proof of
the truth of my theory. Unless myth were due to an intrinsic psychical and organic law, it
would not so persistently reappear. As soon as men are rationally conscious of this entifying
faculty and its immediate effects on knowledge, the illusion will cease. Myth will be destroyed
in every kind of facts and phenomena, and science, no longer the unconscious victim of this
illusion, will advance with caution and assurance.

CHAPTER VIII. 

2. Evolutionalism, which since the time of Darwin has been applied by Spencer and others to
account for the growth of our moral ideas, holds that conscience is the result of a process of
development, but does not limit the process to the life of the individual. It extends to the experience
of the race. While admitting the existence of conscience as a moral faculty in the rational
man of to-day, it holds that it did not exist in his primitive ancestors.
 Putting man out of the question, we
ascertained that the same innate necessity was common to the animal kingdom.

In order to complete the theory, we must consider some other facts and psychical phenomena,
both normal and abnormal, so as to ascertain whether these are not due to the same cause, as
far as respects their intrinsic forms; namely, the belief in the reality of images seen in
dreams, as well as in those which appear in illusions, in normal hallucinations of the senses,
and in those which are abnormal, in ecstasy, in delirium, in madness, in idiocy, and dementia.
In all these mental conditions, we ascribe a body and material existence to images which for
various causes appear to be really presented to our senses.

If we are able to show that all such appearances are believed to have a real existence in virtue
of the same law and faculty of perception which generated myth in its earliest manifestation,
we shall have succeeded in establishing a common genesis for all these various psychical phenomena,
thus affording no contemptible contribution to psychology in general, and to the science of
human thought.

To dream is not merely a normal act of man, but, as it appears from many witnesses, it is common
to all animals. In dreams the ordinary laws of time and space are strangely modified, and images
of all kinds appear, sometimes confusedly, sometimes in a rational order, often in accordance
with the laws of association, while the voluntary exercise of thought may be said to be dormant.
This is, speaking generally, the condition and nature of dreams, which we must presently consider
adequately with more subtle and exact analysis.

Before we trace the cause of the apparent reality of these images, and the laws which govern
it, let us consider man in his waking condition, so as to ascertain at once the likeness and
the difference between these two states. We must first inquire whether the waking is absolutely
distinct from the dreaming state as far as the appearance of the images, their nature, and
mode of action are concerned. It has been observed by many psychologists and physiologists
that in the waking state, when images do not arise from the immediate presence of objects,
or are not directed by the will to a definite aim, they appear, group themselves, and disperse
by the immediate association of ideas, and the measurements of time and space are modified
just as they are in dreams. These observations are correct, and the phenomena may be verified
by every one for himself.

