Turning away from the jump board, he saw Rowena regarding him with large eyes from the doorway.
"We're now back to a point in time that precedes the theft of the Sangraal," he told her, "and
we're relocated farther down the valley. But don't let it throw you. None other than Merlin
himself built the magic apparatus you see before you in this room, and you know yourself that
once he makes up his mind to it, Merlin can do anything."

She blinked once, but evinced no other signs of surprise. "Yea, fair sir," she said, "I am
ware of the magic of Merlin."

"However," Mallory went on, "magic such as this isn't something for a gentlewoman such as yourself
to fool around with, so I must forbid you to enter this room during my absence from the castle.
Also, while we're on the subject, I must also forbid you to leave the castle during my absence.
Merlin would be upset no end if there were two damosels that hight Rowena gallivanting around
the countryside at the same time."

She blinked again. "By my troth, fair sir," she said, "I would lever die than disobey thy two
commands." And then, "Have ye ate any meat late?"

This time, Mallory blinked, "Meat?"

"It is fitting that ye should eat meat afore ye ride out."

"Oh, you mean food. I'll eat when I get back. But there's no need for you to wait." He took
her into the supply room and showed her where the vacuum tins were stored. "You open them like
this," he explained, pulling one out and activating the desealer. "Then, as soon as the contents
cool off a little, you sit down to dinner."

"But this be not meat," she objected.

"Maybe not, but it's a good substitute, and a lot better for you." A thought struck him, and
he took her into the lavatory and showed her how to operate the hot and cold-water dispenser,
ascribing the setup to more of Merlin's magic. He debated on whether to explain the function
and purpose of the adjacent shower, decided not to. There was a limit to all things, and an
apparatus for washing one's whole body was simply too farfetched for anyone living in the sixth-century
to take seriously.

Back in the rec-hall, he donned his helmet and gauntlets, reset the gauntlet timepiece, picked
up his spear and encephalopathed Easy Money to his side. Mounting, he set the spear in the
stirrup socket. Rowena gazed up at him, plum-blue eyes round with awe and admiration--and concern.
"Wit ye well, fair sir," she said, "that Sir Launcelot, the which is thy father, is a knight
of many victories, and therefore ye must take care."

Mallory grinned. "Dismay you not, fair damsel, I'll smite him from his steed before he can
say 'Queen Guinevere'." He straightened his sword belt, activated the Yore's lock, and rode
across the mirage-moat and entered the forest. The "portcullis" closed behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dusk had become darkness by the time he reached the highway. Approximately half an hour later
he would reach the highway again. However, the seeming paradox did not disconcert him in the
least: this was far from being the first time he had backtracked himself on a job.

As "before," he spurned the shadows of the bordering oaks and beeches and encephalopathed Easy
Money to keep to the center of the lane. And, as "before," no one was abroad. Probably King
Pelles' wassail was already in progress, or, if not, the goodly knights and gentlewomen were
still at evensong. In any event, he reached the lane that led to the castle of Carbonek without
mishap.

After entering the lane, he encephalopathed Easy Money into the concealment of the shadows
of the bordering trees and settled back in the saddle to wait. Rowena's placing the time of
the theft at "a little while afore eight of the clock" had been a general estimate at best;
hence he had allowed himself plenty of leeway and had arrived on the scene a little early.
It was well that he had, for hardly a minute passed before he heard hoofbeats approaching from
the south, and presently he saw a tall knight astride a resplendent steed turn into the lane.
His armor gleamed in the moonlight and bespoke a quality and class that only a knight of Sir
Launcelot's status would be able to afford.

Mallory watched him ride down the lane to the lion-flanked entrance and heard him announce
himself as "Sir Launcelot". The portcullis was raised without delay, and the knight rode through
the gateway and disappeared from view.

Mallory frowned in the darkness. Something about the incident had failed to jibe. He thought
back, but he could isolate nothing that, in retrospect anyway, seemed in the least incongruous.
He tried again, with the same result, and at length he concluded that the note of discord had
originated in his imagination.

Again, he settled back to wait. He wasn't particularly worried about the outcome of the forthcoming
encounter--the superiority of the weapons and armor should be more than enough to see him through--but
just the same he wished there was some way to avoid it. There wasn't, of course. Sir Launcelot's
theft of the Sangraal was already incorporated in fact, and, as a fait accompli, could not
be obviated by a previous theft. All Mallory could do was to make his move after the fait acccompli
in the hope that that was when he had made his move. A time-thief didn't have nearly as much
leeway as his seeming freedom of movement might lead the uninitiated to believe. About all
he could do was to play along with destiny and await his opportunities. If destiny smiled,
he succeeded; if destiny frowned, he did not. However, Mallory was optimistic about his forthcoming
bid for the Grail, for if it wasn't in the books for him to wrest the Cup from Sir Launcelot,
the chances were he wouldn't have gotten as far as he had.

He estimated that it would take the man five minutes to enter the castle, proceed to the chamber,
seize the Sangraal, return to the courtyard and come riding back to the portcullis. Seven minutes
proved to be nearer the mark. A great saving in fuel may be made by digging a trench about two feet
long by eight inches in width and depth; the fires are made in the bottom of the trench, and
the cooking utensils placed upon the top, where they receive all
the heat

. He waited till
Sir Launcelot was half a hundred yards down the highway before he encephalopathed Easy Money
to follow, and he waited till a bend in the road hid the castle of Carbonek from view before
encephalopathing the command to charge. At this point, Sir Launcelot became aware that he was
no longer alone, and wheeled his steed around. Without an instant's hesitation, he dressed
his spear and launched a counter-charge. All Mallory could think of was a twentieth-century
steam locomotive bearing down upon him.

He swallowed grimly, "aventred" his own spear, and upped Easy Money's pace. Two could play
at being locomotives. The approaching knight and steed loomed larger; the sound of hoofbeats
crescendoed into staccato thunder. The spear pointing straight toward Mallory's breastplate
had something of the aspect of a jet-propelled flagpole. Hurriedly, he got his shield into
position. Maybe the man would spot the red cross, realize its significance, and slow down.

