Transcriber's note: The few spelling mistakes found in this text
                    were left intact.

THE BUSINESS OF BEING A WOMAN

by

IDA M. TARBELL

Associate Editor of the "American Magazine" Author of "Life of Abraham Lincoln" "History of
the Standard Oil Co." Its ideas are the result of a long, if somewhat desultory, observation
of the professional, political, and domestic activities of women in this country and in France.
These observations have led to certain definite opinions as to those phases of the woman question
most in need of emphasis to-day.

A great problem of human life is to preserve faith in and zest for everyday activities. The
universal easily becomes the vulgar and the burdensome. The highest civilization is that in
which the largest number sense, and are so placed as to realize, the dignity and the beauty
of the common experiences and obligations.

       *       *       *       *       *

The courtesy of the publishers of the American Magazine, in permitting the use here of chapters
which have appeared in that periodical, is gratefully acknowledged.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                                 PAGE

   I. THE UNEASY WOMAN                                     1

  II. ON THE IMITATION OF MAN                             30

 III. THE BUSINESS OF BEING A WOMAN                       53

  IV. THE SOCIALIZATION OF THE HOME                       84

   V. THE WOMAN AND HER RAIMENT                          109

  VI. THE WOMAN AND DEMOCRACY                            142

 VII. THE HOMELESS DAUGHTER                              164

VIII. THE CHILDLESS WOMAN AND THE FRIENDLESS CHILD       190

  IX. ON THE ENNOBLING OF THE WOMAN'S BUSINESS           216

THE BUSINESS OF BEING A WOMAN

CHAPTER I

The Uneasy Woman

The most conspicuous occupation of the American woman of to-day, dressing herself aside, is
self-discussion. It is a disquieting phenomenon. Chronic self-discussion argues chronic ferment
of mind, and ferment of mind is a serious handicap to both happiness and efficiency. Nor is
self-discussion the only exhibit of restlessness the American woman gives. To an unaccustomed
observer she seems always to be running about on the face of things with no other purpose than
to put in her time. He points to the triviality of the things in which she can immerse herself--her
fantastic and ever-changing raiment, the welter of lectures and other culture schemes which
she supports, the eagerness with which she transports herself to the ends of the earth--as
marks of a spirit not at home with itself, and certainly not convinced that it is going in
any particular direction or that it is committed to any particular worth-while task.

Perhaps the most disturbing side of the phenomenon is that it is coincident with the emancipation
of woman. At a time when she is freer than at any other period of the world's history--save
perhaps at one period in ancient Egypt--she is apparently more uneasy.

Those who do not like the exhibit are inclined to treat her as if she were a new historical
type. The reassuring fact is, that ferment of mind is no newer thing in woman than in man.
It is a human ailment. Its attacks, however, have always been unwelcome. Society distrusts
uneasiness in sacred quarters; that is, in her established and privileged works. They are the
best mankind has to show for itself. At least they are the things for which the race has slaved
longest and which so far have best resisted attack. We would like to pride ourselves that they
were permanent, that we had settled some things. And hence society resents a restless woman.
And this is logical enough.

Embroiled as man is in an eternal effort to conquer, understand, and reduce to order both nature
and his fellows, it is imperative that he have some secure spot where his head is not in danger,
his heart is not harassed. Woman, by virtue of the business nature assigns her, has always
been theoretically the maker and keeper of this necessary place of peace. But she has rarely
made it and kept it with full content. Eve was a revoltée, so was Medea. In every century they
have appeared, restless Amazons, protesting and remolding. Out of their uneasy souls have come
the varying changes in the woman's world which distinguish the ages.

Society has not liked it--was there to be no quiet anywhere? It is poor understanding that
does not appreciate John Adams' parry of his wife Abigail's list of grievances, which she declared
the Continental Congress must relieve if it would avoid a woman's rebellion. Under the stress
of the Revolution children, apprentices, schools, colleges, Indians, and negroes had all become
insolent and turbulent, he told her. What was to become of the country if women, "the most
numerous and powerful tribe in the world," grew discontented?

Now this world-old restlessness of the women has a sound and a tragic cause. Nature lays a
compelling hand on her. Unless she obeys freely and fully she must pay in unrest and vagaries.
For the normal woman the fulfillment of life is the making of the thing we best describe as
a home--which means a mate, children, friends, with all the radiating obligations, joys, burdens,
these relations imply.

This is nature's plan for her; but the home has got to be founded inside the imperfect thing
we call society. And these two, nature and society, are continually getting into each other's
way, wrecking each other's plans, frustrating each other's schemes. The woman almost never
is able to adjust her life so as fully to satisfy both. She is between two fires.

Medea's difficulty was that which is oftenest in the way of a woman carrying her business in
life to a satisfactory completion--false mating. It is not a difficulty peculiar to woman.
Man knows it as often. It is the heaviest curse society brings on human beings--the most fertile
cause of apathy, agony, and failure. If the woman's cry is more poignant under it than the
man's, it is because the machine which holds them both allows him a wider sweep, more interests
outside of their immediate alliance. Monday, May 14th.--No longer will the FIRST SEA LORD be distracted
from his primary duty of strafing the Hun by the necessity of looking after supplies. That function
will now be discharged by an hon. and temp.

Vice-Admiral, in the person of Sir ERIC GEDDES, late hon. and temp. Major-General and Director of
Transportation to the Army in France, and now Shipbuilder-in-Chief to the nation. Everyone
seemed pleased, with the notable exception of Mr. HOGGE, who cannot
understand why all these appointments should be showered upon Sir
ERIC GEDDES, when there are other able Scotsmen still unemployed.

A late hon. Admiral of the Fleet, now residing at Potsdam, is believed to share Mr. HOGGE'S
objections.
 The Amazons refused to recognize man as an equal
and mated simply that they might rear more women like themselves. Here the tables were turned
and the boy baby turned out--not to the wolves, but to man! The convent has always been a favorite
way of escape.

It has never been a majority of women who for a great length of time have shirked this problem
by any one of these methods. By individuals and by groups woman has always been seeking to
develop the business of life to such proportions, to so diversify, refine, and broaden it that
no half failure or utter failure of its fundamental relations would swamp her, leave her comfortless,
or prevent her working out that family which she knew to be her part in the scheme of things.
It is from her conscious attempt to make the best of things when they are proved bad, that
there has come the uneasiness which trails along her path from Eve to Mrs. Pankhurst.

When great changes have come in the social system, her quest has responded to them, taken its
color and direction from them. The peculiar forms of uneasiness in the American woman of to-day
come naturally enough from the Revolution of 1776. That movement upset theoretically everything
which had been expected of her before. Theoretically, it broke down the division fences which
had kept her in sets and groups. She was no longer to be a woman of class; she was a woman
of the people. This was striking at the very underpinning of femininity, as the world knew
it. Theoretically, too, her ears were no longer to be closed to all ideas save those of her
church or party,--a new thing, freedom of speech, was abroad,--her lips were opened with man's.
Moreover, her business of family building was modified, as well as her attitude towards life.
The necessity of all women educating themselves that they might be able to educate their children
was an obligation on the face of the new undertaking. Another revolutionary duty put upon her
was--paying her way. There can be no real democracy where there is parasitism. She must achieve
conscious independence whether in or out of the family. Unquestionably there came with the
Revolution a vision of a new woman--a woman from whom all of the willfulness and frivolity
and helplessness of the "Lady" of the old régime should be stripped, while all her qualities
of gentleness and charm should be preserved. The old-world lady was to be merged into a woman
strong, capable, severely beautiful, a creature who had all of the virtues and none of the
follies of femininity.

It was strong yeast they put into the pot in '76.

A fresh leaven in a people can never be distributed evenly. Moreover, the mass to which it
is applied is never homogeneous. There are spots so hard no yeast can move them; there are
others so light the yeast burns them out. Taken as a whole, the change is labored and painful.
So our new notions worked on women. There were groups which resented and refused them, became
reactionary at the stating of them. There were those which grew grave and troubled under them,
shrinking from the portentous upheaval they felt in their touch, yet sensing that they must
be accepted. There were still others where the notion frothed and foamed, turning up unexpected
ideas, revealing depths of dissatisfaction, of desire, of unsuspected powers in woman that
startled the staid old world. It was in these quarters that there was produced the uneasy woman
typical of the day.

Her ferment went to the bottom of things this time. Not since the age of the Amazon had a body
of women broken more utterly with things as they are. And like the Amazon, the revolt was against
man and his pretensions.

It was no unorganized revolt. It was deliberate. It presented her case in a carefully prepared
List of Grievances, and an eloquent Declaration of Sentiments[1] both adopted in a strictly
parliamentary way, and made the basis of an organized revolt, which has gone on systematically
ever since. And there are compensations About the job that field-grey heroes lack. Although,
e.g., there is a dearth of rations, I'm not the one that goes without his whack; Nor do the
bayonets of inferior nations Send nervous chills down my retreating back.

Yet sometimes in the small and early watches I think, "Good Lord!
suppose the U-boats fail! Or our Colossus of the purple blotches Should
let the Allies get him by the tail!

The inference from all this is that the Business of Being a Woman, as it has been conducted
heretofore by society, is of less importance than the Business of Being a Man, and that the
time has come to enter his world and prove her equality.

There are certain assumptions in her program which will bear examination. Is man the calculating
tyrant the modern uneasy woman charges? Are her fetters due only to his unfair domination?
Or is she suffering from the generally bungling way things go in the world? And is not man
a victim as well as she--caught in the same trap? Moreover, is woman never a tyrant? One of
the first answers to her original revolt came from the most eminent woman of the day, Harriet
Beecher Stowe, and it was called "Pink and White Tyranny!" "I have seen a collection of medieval
English poems," says Chesterton, "in which the section headed 'Poems of Domestic Life' consisted
entirely (literally entirely) of the complaints of husbands bullied by their wives."

Again, will doing the same things a man does work as well in stifling her unrest as she fancies
it has in man's case? If a woman's temperamental and intellectual operations were identical
with a man's, there would be hope of success,--but they are not. She is a different being.
Whether she is better or worse, stronger or weaker, primary or secondary, is not the question.
She is different.

And she tries to ease a world-old human curse by imitating the occupations, points of views,
and methods of a radically different being. Can she realize her quest in this way? Generally
speaking, nothing is more wasteful in human operations than following a course which is not
native and spontaneous, not according to the law of the being.

If she demonstrates her points, successfully copies man's activities, can she impress her program
on any great body of women? His latest discovery is that they are allowed the use of writing-paper
not more than once a month; and for the rest of the time have to
entrust their literary compositions to the unsympathetic surface of
a slate, with the aid of a probably squeaky slate-pencil. They
know instinctively that under no other circumstances can such ripeness and such wisdom be developed,
that nowhere else is the full nature called upon, nowhere else are there such intricate, delicate,
and intimate forces in play, calling and testing them.

To bear and to rear, to feel the dependence of man and child--the necessity for themselves--to
know that upon them depend the health, the character, the happiness, the future of certain
human beings--to see themselves laying and preserving the foundations of so imposing a thing
as a family--to build so that this family shall become a strong stone in the state--to feel
themselves through this family perpetuating and perfecting church, society, republic,--this
is their destiny,--this is worth while. They may not be able to state it, but all their instincts
and experiences convince them of the supreme and eternal value of their place in the world.
They dare not tamper with it. Their opposition to the militant program badly and even cruelly
expressed at times has at bottom, as an opposition always has, the principle of preservation.
It is not bigotry or vanity or a petty notion of their own spheres which has kept the majority
of women from lending themselves to the radical wing of the woman's movement. It is fear to
destroy a greater thing which they possess. The fear of change is not an irrational thing--the
fear of change is founded on the risk of losing what you have, on the certainty of losing much
temporarily at least. It sees the cost, the ugly and long period of transition.

Moreover, respect for your calling brings patience with its burden and its limitations. The
change you desire you work for conservatively, if at all. The women who opposed the first movement
for women's rights in this country might deplore the laws that gave a man the power to beat
his wife--but as a matter of fact few men did beat their wives, and popular opinion was a powerful
weapon. They might deplore the laws of property--but few of them were deeply touched by them.
The husband, the child, the home, the social circle, the church, these things were infinitely
more interesting and important to them than diplomas, rights to work, rights to property, rights
to vote. All the sentiments in the revolting women's program seemed trivial, cold, profitless
beside the realities of life as they dreamed them and struggled to realize them. 

COUSIN EDWIN, as an ex-Secretary of the Treasury, did not think the House had suffered any serious
loss through being unable to cross-examine that official direct. COUSIN HERBERT was shocked
at this revolutionary sentiment coming from his kinsman. And it is the effort to move this mass which she derides as inert that
leads to much of the overemphasis in her program and her methods. If she is to attract attention,
she must be extreme. The campaigner is like the actor--he must exaggerate to get his effect
over the footlights. Moreover, there are natures like that of the actor who could not play
Othello unless his whole body was blackened. Nor is the extravagance of the methods, which
the militant lady follows to put over her program, so foreign to her nature as it may seem.
The suffragette adapts to her needs a form of feminine coquetry as old as the world. To defy
and denounce the male has always been one of woman's most successful provocative ways!

However much certain of the assumptions in her program may seem to be against its success,
there is much for it. It gives her a scapegoat--an outside, personal, attackable cause for
the limitations and defeats she suffers. And there is no greater consolation than fixing blame.
It is half a cure in itself to know or to think you know the cause of your difficulties. Moreover,
it gives her a scapegoat against whom it is easy to make up a case. She knows him too well,
much better than he knows her, much better than she knows herself; at least her knowledge of
him is better formulated. And she has this advantage: custom makes it cowardly for a man to
attempt to demonstrate that woman is a tyrant--it laughs and applauds woman's attempt to fix
the charge on man.

It gives her a definite program of relief. To attack life as man does: to secure the same kind
of training, enter a trade or profession where she can support herself, mingle with the crowd
as he does, get into politics--that she assumes to be the practical way of curing the inferiority
of position and of powers which she is willing to admit, even willing to demonstrate. That
a man's life may not be altogether satisfactory, she declines to believe. The uneasy woman
has always taken it for granted that man is happier than woman. It is an assumption which is
at least discussible.

