The object is not to talk each other down, but to improve the mind, which, unguided, is apt
to get frivolous at the convivial board. It is notorious that men by themselves at lunch or
dinner usually shun grave topics and indulge in persiflage, and even descend to talk about
wine and the made dishes. The women's lunch of this summer takes higher ground. It will give
Mr. Browning his final estimate; it will settle Mr. Ibsen; it will determine the suffrage question;
it will adjudicate between the total abstainers and the halfway covenant of high license; it
will not hesitate to cut down the tariff.

The Drawer anticipates a period of repose in all our feverish social life. We shall live more
by rule and less by impulse. When we meet we shall talk on set topics, determined beforehand.
By this concentration we shall be able as one man or one woman to reach the human limit of
cultivation, and get rid of all the aberrations of individual assertion and feeling. By studying
together in clubs, by conversing in monotone and by rule, by thinking the same things and exchanging
ideas until we have none left, we shall come into that social placidity which is one dream
of the nationalists--one long step towards what may be called a prairie mental condition--the
slope of Kansas, where those who are five thousand feet above the sea-level seem to be no higher
than those who dwell in the Missouri Valley.

THE DIRECTOIRE GOWN

We are all more or less devoted to 'liberte', 'egalite', and considerable 'fraternite', and
we have various ways of showing it. It is the opinion of many that women do not care much about
politics, and that if they are interested at all in them, they are by nature aristocrats. It
is said, indeed, that they care much more about their dress than they do about the laws or
the form of government. This notion arises from a misapprehension both of the nature of woman
and of the significance of dress.

Men have an idea that fashions are haphazard, and are dictated and guided by no fixed principles
of action, and represent no great currents in politics or movements of the human mind. Women,
who are exceedingly subtle in all their operations, feel that it is otherwise. They have a
prescience of changes in the drift of public affairs, and a delicate sensitiveness that causes
them to adjust their raiment to express these changes. Men have written a great deal in their
bungling way about the philosophy of clothes. Women exhibit it, and if we should study them
more and try to understand them instead of ridiculing their fashions as whims bred of an inconstant
mind and mere desire for change, we would have a better apprehension of the great currents
of modern political life and society.

Many observers are puzzled by the gradual and insidious return recently to the mode of the
Directoire, and can see in it no significance other than weariness of some other mode. We need
to recall the fact of the influence of the centenary period upon the human mind. It is nearly
a century since the fashion of the Directoire. What more natural, considering the evidence
that we move in spirals, if not in circles, that the signs of the anniversary of one of the
most marked periods in history should be shown in feminine apparel? It is woman's way of hinting
what is in the air, the spirit that is abroad in the world. It will be remembered that women
took a prominent part in the destruction of the Bastile, helping, indeed, to tear down that
odious structure with their own hands, the fall of which, it is well known, brought in the
classic Greek and republican simplicity, the subtle meaning of the change being expressed in
French gowns. Thou shalt erelong have thy way up the rivers, up all the rivers of the globe,
if I am not mistaken. Yea, even thy dull watery dream shall be more than realized. If it were
not so, but thou wert to be overlooked at first and at last, then
would not I take their heaven. So strong was this that it passed to other
countries, and in England the impulse outlasted even the Reform Bill, and skirts grew more
and more bulbous, until it did not need more than three or four women to make a good-sized
assembly. This was not the result of, a whim about clothes, but a subtle recognition of a spirit
of exclusiveness and defense abroad in the world. Each woman became her own Bastile. Men surrounded
it and thundered against it without the least effect. It seemed as permanent as the Pyramids.
At every male attack it expanded, and became more aggressive and took up more room. Women have
such an exquisite sense of things--just as they have now in regard to big obstructive hats
in the theatres. They know that most of the plays are inferior and some of them are immoral,
and they attend the theatres with head-dresses that will prevent as many people as possible
from seeing the stage and being corrupted by anything that takes place on it. They object to
the men seeing some of the women who are now on the stage. It happened, as to the private Bastiles,
that the women at last recognized a change in the sociological and political atmosphere of
the world, and without consulting any men of affairs or caring for their opinion, down went
the Bastiles. When women attacked them, in obedience to their political instincts, they collapsed
like punctured balloons. Natural woman was measurably (that is, a capacity of being measured)
restored to the world. And we all remember the great political revolutionary movements of 1848.

Now France is still the arbiter of the modes. Say what we may about Berlin, copy their fashion
plates as we will, or about London, or New York, or Tokio, it is indisputable that the woman
in any company who has on a Paris gown--the expression is odious, but there is no other that
in these days would be comprehended--"takes the cake." It is not that the women care for this
as a mere matter of apparel. But they are sensitive to the political atmosphere, to the philosophical
significance that it has to great impending changes. We are approaching the centenary of the
fall of the Bastile. The French have no Bastile to lay low, nor, indeed, any Tuileries to burn
up; but perhaps they might get a good way ahead by demolishing Notre Dame and reducing most
of Paris to ashes. Apparently they are on the eve of doing something. The women of the world
may not know what it is, but they feel the approaching recurrence of a period. Their movements
are not yet decisive. It is as yet only tentatively that they adopt the mode of the Directoire.
It is yet uncertain--a sort of Boulangerism in dress. But if we watch it carefully we shall
be able to predict with some assurance the drift in Paris. The Directoire dress points to another
period of republican simplicity, anarchy, and the rule of a popular despot.

It is a great pity, in view of this valuable instinct in women and the prophetic significance
of dress, that women in the United States do not exercise their gifts with regard to their
own country. We should then know at any given time whether we are drifting into Blaineism,
or Clevelandism, or centralization, or free-trade, or extreme protection, or rule by corporations.
We boast greatly of our smartness. It is time we were up and dressed to prove it.

THE MYSTERY OF THE SEX

There appears to be a great quantity of conceit around, especially concerning women. The statement
was recently set afloat that a well-known lady had admitted that George Meredith understands
women better than any writer who has preceded him. This may be true, and it may be a wily statement
to again throw men off the track; at any rate it contains the old assumption of a mystery,
practically insoluble, about the gentler sex. Women generally encourage this notion, and men
by their gingerly treatment of it seemed to accept it. But is it well-founded, is there any
more mystery about women--than about men? Is the feminine nature any more difficult to understand
than the masculine nature? Have women, conscious of inferior strength, woven this notion of
mystery about themselves as a defense, or have men simply idealized them for fictitious purposes?
To recur to the case cited, is there any evidence that Mr. Meredith understands human nature--as
exhibited in women any better than human nature--in men, or is more consistent in the production
of one than of the other? Whether we live by the seaside, or by the lakes and rivers, or on the prairie,
it concerns us to attend to the nature of fishes, since they are not phenomena confined to certain
localities only, but forms and phases of the life in nature universally
dispersed. In the Bible records there is
not much mystery about her; there are many tributes to her noble qualities, and some pretty
severe and uncomplimentary things are said about her, but there is little affectation of not
understanding her. She may be a prophetess, or a consoler, or a snare, but she is no more "deceitful
and desperately wicked" than anybody else. There is nothing mysterious about her first recorded
performance. Eve trusted the serpent, and Adam trusted Eve. The mystery was in the serpent.
There is no evidence that the ancient Egyptian woman was more difficult to comprehend than
the Egyptian man. They were both doubtless wily as highly civilized people are apt to be; the
"serpent of old Nile" was in them both. Is it in fact till we come to mediaeval times, and
the chivalric age, that women are set up as being more incomprehensible than men? That is,
less logical, more whimsical, more uncertain in their mental processes? The play-writers and
essayists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries "worked" this notion continually. They
always took an investigating and speculating attitude towards women, that fostered the conceit
of their separateness and veiled personality. Every woman was supposed to be playing a part
behind a mask. Montaigne is always investigating woman as a mystery. It is, for instance, a
mystery he does not relish that, as he says, women commonly reserve the publication of their
vehement affections for their husbands till they have lost them; then the woful countenance
"looks not so much back as forward, and is intended rather to get a new husband than to lament
the old." And he tells this story:

