Life as a matter of fact, partakes largely of the nature of tragedy. The gospel according to
Whitman, even if it be not so logical, has this advantage over the gospel according to Pangloss,
that it does not utterly disregard the existence of temporal evil. Whitman accepts the fact
of disease and wretchedness like an honest man; and instead of trying to qualify it in the
interest of his optimism, sets himself to spur people up to be helpful.

*****

Indeed, I believe this is the lesson; if it is for fame that men do brave actions, they are
only silly fellows after all.

*****

To avoid an occasion for our virtues is a worse degree of failure than to push forward pluckily
and make a fall. It is lawful to pray God that we be not led into temptation; but not lawful
to skulk from those that come to us.

*****

To be honest, to be kind--to earn a little and to spend a little less, to make upon the whole
a family happier for his presence, to renounce when that shall be necessary and not to be embittered,
to keep a few friends, but these without capitulation--above all, on the same grim conditions,
to keep friends with himself--here is a task for all that a man has of fortitude and delicacy.

*****

I find I never weary of great churches. It is my favourite kind of mountain scenery. Mankind
was never so happily inspired as when it made a cathedral: a thing as single and specious as
a statue to the first glance, and yet, on examination, as lively and interesting as a forest
in detail. The height of spires cannot be taken by trigonometry; they measure absurdly short,
but how tall they are to the admiring eye! And where we have so many elegant proportions, growing
one out of the other, and all together into one, it seems as if proportion transcended itself
and became something different and more imposing. I could never fathom how a man dares to lift
up his voice to preach in a cathedral. What is he to say that will not be an anti-climax? For
though I have heard a considerable variety of sermons, I never yet heard one that was so expressive
as a cathedral. 'Tis the best preacher itself, and preaches day and night; not only telling
you of man's art and aspirations in the past, but convicting your own soul of ardent sympathies;
or rather, like all good preachers, it sets you preaching to yourself--and every man is his
own doctor of divinity in the last resort.

*****

As the business man comes to love the toil, which he only looked upon at first as a ladder
towards other desires and less unnatural gratifications, so the dumb man has felt the charm
of his trade and fallen captivated before the eyes of sin. It is a mistake when preachers tell
us that vice is hideous and loathsome; for even vice has her Horsel and her devotees, who love
her' for her own sake.

*****

It may be argued again that dissatisfaction with our life's endeavour springs in some degree
from dulness. We require higher tasks because we do not recognise the height of those we have.
Trying to be kind and honest seems an affair too simple and too inconsequential for gentlemen
of our heroic mould; we had rather set ourselves something bold, arduous, and conclusive; we
had rather found a schism or suppress a heresy, cut off a hand or mortify an appetite. But
the task before us, which is to co-endure with our existence, is rather one of microscopic
fineness, and the heroism required is that of patience. There is no cutting of the Gordian
knots of life; each must be smilingly unravelled.

*****

It is perhaps a more fortunate destiny to have a taste for collecting shells than to be born
a millionaire. Although neither is to be despised, it is always better policy to learn an interest
than to make a thousand pounds; for the money will soon be spent, or perhaps you may feel no
joy in spending it; but the interest remains imperishable and ever new. To become a botanist,
a geologist, a social philosopher, an antiquary, or an artist, is to enlarge one's possessions
in the universe by an incalculably higher degree, and by a far surer sort of property, than
to purchase a farm of many acres.

*****

He who has learned to love an art or science has wisely laid up riches against the day of riches;
if prosperity come, he will not enter poor into his inheritance; he will not slumber and forget
himself in the lap of money, or spend his hours in counting idle treasures, but be up and briskly
doing; he will have the true alchemic touch, which is not that of Midas, but which transmutes
dead money into living delight and satisfaction. ETRE ET PAS AVOIR--to be, not to possess--that
is the problem of life. To be wealthy, a rich nature is the first requisite and money but the
second. To be of a quick and healthy blood, to share in all honourable curiosities, to be rich
in admiration and free from envy, to rejoice greatly in the good of others, to love with such
generosity of heart that your love is still a dear possession in absence or unkindness--these
are the gifts of fortune which money cannot buy, and without which money can buy nothing.

*****

An aim in life is the only fortune worth the finding; and it is not to be found in foreign
lands, but in the heart itself.

*****

'Mr. Archer was telling me in some strange land they used to run races each with a lighted
candle, and the art was to keep the candle burning. Well, now, I thought that was like life;
a man's good conscience is the flame he gets to carry, and if he comes to the winning-post
with that still burning, why, take it how you will, the man is a hero--even if he was low-born
like you and me.'

*****

Hope, they say, deserts us at no period of our existence. From first to last, and in the face
of smarting disillusions, we continue to expect good fortune, better health, and better conduct;
and that so confidently, that we judge it needless to deserve them.

*****

'Do I, indeed, lack courage?' inquired Mr. Archer of himself. 'Courage, the footstool of the
virtues, upon which they stand? Courage, that a poor private carrying a musket has to spare
of; that does not fail a weasel or a rat; that is a brutish faculty? I to fail there, I wonder?
But what is courage? The constancy to endure oneself or to see others suffer? The itch of ill-advised
activity: mere shuttle-wittedness, or to be still and patient? To inquire of the significance
of words is to rob ourselves of what we seem to know, and yet, of all things, certainly to
stand still is the least heroic.'

*****

To be what we are, and to become what we are capable of becoming, is the only end of life.

*****

But let the man learn to love a woman as far as he is capable of love; and for this random
affection of the body there is substituted a steady determination, a consent of all his powers
and faculties, which supersedes, adopts, and commands the others. The desire survives, strengthened,
perhaps, but taught obedience, and changed in scope and character. Life is no longer a tale
of betrayals and regrets; for the man now lives as a whole; his consciousness now moves on
uninterrupted like a river; through all the extremes and ups and downs of passion, he remains
approvingly conscious of himself. 

It is apprehended, that the more conversant the reader is with our elder writers, and with
those in modern times who have been the most successful in painting manners and passions,
the fewer complaints of this kind will he have to make.

The tale of Goody Blake and Harry Gill is founded on a well-authenticated fact which happened in
Warwickshire. Of the other poems in the collection, it may be proper to say that they are either
absolute inventions of the author, or facts which took place within his personal observation
or that of his friends. The poem of the Thorn, as the reader will soon discover, is not supposed
to be spoken in the author's own person: the character of the loquacious narrator will sufficiently
shew itself in the course of the story. The Rime of the Ancyent Marinere was professedly written
in imitation of the style, as well as of the spirit of the elder poets; but with a few exceptions,
the Author believes that the language adopted in it has been equally
intelligible for these three last centuries.

The lines entitled Expostulation and Reply, and those which follow,
arose out of conversation with a friend who was somewhat unreasonably
attached to modern books of moral philosophy.

CONTENTS. Said the Hermit cheerily.

THE FOSTER-MOTHER'S TALE, A DRAMATIC FRAGMENT. This lonely yew-tree stands Far from all human
dwelling: what if here No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb; What if these barren boughs
the bee not loves; Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves, That break against the
shore, shall lull thy mind By one soft impulse saved from vacancy.

--Who he was That piled these stones, and with the mossy sod First covered o'er, and taught this
aged tree, Now wild, to bend its arms in circling shade, I well remember.--He was one who own'd
No common soul. In this deep vale He died, this seat his only monument.

If thou be one whose heart the holy forms Of young imagination have kept pure, Stranger! henceforth
be warned; and know, that pride, Howe'er disguised in its own majesty, Is littleness; that he,
who feels contempt For any living thing, hath faculties Which he has never used; that thought
with him Is in its infancy. O, be wiser thou! Instructed that true knowledge leads to love, True
dignity abides with him alone Who, in the silent hour of inward thought, Can still suspect, and
still revere himself, In lowliness of heart. A melancholy Bird? O idle thought!

THE FEMALE VAGRANT.

By Derwent's side my Father's cottage stood, (The Woman thus her artless story told) One field,
a flock, and what the neighbouring flood Supplied, to him were more than mines of gold. Light
was my sleep; my days in transport roll'd: With thoughtless joy I
stretch'd along the shore My father's nets, or watched, when from
the fold High o'er the cliffs I led my fleecy store, A dizzy depth
below! his boat and twinkling oar.

My father was a good and pious man, An honest man by honest parents bred, And I believe that,
soon as I began To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed, And in his hearing there my prayers
I said: And afterwards, by my good father taught, I read, and loved the books in which I read;
For books in every neighbouring house I sought, And nothing to my
mind a sweeter pleasure brought.

Can I forget what charms did once
adorn My garden, stored with pease, and mint, and thyme, And rose
and lilly for the sabbath morn?

*****

It is a commonplace that we cannot answer for ourselves before we have been tried. But it is
not so common a reflection, and surely more consoling, that we usually find ourselves a great
deal braver and better than we thought. I believe this is every one's experience; but an apprehension
that they may belie themselves in the future prevents mankind from trumpeting this cheerful
sentiment abroad. I wish sincerely, for it would have saved me much trouble, there had been
some one to put me in a good heart about life when I was younger; to tell sue how dangers are
most portentous on a distant sight; and how the good in a man's spirit will not suffer itself
to be overlaid, and rarely or never deserts him in the hour of need. But we are all for tootling
on the sentimental flute in literature; and not a man among us will go to the head of the march
to sound the heady drums.

*****

It is a poor heart, and a poorer age, that cannot accept the conditions of life with some heroic
readiness.

*****

I told him I was not much afraid of such accidents; and at any rate judged it unwise to dwell
upon alarms or consider small perils in the arrangement of life. Life itself I submitted, was
a far too risky business as a whole to make each additional particular of danger worth regard.

*****

There is nothing but tit for tat in this world, though sometimes it be a little difficult to
trace; for the scores are older than we ourselves, and there has never yet been a settling
day since things were. You get entertainment pretty much in proportion as you give. As long
as we were a sort of odd wanderers, to be stared at and followed like a quack doctor or a caravan,
we had no want of amusement in return; but as soon as we sunk into commonplace ourselves, all
whom we met were similarly disenchanted. And here is one reason of a dozen why the world is
dull to dull persons.

*****

It is not over the virtues of a curate-and-tea-party novel that people are abashed into high
resolutions. It may be because their hearts are crass, but to stir them properly they must
have men entering into glory with sonic pomp and circumstance. And that is why these stories
of our sea-captains, printed, so to speak, in capitals, and full of bracing moral influence,
are more valuable to England than any material benefit in all the books of political economy
between Westminster and Birmingham. Greenville chewing wine-glasses at table makes no very
pleasant figure, any more than a thousand other artists when they are viewed in the body, or
met in private life; but his work of art, his finished tragedy, is an elegant performance;
and I contend it ought not only to enliven men of the sword as they go into battle, but send
back merchant-clerks with more heart and spirit to their book-keeping by double entry.

*****

It is said that a poet has died young in the breast of the most stolid. 'It may be contended,
rather, that this (somewhat minor) bard in almost every case survives, and is the spice of
life to his possessor. Justice is not done to the versatility and the unplumbed childishness
of man's imagination. His life from without may seem but a rude mound of mud; there will be
some golden chamber at the heart of it, in which he dwells delighted; and for as dark as his
pathway seems to the observer, he will have some kind of a bull's-eye at his belt.

*****

For, to repeat, the ground of a man's joy is often hard to hit. It may hinge at times upon
a mere accessory, like the lantern; it may reside, like Dancer's in the mysterious inwards
of psychology. It may consist with perpetual failure, and find exercise in the continued chase.
It has so little bond with externals (such as the observer scribbles in his notebook) that
it may even touch them not; and the man's true life, for which he consents to live, lie altogether
in the field of fancy. The clergyman in his spare hours may be winning battles, the farmer
sailing ships, the banker reaping triumph in the arts: all leading another life, plying another
trade from that they chose; like the poet's house-builder, who, after all, is cased in stone,

     'By his fireside, as impotent fancy prompts,
      Rebuilds it to his liking.'

In such a case the poetry runs underground. The observer (poor soul, with his documents!) is
all abroad. For to look at the man is but to court deception. We shall see the trunk from which
he draws his nourishment; but he himself is above and abroad in the green dome of foliage,
hummed through by winds and nested in by nightingales. And the true realism were that of the
poets, to climb up after him like a squirrel, and catch some glimpse of the heaven for which
he lives. And the true realism, always and everywhere, is that of the poets: to find out where
joy resides, and give it voice beyond singing.

*****

He who shall pass judgment on the records of our life is the same that formed us in frailty.

*****

We are all so busy, and have so many far-off projects to realise, and castles in the fire to
turn into solid habitable mansions on a gravel soil, that we can find no time for pleasure
trips into the Land of Thought and among the Hills of Vanity. Changed times, indeed, when we
must sit all night, beside the fire, with folded hands; and a changed world for most of us,
when we find we can pass the hours without discontent, and be happy thinking. We are in such
haste to be doing, to be writing, to be gathering gear, to make our voice audible a moment
in the derisive silence of eternity, that we forget that one thing, of which these are but
the parts--namely, to live. We fall in love, we drink hard, we run to and fro upon the earth
like frightened sheep. And now you are to ask yourself if, when all is done, you would not
have been better to sit by the fire at home, and be happy thinking. To sit still and contemplate--to
remember the faces of women without desire, to be pleased by the great deeds of men without
envy, to be everything and everywhere in sympathy, and yet content to remain where and what
you are--is not this to know both wisdom and virtue, and to dwell with happiness?

*****

Of those who fail, I do not speak--despair should be sacred; but to those who even modestly
succeed, the changes of their life bring interest: a job found, a shilling saved, a dainty
earned, all these are wells of pleasure springing afresh for the successful poor; and it is
not from these, but from the villa-dweller, that we hear complaints of the unworthiness of life.

*****

There are two just reasons for the choice any way of life: the first is inbred taste in the
chooser; the second some high utility in the industry selected.

*****

There is an idea abroad among moral people that they should make their neighbours good. One
person I have to make good: myself. But my duty to my neighbour is much more nearly expressed
by saying that I have to make him happy--if I may.

*****

In his own life, then, a man is not to expect happiness, only to profit by it gladly when it
shall arise; he is on duty here; he knows not how or why, and does not need to know; he knows
not for what hire, and must not ask. Somehow or other, though he does not know what goodness
is, he must try to be good; somehow or other, though he cannot tell what will do it, he must
try to give happiness to others.

*****

Of this one thing I am sure: that every one thawed and became more humanised and conversible
as soon as these innocent people appeared upon the scene. I would not readily trust the travelling
merchant with any extravagant sum of money, but I am sure his heart was in the right place.

In this mixed world, if you can find one or two sensible places in a man; above all, if you
should find a whole family living together on such pleasant terms, you may surely be satisfied,
and take the rest for granted; or, what is a great deal better, boldly make up your mind that
you can do perfectly well without the rest, and that ten thousand bad traits cannot make a
single good one any the less good.

*****

His was, indeed, a good influence in life while he was still among us; he had a fresh laugh;
it did you good to see him; and, however sad he may have been at heart, he always bore a bold
and cheerful countenance and took fortune's worst as it were the showers of spring.

*****

Mme. Bazin came out after a while; she was tired with her day's work, I suppose; and she nestled
up to her husband and laid her head upon his breast. He had his arm about her and kept gently
patting her on the shoulder. I think Bazin was right, and he was really married. Of how few
people can the same be said!

Little did the Bazins know how much they served us. We were charged for candles, for food and
drink, and for the beds we slept in. But there was nothing in the bill for the husband's pleasant
talk; nor for the pretty spectacle of their married life. And there was yet another item uncharged.
For these people's, politeness really set us up again in our own esteem. We had a thirst for
consideration; the sense of insult was still hot in our spirits; and civil usage seemed to
restore us to our position in the world.

How little we pay our way in life! Although we have our purses continually in our hand, the
better part of service goes still unrewarded. But I like to fancy that a grateful spirit gives
as good as it gets. Perhaps the Bazins knew how much I liked them? perhaps they, also, were
healed of some slights by the thanks that I gave them in my manner?

*****

No art, it may be said, was ever perfect, and not many noble, that has not been mirthfully
conceived. And no man, it may be added, was ever anything but a wet blanket and a cross to
his companions who boasted not a copious spirit of enjoyment.

*****

There is yet another class who do not depend on corporal advantages, but support the winter
in virtue of a brave and merry heart. One shivering evening, cold enough for frost, but with
too high a wind, and a little past sundown, when the Lamps were beginning to enlarge their
circles in the growing dusk, a brace of barefooted lassies were seen coming eastward in the
teeth of the wind. If the one was as much as nine, the other was certainly not more than seven.
They were miserably clad; and the pavement was so cold, you would have thought no one could
lay a naked foot on it unflinching. Yet they came along waltzing, if you please, while the
elder sang a tune to give them music. The person who saw this, and whose heart was full of
bitterness at the moment, pocketed a reproof which has been of use to him ever since, and which
he now hands on, with his good wishes, to the reader.

*****

Happiness, at least, is not solitary; it joys to communicate; it loves others, for it depends
on them for its existence; it sanctions and encourages to all delights that are not unkind
in themselves; if it lived to a thousand, it would not make excision of a single humorous passage;
and while the self-improver dwindles toward the prig, and, if he be not of an excellent constitution,
may even grow deformed into an Obermann, the very name and appearance of a happy man breathe
of good-nature, and help the rest of us to live. 

In the will of Henry VI. there is the following item:--"The space
between the wall of the church and the wall of the cloyster shall
conteyne 38 feyte, which is left for to sett in certayne trees and
flowers, behovable and convenient for the custom of the said church."

Several reasons may be assigned for giving this tree a preference to every other evergreen.
It is very hardy, long-lived, and, though in time it attains a considerable height, produces
branches in abundance, so low as to be always within reach of the hand, and at last affords
a beautiful wood for furniture.--The date of the yews at Bedfont
is 1704.

By a statute made in the 5th year of Edward IV., every Englishman,
and Irishman dwelling with Englishmen, was directed to have a bow
of his own height made of yew, wych-hazel, ash, or awburne--that is,
laburnum, which is still styled "awburne saugh," or awburne willow,
in many parts of Scotland.

His skill in the use of the long bow was the proud distinction of
the English yeoman, and it was his boast that none but an Englishman
could bend that powerful weapon.

It seems that there was a peculiar art in the English use of this bow; for our archers did not
employ all their muscular strength in drawing the string with the right hand, but thrust the
whole weight of the body into the horns of the bow with the left.

Chaucer describes his archer as carrying "a mighty bowe;" and the
"cloth-yard shaft," which was discharged from this engine, is often
mentioned by our old poets and chroniclers.

The command of Richard III. at the battle which was fatal to him, was this:

"Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head."

The bowmen were the chief reliance of the English leaders in those
bloody battles which attended our unjust contests for the succession
to the crown of France.

Some of these scenes are graphically described by Froissart.

Box

Is a native of all the middle and southern parts of Europe; and it is found in greater abundance
and of a larger size in the countries on the west of Asia, to the south of the mountains of
Caucasus. In many parts of France it is also plentiful, though generally
in the character of a shrub.

In early times it flourished upon many of the barren hills of England.

Evelyn found it upon some of the higher hills in Surrey, displaying
its myrtle-shaped leaves and its bright green in the depth of winter;
and, till very recently, it gave to Boxhill, in that county, the charms
of a delightful and perennial verdure.

The trees have now been destroyed, and the name, as at other places
called after the box, has become the monument of its former beauty.[4]

[4]
In the twelfth volume of the MIRROR, we gave an accurate picture of
the past and present celebrity of Box Hill, especially with respect
to the quantity of box grown there.

The box trees on the hill are again flourishing, and with these and other evergreens the chief
part of Box Hill is still covered.

Yet no tree so well merits cultivation--though its growth be slow. It is an unique among timber,
and combines qualities which are not found existing together in any other. It is as close and
as heavy as ebony; not very much softer than lignumvitae; it cuts better than any other wood;
and when an edge is made of the ends of the fibres, it stands better than lead or tin, nay almost
as well as brass. Like holly, the box is very retentive of its sap, and warps when not properly
dried, though when sufficiently seasoned it stands well.

Hence, for the wooden part of the finer tools, for every thing that
requires strength, beauty, and polish in timber, there is nothing
equal to it.

There is one purpose for which box, and box alone, is properly adapted, and that is the forming
of wood-cuts, for scientific or other illustrations in books.

These reduce the price considerably in the first engraving, and also
in the printing; while the wood-cut in box admits of as high and sharp
a finish as any metal, and takes the ink much better.

    There is a marked
difference between decreeing light in chaos, and lighting the gas in a metropolitan back parlour
with a box of patent matches; and, do what we will, there is always something made to our hand,
if it were only our fingers.

*****

Benjamin Franklin went through life an altered man, because he once paid too dearly for a penny
whistle. My concern springs usually from a deeper source, to wit, from having bought a whistle
when I did not want one.

*****

I believe in a better state of things, that there will be no more nurses, and that every mother
will nurse her own offspring; for what can be more hardening and demoralising than to call
forth the tenderest feelings of a woman's heart and cherish them yourself as long as you need
them, as long as your children require a nurse to love them, and then to blight and thwart
and destroy them, whenever your own use for them is at an end.

*****

We had needs invent heaven if it had not been revealed to us; there are some things that fall
so bitterly ill on this side time!

*****

To write with authority about another man, we must have fellow-feeling and some common ground
of experience with our subject. We may praise or blame according as we find him related to
us by the best or worst in ourselves; but it is only in virtue of some relationship that we
can be his judges, even to condemn. Feelings which we share and understand enter for us into
the tissue of the man's character; those to which we are strangers in our own experience we
are inclined to regard as blots, exceptions, inconsistencies, and excursions of the diabolic;
we conceive them with repugnance, explain them with difficulty, and raise our hands to heaven
in wonder when we find them in conjunction with talents that we respect or virtues that we admire.

*****

To the best of my belief, Mr. Shandy is the first who fairly pointed out the incalculable influence
of nomenclature upon the whole life--who seems first to have recognised the one child, happy
in an heroic appellation, soaring upwards on the wings of fortune, and the other, like the
dead sailor in his shotted hammock, haled down by sheer weight of name into the abysses of
social failure.

*****

It would be well if nations and races could communicate their qualities; but in practice when
they look upon each other, they have an eye to nothing but defects.

*****

Many a man's destiny has been settled by nothing apparently more grave than a pretty face on
the opposite side of the street and a couple of bad companions round the corner.

*****

So kindly is the world arranged, such great profit may arise from a small degree of human reliance
on oneself, and such, in particular, is the happy star of this trade of writing, that it should
combine pleasure and profit to both parties, and be at once agreeable, like fiddling, and useful,
like good preaching.

*****

In all garrison towns, guard-calls, and reveilles, and such like, make a fine, romantic interlude
in civic business. Bugles, and drums, and fifes are of themselves most excellent things in
nature, and when they carry the mind to marching armies and the picturesque vicissitudes of
war they stir up something proud in the heart.

*****

To pass from hearing literature to reading it is to take a great and dangerous step. With not
a few, I think a large proportion of their pleasure then comes to an end; 'the malady of not
marking' overtakes them; they read thenceforward by the eye alone and hear never again the
chime of fair words or the march of the stately period. NON RAGIONIAM of these. But to all
the step is dangerous; it involves coming of age; it is even a kind of second weaning. In the
past all was at the choice of others; they chose, they digested, they read aloud for us and
sang to their own tune the books of childhood. In the future we are to approach the silent,
inexpressive type alone, like pioneers; and the choice of what we are to read is in our own
hands thenceforward.

*****

It remains to be seen whether you can prove yourselves as generous as you have been wise and
patient.

*****

'If folk dinna ken what ye're doing, Davie, they're terrible taken up with it; but if they
think they ken, they care nae mair for it than what I do for pease porridge.'

*****

And perhaps if you could read in my soul, or I could read in yours, our own composure might
seem little less surprising.

*****

For charity begins blindfold; and only through a series of misapprehensions rises at length
into a settled principle of love and patience, and a firm belief in all our fellow-men.

*****

There is no doubt that the poorer classes in our country are much more charitably disposed
than their superiors in wealth. And I fancy it must arise a great deal from the comparative
indistinction of the easy and the not so easy in these ranks. A workman or a pedlar cannot
shutter himself off from his less comfortable neighbours. If he treats himself to a luxury,
he must do it in the face of a dozen who cannot. And what should more directly lead to charitable
thoughts? Thus the poor man, camping out in life, sees it as it is, and knows that every mouthful
he puts in his belly has been wrenched out of the fingers of the hungry.

But at a certain stage of prosperity, as in a balloon ascent, the fortunate person passes through
a zone of clouds, and sublunary matters are thenceforward hidden from his view. He sees nothing
but the heavenly bodies, all in admirable order, and positively as good as new. He finds himself
surrounded in the most touching manner by the attentions of Providence, and compares himself
involuntarily with the lilies and the skylarks. He does not precisely sing, of course; but
then he looks so unassuming in his open laudau! If all the world dined at one table, this philosophy
would meet with some rude knocks.

*****

Forgive me, if I seem to teach, who am as ignorant as the trees of the mountain; but those
who learn much do but skim the face of knowledge; they seize the laws, they conceive the dignity
of the design--the horror of the living fact fades from the memory. It is we who sit at home
with evil who remember, I think, and are warned and pity.

*****

Look back now, for a moment, on your own brief experience of life; and although you lived it
feelingly in your own person, and had every step of conduct burned in by pains and joys upon
your memory, tell me what definite lesson does experience hand on from youth to manhood, or
from both to age? The settled tenor which first strikes the eye is but the shadow of a delusion.
This is gone; that never truly was; and you yourself are altered beyond recognition. Times
and men and circumstances change about your changing character, with a speed of which no earthly
hurricane affords an image. What was the best yesterday, is it still the best in this changed
theatre of a to-morrow? Will your own Past truly guide you in your own violent and unexpected
Future? And if this be questionable, with what humble, with what hopeless eyes, should we not
watch other men driving beside us on their unknown careers, seeing with unlike eyes, impelled
by different gales, doing and suffering in another sphere of things?

*****

The problem of education is twofold: first to know, and then to utter. Every one who lives
any semblance of an inner life thinks more nobly and profoundly than he speaks; and the best
teachers can impart only broken images of the truth which they perceive. Speech which goes
from one to another between two natures, and, what is worse, between two experiences, is doubly
relative. The speaker buries his meaning; it is for the hearer to dig it up again; and all
speech, written or spoken, is in a dead language until it finds a willing and prepared hearer.

*****

Culture is not measured by the greatness of the field which is covered by our knowledge, but
by the nicety with which we can perceive relations in that field, whether great or small.

*****

We are accustomed nowadays to a great deal of puling over the circumstances in which we are
placed. The great refinement of many poetical gentlemen has rendered them practically unfit
for the jostling and ugliness of life, and they record their unfitness at considerable length.
The bold and awful poetry of Job's complaint produces too many flimsy imitators; for there
is always something consolatory in grandeur, but the symphony transposed for the piano becomes
hysterically sad. This literature of woe, as Whitman calls it, this MALADIE DE RENE, as we
like to call it in Europe, is in many ways a most humiliating and sickly phenomenon. Young
gentlemen with three or four hundred a year of private means look down from a pinnacle of doleful
experience on all the grown and hearty men who have dared to say a good word for life since
the beginning of the world. There is no prophet but the melancholy Jacques, and the blue devils
dance on all our literary wires.

It would be a poor service to spread culture, if this be its result, among the comparatively
innocent and cheerful ranks of men. When our little poets have to be sent to look at the ploughman
and learn wisdom, we must be careful how we tamper with our ploughmen. Where a man in not the
best of circumstances preserves composure of mind, and relishes ale and tobacco, and his wife
and children, in the intervals of dull and unremunerative labour; where a man in this predicament
can afford a lesson by the way to what are called his intellectual superiors, there is plainly
something to be lost, as well as something to be gained, by teaching him to think differently. It
is the honourable characteristic of Poetry that its materials are to be found in every subject
which can interest the human mind. The evidence of this fact is to be sought, not in the writings
of Critics, but in those of Poets themselves. It is desirable that such readers, for their own sakes,
should not suffer the solitary word Poetry, a word of very disputed meaning, to stand in the
way of their gratification; but that, while they are perusing this book, they should ask themselves
if it contains a natural delineation of human passions, human characters, and human incidents;
and if the answer be favourable to the author's wishes, that they
should consent to be pleased in spite of that most dreadful enemy
to our pleasures, our own pre-established codes of decision.

*****

All opinions, properly so called, are stages on the road to truth. It does not follow that
a man will travel any further; but if he has really considered the world and drawn a conclusion,
he has travelled so far. This does not apply to formulae got by rote, which are stages on the
road to nowhere but second childhood and the grave. To have a catchword in your mouth is not
the same thing as to hold an opinion; still less is it the same thing as to have made one for
yourself.

*****

It is supposed that all knowledge is at the bottom of a well, or the far end of a telescope. 

A-bed or up, by night or day; His teeth they chatter, chatter still.

Now think, ye farmers all, I pray, Of Goody Blake and Harry Gill.

LINES WRITTEN AT A SMALL DISTANCE FROM MY HOUSE, AND SENT BY MY LITTLE
BOY TO THE PERSON TO WHOM THEY ARE ADDRESSED. There are many sordid tragedies in the life of the student, above all if he be poor,
or drunken, or both; but nothing more moves a wise man s pity than the case of the lad who
is in too much hurry to be learned.

*****

'My friend,' said I, 'it is not easy to say who know the Lord; and it is none of our business.
Protestants and Catholics, and even those who worship stones, may know Him and be known by
Him; for He has made all.'

*****

Cheylard scrapes together halfpence or the darkened souls in Edinburgh; while Balquhidder and
Dunrossness bemoans the ignorance of Rome. Thus, to the high entertainment of the angels, do
we pelt each other with evangelists, like schoolboys bickering in the snow.

*****

For courage respects courage; but where a faith has been trodden out, we may look for a mean
and narrow population.

*****

