At the entrance of every studio court and apartment, there lives the concierge in a box of
a room generally, containing a huge feather-bed and furnished with a variety of things left
by departing tenants to this faithful guardian of the gate. Many of these small rooms resemble
the den of an antiquary with their odds and ends from the studios--old swords, plaster casts,
sketches and discarded furniture--until the place is quite full. Yet it is kept neat and clean
by madame, who sews all day and talks to her cat and to every one who passes into the court-yard.
Here your letters are kept, too, in one of a row of boxes, with the number of your atelier
marked thereon.

At night, after ten, your concierge opens the heavy iron gate of your court by pulling a cord
within reach of the family bed. He or she is waked up at intervals through the night to let
into and out of a court full of studios those to whom the night is ever young. Or perhaps your
concierge will be like old Père Valois, who has three pretty daughters who do the housework
of the studios, as well as assist in the guardianship of the gate. They are very busy, these
three daughters of Père Valois--all the morning you will see these little "femmes de ménage"
as busy as bees; the artists and poets must be waked up, and beds made and studios cleaned.
There are many that are never cleaned at all, but then there are many, too, who are not so
fortunate as to be taken care of by the three daughters of Père Valois.

There is no gossip within the quarter that your "femme de ménage" does not know, and over your
morning coffee, which she brings you, she will regale you with the latest news about most of
your best friends, including your favorite model, and madame from whom you buy your wine, always
concluding with: "That is what I heard, monsieur,--I think it is quite true, because the little
Marie, who is the femme de ménage of Monsieur Valentin, got it from Céleste Dauphine yesterday
in the café in the rue du Cherche Midi."

In the morning, this demure maid-of-all-work will be in her calico dress with her sleeves rolled
up over her strong white arms, but in the evening you may see her in a chic little dress, at
the "Bal Bullier," or dining at the Panthéon, with the fellow whose studio is opposite yours.

Alice Lemaître, however, was a far different type of femme de ménage than any of the gossiping
daughters of old Père Valois, and her lot was harder, for one night she left her home in one
of the provincial towns, when barely sixteen, and found herself in Paris with three francs
to her name and not a friend in this big pleasure-loving city to turn to. After many days of
privation, she became bonne to a woman known as Yvette de Marcie, a lady with a bad temper
and many jewels, to whom little Alice, with her rosy cheeks and bright eyes and willing disposition
to work in order to live, became a person upon whom this fashionable virago of a demi-mondaine
vented the worst that was in her--and there was much of this--until Alice went out into the
world again. I could see from the flash of our lamps as the rays fell on them, that the horses
were coal-black and splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a long brown beard and
a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. The baker paid her a trifle a week for her labor, while
the attractive Yvette de Marcie turned her into the street without her wages. It was while
delivering bread one morning to an atelier in the rue des Dames, that she chanced to meet a
young painter who was looking for a good femme de ménage to relieve his artistic mind from
the worries of housekeeping. Little Alice fairly cried when the good painter told her she might
come at twenty francs a month, which was more money than this very grateful and brave little
Brittany girl had ever known before.

"You see, monsieur, one must do one's best whatever one undertakes," said Alice to me; "I have
tried every profession, and now I am a good femme de ménage, and I am 'bien contente.' No,"
she continued, "I shall never marry, for one's independence is worth more than anything else.
When one marries," she said earnestly, her little brow in a frown, "one's life is lost; I am
young and strong, and I have courage, and so I can work hard. One should be content when one
is not cold and hungry, and I have been many times that, monsieur. Once I worked in a fabrique,
where, all day, we painted the combs of china roosters a bright red for bon-bon boxes--hundreds
and hundreds of them until I used to see them in my dreams; but the fabrique failed, for the
patron ran away with the wife of a Russian. He was a very stupid man to have done that, monsieur,
for he had a very nice wife of his own--a pretty brunette, with a charming figure; but you
see, monsieur, in Paris it is always that way. C'est toujours comme ça."

CHAPTER VI

"AT MARCEL LEGAY'S"

Just off the Boulevard St. Michel and up the narrow little rue Cujas, you will see at night
the name "Marcel Legay" illumined in tiny gas-jets. This is a cabaret of chansonniers known
as "Le Grillon," where a dozen celebrated singing satirists entertain an appreciative audience
in the stuffy little hall serving as an auditorium. Here, nightly, as the pièce de résistance--and
late on the programme (there is no printed one)--you will hear the Bard of Montmartre, Marcel
Legay, raconteur, poet, musician, and singer; the author of many of the most popular songs
of Montmartre, and a veteran singer in the cabarets.

From these cabarets of the student quarters come many of the cleverest and most beautiful songs.
Here men sing their own creations, and they have absolute license to sing or say what they
please; there is no mincing of words, and many times these rare bohemians do not take the trouble
to hide their clever songs and satires under a double entente. No celebrated man or woman,
known in art or letters, or connected with the Government--from the soldier to the good President
of the République Française--is spared. The eccentricity of each celebrity is caught by them,
and used in song or recitation.

Besides these personal caricatures, the latest political questions of the day--religion and
the haut monde--come in for a large share of good-natured satire. To be cleverly caricatured
is an honor, and should evince no ill-feeling, especially from these clever singing comedians,
who are the best of fellows at heart; whose songs are clever but never vulgar; who sing because
they love to sing; and whose versatility enables them to create the broadest of satires, and,
again, a little song with words so pure, so human, and so pathetic, that the applause that
follows from the silent room of listeners comes spontaneously from the heart.

It is not to be wondered at that "The Grillon" of Marcel Legay's is a popular haunt of the
habitués of the Quarter, who crowd the dingy little room nightly. You enter the "Grillon" by
way of the bar, and at the further end of the bar-room is a small anteroom, its walls hung
in clever posters and original drawings. This anteroom serves as a sort of green-room for the
singers and their friends; here they chat at the little tables between their songs--since there
is no stage--and through this anteroom both audience and singers pass into the little hall.
There is the informality of one of our own "smokers" about the whole affair.

Furthermore, no women sing in "Le Grillon"--a cabaret in this respect is different from a café
concert, which resembles very much our smaller variety shows. A small upright piano, and in
front of it a low platform, scarcely its length, complete the necessary stage paraphernalia
of the cabaret, and the admission is generally a franc and a half, which includes your drink.

In the anteroom, four of the singers are smoking and chatting at the little tables. One of
them is a tall, serious-looking fellow, in a black frock coat. He peers out through his black-rimmed
eyeglasses with the solemnity of an owl--but you should hear his songs!--they treat of the
lighter side of life, I assure you. Another singer has just finished his turn, and comes out
of the smoky hall, wiping the perspiration from his short, fat neck. The audience is still
applauding his last song, and he rushes back through the faded green velvet portières to bow
his thanks.

A broad-shouldered, jolly-looking fellow, in white duck trousers, is talking earnestly with
the owl-like looking bard in eyeglasses. Suddenly his turn is called, and you follow him in,
where, as soon as he is seen, he is welcomed by cheers from the students and girls, and an
elaborate fanfare of chords on the piano. When this popular poet-singer has finished, there
follows a round of applause and a pounding of canes, and then the ruddy-faced, gray-haired
manager starts a three-times-three handclapping in unison to a pounding of chords on the piano.
This is the proper ending to every demand for an encore in "Le Grillon," and it never fails
to bring one. 

I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver, however, was not in the least
disturbed. He kept turning his head to left and right, but I could
not see anything through the darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left
I saw a faint flickering blue flame. He passes his hand over
his bald pate--gives an extra polish to his eyeglasses--beams with an irresistibly funny expression
upon his audience--coughs--whistles--passes a few remarks, and then, adjusting his glasses
on his stubby red nose, looks serio-comically over his roll of music. He is dressed in a long,
black frock-coat reaching nearly to his heels. This coat, with its velvet collar, discloses
a frilled white shirt and a white flowing bow scarf; these, with a pair of black-and-white
check trousers, complete this every-day attire.

But the man inside these voluminous clothes is even still more eccentric. Short, indefinitely
past fifty years of age, with a round face and merry eyes, and a bald head whose lower portion
is framed in a fringe of long hair, reminding one of the coiffure of some pre-Raphaelite saint--indeed,
so striking is this resemblance that the good bard is often caricatured with a halo surrounding
this medieval fringe.

In the meantime, while this famous singer is selecting a song, he is overwhelmed with demands
for his most popular ones. A dozen students and girls at one end of the little hall, now swimming
in a haze of pipe and cigarette smoke, are hammering with sticks and parasols for "Le matador
avec les pieds du vent"; another crowd is yelling for "La Goularde." Marcel Legay smiles at
them all through his eyeglasses, then roars at them to keep quiet--and finally the clamor in
the room gradually subsides--here and there a word--a giggle--and finally silence.

"Now, my children, I will sing to you the story of Clarette," says the bard; "it is a very
sad histoire. I have read it," and he smiles and cocks one eye.

His baritone voice still possesses considerable fire, and in his heroic songs he is dramatic.
In "The Miller who grinds for Love," the feeling and intensity and dramatic quality he puts
into its rendition are stirring. As he finishes his last encore, amidst a round of applause,
he grasps his hat from the piano, jams it over his bald pate with its celestial fringe, and
rushes for the door. Here he stops, and, turning for a second, cheers back at the crowd, waving
the straw hat above his head. The next moment he is having a cooling drink among his confrères
in the anteroom.

