"What geese you girls are!--you are always thinking of love, and weddings, and orange-blossoms."

"It is only for you I think about them," said Emmeline. "I know there is something to tell.
Dear Herbert, do tell me."

"There is a young bachelor duke coming here to-morrow. He has a million a-year, and three counties
all his own; he has blue eyes, and is the handsomest man that ever was seen. Is that news enough?"

"Very well, Herbert. I would tell you anything."

"Well; tell me anything."

"I'll tell you this. I know you're in love with Clara Desmond, and I'm sure she's in love with
you; and I believe you are both engaged, and you're not nice at all to have a secret from me.
I never tease you, as Mary does, and it would make me so happy to know it."

Upon this he put his arm round her waist and whispered one word into her ear. She gave an exclamation
of delight; and as the tears came into her eyes congratulated him with a kiss. "Oh dear, oh
dear! I am so happy!" she exclaimed.

"Hush--sh," he whispered. "I knew how it would be if I told you."

"But they will all know to-morrow, will they not?"

"Leave that to me. You have coaxed me out of my secret, and you are bound to keep it. And then
he went away well pleased. This description of delight on his sister's part was the first instalment
of that joy which he had promised himself from the satisfaction of his family."

Lady Fitzgerald had watched all that had passed, and had already learned her mistake--her mistake
in that she had prophesied that no immediate proposal was likely to be made by her son. She
now knew well enough that he had made such a proposal, and that he had been accepted.

And this greatly grieved her. She had felt certain from the few slight words which Sir Thomas
had spoken that there were valid reasons why her son should not marry a penniless girl. That
conversation, joined to other things, to the man's visit, and her husband's deep dejection,
had convinced her that all was not right. Some misfortune was impending over them, and there
had been that in her own early history which filled her with dismay as she thought of this.

She had ardently desired to caution her son in this respect,--to guard him, if possible, against
future disappointment and future sorrow. But she could not do so without obtaining in some
sort her husband's assent to her doing so. She resolved that she would talk it over with Sir
Thomas. But the subject was one so full of pain, and he was so ill, and therefore she had put
it off.

And now she saw that the injury was done.

Nevertheless, she said nothing either to Emmeline or to Herbert. If the injury were done, what
good could now result from talking? She doubtless would hear it all soon enough. So she sat
still, watching them.

On the following morning Sir Thomas did not come out to breakfast. Herbert went into his room
quite early, as was always his custom; and as he left it for the breakfast-parlour he said,
"Father, I should like to speak to you just now about something of importance."

"Something of importance, Herbert; what is it? Anything wrong?" For Sir Thomas was nervous,
and easily frightened.

"Oh dear, no; nothing is wrong. It is nothing that will annoy you; at least, I think not. But
it will keep till after breakfast. I will come in again the moment breakfast is over." And
so saying he left the room with a light step.

In the breakfast-parlour it seemed to him as though everybody was conscious of some important
fact. His mother's kiss was peculiarly solemn and full of solicitude; Aunt Letty smirked as
though she was aware of something--something over and above the great Protestant tenets which
usually supported her; and Mary had no joke to fling at him.

"Emmeline," he whispered, "you have told."

"No, indeed," she replied. But what mattered it? Everybody would know now in a few minutes.
So he ate his breakfast, and then returned to Sir Thomas.

"Father," said he, as soon as he had got into the armchair, in which it was his custom to sit
when talking with Sir Thomas, "I hope what I am going to tell you will give you pleasure. I
have proposed to a young lady, and she has--accepted me."

"You have proposed, and have been accepted!"

"Yes, father."

"And the young lady--?"

"Is Lady Clara Desmond. I hope you will say that you approve of it. She has no fortune, as
we all know, but that will hardly matter to me; and I think you will allow that in every other
respect she is--"

Perfect, Herbert would have said, had he dared to express his true meaning. But he paused for
a moment to look for a less triumphant word; and then paused again, and left his sentence incomplete,
when he saw the expression of his father's face.

"Oh, father! you do not mean to say that you do not like her?"

But it was not dislike that was expressed in his father's face, as Herbert felt the moment
after he had spoken. There was pain there, and solicitude, and disappointment; a look of sorrow
at the tidings thus conveyed to him; but nothing that seemed to betoken dislike of any person.

"What is it, sir? Why do you not speak to me? Can it be that you disapprove of my marrying?"

Sir Thomas certainly did disapprove of his son's marrying, but he lacked the courage to say
so. Much misery that had hitherto come upon him, and that was about to come on all those whom
he loved so well, arose from this lack of courage. He did not dare to tell his son that he
advised him for the present to put aside all such hopes. It would have been terrible for him
to do so; but he knew that in not doing so he was occasioning sorrow that would be more terrible.

And yet he did not do it. Herbert saw clearly that the project was distasteful to his father,--that
project which he had hoped to have seen received with so much delight; but nothing was said
to him which tended to make him alter his purpose.

"Do you not like her?" he asked his father, almost piteously.

"Yes, yes; I do like her, we all like her, very much indeed, Herbert."

"Then why--"

"You are so young, my boy, and she is so very young, and--"

"And what?"

"Why, Herbert, it is not always practicable for the son even of a man of property to marry
so early in life as this. She has nothing, you know."

"So," said the young man, proudly; "I never thought of looking for money."

"But in your position it is so essential if a young man wishes to marry."

Herbert had always regarded his father as the most liberal man breathing,--as open-hearted
and open-handed almost to a fault. To him, his only son, he had ever been so, refusing him
nothing, and latterly allowing him to do almost as he would with the management of the estate.
He could not understand that this liberality should be turned to parsimony on such an occasion
as that of his son's marriage.

"You think then, sir, that I ought not to marry Lady Clara?" said Herbert very bitterly.

"I like her excessively," said Sir Thomas. "I think she is a sweet girl, a very sweet girl,
all that I or your mother could desire to see in your wife; but--"

"But she is not rich."

"Do not speak to me in that tone, my boy," said Sir Thomas, with an expression that would have
moved his enemy to pity, let alone his son. His son did pity him, and ceased to wear the angry
expression of face which had so wounded his father.

"But, father, I do not understand you," he said. "Is there any real objection why I should
not marry? I am more than twenty-two, and you, I think, married earlier than that."

In answer to this Sir Thomas only sighed meekly and piteously.

"If you mean to say," continued the son, "that it will be inconvenient to you to make me any
allowance--"

"No, no, no; you are of course entitled to what you want, and as long as I can give it, you
shall have it."

"As long as you can give it, father!"

"As long as it is in my power, I mean. What can I want of anything but for you--for you and them?"

After this Herbert sat silent for a while, leaning on his arm. He knew that there existed some
mischief, but he could not fathom it. Had he been prudent, he would have felt that there was
some impediment to his love; some evil which it behoved him to fathom before he allowed his
love to share it; but when was a lover prudent?

"We should live here, should we not, father? No second establishment would be necessary."

"Of course you would live here," said Sir Thomas, glad to be able to look at the subject on
any side that was not painful. "Of course you would live here. For the matter of that, Herbert,
the house should be considered as your own if you so wished it."

Against this the son put in his most violent protest. Nothing on earth should make him consider
himself master of Castle Richmond as long as his father lived. Nor would Clara,--his Clara,
wish it. He knew her well, he boasted. It would amply suffice to her to live there with them
all. Was not the house large enough? And, indeed, where else could he live, seeing that all
his interests were naturally centred upon the property?

And then Sir Thomas did give his consent. It would be wrong to say that it was wrung from him.
He gave it willingly enough, as far as the present moment was concerned. When it was once settled,
he assured his son that he would love Clara as his daughter. But, nevertheless--

The father knew that he had done wrong; and Herbert knew that he also, he himself, had done
wrongly. He was aware that there was something which he did not understand. But he had promised
to see Clara either that day or the next, and he could not bring himself to unsay all that
he had said to her. He left his father's room sorrowful at heart, and discontented. He had
expected that his tidings would have been received in so far other a manner; that he would
have been able to go from his father's study upstairs to his mother's room with so exulting
a step; that his news, when once the matter was ratified by his father's approval, would have
flown about the house with so loud a note of triumph. And now it was so different! His father
had consented; but it was too plain that there was no room for any triumph.

"Well, Herbert!" said Emmeline, jumping up to meet him as he returned to a small back drawing-room,
through which he had gone to his father's dressing-room. She had calculated that he would come
there, and that she might thus get the first word from him after the interview was over.

But there was a frown upon his brow, and displeasure in his eyes. There was none of that bright
smile of gratified pride with which she had expected that her greeting would have been met.
"Is there anything wrong?" she said. "He does not disapprove, does he?"

"Never mind; and do leave me now. I never can make you understand that one is not always in
a humour for joking." And so saying, he put her aside, and passed on.

Joking! That was indeed hard upon poor Emmeline, seeing that her thoughts were so full of him,
that her heart beat so warmly for his promised bride. But she said nothing, shrinking back
abashed, and vanishing out of the way. Could it be possible that her father should have refused
to receive Lady Clara Desmond as his daughter-in-law?

He then betook himself to a private territory of his own, where he might be sure that he would
remain undisturbed for some half-hour or so. He would go to his mother, of course, but not
quite immediately. He would think over the matter, endeavouring to ascertain what it was that
had made his father's manner and words so painful to him.

But he could not get his thoughts to work rightly;--which getting of the thoughts to work rightly
is, by-the-by, as I take it, the hardest work which a man is called upon to do. Not that the
subject to be thought about need in itself be difficult. Were one to say that thoughts about
hydrostatics and pneumatics are difficult to the multitude, or that mental efforts in regions
of political economy or ethical philosophy are beyond ordinary reach, one would only pronounce
an evident truism, an absurd platitude. But let any man take any subject fully within his own
mind's scope, and strive to think about it steadily, with some attempt at calculation as to
results. The chances are his mind will fly off, will-he-nill-he, to some utterly different
matter. When he wishes to debate within himself that question of his wife's temper, he will
find himself considering whether he may not judiciously give away half a dozen pairs of those
old boots; or when it behoves him to decide whether it shall be manure and a green crop, or
a fallow season and then grass seeds, he cannot keep himself from inward inquiry as to the
meaning of that peculiar smile on Mrs. Walker's face when he shook hands with her last night.

Lord Brougham and Professor Faraday can, no doubt, command their thoughts. If many men could
do so, there would be many Lord Broughams and many Professor Faradays.

At the present moment Herbert Fitzgerald had no right to consider himself as following in the
steps of either one or other of these great men. He wished to think about his father's circumstances,
but his mind would fly off to Clara Desmond and her perfections. And thus, though he remained
there for half an hour, with his back to the fire and his hands in his pockets, his deliberations
had done him no good whatever,--had rather done him harm, seeing that he had only warmed himself
into a firmer determination to go on with what he was doing. And then he went to his mother.

She kissed him, and spoke very tenderly, nay affectionately, about Clara; but even she, even
his mother, did not speak joyously; and she also said something about the difficulty of providing
a maintenance for a married son. Then to her he burst forth, and spoke somewhat loudly.

"I cannot understand all this, mother. If either you or my father know any reason why I should
be treated differently from other sons, you ought to tell me; not leave me to grope about in
the dark."

"But, my boy, we both think that no son was ever entitled to more consideration, or to kinder
or more liberal treatment."

"Why do I hear all this, then, about the difficulty of my marrying? Or if I hear so much, why
do I not hear more? I know pretty well, I believe, what is my father's income."

"If you do not, he would tell you for the asking."

"And I know that I must be the heir to it, whatever it is,--not that that feeling would make
any difference in my dealings with him, not the least. And, under these circumstances, I cannot
conceive why he and you should look coldly upon my marriage."

"I look coldly on it, Herbert!"

"Do you not? Do you not tell me that there will be no income for me? If that is to be so; if
that really is the case; if the property has so dwindled away, or become embarrassed--"

"Oh, Herbert! there never was a man less likely to injure his son's property than your father."

"I do not mean that, mother. Let him do what he likes with it, I should not upbraid him, even
in my thoughts. But if it be embarrassed; if it has dwindled away; if there be any reason why
I should not regard myself as altogether untrammelled with regard to money, he ought to tell
me. I cannot accuse myself of expensive tastes."

"Dearest Herbert, nobody accuses you of anything."

"But I do desire to marry; and now I have engaged myself, and will not break from my engagement,
unless it be shown to me that I am bound in honour to do so. Then, indeed--"

"Oh, Herbert! I do not know what you mean."

"I mean this: that I expect that Clara shall be received as my wife with open arms--"

"And so she shall be if she comes."

"Or else that some reason should be given me why she should not come. As to income, something
must be done, I suppose. If the means at our disposal are less than I have been taught to believe,
I at any rate will not complain. But they cannot, I think, be so small as to afford any just
reason why I should not marry."

"Your father, you see, is ill, and one can hardly talk to him fully upon such matters at present."

"Then I will speak to Somers. He, at any rate, must know how the property is circumstanced,
and I suppose he will not hesitate to tell me."

"I don't think Somers can tell you anything."

"Then what is it? As for the London estate, mother, that is all moonshine. What if it were
gone altogether? It may be that it is that which vexes my father; but if so, it is a monomania."

"Oh, my boy, do not use such a word!"

"You know what I mean. If any doubt as to that is creating this despondency, it only shows
that though we are bound to respect and relieve my father's state of mind, we are not at all
bound to share it. What would it really matter, mother, if that place in London were washed
away by the Thames? There is more than enough left for us all, unless--"

"Ah, Herbert, that is it."

"Then I will go to Somers, and he shall tell me. My father's interest in this property cannot
have been involved without his knowledge; and circumstanced as we and my father are, he is
bound to tell me."

"If there be anything within his knowledge to tell, he will tell it."

"And if there be nothing within his knowledge, then I can only look upon all this as a disease
on my poor father's part. I will do all I can to comfort him in it; but it would be madness
to destroy my whole happiness because he labours under delusions."

Lady Fitzgerald did not know what further to say. She half believed that Sir Thomas did labour
under some delusion; but then she half believed also that he had upon his mind a sorrow, terribly
real, which was in no sort delusive. Under such circumstances, how could she advise her son?
Instead of advising him, she caressed him.

"But I may claim this from you, mother, that if Somers tells me nothing which ought to make
me break my word to Clara, you will receive her as your daughter. You will promise me that,
will you not?"

Lady Fitzgerald did promise, warmly; assuring him that she already dearly loved Clara Desmond,
that she would delight in having such a daughter-in-law, and that she would go to her to welcome
her as such as soon as ever he should bid her do so. With this Herbert was somewhat comforted,
and immediately started on his search after Mr. Somers.

I do not think that any person is to be found, as a rule, attached to English estates whose
position is analogous to that of an Irish agent. And there is a wide misunderstanding in England
as to these Irish functionaries. I have attempted, some pages back, to describe the national
delinquencies of a middleman, or profit-renter. In England we are apt to think that the agents
on Irish properties are to be charged with similar shortcomings. This I can assert to be a
great mistake; and I believe that, as a class, the agents on Irish properties do their duty
in a manner beneficial to the people.

That there are, or were, many agents who were also middlemen, or profit-renters, and that in
this second position they were a nuisance to the country, is no doubt true. But they were no
nuisance in their working capacity as agents. That there are some bad agents there can be no
doubt, as there are also some bad shoemakers.

The duties towards an estate which an agent performs in Ireland are, I believe, generally shared
in England between three or four different persons. The family lawyer performs part, the estate
steward performs part, and the landlord himself performs part;--as to small estates, by far
the greater part.

In Ireland, let the estate be ever so small--eight hundred a-year, we will say--all the working
of the property is managed by the agent. It is he who knows the tenants, and the limits of
their holdings; it is he who arranges leases, and allows--or much more generally does not allow--for
improvements. He takes the rent, and gives the order for the ejection of tenants if he cannot
get it.

I am far from saying that it would not be well that much of this should be done by the landlord
himself; that all of it should be so done on a small property. But it is done by agents; and,
as a rule, is, I think, done honestly.

Mr. Somers was agent to the Castle Richmond property, and as he took to himself as such five
per cent, on all rents paid, and as he was agent also to sundry other small properties in the
neighbourhood, he succeeded in making a very snug income. He had also an excellent house on
the estate, and was altogether very much thought of; on the whole, perhaps, more than was Sir
Thomas. But in this respect it was probable that Herbert might soon take the lead.

He was a large, heavy, consequential man, always very busy, as though aware of being one of
the most important wheels that kept the Irish clock agoing; but he was honest, kind-hearted
in the main, true as steel to his employers, and good-humoured--as long as he was allowed to
have his own way. In these latter days he had been a little soured by Herbert's interference,
and had even gone so far as to say that, "in his humble judgment, Mr. Fitzgerald was wrong
in doing"--so and so. But he generally called him Herbert, was always kind to him, and in his
heart of hearts loved him dearly. But that was a matter of course, for had he not been agent
to the estate before Herbert was born?

Immediately after his interview with his mother, Mr. Herbert rode over to Mr. Somers's house,
and there found him sitting alone in his office. He dashed immediately into the subject that
had brought him there. "I have come, Mr. Somers," said he, "to ask you a question about the
property."

"About the Castle Richmond property?" said Mr. Somers, rather surprised by his visitor's manner.

"Yes; you know in what a state my poor father now is."

"I know that Sir Thomas is not very well. I am sorry to say that it is long since he has been
quite himself."

"There is something that is preying upon his spirits."

"I am afraid so, Herbert."

"Then tell me fairly, Mr. Somers, do you know what it is?"

"Not--in--the least. I have no conception whatever, and never have had any. I know no cause
for trouble that should disquiet him."

"There is nothing wrong about the property?"

"Not to my knowledge."

"Who has the title-deeds?"

"They are at Coutts's."

"You are sure of that?"

"Well; as sure as a man can be of a thing that he does not see. I have never seen them there;
indeed, have never seen them at all; but I feel no doubt in my own mind as to their being at
the bankers."

"Is there much due on the estate?"

"Very little. No estate in county Cork has less on it. Miss Letty has her income, and when
Poulnasherry was bought,--that townland lying just under Berryhill, where the gorse cover is,
part of the purchase money was left on mortgage. That is still due; but the interest is less
than a hundred a-year."

"And that is all?"

"All that I know of."

"Could there be encumbrances without your knowing it?"

"I think not. I think it is impossible. Of all men your father is the last to encumber his
estates in a manner unknown to his agent, and to pay off the interest in secret."

"What is it, then, Mr. Somers?"

"I do not know." And then Mr. Somers paused. "Of course you have heard of a visit he received
the other day from a stranger?"

"Yes; I heard of it."

"People about here are talking of it. And he--that man, with a younger man--they are still
living in Cork, at a little drinking-house in South Main Street. The younger man has been seen
down here twice."

"But what can that mean?"

"I do not know. I tell you everything that I do know."

Herbert exacted a promise from him that he would continue to tell him everything which he might
learn, and then rode back to Castle Richmond.

"The whole thing must be a delusion," he said to himself; and resolved that there was no valid
reason why he should make Clara unhappy by any reference to the circumstance.

CHAPTER XIII

MR. MOLLETT RETURNS TO SOUTH MAIN STREET

I must now take my readers back to that very unsavoury public-house in South Main Street, Cork,
in which, for the present, lived Mr. Matthew Mollett and his son Abraham.

I need hardly explain to a discerning public that Mr. Matthew Mollett was the gentleman who
made that momentous call at Castle Richmond, and flurried all that household.

"Drat it!" said Mrs. Jones to herself on that day, as soon as she had regained the solitude
of her own private apartment, after having taken a long look at Mr. Mollett in the hall. On
that occasion she sat down on a low chair in the middle of the room, put her two hands down
substantially on her two knees, gave a long sigh, and then made the above exclamation,--"Drat it!"

Mrs. Jones was still thoroughly a Saxon, although she had lived for so many years among the
Celts. But it was only when she was quite alone that she allowed herself the indulgence of
so peculiarly Saxon a mode of expressing either her surprise or indignation.

"It's the same man," she said to herself, "as come that day, as sure as eggs;" and then for
five minutes she maintained her position, cogitating. "And he's like the other fellow too,"
she continued. "Only, somehow he's not like him." And then another pause. "And yet he is; only
it can't be; and he ain't just so tall, and he's older like." And then, still meditating, Mrs.
Jones kept her position for full ten minutes longer; at the end of which time she got up and
shook herself. She deserved to be bracketed with Lord Brougham and Professor Faraday, for she
had kept her mind intent on her subject, and had come to a resolution. "I won't say nothing
to nobody, noways," was the expression of her mind's purpose. "Only I'll tell missus as how
he was the man as come to Wales." And she did tell so much to her mistress--as we have before
learned.

Mr. Mollett had gone down from Cork to Castle Richmond in one of those delightful Irish vehicles
called a covered car. An inside-covered car is an equipage much given to shaking, seeing that
it has a heavy top like a London cab, and that it runs on a pair of wheels. It is entered from
behind, and slopes backwards. The sitter sits sideways, between a cracked window on one side
and a cracked doorway on the other; and as a draught is always going in at the ear next the
window, and out at the ear next the door, it is about as cold and comfortless a vehicle for
winter as may be well imagined. Now the journey from Castle Richmond to Cork has to be made
right across the Boggeragh Mountains. It is over twenty miles Irish; and the road is never
very good. Mr. Mollett, therefore, was five hours in the covered car on his return journey;
and as he had stopped for lunch at Kanturk, and had not hurried himself at that meal, it was
very dark and very cold when he reached the house in South Main Street.

I think I have explained that Mr. Mollett senior was not absolutely a drunkard; but nevertheless,
he was not averse to spirits in cold weather, and on this journey had warmed himself with whiskey
once or twice on the road. He had found a shebeen house when he crossed the Nad river, and
another on the mountaintop, and a third at the point where the road passes near the village
of Blarney, and at all these convenient resting-spots Mr. Mollett had endeavoured to warm himself.

There are men who do not become absolutely drunk, but who do become absolutely cross when they
drink more than is good for them; and of such men Mr. Mollett was one. What with the cold air,
and what with the whisky, and what with the jolting, Mr. Mollett was very cross when he reached
the Kanturk Hotel so that he only cursed the driver instead of giving him the expected gratuity.

"I'll come to yer honour in the morning," said the driver.

"You may go to the devil in the morning," answered Mr. Mollett; and this was the first intimation
of his return which reached the ears of his expectant son.

"There's the governor," said Aby, who was then flirting with Miss O'Dwyer in the bar. "Somebody's
been stroking him the wrong way of the 'air."

The charms of Miss O'Dwyer in these idle days had been too much for the prudence of Mr. Abraham
Mollett; by far too much, considering that in his sterner moments his ambition led him to contemplate
a match, with a young lady of much higher rank in life. But wine, which "inspires us" and fires us

   "With courage, love, and joy,"

had inspired him with courage to forget his prudence, and with love for the lovely Fanny.

"Now, nonsense, Mr. Aby," she had said to him a few minutes before the wheels of the covered
car were heard in South Main Street. "You know you main nothing of the sort."

"By 'eavens, Fanny, I mean every word of it; may this drop be my poison if I don't. This piece
of business here keeps me and the governor hon and hoff like, and will do for some weeks perhaps;
but when that's done, honly say the word, and I'll make you Mrs. M. Isn't that fair, now?"

"But, Mr. Aby--"

"Never mind the mister, Fan, between friends."

"La! I couldn't call you Aby without it; could I?"

"Try, my darling."

"Well--Aby--there now. It does sound so uppish, don't it? But tell me this now; what is the
business that you and the old gentleman is about down at Kanturk?"

Abraham Mollett hereupon had put one finger to his nose, and then winked his eye.

"If you care about me, as you say you do, you wouldn't be shy of just telling me as much as that."

"That's business, Fan; and business and love don't hamalgamate like whisky and sugar."

"Then I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Aby; I don't want to have anything to do with a man who
won't show his rispect by telling me his sacrets."

"That's it, is it, Fan?"

"I suppose you think I can't keep a sacret. You think I'd be telling father, I suppose."

"Well, it's about some money that's due to him down there."

"Who from?"

"He expects to get it from some of those Fitzgerald people."

In saying so much Mr. Mollett the younger had not utterly abandoned all prudence. He knew very
well that the car-driver and others would be aware that his father had been to Castle Richmond;
and that it was more than probable that either he or his father would have to make further
visits there. Indeed, he had almost determined that he would go down to the baronet himself.
Under these circumstances it might be well that some pretext for these visits should be given.

"Which Fitzgerald, Mr. Aby? Is it the Hap House young man?"

"Hap House. I never heard of such a place. These people live at Castle Richmond."

"Oh--h--h! If Mr. Mollett have money due there, sure he have a good mark to go upon. Why, Sir
Thomas is about the richest man in these parts."

"And who is this other man; at 'Appy--what is it you call his place?"

"Hap House. Oh, it's he is the thorough-going young gentleman. Only they say he's a leetle
too fast. To my mind, Mr. Owen is the finest-looking man to be seen anywheres in the county Cork."

"He's a flame of yours, is he, Fan?"

"I don't know what you main by a flame. But there's not a girl in Cork but what likes the glance
of his eye. They do say that he'd have Lady Clara Desmond; only there ain't no money."

"And what's he to these other people?"

"Cousin, I believe; or hardly so much as that, I'm thinking. But all the same if anything was
to happen to young Mr. Herbert, it would all go to him."

"It would, would it?"

"So people say."

"Mr. 'Erbert is the son of the old cock at Castle Richmond, isn't he?"

"Just so. He's the young cock; he, he, he!"

"And if he was to be--nowhere like; not his father's son at all, for instance, it would all
go to this 'andsome 'Appy 'Ouse man; would it?"

"Every shilling, they say; house, title, and all."

"Hum," said Mr. Abraham Mollett; and he began again to calculate his family chances. Perhaps,
after all, this handsome young man who was at present too poor to marry his noble lady love
might be the more liberal man to deal with. But then any dealings with him would kill the golden
goose at once. All would depend on the size of the one egg which might be extracted.

He certainly felt, however, that this Fitzgerald family arrangement was one which it was beneficial
that he should know; but he felt also that it would be by no means necessary at present to
communicate the information to his father. He put it by in his mind, regarding it as a fund
on which he might draw if occasion should require. It might perhaps be pleasant for him to
make the acquaintance of this 'andsome young Fitzgerald of 'Appy 'Ouse.

"And now, Fan, my darling, give us a kiss," said he, getting up from his seat.

"'Deed and I won't," said Fan, withdrawing herself among the bottles and glasses.

"'Deed and you shall, my love," said Aby, pertinaciously, as he prepared to follow her through
the brittle ware.

"Hu--sh--be aisy now. There's Tom. He's ears for everything, and eyes like a cat."

"What do I care for Tom?"

"And father'll be coming in. Be aisy, I tell you. I won't now, Mr. Aby; and that's enough.
You'll break the bottle."

"D---the bottle. That's smashed hany way. Come, Fan, what's a kiss among friends?"

"Cock you up with kisses, indeed! how bad you are for dainties! There; do you hear that? That's
the old gentleman;" and then, as the voice of Mr. Mollett senior was heard abusing the car-driver,
Miss O'Dwyer smoothed her apron, put her hands to her side hair, and removed the debris of
the broken bottle.

"Well, governor," said Aby, "how goes it?"

"How goes it, indeed! It goes pretty well, I dare say, in here, where you can sit drinking
toddy all the evening, and doing nothing."

"Why, what on hearth would you have me be doing? Better here than paddling about in the streets,
isn't it?"

"If you could do a stroke of work now and then to earn your bread, it might be better." Now
Aby knew from experience that whenever his father talked to him about earning his bread, he
was half drunk and whole cross. So he made no immediate reply on that point.

"You are cold, I suppose, governor, and had better get a bit of something to eat, and a little
tea."

"And put my feet in hot water, and tallow my nose, and go to bed, hadn't I? Miss O'Dwyer, I'll
trouble you to mix me a glass of brandy-punch. Of all the roads I ever travelled, that's the
longest and hardest to get over. Dashed, if I didn't begin to think I'd never be here." And
so saying he flung himself into a chair, and put up his feet on the two hobs.

There was a kettle on one of them, which the young lady pushed a little nearer to the hot coals,
in order to show that the water should be boiling; and as she did so Aby gave her a wink over
his father's shoulder, by way of conveying to her an intimation that "the governor was a little
cut," or in other language tipsy, and that the brandy-punch should be brewed with a discreet
view to past events of the same description. All which Miss O'Dwyer perfectly understood.

It may easily be conceived that Aby was especially anxious to receive tidings of what had been
done this day down in the Kanturk neighbourhood. He had given his views to his father, as will
be remembered; and though Mr. Mollett senior had not professed himself as absolutely agreeing
with them, he had nevertheless owned that he was imbued with the necessity of taking some great
step. He had gone down to take this great step, and Aby was very anxious to know how it had
been taken.

When the father and son were both sober, or when the son was tipsy, or when the father was
absolutely drunk--an accident which would occur occasionally, the spirit and pluck of the son
was in the ascendant. He at such times was the more masterful of the two, and generally contrived,
either by persuasion or bullying, to govern his governor. But when it did happen that Mollett
pere was half drunk and cross with drink, then, at such moments, Mollett fils had to acknowledge
to himself that his governor was not to be governed.

And, indeed, at such moments his governor could be very disagreeable--could say nasty, bitter
things, showing very little parental affection, and make himself altogether bad society, not
only to his son, but to his son's companions also. Now it appeared to Aby that his father was
at present in this condition.

He had only to egg him on to further drinking, and the respectable gentleman would become stupid,
noisy, soft, and affectionate. But then, when in that state, he would blab terribly. It was
much with the view of keeping him from that state, that under the present circumstances the
son remained with the father. To do the father justice, it may be asserted that he knew his
own weakness, and that, knowing it, he had abstained from heavy drinking since he had taken
in hand this great piece of diplomacy.

"But you must be hungry, governor; won't you take a bit of something?"

"Shall we get you a steek, Mr. Mollett?" asked Miss O'Dwyer, hospitably, "or just a bit of
bacon with a couple of eggs or so? It wouldn't be a minute, you know?"

"Your eggs are all addled and bad," said Mr. Mollett; "and as for a beef-steak, it's my belief
there isn't such a thing in all Ireland." After which civil speech, Miss O'Dwyer winked at
Aby, as much as to say, "You see what a state he's in."

"Have a bit of buttered toast and a cup of tea, governor," suggested the son.

"I'm d---if I do," replied the father. "You're become uncommon fond of tea of late--that is,
for other people. I don't see you take much of it yourself."

"A cup of tay is the thing to warm one afther such a journey as you've had; that's certain,
Mr. Mollett," said Fanny.

"Them's your ideas about warming, are they, my dear?" said the elderly gentleman. "Do you come
and sit down on my knee here for a few minutes or so, and that'd warm me better than all the
'tay' in the world."

Aby showed by his face that he was immeasurably disgusted by the iniquitous coarseness of this
overture. Miss O'Dwyer, however, looking at the gentleman's age, and his state as regarded
liquor, passed it over as of no moment whatsoever. So that when, in the later part of the evening,
Aby expressed to that young lady his deep disgust, she merely said, "Oh, bother; what matters
an old man like that?"

And then, when they were at this pass, Mr. Dwyer came in. He did not interfere much with his
daughter in the bar room, but he would occasionally take a dandy of punch there, and ask how
things were going on indoors. He was a fat, thickset man, with a good-humoured face, a flattened
nose, and a great aptitude for stable occupations. He was part owner of the Kanturk car, as
has been before said, and was the proprietor of sundry other cars, open cars and covered cars,
plying for hire in the streets of Cork.

"I hope the mare took your honour well down Kanturk and back again," said he, addressing his
elder customer with a chuck of his head intended for a bow.

"I don't know what you call well," said Mr. Mollett "She hadn't a leg to stand upon for the
last three hours."

"Not a leg to stand upon! Faix, then, and it's she'd have the four good legs if she travelled
every inch of the way from Donagh-a-Dee to Ti-vora," to which distance Mr. O'Dwyer specially
referred as being supposed to be the longest known in Ireland.

"She may be able to do that; but I'm blessed if she's fit to go to Kanturk and back."

"She's done the work, anyhow," said Mr. O'Dwyer, who evidently thought that this last argument
was conclusive.

"And a precious time she's been about it. Why, my goodness, it would have been better for me
to have walked it. As Sir Thomas said to me--"

"What! did you see Sir Thomas Fitzgerald?"

Hereupon Aby gave his father a nudge; but the father either did not appreciate the nudge, or
did not choose to obey it.

"Yes; I did see him. Why shouldn't I?"

"Only they do say he's hard to get to speak to now-a-days. He's not over well, you know, these
years back."

"Well or ill he'll see me, I take it, when I go that distance to ask him. There's no doubt
about that; is there, Aby?"

"Can't say, I'm sure, not knowing the gentleman," said Aby.

"We holds land from Sir Thomas, we do; that is, me and my brother Mick, and a better landlord
ain't nowhere," said Mr. O'Dwyer.

"Oh, you're one of the tenants, are you? The rents are paid pretty well, ain't they?"

"To the day," said Mr. O'Dwyer, proudly.

"What would you think, now--" Mr. Mollett was continuing; but Aby interrupted him somewhat
violently.

"Hold your confounded stupid tongue, will you, you old jolterhead;" and on this occasion he
put his hand on his father's shoulder and shook him.

"Who are you calling jolterhead? Who do you dare to speak to in that way? you impudent young
cub you. Am I to ask your leave when I want to open my mouth?"

Aby had well known that his father in his present mood would not stand the manner in which
the interruption was attempted. Nor did he wish to quarrel before the publican and his daughter.
But anything was better than allowing his father to continue in the strain in which he was talking.

"You are talking of things which you don't hunderstand, and about people you don't know," said
Aby. "You've had a drop too much on the road too, and you 'ad better go to bed."

Old Mollett turned round to strike at his son; but even in his present state he was somewhat
quelled by Aby's eye. Aby was keenly alive to the necessity for prudence on his father's part,
though he was by no means able to be prudent himself.

"Talking of things which I don't understand, am I?" said the old man. "That's all you know
about it. Give me another glass of that brandy toddy, my dear."

But Aby's look had quelled, or at any rate silenced him; and though he did advance another
stage in tipsiness before they succeeded in getting him off to bed, he said no more about Sir
Thomas Fitzgerald or his Castle Richmond secrets.

Nevertheless, he had said enough to cause suspicion. One would not have imagined, on looking
at Mr. O'Dwyer, that he was a very crafty person, or one of whose finesse in affairs of the
world it would be necessary to stand much in awe. He seemed to be thick, and stolid, and incapable
of deep inquiry; but, nevertheless, he was as fond of his neighbour's affairs as another, and
knew as much about the affairs of his neighbours at Kanturk as any man in the county Cork.

He himself was a Kanturk man, and his wife had been a Kanturk woman; no less a person, indeed,
than the sister of Father Bernard M'Carthy, rest her soul;--for it was now at peace, let us
all hope. She had been dead these ten years; but he did not the less keep up his connection
with the old town, or with his brother-in-law the priest, or with the affairs of the persons
there adjacent; especially, we may say, those of his landlord, Sir Thomas Fitzgerald, under
whom he still held a small farm, in conjunction with his brother Mick, the publican at Kanturk.

"What's all that about Sir Thomas?" said he to his daughter in a low voice as soon as the Molletts
had left the bar.

"Well, I don't just know," said Fanny. She was a good daughter, and loved her father, whose
indoor affairs she kept tight enough for him. But she had hardly made up her mind as yet whether
or no it would suit her to be Mrs. Abraham Mollett. Should such be her destiny, it might be
as well for her not to talk about her husband's matters.

"Is it true that the old man did see Sir Thomas to-day?"

"You heard what passed, father; but I suppose it is true."

"And the young 'un has been down to Kanturk two or three times. What can the like of them have
to do with Sir Thomas?"

To this Fanny could only say that she knew nothing about it, which in the main was true. Aby,
indeed, had said that his father had gone down to collect money that was due to him; but then
Fanny did not believe all that Aby said.

"I don't like that young 'un at all," continued Mr. O'Dwyer. "He's a nasty, sneaking fellow,
as cares for no one but his own belly. I'm not over fond of the old 'un neither."

"They is both free enough with their money, father," said the prudent daughter.

"Oh, they is welcome in the way of business, in course. But look here, Fan; don't you have
nothing to say to that Aby; do you hear me?"

"Who? I? ha, ha, ha!"

"It's all very well laughing; but mind what I says, for I won't have it. He is a nasty, sneaking,
good-for-nothing fellow, besides being a heretic. What'd your uncle Bernard say?"

"Oh! for the matter of that, if I took a liking to a fellow I shouldn't ask Uncle Bernard what
he had to say. If he didn't like it, I suppose he might do the other thing."

"Well, I won't have it. Do you hear that?"

"Laws, father, what nonsense you do talk. Who's thinking about the man? He comes here for what
he wants to ate and dhrink, and I suppose the house is free to him as another. If not we'd
betther just shut up the front door." After which she tossed herself up and began to wipe her
glasses in a rather dignified manner.

Mr. O'Dwyer sat smoking his pipe and chewing the cud of his reflections. "They ain't afther
no good, I'm sure of that." In saying which, however, he referred to the doings of the Molletts
down at Kanturk, rather than to any amatory proceedings which might have taken place between
the young man and his daughter.

On the following morning Mr. Mollett senior awoke with a racking headache. My belief is, that
when men pay this penalty for drinking, they are partly absolved from other penalties. The
penalties on drink are various. I mean those which affect the body, exclusive of those which
affect the mind. There are great red swollen noses, very disagreeable both to the wearer and
his acquaintances; there are morning headaches, awful to be thought of; there are sick stomachs,
by which means the offender escapes through a speedy purgatory; there are sallow cheeks, sunken
eyes, and shaking shoulders; there are very big bellies, and no bellies at all; and there is
delirium tremens. For the most part a man escapes with one of these penalties. If he have a
racking headache, his general health does not usually suffer so much as though he had endured
no such immediate vengeance from violated nature. Young Aby when he drank had no headaches;
but his eye was bloodshot, his cheek bloated, and his hand shook. His father, on the other
hand, could not raise his head after a debauch; but when that was gone, all ill results of
his imprudence seemed to have vanished.

At about noon on that day Aby was sitting by his father's bedside. Up to that time it had been
quite impossible to induce him to speak a word. He could only groan, swallow soda-water with
"hairs of the dog that bit him" in it and lay with his head between his arms. But soon after
noon Aby did induce him to say a word or two. The door of the room was closely shut, the little
table was strewed with soda-water bottles and last drops of small goes of brandy. Aby himself
had a cigar in his mouth, and on the floor near the bed-foot was a plate with a cold, greasy
mutton chop, Aby having endeavoured in vain to induce his father to fortify exhausted nature
by eating. The appearance of the room and the air within it would not have been pleasant to
fastidious people. But then the Molletts were not fastidious.

"You did see Sir Thomas, then?"

"Yes, I did see him. I wish, Aby, you'd let me lie just for another hour or so. I'd be all
right then. The jolting of that confounded car has nearly shaken my head to pieces."

But Aby was by no means inclined to be so merciful. The probability was that he would be able
to pump his father more thoroughly in his present weak state than he might do in a later part
of the afternoon; so he persevered.

"But, governor, it's so important we should know what we're about. Did you see any one else
except himself?"

"I saw them all, I believe, except her. I was told she never showed in the morning; but I'm
blessed if I don't think I saw the skirt of her dress through an open door. I'll tell you what,
Aby, I could not stand that."

"Perhaps, father, after hall it'll be better I should manage the business down there."

"I believe there won't be much more to manage. But, Aby, do leave me now, there's a good fellow;
then in another hour or so I'll get up, and we'll have it all out."

"When you're out in the open air and comfortable, it won't be fair to be bothering you with
business. Come, governor, ten minutes will tell the whole of it if you'll only mind your eye.
How did you begin with Sir Thomas?" And then Aby went to the door, opened it very gently, and
satisfied himself that there was nobody listening on the landing-place.

Mr. Mollett sighed wearily, but he knew that his only hope was to get this job of talking over.
"What was it you were saying, Aby?"

"How did you begin with Sir Thomas?"

"How did I begin with him? Let me see. Oh! I just told him who I was; and then he turned away
and looked down under the fire like, and I thought he was going to make a faint of it."

"I didn't suppose he would be very glad to see you, governor."

"When I saw how badly he took it, and how wretched he seemed, I almost made up my mind to go
away and never trouble him any more."

"You did, did you?"

"And just to take what he'd choose to give me."

"Oh, them's your hideas, hare they? Then I tell you what; I shall just take the matter into
my own hands hentirely. You have no more 'eart than a chicken."

"Ah, that's very well, Aby; but you did not see him."

"Do you think that would make hany difference? When a man's a job of work to do, 'e should
do it. Them's my notions. Do you think a man like that is to go and hact in that way, and then
not pay for it? Whose wife is she, I'd like to know?"

There was a tone of injured justice about Aby which almost roused the father to participate
in the son's indignation. "Well; I did my best, though the old gentleman was in such a taking,"
said he.

"And what was your best? Come, out with it at once."

"I--m-m. I--just told him who I was, you know."

"I guess he understood that quite well."

"And then I said things weren't going exactly well with me."

"You shouldn't have said that at all. What matters that to him? What you hask for you hask
for because you're able to demand it. That's the ground for hus to take, and by---I'll take
it too. There shall be no 'alf-measures with me."

"And then I told him--just what we were agreed, you know."

"That we'd go snacks in the whole concern?"

"I didn't exactly say that."

"Then what the devil did you say?"

"Why, I told him that, looking at what the property was, twelve hundred pounds wasn't much."

"I should think not either."

"And that if his son was to be allowed to have it all--"

"A bastard, you know, keeping it away from the proper heir." It may almost be doubted whether,
in so speaking, Aby did not almost think that he himself had a legitimate right to inherit
the property at Castle Richmond.

"He must look to pay up handsome."

"But did you say what 'andsome meant?"

"Well, I didn't--not then. He fell about upon the table like, and I wasn't quite sure he wouldn't
make a die of it; and then heaven knows what might have happened to me."

"Psha; you 'as no pluck, governor."

"I'll tell you what it is, Aby, I ain't so sure you'd have such an uncommon deal of pluck yourself."

"Well, I'll try, at any rate."

"It isn't such a pleasant thing to see an old gentleman in that state. And what would happen
if he chose to ring the bell and order the police to take me? Have you ever thought of that?"

"Gammon."

"But it isn't gammon. A word from him would put me into quod, and there I should be for the
rest of my days. But what would you care for that?" And poor Mr. Mollett senior shook under
the bedclothes as his attention became turned to this very dreary aspect of his affairs. "Pluck,
indeed! I'll tell you what it is, Aby, I often wonder at my own pluck."

"Psha! Would'nt a word from you split upon him, and upon her, and upon the young 'un, and ruin
'em? Or a word from me either, for the matter of that?"

Mr. Mollett senior shook again. He repented now, as he had already done twenty times, that
he had taken that son of his into his confidence.

"And what on hearth did you say to him?" continued Aby.

"Well, not much more then; at least, not very much more. There was a good deal of words, but
they didn't seem to lead to much, except this, just to make him understand that he must come
down handsome."

"And there was nothing done about Hemmiline?"

"No," said the father, rather shortly.

"If that was settled, that would be the clincher. There would be no further trouble to nobody
then. It would be all smooth sailing for your life, governor, and lots of tin."

"I tell you what it is, Aby, you may just drop that, for I won't have the young lady bothered
about it, nor yet the young lady's father."

"You won't, won't you?"

"No, I won't; so there's an end of it."

"I suppose I may pay my distresses to any young lady if I think fitting."

"And have yourself kicked into the ditch."

"I know too much for kicking, governor."

"They shall know as much as you do, and more too, if you go on with that. There's a measure
in all things. I won't have it done, so I tell you." And the father turned his face round to
the wall.

This was by no means the end of the conversation, though we need not verbatim go through any
more of it. It appeared that old Mollett had told Sir Thomas that his permanent silence could
be purchased by nothing short of a settled "genteel" income for himself and his son, no absolute
sum having been mentioned; and that Sir Thomas had required a fortnight for his answer, which
answer was to be conveyed to Mr. Mollett verbally at the end of that time. It was agreed that
Mr. Mollett should repeat his visit to Castle Richmond on that day fortnight.

"In the mean time I'll go down and freshen the old gentleman up a bit," said Aby, as he left
his father's bedroom.

CHAPTER XIV

THE REJECTED SUITOR

After the interview between Herbert and his mother, it became an understood thing at Castle
Richmond that he was engaged to Lady Clara. Sir Thomas raised no further objection, although
it was clear to all the immediate family that he was by no means gratified at his son's engagement.
Very little more passed between Sir Thomas and Lady Fitzgerald on the subject. He merely said
that he would consider the question of his son's income, and expressed a hope, or perhaps an
opinion rather than a hope, that the marriage would not take place quite immediately.

Under these circumstances, Herbert hardly spoke further to his father upon the matter. He certainly
did feel sore that he should be so treated--that he should be made to understand that there
was a difficulty, but that the difficulty could not be explained to him. No absolute position
was however made, and he would not therefore complain. As to money, he would say nothing till
something should be said to him.

With his mother, however, the matter was different. She had said that she would welcome Clara;
and she did so. Immediately after speaking to Sir Thomas she drove over to Desmond Court, and
said soft, sweet things to Clara in her most winning way;--said soft things also to the countess,
who received them very graciously; took Clara home to Castle Richmond for that night, somewhat
to the surprise and much to the gratification of Herbert, who found her sitting slily with
the other girls when he came in before dinner; and arranged for her to make a longer visit
after the interval of a week or two. Herbert, therefore, was on thoroughly good terms with
his mother, and did enjoy some of the delights which he had promised himself.

With his sisters, also, and especially with Emmeline, he was once more in a good humour. To
her he made ample apology for his former crossness, and received ample absolution. "I was so
harassed," he said, "by my father's manner that I hardly knew what I was doing. And even now,
when I think of his evident dislike to the marriage, it nearly drives me wild." The truth of
all which Emmeline sadly acknowledged. How could any of them talk of their father except in
a strain of sadness?

All these things did not happen in the drawing-room at Castle Richmond without also being discussed
in the kitchen. It was soon known over the house that Master Herbert was to marry Lady Clara,
and, indeed, there was no great pretence of keeping it secret. The girls told the duchess,
as they called Mrs. Jones--of course in confidence--but Mrs. Jones knew what such confidence
meant, especially as the matter was more than once distinctly alluded to by her ladyship; and
thus the story was told, in confidence, to everybody in the establishment, and then repeated
by them, in confidence also, to nearly everybody out of it.

Ill news, they say, flies fast; and this news, which, going in that direction, became ill,
soon flew to Hap House.

"So young Fitzgerald and the divine Clara are to hit it off, are they?" said Captain Donnellan,
who had driven over from Buttevant barracks to breakfast at Hap House on a hunting-morning.

There were other men present, more intimate friends of Owen than this captain, who had known
of Owen's misfortune in that quarter; and a sign was made to Donnellan to bid him drop the
subject; but it was too late.

"Who? my cousin Herbert," said Owen, sharply. "Have you heard of this, Barry?"

"Well," said Barry, "those sort of things are always being said, you know. I did hear something
of it somewhere. But I can't say I thought much about it." And then the subject was dropped
during that morning's breakfast. They all went to the hunt, and in the course of the day Owen
contrived to learn that the report was well founded.

That evening, as the countess and her daughter were sitting together over the fire, the grey-headed
old butler brought in a letter upon an old silver salver, saying, "For Lady Clara, if you please,
my lady."

The countess not unnaturally thought that the despatch had come from Castle Richmond, and smiled
graciously as Clara put out her hand for the missive. Lady Desmond again let her eyes drop
upon the book which she was reading, as though to show that she was by far too confiding a
mamma to interfere in any correspondence between her daughter and her daughter's lover. At
the moment Lady Clara had been doing nothing. Her work was, indeed, on her lap, and her workbox
was at her elbow; but her thoughts had been far away; far away as regards idea, though not
so as to absolute locality; for in her mind she was walking beneath those elm-trees, and a
man was near her, with a horse following at his heels.

"The messenger is to wait for an answer, my lady," said the old butler, with a second nod,
which on this occasion was addressed to Clara; and then the man withdrew.

Lady Clara blushed ruby red up to the roots of her hair when her eyes fell on the address of
the letter, for she knew it to be in the handwriting of Owen Fitzgerald. Perhaps the countess
from the corner of her eye may have observed some portion of her daughter's blushes; but if
so, she said nothing, attributing them to Clara's natural bashfulness in her present position.
"She will get over it soon," the countess may probably have said to herself.

Clara was indecisive, disturbed in her mind, and wretched. Owen had sent her other letters;
but they had been brought to her surreptitiously, had been tendered to her in secret, and had
always been returned by her unopened. She had not told her mother of these; at least, not purposely
or at the moment: but she had been at no trouble to conceal the facts; and when the countess
had once asked, she freely told her what had happened with an absence of any confusion which
had quite put Lady Desmond at her ease. But this letter was brought to her in the most open
manner, and an answer to it openly demanded.

She turned it round slowly in her hand, and then looking up, said, "Mamma, this is from Owen
Fitzgerald; what had I better do with it?"

"From Owen Fitzgerald! Are you sure?"

"Yes, mamma." And then the countess had also to consider what steps under such circumstances
had better be taken. In the mean time Clara held out her hand, tendering the letter to her mother.

"You had better open it, my dear, and read it. No doubt it must be answered." Lady Desmond
felt that now there could be no danger from Owen Fitzgerald. Indeed she thought that there
was not a remembrance of him left in her daughter's bosom; that the old love, such baby-love
as there had been, had vanished, quite swept out of that little heart by this new love of a
brighter sort. But then Lady Desmond knew nothing of her daughter.

So instructed, Clara broke the seal, and read the letter, which ran thus:--

"Hap House, February, 184-.

"My promised Love,

"For let what will happen, such you are; I have this morning heard tidings which, if true,
will go far to drive me to despair. But I will not believe them from any lips save your own.
I have heard that you are engaged to marry Herbert Fitzgerald. At once, however, I declare
that I do not believe the statement. I have known you too well to think that you can be false.

"But, at any rate, I beg the favour of an interview with you. After what has passed I think
that under any circumstances I have a right to demand it. I have pledged myself to you; and
as that pledge has been accepted, I am entitled to some consideration.

"I write this letter to you openly, being quite willing that you should show it to your mother
if you think fit. My messenger will wait, and I do implore you to send me an answer. And remember,
Lady Clara, that, having accepted my love, you cannot whistle me down the wind as though I
were of no account. After what has passed between us, you cannot surely refuse to see me once more.

"Ever your own--if you will have it so,

"OWEN FITZGERALD."

She read the letter very slowly, ever and anon looking up at her mother's face, and seeing
that her mother was--not reading her book, but pretending to read it. When she had finished
it, she held it for a moment, and then said, "Mamma, will you not look at it?"

"Certainly, my dear, if you wish me to do so." And she took the letter from her daughter's
hand, and read it.

"Just what one would expect from him, my dear; eager, impetuous, and thoughtless. One should
not blame him much, for he does not mean to do harm. But if he had any sense, he would know
that he was taking trouble for nothing."

"And what shall I do, mamma?"

"Well, I really think that I should answer him." It was delightful to see the perfect confidence
which the mother had in her daughter. "And I think I should see him, if he will insist upon
it. It is foolish in him to persist in remembering two words which you spoke to him as a child;
but perhaps it will be well that you should tell him yourself that you were a child when you
spoke those two words."

And then Clara sent off the following reply, written under her mother's dictation; though the
countess strove very hard to convince her daughter that she was wording it out of her own head:--

"Lady Clara Desmond presents her compliments to Mr. Owen Fitzgerald, and will see Mr. Owen
Fitzgerald at Desmond Court at two o'clock to-morrow, if Mr. Owen Fitzgerald persists in demanding
such an interview. Lady Clara Desmond, however, wishes to express her opinion that it would
be better avoided.

"Desmond Court,

"Thursday evening."

The countess thought that this note was very cold and formal, and would be altogether conclusive;
but, nevertheless, at about eleven o'clock that night there came another messenger from Hap
House with another letter, saying that Owen would be at Desmond Court at two o'clock on the
following day.

"He is very foolish; that is all I can say," said the countess.

All that night and all the next morning poor Clara was very wretched. That she had been right
to give up a suitor who lived such a life as Owen Fitzgerald lived she could not doubt. But,
nevertheless, was she true in giving him up? Had she made any stipulation as to his life when
she accepted his love? If he called her false, as doubtless he would call her, how would she
defend herself? Had she any defence to offer? It was not only that she had rejected him, a
poor lover; but she had accepted a rich lover! What could she say to him when he upbraided
her for such sordid conduct?

And then as to her whistling him down the wind. Did she wish to do that? In what state did
her heart stand towards him? Might it not be that, let her be ever so much on her guard, she
would show him some tenderness,--tenderness which would be treason to her present affianced
suitor? Oh, why had her mother desired her to go through such an interview as this!

When two o'clock came Clara was in the drawing-room. She had said nothing to her mother as
to the manner in which this meeting should take place. But then at first she had had an idea
that Lady Desmond would be present. But as the time came near Clara was still alone. When her
watch told her that it was already two, she was still by herself; and when the old servant,
opening the door, announced that Mr. Fitzgerald was there, she was still unsupported by the
presence of any companion. It was very surprising that on such an occasion her mother should
have kept herself away.

She had not seen Owen Fitzgerald since that day when they had walked together under the elm-trees,
and it can hardly be said that she saw him now. She had a feeling that she had injured him--had
deceived, and in a manner betrayed him; and that feeling became so powerful with her that she
hardly dared to look him in the face.

He, when he entered the room, walked straight up to her, and offered her his hand. He, too,
looked round the room to see whether Lady Desmond was there, and not finding her, was surprised.
He had hardly hoped that such an opportunity would be allowed to him for declaring the strength
of his passion.

She got up, and taking his hand, muttered something; it certainly did not matter what, for
it was inaudible; but such as the words were, they were the first spoken between them.

"Lady Clara," he began; and then stopped himself; and, considering, recommenced--"Clara, a
report has reached my ears which I will believe from no lips but your own."

She now sat down on a sofa, and pointed to a chair for him, but he remained standing, and did
so during the whole interview; or rather, walking; for when he became energetic and impetuous,
he moved about from place to place in the room, as though incapable of fixing himself in one
position.

Clara was ignorant whether or no it behoved her to rebuke him for calling her simply by her
Christian name. She thought that she ought to do so, but she did not do it.

"I have been told," he continued, "that you have engaged yourself to marry Herbert Fitzgerald;
and I have now come to hear a contradiction of this from yourself."

"But, Mr. Fitzgerald, it is true."

"It is true that Herbert Fitzgerald is your accepted lover?"

"Yes," she said, looking down upon the ground, and blushing deeply as she said it.

There was a pause of a few moments, during which she felt that the full fire of his glance
was fixed upon her, and then he spoke.

"You may well be ashamed to confess it," he said; "you may well feel that you dare not look
me in the face as you pronounce the words. I would have believed it, Clara, from no other mouth
than your own."

It appeared to Clara herself now as though she were greatly a culprit. She had not a word to
say in her own defence. All those arguments as to Owen's ill course of life were forgotten;
and she could only remember that she had acknowledged that she loved him, and that she was
now acknowledging that she loved another.

But now Owen had made his accusation; and as it was not answered, he hardly knew how to proceed.
He walked about the room, endeavouring to think what he had better say next.

"I know this, Clara; it is your mother's doing, and not your own. You could not bring yourself
to be false, unless by her instigation."

"No," said she; "you are wrong there. It is not my mother's doing: what I have done, I have
done myself."

"Is it not true," he asked, "that your word was pledged to me? Had you not promised me that
you would be my wife?"

"I was very young," she said, falling back upon the only excuse which occurred to her at the
moment as being possible to be used without incriminating him.

"Young! Is not that your mother's teaching? Why, those were her very words when she came to
me at my house. I did not know that youth was any excuse for falsehood."

"But it may be an excuse for folly," said Clara.

"Folly! what folly? The folly of loving a poor suitor; the folly of being willing to marry
a man who has not a large estate! Clara, I did not think that you could have learned so much
in so short a time."

All this was very hard upon her. She felt that it was hard, for she knew that he had done that
which entitled her to regard her pledge to him as at an end; but the circumstances were such
that she could not excuse herself.

"Am I to understand," said Owen Fitzgerald, "that all that has passed between us is to go for
nothing? that such promises as we have made to each other are to be of no account? To me they
are sacred pledges, from which I would not escape even if I could."

As he then paused for a reply, she was obliged to say something.

"I hope you have not come here to upbraid me, Mr. Fitzgerald."

"Clara," he continued, "I have passed the last year with perfect reliance upon your faith.
I need hardly tell you that it has not been passed happily, for it has been passed without
seeing you. But though you have been absent from me, I have never doubted you. I have known
that it was necessary that we should wait--wait perhaps till years should make you mistress
of your own actions: but nevertheless I was not unhappy, for I was sure of your love."

Now it was undoubtedly the case that Fitzgerald was treating her unfairly; and though she had
not her wits enough about her to ascertain this by process of argument, nevertheless the idea
did come home to her. It was true that she had promised her love to this man, as far as such
promise could be conveyed by one word of assent; but it was true also that she had been almost
a child when she pronounced that word, and that things which had since occurred had entitled
her to annul any amount of contract to which she might have been supposed to bind herself by
that one word. She bethought herself, therefore, that as she was so hard pressed she was forced
to defend herself.

"I was very young then, Mr. Fitzgerald, and hardly knew what I was saying: afterwards, when
mamma spoke to me, I felt that I was bound to obey her."

"What, to obey her by forgetting me?"

"No; I have never forgotten you, and never shall. I remember too well your kindness to my brother;
your kindness to us all."

"Psha! you know I do not speak of that. Are you bound to obey your mother by forgetting that
you have loved me?"

She paused a moment before she answered him, looking now full before her,--hardly yet bold
enough to look him in the face.

"No," she said; "I have not forgotten that I loved you. I shall never forget it. Child as I
was, it shall never be forgotten. But I cannot love you now--not in the manner you would have me."

"And why not, Lady Clara? Why is love to cease on your part--to be thrown aside so easily by
you, while with me it remains so stern a fact, and so deep a necessity? Is that just? When
the bargain has once been made, should it not be equally binding on us both?"

"I do not think you are fair to me, Mr. Fitzgerald," she said; and some spirit was now rising
in her bosom.

"Not fair to you? Do you say that I am unfair to you? Speak but one word to say that the troth
which you pledged me a year since shall still remain unbroken, and I will at once leave you
till you yourself shall name the time when my suit may be renewed."

"You know that I cannot do that."

"And why not? I know that you ought to do it."

"No, Mr. Fitzgerald, I ought not. I am now engaged to your cousin, with the consent of mamma
and of his friends. I can say nothing to you now which I cannot repeat to him; nor can I say
anything which shall oppose his wishes."

"He is, then, so much more to you now than I am?"

"He is everything to me now."

"That is all the reply I am to get, then! You acknowledge your falseness, and throw me off
without vouchsafing me any answer beyond this."

"What would you have me say? I did do that which was wrong and foolish, when--when we were
walking there on the avenue. I did give a promise which I cannot now keep. It was all so hurried
that I hardly remember what I said. But of this I am sure, that if I have caused you unhappiness,
I am very sorry to have done so. I cannot alter it all now; I cannot unsay what I said then,
nor can I offer yon that which I have now absolutely given to another."

And then, as she finished speaking, she did pluck up courage to look him in the face. She was
now standing as well as he; but she was so standing that the table, which was placed near the
sofa, was still between him and her. As she finished speaking the door opened, and the Countess
of Desmond walked slowly into the room.

Owen Fitzgerald, when he saw her, bowed low before her, and then frankly offered her his hand.
There was something in his manner to ladies devoid of all bashfulness, and yet never too bold.
He seemed to be aware that in speaking to any lady, be she who she might, he was only exercising
his undoubted privilege as a man. He never hummed and hawed and shook in his shoes as though
the majesty of womanhood were too great for his encounter. There are such men, and many of
them, who carry this dread to the last day of their long lives. I have often wondered what
women think of men who regard women as too awful for the free exercise of open speech.

"Mr. Fitzgerald," she said accepting the hand which he offered to her, but resuming her own
very quickly, and then standing before him in all the dignity which she was able to assume,
"I quite concurred with my daughter that it was right that she should see you, as you insisted
on such an interview, but you must excuse me if I interrupt it. I must protect her from the
embarrassment which your--your vehemence may occasion her."

"Lady Desmond," he replied, "you are quite at liberty, as far as I am concerned, to hear all
that passes between us. Your daughter is betrothed to me, and I have come to claim from her
the fulfilment of her promise."

"For shame, Mr. Fitzgerald, for shame! When she was a child you extracted from her one word
of folly; and now you would take advantage of that foolish word; now, when you know that she
is engaged to a man she loves with the full consent of all her friends. I thought I knew you
well enough to feel sure that you were not so ungenerous."

"Ungenerous! no; I have not that generosity which would enable me to give up my very heart's
blood, the only joy of my soul, to such a one as my cousin Herbert."

"You have nothing to give up, Mr. Fitzgerald: you must have known from the very first that
my daughter could not marry you--"

"Not marry me! And why not, Lady Desmond? Is not my blood as good as his?--unless, indeed,
you are prepared to sell your child to the highest bidder!"

"Clara, my dear, I think you had better leave the room," said the countess; "no doubt you have
assured Mr. Fitzgerald that you are engaged to his cousin Herbert."

"Yes, mamma."

"Then he can have no further claim on your attendance, and his vehemence will terrify you."

"Vehement! how can I help being vehement when, like a ruined gambler, I am throwing my last
chance for such a stake?"

And then he intercepted Clara as she stepped towards the drawing-room door. She stopped in
her course, and stood still, looking down upon the ground.

"Mr. Fitzgerald," said the countess, "I will thank you to let Lady Clara leave the room. She
has given you the answer for which you have asked, and it would not be right in me to permit
her to be subjected to further embarrassment."

"I will only ask her to listen to one word. Clara--"

"Mr. Fitzgerald, you have no right to address my daughter with that freedom," said the countess;
but Owen hardly seemed to hear her.

"I here, in your hearing, protest against your marriage with Herbert Fitzgerald. I claim your
love as my own. I bid you think of the promise which you gave me; and I tell you that as I
loved you then with all my heart, so do I love you at this moment; so shall I love you always.
Now I will not hinder you any longer."

And then he opened the door for her, and she passed on, bowing to him, and muttering some word
of farewell that was inaudible.

He stood for a moment with the door in his hand, meditating whether he might not say good morning
to the countess without returning into the room; but as he so stood she called him. "Mr. Fitzgerald,"
she said; and so he therefore came back, and once more closed the door.

And then he saw that the countenance of Lady Desmond was much changed. Hitherto she had been
every inch the countess, stern and cold and haughty; but now she looked at him as she used
to look in those old winter evenings when they were accustomed to talk together over the evening
fire in close friendliness, while she, Lady Desmond, would speak to him in the intimacy of
her heart of her children, Patrick ad Clara.

"Mr. Fitzgerald," she said, and the tone of her voice also was changed. "You are hardly fair
to us; are you?"

"Not fair, Lady Desmond?"

"No, not fair. Sit down now, and listen to me for a moment. If you had a child, a penniless
girl like Clara, would you be glad to see her married to such a one as you are yourself?"

"In what way do you mean? Speak out, Lady Desmond."

"No; I will not speak out, for I would not hurt you. I myself am too fond of you--as an old
friend, to wish to do so. That you may marry and live happily, live near us here, so that we
may know you, I most heartily desire. But you cannot marry that child."

"And why not, if she loves me?"

"Nay, not even if she did. Wealth and position are necessary to the station in which she has
been born. She is an earl's daughter, penniless as she is. I will have no secrets from you.
As a mother, I could not give her to one whose career is such as yours. As the widow of an
earl, I could not give her to one whose means of maintaining her are so small. If you will
think of this, you will hardly be angry with me."

"Love is nothing, then?"

"Is all to be sacrificed to your love? Think of it, Mr. Fitzgerald, and let me have the happiness
of knowing that you consent to this match."

"Never!" said he. "Never!" And so he left the room, without wishing her further farewell.

CHAPTER XV

DIPLOMACY

About a week after the last conversation that has been related as having taken place at the
Kanturk Hotel, Mr. Mollett junior was on his way to Castle Richmond. He had on that occasion
stated his intention of making such a journey with the view of "freshening the old gentleman
up a bit;" and although his father did all in his power to prevent the journey, going so far
on one occasion as to swear that if it was made he would throw over the game altogether, nevertheless
Aby persevered.

"You may leave the boards whenever you like, governor," said Aby. "I know quite enough of the
part to carry on the play."

"You think you do," said the father in his anger; "but you'll find yourself in the dark yet
before you've done."

And then again he expostulated in a different tone. "You'll ruin it all, Aby; you will indeed;
you don't know all the circumstances; indeed you don't."

"Don't I?" said Aby. "Then I'll not be long learning them."

The father did what he could; but he had no means of keeping his son at home, and so Aby went.
Aby doubtless entertained an idea that his father was deficient in pluck for the management
of so difficult a matter, and that he could supply what his father wanted. So he dressed himself
in his best, and having hired a gig and a man who he flattered himself would look like a private
servant, he started from Cork, and drove himself to Castle Richmond.

He had on different occasions been down in the neighbourhood, prowling about like a thief in
the night, picking up information, as he called it, and seeing how the land lay; but he had
never yet presented himself to any one within the precincts of the Castle Richmond demesne.
His present intention was to drive up to the front door, and ask at once for Sir Thomas Fitzgerald,
sending in his card if need be, on which were printed the words:--

MR. ABRAHAM MOLLETT, Junior.

With the additional words, "Piccadilly, London," written in the left-hand lower corner.

"I'll take the bull by the horns," said he to himself. "It's better to make the spoon at once,
even if we do run some small chance of spoiling the horn." And that he might be well enabled
to carry out his purpose with reference to this bull, he lifted his flask to his mouth as soon
as he had passed through the great demesne gate, and took a long pull at it. "There's nothing
like a little jumping powder," he said, speaking to himself again, and then he drove boldly
up the avenue.

He had not yet come in sight of the house when he met two gentlemen walking on the road. They,
as he approached, stood a little on one side, not only so as to allow him to pass, but to watch
him as he did so. They were Mr. Somers and Herbert Fitzgerald.

"It is the younger of those two men. I'm nearly certain of it," said Somers as the gig approached.
"I saw him as he walked by me in Kanturk Street, and I don't think I can mistake the horrid
impudence of his face. I beg your pardon, sir,"--and now he addressed Mollett in the gig--"but
are you going up to the house?"

"Yes, sir; that's my notion just at present. Any commands that way?"

"This is Mr. Fitzgerald--Mr. Herbert Fitzgerald; and I am Mr. Somers, the agent. Can we do
anything for you?"

Aby Mollett raised his hat, and the two gentlemen touched theirs. "Thank'ee, sir," said Aby;
"but I believe my business must be with the worthy baro-nett himself; more particularly as
I 'appen to know that he's at home."

"My father is not very well," said Herbert, "and I do not think that he will be able to see you."

"I'll take the liberty of hasking and of sending in my card," said Aby; and he gave his horse
a flick as intending thus to cut short the conversation. But Mr. Somers had put his hand upon
the bridle, and the beast was contented to stand still.

"If you'll have the kindness to wait a moment," said Mr. Somers; and he put on a look of severity,
which he well knew how to assume, and which somewhat cowed poor Aby. "You have been down here
before, I think," continued Mr. Somers.

"What, at Castle Richmond? No, I haven't. And if I had, what's that to you if Sir Thomas chooses
to see me? I hain't hintruding, I suppose."

"You've been down at Kanturk before--once or twice; for I have seen you."

"And supposing I've been there ten or twelve times,--what is there in that?" said Aby.

Mr. Somers still held the horse's head, and stood a moment considering.

"I'll thank you to let go my 'oss," said Aby, raising his whip and shaking the reins.

"What do you say your name is?" asked Mr. Somers.

"I didn't say my name was anything yet. I hain't ashamed of it, however, nor hasn't hany cause
to be. That's my name, and if you'll send my card in to Sir Thomas, with my compliments, and
say that hi've three words to say to him very particular; why, hi'll be obliged to you." And
then Mr. Mollett handed Mr. Somers his card.

"Mollett!" said Mr. Somers very unceremoniously. "Mollett, Mollett. Do you know the name, Herbert?"

Herbert said that he did not.

"It's about business, I suppose?" asked Mr. Somers.

"Yes," said Aby; "private business; very particular."

"The same that brought your father here;" and Mr. Somers again looked into his face with a
close scrutiny.

Aby was abashed, and for a moment or two he did not answer. "Well, then; it is the same business,"
he said at last. "And I'll thank you to let me go on. I'm not used to be stopped in this way."

"You can follow us up to the house," said Mr. Somers to him. "Come here, Herbert." And then
they walked along the road in such a way that Aby was forced to allow his horse to walk after them.

"These are the men who are doing it," said Mr. Somers in a whisper to his companion. "Whatever
is in the wind, whatever may be the cause of your father's trouble, they are concerned in it.
They are probably getting money from him in some way."

"Do you think so?"

"I do. We must not force ourselves upon your father's confidence, but we must endeavour to
save him from this misery. Do you go in to him with this card. Do not show it to him too suddenly;
and then find out whether he really wishes to see the man. I will stay about the place; for
it may be possible that a magistrate will be wanted, and in such a matter you had better not act."

They were now at the hall door, and Somers, turning to Mollett, told him that Mr. Herbert Fitzgerald
would carry the card to his father. And then he added, seeing that Mollett was going to come
down, "You had better stay in the gig till Mr. Fitzgerald comes back; just sit where you are;
you'll get an answer all in good time."

Sir Thomas was crouching over the fire in his study when his son entered, with his eyes fixed
upon a letter which he held in his hand, and which, when he saw Herbert, he closed up and put away.

"Father," said Herbert, in a cheerful everyday voice, as though he had nothing special to communicate,
"there is a man in a gig out there. He says he wants to see you."

"A man in a gig!" and Herbert could see that his father had already begun to tremble. But every
sound made him tremble now.

"Yes; a man in a gig. What is it he says his name is? I have his card here. A young man."

"Oh, a young man?" said Sir Thomas.

"Yes, here it is. Abraham Mollett. I can't say that your friend seems to be very respectable,
in spite of his gig," and Herbert handed the card to his father.

The son purposely looked away as he mentioned the name, as his great anxiety was not to occasion
distress. But he felt that the sound of the word had been terrible in his father's ears. Sir
Thomas had risen from his chair; but he now sat down again, or rather fell into it. But nevertheless
he took the card, and said that he would see the man.

"A young man, do you say, Herbert?"

"Yes, father, a young man. And, father, if you are not well, tell me what the business is and
let me see him."

But Sir Thomas persisted, shaking his head, and saying that he would see the man himself.

"Somers is out there. Will you let him do it?"

"No. I wonder, Herbert, that you can tease me so. Let the man be sent in here. But, oh, Herbert--Herbert--!"

The young man rushed round and kneeled at his father's knee. "What is it, father? Why will
you not tell me? I know you have some grief, and cannot you trust me? Do you not know that
you can trust me?"

"My poor boy, my poor boy!"

"What is it, father? If this man here is concerned in it, let me see him."

"No, no, no."

"Or at any rate let me be with you when he is here. Let me share your trouble if I can do nothing
to cure it."

"Herbert, my darling, leave me and send him in. If it be necessary that you should bear this
calamity, it will come upon you soon enough."

"But I am afraid of this man--for your sake, father."

"He will do me no harm; let him come to me. But, Herbert, say nothing to Somers about this.
Somers has not seen the man; has he?"

"Yes; we both spoke to him together as he drove up the avenue."

"And what did he say? Did he say anything?

"Nothing but that he wanted to see you, and then he gave his card to Mr. Somers. Mr. Somers
wished to save you from the annoyance."

"Why should it annoy me to see any man? Let Mr. Somers mind his own business. Surely I can
have business of my own without his interference." With this Herbert left his father, and returned
to the hall door to usher in Mr. Mollett junior.

"Well?" said Mr. Somers, who was standing by the hall fire, and who joined Herbert at the front
door.

"My father will see the man."

"And have you learned who he is?"

"I have learned nothing but this--that Sir Thomas does not wish that we should inquire. Now,
Mr. Mollett, Sir Thomas will see you; so you can come down. Make haste now, and remember that
you are not to stay long, for my father is ill." And then leading Aby through the hall and
along a passage, he introduced him into Sir Thomas's room.

"And, Herbert--" said the father; whereupon Herbert again turned round. His father was endeavouring
to stand, but supporting himself by the back of his chair. "Do not disturb me for half an hour;
but come to me then, and knock at the door. This gentleman will have done by that time."

"If we do not put a stop to this, your father will be in a mad-house or on his death-bed before
long." So spoke Mr. Somers in a low, solemn whisper when Herbert again joined him at the hall door.

"Sit down, sir; sit down," said Sir Thomas, endeavouring to be civil and to seem at his ease
at the same time. Aby was himself so much bewildered for the moment, that he hardly perceived
the embarrassment under which the baronet was labouring.

Aby sat down, in the way usual to such men in such places, on the corner of his chair, and
put his hat on the ground between his feet. Then he took out his handkerchief and blew his
nose, and after that he expressed an opinion that he was in the presence of Sir Thomas Fitzgerald.

"And you are Mr. Abraham Mollett," said Sir Thomas.

"Yes, Sir Thomas, that's my name. I believe, Sir Thomas, that you have the pleasure of some
slight acquaintance with my father, Mr. Matthew Mollett?"

What a pleasure under such circumstances! Sir Thomas, however, nodded his head, and Aby went on.

"Well, now, Sir Thomas, business is business; and my father, 'e ain't a good man of business.
A gen'leman like you, Sir Thomas, has seen that with 'alf an eye, I know." And then he waited
a moment for an answer; but as he got none he proceeded.

"My governor's one of the best of fellows going, but 'e ain't sharp and decisive. Sharp's the
word now a days, Sir Thomas; ain't it?" and he spoke this in a manner so suited to the doctrine
which he intended to inculcate, that the poor old gentleman almost jumped up in his chair.

And Aby, seeing this, seated himself more comfortably in his own. The awe which the gilt bindings
of the books and the thorough comfort of the room had at first inspired was already beginning
to fade away. He had come there to bully, and though his courage had failed him for a moment
under the stern eye of Mr. Somers, it quickly returned to him now that he was able to see how
weak was his actual victim.

"Sharp's the word, Sir Thomas; and my governor, 'e ain't sharp--not sharp as he ought to be
in such a matter as this. This is what I calls a real bit of cheese. Now it's no good going
on piddling and peddling in such a case as this; is it now, Sir Thomas?"

Sir Thomas muttered something, but it was no more than a groan.

"Not the least use," continued Aby. "Now the question, as I takes it, is this. There's your
son there as fetched me in 'ere; a fine young gen'leman 'e is, as ever I saw; I will say that.
Well, now; who's to have this 'ere property when you walk the plank--as walk it you must some
day, in course? Is it to be this son of yours, or is it to be this other Fitzgerald of 'Appy
'Ouse? Now, if you ask me, I'm all for your son, though maybe he mayn't be all right as regards
the dam."

There was certainly some truth in what Aby had said with reference to his father. Mr. Mollett
senior had never debated the matter in terms so sharp and decisive as these were. Think who
they were of whom this brute was talking to that wretched gentleman; the wife of his bosom,
than whom no wife was ever more dearly prized; the son of his love, the centre of all his hopes,
the heir of his wealth--if that might still be so. And yet he listened to such words as these,
and did not call in his servants to turn the speaker of them out of his doors.

"I've no wish for that 'Appy 'Ouse man, Sir Thomas; not the least. And as for your good lady,
she's nothing to me one way or the other whatever she may be to my governor--" and here there
fell a spasm upon the poor man's heart, which nearly brought him from the chair to the ground;
but nevertheless, he still contained himself--"my governor's former lady, my own mother," continued
Aby, "whom I never see'd, she'd gone to kingdom come, you know, before that time, Sir Thomas.
There hain't no doubt about that. So you see--" and hereupon he dropped his voice from the
tone which he had hitherto been using to an absolute whisper, and drawing his chair close to
that of the baronet, and putting his hands upon his knees, brought his mouth close to his companion's
ear--"So you see," he said, "when that youngster was born, Lady F. was Mrs. M.--wasn't she?
and for the matter of that, Lady F. is Mrs. M. to this very hour. That's the real chat; ain't
it, Sir Thomas? My stepmother, you know. The governor could take her away with him to-morrow
if he chose, according to the law of the land--couldn't he now?"

There was no piddling or peddling about this at any rate. Old Mollett in discussing the matter
with his victim had done so by hints and inuendos, through long windings, by signs and the
dropping of a few dark words. He had never once mentioned in full terms the name of Lady Fitzgerald;
had never absolutely stated that he did possess or ever had possessed a wife. It had been sufficient
for him to imbue Sir Thomas with the knowledge that his son Herbert was in great danger as
to his heritage. Doubtless the two had understood each other; but the absolute naked horror
of the surmised facts had been kept delicately out of sight. But such delicacy was not to Aby's
taste. Sharp, short, and decisive; that was his motto. No "longae ambages" for him. The whip
was in his hand, as he thought, and he could best master the team by using it.

And yet Sir Thomas lived and bore it. As he sat there half stupefied, numbed as it were by
the intensity of his grief, he wondered at his own power of endurance. "She is Mrs. M., you
know; ain't she now?" He could sit there and hear that, and yet live through it. So much he
could do, and did do; but as for speaking, that was beyond him.

Young Mollett thought that this "freshening up of the old gentleman" seemed to answer; so he
continued. "Yes, Sir Thomas, your son's my favourite, I tell you fairly. But then, you know,
if I backs the favourite, in course I likes to win upon him. How is it to be, now?" and then
he paused for an answer, which, however, was not forthcoming.

"You see you haven't been dealing quite on the square with the governor. You two is, has it
were, in a boat together. We'll call that boat the Lady F., or the Mrs. M., which ever you
like; "--and then Aby laughed, for the conceit pleased him--"but the hearnings of that boat
should be divided hequally. Ain't that about the ticket? heh, Sir Thomas? Come, don't be down
on your luck. A little quiet talkee-talkee between you and me'll soon put this small matter
on a right footing."

"What is it you want? tell me at once," at last groaned the poor man.

"Well now, that's something like; and I'll tell you what we want. There are only two of us
you know, the governor and I; and very lonely we are, for it's a sad thing for a man to have
the wife of his bosom taken from him."

Then there was a groan which struck even Aby's ear; but Sir Thomas was still alive and listening,
and so he went on.

"This property here, Sir Thomas, is a good twelve thousand a year. I know hall about it as
though I'd been 'andling it myself for the last ten years. And a great deal of cutting there
is in twelve thousand a year. You've 'ad your whack out of it, and now we wants to have hourn.
That's Henglish, hain't it?"

"Did your father send you here, Mr. Mollett?"

"Never you mind who sent me, Sir Thomas. Perhaps he did, and perhaps he didn't. Perhaps I came
without hany sending. Perhaps I'm more hup to this sort of work than he is. At any rate, I've
got the part pretty well by 'eart--you see that, don't you? Well hour hultimatum about the
business is this. Forty thousand pounds paid down on the nail, half to the governor, and half
to your 'umble servant, before the end of this year; a couple of thousand more in hand for
the year's hexpenses--and--and--a couple of hundred or so now at once before I leave you; for
to tell the truth we're run huncommonly dry just at the present moment." And then Aby drew
his breath and paused for an answer.

Poor Sir Thomas was now almost broken down. His head swam round and round, and he felt that
he was in a whirlpool from which there was no escape. He had heard the sum named, and knew
that he had no power of raising it. His interest in the estate was but for his life, and that
life was now all but run out. He had already begun to feel that his son must be sacrificed,
but he had struggled and endured in order that he might save his wife. But what could he do
now? What further struggle could he make? His present most eager desire was that that horrid
man should be removed from his hearing and his eyesight.

But Aby had not yet done: he had hitherto omitted to mention one not inconsiderable portion
of the amicable arrangement which, according to him, would have the effect of once more placing
the two families comfortably on their feet. "There's one other pint, Sir Thomas," he continued,
"and hif I can bring you and your good lady to my way of thinking on that, why, we may all
be comfortable for all that is come and gone. You've a daughter Hemmeline."

"What!" said Sir Thomas, turning upon him; for there was still so much of life left in him
that he could turn upon his foe when he heard his daughter's name thus polluted.

"Has lovely a gal to my way of thinking as my heyes ever rested on; and I'm not haccounted
a bad judge of such cattle, I can tell you, Sir Thomas."

"That will do, that will do," said Sir Thomas, attempting to rise, but still holding on by
the back of his chair. "You can go now, sir; I cannot hear more from you."

"Go!"

"Yes, sir; go."

"I know a trick worth two of that, Sir Thomas. If you like to give me your daughter Hemmeline
for my wife, whatever her fortin's to be, I'll take it as part of my half of the forty thousand
pounds. There now." And then Aby again waited for a reply.

But now there came a knock at the door, and following quick upon the knock Herbert entered
the room. "Well, father," said the son.

"Herbert!"

"Yes, father;" and he went round and supported his father on his arm.

"Herbert, will you tell that man to go?"

"Come, sir, you have disturbed my father enough; will you have the kindness to leave him now?"

"I may chance to disturb him more, and you too, sir, if you treat me in that way. Let go my
arm, sir. Am I to have any answer from you, Sir Thomas?"

But Sir Thomas could make no further attempt at speaking. He was now once more seated in his
chair, holding his son's hand, and when he again heard Mollett's voice he merely made a sign
for him to go.

"You see the state my father is in, Mr. Mollett," said Herbert; "I do not know what is the
nature of your business, but whatever it may be, you must leave him now." And he made a slight
attempt to push the visitor towards the door.

"You'd better take care what you're doing, Mr. Fitzgerald," said Mollett. "By---you had! If
you anger me, I might say a word that I couldn't unsay again, which would put you into queer
street, I can tell you."

"Don't quarrel with him, my boy; pray don't quarrel with him, but let him leave me," said Sir
Thomas.

"Mr. Mollett, you see my father's state; you must be aware that it is imperative that he should
be left alone."

"I don't know nothing about that, young gen'leman; business is business, and I hain't got hany
answer to my proposals. Sir Thomas, do you say 'Yes' to them proposals." But Sir Thomas was
still dumb. "To all but the last? Come," continued Aby, "that was put in quite as much for
your good as it was for mine." But not a word came from the baronet.

"Then I shan't stir," said Aby, again seating himself.

"Then I shall have the servants in," said Herbert, "and a magistrate who is in the hall," and
he put his hand towards the handle of the bell.

"Well, as the old gen'leman's hill, I'll go now and come again. But look you here, Sir Thomas,
you have got my proposals, and if I don't get an answer to them in three days' time,--why you'll
hear from me in another way, that's all. And so will her ladyship." And with this threat Mr
Abraham Mollett allowed himself to be conducted through the passage into the hall, and from
thence to his gig.

"See that he drives away, see that he goes," said Herbert to Mr. Somers, who was still staying
about the place.

"Oh, I'll drive away fast enough," said Aby, as he stepped into the gig, "and come back fast
enough too," he muttered to himself. In the mean time Herbert had run back to his father's room.

"Has he gone?" murmured Sir Thomas.

"Yes, he has gone. There; you can hear the wheels of his gig on the gravel."

"Oh, my boy, my poor boy!"

"What is it, father? Why do you not tell me? Why do you allow such men as that to come and
harass you, when a word would keep them from you? Father, good cannot come of it."

"No, Herbert, no, good will not come of it. There is no good to come at all."

"Then why will you not tell us?"

"You will know it all soon enough. But, Herbert, do not say a word to your mother. Not a word
as you value my love. Let us save her while we can. You promise me that."

Herbert gave him the required promise.

"Look here," and he took up the letter which he had before crumpled in his hand. "Mr. Prendergast
will be here next week. I shall tell everything to him."

Soon afterwards Sir Thomas went to his bed, and there by his bedside his wife sat for the rest
of the evening. But he said no word to her of his sorrow.

"Mr. Prendergast is coming here," said Herbert to Mr. Somers.

"I am glad of it, though I do not know him," said Mr. Somers. "For, my dear boy, it is necessary
that there should be some one here."

CHAPTER XVI

THE PATH BENEATH THE ELMS

It will be remembered that in the last chapter but one Owen Fitzgerald left Lady Desmond in
the drawing-room at Desmond Court somewhat abruptly, having absolutely refused to make peace
with the Desmond faction by giving his consent to the marriage between Clara and his cousin
Herbert. And it will perhaps be remembered also, that Lady Desmond had asked for this consent
in a manner that was almost humble. She had shown herself most anxious to keep on friendly
terms with the rake of Hap House,--rake and roue, gambler and spendthrift, as he was reputed
to be,--if only he would abandon his insane claim to the hand of Clara Desmond. But this feeling
she had shown when they two were alone together, after Clara had left them. As long as her
daughter had been present, Lady Desmond had maintained her tone of indignation and defiance;
but, when the door was closed and they two were alone, she had become kind in her language
and almost tender.

My readers will probably conceive that she had so acted, overcome by her affection for Owen
Fitzgerald and with a fixed resolve to win him for herself. Men and women when they are written
about are always supposed to have fixed resolves, though in life they are so seldom found to
be thus armed. To speak the truth, the countess had had no fixed resolve in the matter, either
when she had thought about Owen's coming, or when, subsequently, she had found herself alone
with him in her drawing-room. That Clara should not marry him,--on so much she had resolved
long ago. But all danger on that head was, it may be said, over. Clara, like a good child,
had behaved in the best possible manner; had abandoned her first lover, a lover that was poor
and unfitted for her, as soon as told to do so; and had found for herself a second lover, who
was rich, and proper, and in every way desirable. As regards Clara, the countess felt herself
to be safe; and, to give her her due, she had been satisfied that the matter should so rest.
She had not sought any further interview with Fitzgerald. He had come there against her advice,
and she had gone to meet him prompted by the necessity of supporting her daughter, and without
any other views of her own.

But when she found herself alone with him; when she looked into his face, and saw how handsome,
how noble, how good it was--good in its inherent manliness and bravery--she could not but long
that this feud should be over, and that she might be able once more to welcome him as her friend.
If only he would give up this frantic passion, this futile, wicked, senseless attempt to make
them all wretched by an insane marriage, would it not be sweet again to make some effort to
rescue him from the evil ways into which he had fallen?

But Owen himself would make no response to this feeling. Clara Desmond was his love, and he
would, of his own consent, yield her to no one. In truth, he was, in a certain degree, mad
on this subject. He did think that because the young girl had given him a promise--had said
to him a word or two which he called a promise--she was now of right his bride; that there
belonged to him an indefeasible property in her heart, in her loveliness, in the inexpressible
tenderness of her young springing beauty, of which no subsequent renouncing on her part could
fairly and honestly deprive him. That others should oppose the match was intelligible to him;
but it was hardly intelligible that she should betray him. And, as yet, he did not believe
that she herself was the mainspring of this renouncing. Others, the countess and the Castle
Richmond people, had frightened her into falseness; and, therefore, it became him to maintain
his right by any means--almost by any means, within his power. Give her up of his own free
will and voice! Say that Herbert Fitzgerald should take her with his consent! that she should
go as a bride to Castle Richmond, while he stood by and smiled, and wished them joy! Never!
And so he rode away with a stern heart, leaving her standing there with something of sternness
about her heart also.

In the meantime, Clara, when she was sure that her rejected suitor was well away from the place,
put on her bonnet and walked out. It was her wont at this time to do so; and she was becoming
almost a creature of habit, shut up as she was in that old dreary barrack. Her mother very
rarely went with her; and she habitually performed the same journey over the same ground, at
the same hour, day after day. So it had been, and so it was still,--unless Herbert Fitzgerald
were with her.

On the present occasion she saw no more of her mother before she left the house. She passed
the drawing-room door, and seeing that it was ajar, knew that the countess was there: but she
had nothing to say to her mother as to the late interview, unless her mother had aught to say
to her. So she passed on. In truth her mother had nothing to say to her. She was sitting there
alone, with her head resting on her hand, with that sternness at her heart and a cloud upon
her brow, but she was not thinking of her daughter. Had she not, with her skill and motherly
care, provided well for Clara? Had she not saved her daughter from all the perils which beset
the path of a young girl? Had she not so brought her child up and put her forth into the world,
that, portionless as that child was, all the best things of the world had been showered into
her lap? Why should the countess think more of her daughter? It was of herself she was thinking;
and of what her life would be all alone, absolutely alone, in that huge frightful home of hers,
without a friend, almost without an acquaintance, without one soul near her whom she could
love or who would love her. She had put out her hand to Owen Fitzgerald, and he had rejected
it. Her he had regarded merely as the mother of the woman he loved. And then the Countess of
Desmond began to ask herself if she were old and wrinkled and ugly, only fit to be a dowager
in mind, body, and in name!

Over the same ground! Yes, always over the same ground. Lady Clara never varied her walk. It
went from the front entrance of the court, with one great curve, down to the old ruined lodge
which opened on to the road running from Kanturk to Cork. It was here that the row of elm trees
stood, and it was here that she had once walked with a hot, eager lover beside her, while a
docile horse followed behind their feet. It was here that she walked daily; and was it possible
that she should walk here without thinking of him?

It was always on the little well-worn path by the road-side, not on the road itself, that she
took her measured exercise; and now, as she went along, she saw on the moist earth the fresh
prints of a horse's hoofs. He also had ridden down the same way, choosing to pass over the
absolute spot in which those words had been uttered, thinking of that moment, as she also was
thinking of it. She felt sure that such had been the case. She knew that it was this that had
brought him there--there on to the foot-traces which they had made together.

And did he then love her so truly,--with a love so hot, so eager, so deeply planted in his
very soul? Was it really true that a passion for her had so filled his heart, that his whole
life must by that be made or marred? Had she done this thing to him? Had she so impressed her
image on his mind that he must be wretched without her? Was she so much to him, so completely
all in all as regarded his future worldly happiness? Those words of his, asserting that love--her
love--was to him a stern fact, a deep necessity--recurred over and over again to her mind.
Could it really be that in doing as she had done, in giving herself to another after she had
promised herself to him, she had committed an injustice which would constantly be brought up
against her by him and by her own conscience? Had she in truth deceived and betrayed him,--deserted
him because he was poor, and given herself over to a rich lover because of his riches?

As she thought of this she forgot again that fact--which, indeed, she had never more than half
realized in her mind--that he had justified her in separating herself from him by his reckless
course of living; that his conduct must be held to have so justified her, let the pledge between
them have been of what nature it might. Now, as she walked up and down that path, she thought
nothing of his wickedness and his sins; she thought only of the vows to which she had once
listened, and the renewal of those vows to which it was now so necessary that her ear should
be deaf.

But was her heart deaf to them? She swore to herself, over and over again, scores and scores
of oaths, that it was so; but each time that she swore, some lowest corner in the depth of
her conscience seemed to charge her with a falsehood. Why was it that in all her hours of thinking
she so much oftener saw his face, Owen's, than she did that other face of which in duty she
was bound to think and dream? It was in vain that she told herself that she was afraid of Owen,
and therefore thought of him. The tone of his voice that rang in her ears the oftenest was
not that of his anger and sternness, but the tone of his first assurance of love--that tone
which had been so inexpressibly sweet to her--that to which she had listened on this very spot
where she now walked slowly, thinking of him. The look of his which was ever present to her
eyes was not that on which she had almost feared to gaze but an hour ago; but the form and
spirit which his countenance had worn when they were together on that well-remembered day.

And then she would think, or try to think, of Herbert, and of all his virtues and of all his
goodness. He too loved her well. She never doubted that. He had come to her with soft words,
and pleasant smiles, and sweet honeyed compliments--compliments which had been sweet to her
as they are to all girls; but his soft words, and pleasant smiles, and honeyed love-making
had never given her so strong a thrill of strange delight as had those few words from Owen.
Her very heart's core had been affected by the vigour of his affection. There had been in it
a mysterious grandeur which had half charmed and half frightened her. It had made her feel
that he, were it fated that she should belong to him, would indeed be her lord and ruler; that
his was a spirit before which hers would bend and feel itself subdued. With him she could realize
all that she had dreamed of woman's love, and that dream which is so sweet to some women--of
woman's subjugation. But could it be the same with him to whom she was now positively affianced,
with him to whom she knew that she did now owe all her duty? She feared that it was not the same.

And then again she swore that she loved him. She thought over all his excellences; how good
he was as a son--how fondly his sisters loved him--how inimitable was his conduct in these
hard trying times. And she remembered also that it was right in every way that she should love
him. Her mother and brother approved of it. Those who were to be her new relatives approved
of it. It was in every way fitting. Pecuniary considerations were so favourable! But when she
thought of that her heart sank low within her breast. Was it true that she had sold herself
at her mother's bidding? Should not the remembrance of Owen's poverty have made her true to
him had nothing else done so?

But be all that as it might, one thing, at any rate, was clear to her, that it was now her
fate, her duty--and, as she repeated again and again, her wish to marry Herbert. No thought
of rebellion against him and her mother ever occurred to her as desirable or possible. She
would be to him a true and loving wife, a wife in very heart and soul. But, nevertheless, walking
thus beneath those trees, she could not but think of Owen Fitzgerald.

In this mood she had gone twice down from the house to the lodge and back again, and now again
she had reached the lodge the third time, making thus her last journey for in these solitary
walks her work was measured. The exercise was needful, but there was little in the task to
make her prolong it beyond what was necessary. But now, as she was turning for the last time,
she heard the sound of a horse's hoof coming fast along the road, and looking from the gate,
she saw that Herbert was coming to her. She had not expected him, but now she waited at the
gate to meet him.

It had been arranged that she was to go over in a few days to Castle Richmond, and stay there
for a fortnight. This had been settled shortly before the visit made by Mr. Mollett, junior,
at that place, and had not as yet been unsettled. But as soon as it was known that Sir Thomas
had summoned Mr. Prendergast from London, it was felt by them all that it would be as well
that Clara's visit should be postponed. Herbert had been especially cautioned by his father,
at the time of Mollett's visit, not to tell his mother anything of what had occurred, and to
a certain extent he had kept his promise. But it was of course necessary that Lady Fitzgerald
should know that Mr. Prendergast was coming to the house, and it was of course impossible to
keep from her the fact that his visit was connected with the lamentable state of her husband's
health and spirits. Indeed, she knew as much as that without any telling. It was not probable
that Mr. Prendergast should come there now on a visit of pleasure.

"Whatever this may be that weighs upon his mind," Herbert had said, "he will be better for
talking it over with a man whom he trusts."

"And why not with Somers?" said Lady Fitzgerald.

"Somers is too often with him, too near to him in all the affairs of his life. I really think
he is wise to send for Mr. Prendergast. We do not know him, but I believe him to be a good man."

Then Lady Fitzgerald had expressed herself as satisfied--as satisfied as she could be, seeing
that her husband would not take her into his confidence; and after this it was settled that
Herbert should at once ride over to Desmond Court, and explain that Clara's visit had better
be postponed.

Herbert got off his horse at the gate, and gave it to one of the children at the lodge to lead
after him. His horse would not follow him, Clara said to herself as they walked back together
towards the house. She could not prevent her mind running off in that direction. She would
fain not have thought of Owen as she thus hung upon Herbert's arm, but as yet she had not learned
to control her thoughts. His horse had followed him lovingly-the dogs about the place had always
loved him-the men and women of the whole country round, old and young, all spoke of him with
a sort of love: everybody admired him. As all this passed through her brain, she was hanging
on her accepted lover's arm, and listening to his soft sweet words.

"Oh, yes! it will be much better," she said, answering his proposal that she should put off
her visit to Castle Richmond. "But I am so sorry that Sir Thomas should be ill. Mr. Prendergast
is not a doctor, is he?"

And then Herbert explained that Mr. Prendergast was not a doctor, that he was a physician for
the mind rather than for the body. Regarding Clara as already one of his own family, he told
her as much as he had told his mother. He explained that there was some deep sorrow weighing
on his father's heart of which they none of them knew anything save its existence; that there
might be some misfortune coming on Sir Thomas of which he, Herbert, could not even guess the
nature; but that everything would be told to this Mr. Prendergast.

"It is very sad," said Herbert.

"Very sad; very sad," said Clara, with tears in her eyes. "Poor gentleman! I wish that we could
comfort him."

"And I do hope that we may," said Herbert.

"Somers seems to think that his mind is partly affected, and that this misfortune, whatever
it be, may not improbably be less serious than we anticipate;-that it weighs heavier on him
than it would do, were he altogether well."

"And your mother, Herbert?"

"Oh, yes; she also is to be pitied. Sometimes, for moments, she seems to dread some terrible
misfortune; but I believe that in her calm judgment she thinks that our worst calamity is the
state of my father's health."

Neither in discussing the matter with his mother or Clara, nor in thinking it over when alone,
did it ever occur to Herbert that he himself might be individually subject to the misfortune
over which his father brooded. Sir Thomas had spoken piteously to him, and called him poor,
and had seemed to grieve over what might happen to him; but this had been taken by the son
as a part of his father's malady.

Everything around him was now melancholy, and therefore these terms had not seemed to have
any special force of their own. He did not think it necessary to warn Clara that bad days might
be in store for both of them, or to caution her that their path of love might yet be made rough.

"And whom do you think I met, just now, on horseback?" he asked, as soon as this question of
her visit had been decided.

"Mr. Owen Fitzgerald, probably," said Clara. "He went from hence about an hour since."

"Owen Fitzgerald here!" he repeated, as though the tidings of such a visit having been made
were not exactly pleasant to him. "I thought that Lady Desmond did not even see him now."

"His visit was to me, Herbert, and I will explain it to you. I was just going to tell you when
you first came in, only you began about Castle Richmond."

"And have you seen him?"

"Oh yes, I saw him. Mamma thought it best. Yesterday he wrote a note to me which I will show
you." And then she gave him such an account of the interview as was possible to her, making
it, at any rate, intelligible to him that Owen had come thither to claim her for himself, having
heard the rumour of her engagement to his cousin.

"It was inexcusable on his part--unpardonable!" said Herbert, speaking with an angry spot on
his face, and with more energy than was usual with him.

"Was it? why?" said Clara, innocently. She felt unconsciously that it was painful to her to
hear Owen ill spoken of by her lover, and that she would fain excuse him if she could.

"Why, dearest? Think what motives he could have had; what other object than to place you in
a painful position, and to cause trouble and vexation to us all. Did he not know that we were
engaged?"

"Oh yes; he knew that;--at least, no; I am not quite sure--I think he said that he had heard
it but did not---"

"Did not what, love?"

"I think he said he did not quite believe it;" and then she was forced, much against her will,
to describe to her betrothed how Owen had boldly claimed her as his own.

"His conduct has been unpardonable," said Herbert, again. "Nay, it has been ungentleman-like.
He has intruded himself where he well knew that he was not wanted; and he has done so taking
advantage of a few words which, under the present circumstances, he should force himself to
forget."

"But, Herbert, it is I that have been to blame."

"No; you have not been in blame. I tell you honestly that I can lay no blame at your door.
At the age you were then, it was impossible that you should know your own mind. And even had
your promise to him been of a much more binding nature, his subsequent conduct, and your mother's
remonstrance, as well as your own age, would have released you from it without any taint of
falsehood. He knew all this as well as I do; and I am surprised that he should have forced
his way into your mother's house with the mere object of causing you embarrassment."

It was marvellous how well Herbert Fitzgerald could lay down the law on the subject of Clara's
conduct, and on all that was due to her, and all that was not due to Owen. He was the victor;
he had gained the prize; and therefore it was so easy for him to acquit his promised bride,
and heap reproaches on the head of his rejected rival. Owen had been told that he was not wanted,
and of course should have been satisfied with his answer. Why should he intrude himself among
happy people with his absurd aspirations? For were they not absurd? Was it not monstrous on
his part to suppose that he could marry Clara Desmond?

It was in this way that Herbert regarded the matter. But it was not exactly in that way that
Clara looked at it. "He did not force his way in." she said. "He wrote to ask if we would see
him; and mamma said that she thought it better."

"That is forcing his way in the sense that I meant it; and if I find that he gives further
annoyance I shall tell him what I think about it. I will not have you persecuted."

"Herbert, if you quarrel with him you will make me wretched. I think it would kill me."

"I shall not do it if I can help it, Clara. But it is my duty to protect you, and if it becomes
necessary I must do so; you have no father, and no brother of an age to speak to him, and that
consideration alone should have saved you from such an attack."

Clara said nothing more, for she knew that she could not speak out to him the feelings of her
heart. She could not plead to him that she had injured Owen, that she had loved him and then
given him up; that she had been false to him: she could not confess that, after all, the tribute
of such a man's love could not be regarded by her as an offence. So she said nothing further,
but walked on in silence, leaning on his arm.

They were now close to the house, and as they drew near to it Lady Desmond met them on the
door-step. "I dare say you have heard that we had a visitor here this morning," she said, taking
Herbert's hand in an affectionate motherly way, and smiling on him with all her sweetness.

Herbert said that he had heard it, and expressed an opinion that Mr. Owen Fitzgerald would
have been acting far more wisely to have remained at home at Hap House.

"Yes, perhaps so; certainly so," said Lady Desmond, putting her arm within that of her future
son, and walking back with him through the great hall. "He would have been wiser: he would
have saved dear Clara from a painful half-hour, and he would have saved himself from perhaps
years of sorrow. He has been very foolish to remember Clara's childhood as he does remember
it. But, my dear Herbert, what can we do? You lords of creation sometimes will be foolish even
about such trifling things as women's hearts."

And then, when Herbert still persisted that Owen's conduct had been inexcusable and ungentlemanlike,
she softly flattered him into quiescence. "You must not forget," she said, "that he perhaps
has loved Clara almost as truly as you do. And then what harm can he do? It is not very probable
that he should succeed in winning Clara away from you!"

"Oh no, it is not that I mean. It is for Clara's sake."

"And she, probably, will never see him again till she is your wife. That event will, I suppose,
take place at no very remote period."

"As soon as ever my father's health will admit. That is if I can persuade Clara to be so merciful."

"To tell the truth, Herbert, I think you could persuade her to anything. Of course we must
not hurry her too much. As for me, my losing her will be very sad; you can understand that;
but I would not allow any feeling of my own to stand in her way for half-an-hour."

"She will be very near you, you know."

"Yes, she will; and therefore, as I was saying, it would be absurd for you to quarrel with
Mr. Owen Fitzgerald. For myself, I am sorry for him--very sorry for him. You know the whole
story of what occurred between him and Clara, and of course you will understand that my duty
at that time was plain. Clara behaved admirably, and if only he would not be so foolish, the
whole matter might be forgotten. As far as you and I are concerned I think it may be forgotten."

"But then his coming here?"

"That will not be repeated. I thought it better to show him that we were not afraid of him,
and therefore I permitted it. Had I conceived that you would have objected--"

"Oh no!" said Herbert.

"Well, there was not much for you to be afraid of, certainly," said the countess. And so he
was appeased, and left the house promising that he, at any rate, would do nothing that might
lead to a quarrel with his cousin Owen.

Clara, who had still kept on her bonnet, again walked down with him to the lodge, and encountered
his first earnest supplication that an early day should be named for their marriage. She had
many reasons, excellent good reasons, to allege why this should not be the case. When was a
girl of seventeen without such reasons? And it is so reasonable that she should have such reasons.
That period of having love made to her must be by far the brightest in her life. Is it not
always a pity that it should be abridged?

"But your father's illness, Herbert, you know."

Herbert acknowledged that, to a certain extent, his father's illness was a reason--only to
a certain extent. It would be worse than useless to think of waiting till his father's health
should be altogether strong. Just for the present, till Mr. Prendergast should have gone, and
perhaps for a fortnight longer, it might be well to wait. But after that--and then he pressed
very closely the hand which rested on his arm. And so the matter was discussed between them
with language and arguments which were by no means original.

At the gate, just as Herbert was about to remount his horse, they were encountered by a sight
which for years past had not been uncommon in the south of Ireland, but which had become frightfully
common during the last two or three months. A woman was standing there of whom you could hardly
say that she was clothed, though she was involved in a mass of rags which covered her nakedness.
Her head was all uncovered, and her wild black hair was streaming round her face. Behind her
back hung two children enveloped among the rags in some mysterious way; and round about her
on the road stood three others, of whom the two younger were almost absolutely naked. The eldest
of the five was not above seven. They all had the same wild black eyes, and wild elfish straggling
locks; but neither the mother nor the children were comely. She was short ad broad in the shoulders,
though wretchedly thin; her bare legs seemed to be of nearly the same thickness up to the knee,
and the naked limbs of the children were like yellow sticks. It is strange how various are
the kinds of physical development among the Celtic peasantry in Ireland. In many places they
are singularly beautiful, especially as children; and even after labour and sickness shall
have told on them as labour and sickness will tell, they still retain a certain softness and
grace which is very nearly akin to beauty. But then again in a neighbouring district they will
be found to be squat, uncouth, and in no way attractive to the eye. The tint of the complexion,
the nature of the hair, the colour of the eyes, shall be the same. But in one place it will
seem as though noble blood had produced delicate limbs and elegant stature, whereas in the
other a want of noble blood had produced the reverse. The peasants of Clare, Limerick, and
Tipperary are, in this way, much more comely than those of Cork and Kerry.

When Herbert and Clara reached the gate they found this mother with her five children crouching
at the ditch-side, although it was still mid-winter. They had seen him enter the demesne, and
were now waiting with the patience of poverty for his return.

"An' the holy Virgin guide an' save you, my lady," said the woman, almost frightening Clara
by the sudden way in which she came forward, "an' you too, Misther Herbert; and for the love
of heaven do something for a poor crathur whose five starving childher have not had wholesome
food within their lips for the last week past."

Clara looked at them piteously and put her hand towards her pocket. Her purse was never well
furnished, and now in these bad days was usually empty. At the present moment it was wholly
so. "I have nothing to give her; not a penny," she said, whispering to her lover.

But Herbert had learned deep lessons of political economy, and was by no means disposed to
give promiscuous charity on the road-side. "What is your name," said he; "and from where do
you come?"

"Shure, an' it's yer honor knows me well enough; and her ladyship too; may the heavens be her
bed. And don't I come from Clady; that is two long miles the fur side of it? And my name is
Bridget Sheehy. Shure, an' yer ladyship remembers me at Clady the first day ye war over there
about the biler."

Clara looked at her, and thought that she did remember her, but she said nothing. "And who
is your husband?" said Herbert.

"Murty Brien, plaze yer honor;" and the woman ducked a curtsey with the heavy load of two children
on her back. It must be understood that among the poorer classes in the south and west of Ireland
it is almost rare for a married woman to call herself or to be called by her husband's name.

"And is he not at work?"

"Shure, an' he is, yer honor--down beyant Kinsale by the say. But what's four shilling a week
for a man's diet, let alone a woman and five bairns?"

"And so he has deserted you?"

"No, yer honor; he's not dasarted me thin. He's a good man and a kind, av' he had the mains.
But we've a cabin up here, on her ladyship's ground that is; and he has sent me up among my
own people, hoping that times would come round; but faix, yer honor, I'm thinking that they'll
never come round, no more."

"And what do you want now, Bridget?"

"What is it I'm wanting? just a thrifle of money then to get a sup of milk for thim five childher
as is starving and dying for the want of it." And she pointed to the wretched, naked brood
around her with a gesture which in spite of her ugliness had in it something of tragic grandeur.

"But you know that we will not give money. They will take you in at the poorhouse at Kanturk."

"Is it the poorhouse, yer honor?"

"Or, if you get a ticket from your priest they will give you meal twice a week at Clady. You
know that. Why do you not go to Father Connellan?"

"Is it the mail? An' shure an' haven't I had it the last month past; nothin' else; not a taste
of a piaty or a dhrop of milk for nigh a month, and now look at the childher. Look at them,
my lady. They are dyin' by the very road-side." And she undid the bundle at her back, and laying
the two babes down on the road, showed that the elder of them was in truth in a fearful state.
It was a child nearly two years of age, but its little legs seemed to have withered away; its
cheeks were wan, and yellow and sunken, and the two teeth which it had already cut were seen
with terrible plainness through its emaciated lips. Its head and forehead were covered with
sores; and then the mother, moving aside the rags, showed that its back and legs were in the
same state. "Look to that," she said, almost with scorn. "That's what the mail has done--my
black curses be upon it, and the day that it first come nigh the counthry." And then again
she covered the child and began to resume her load.

"Do give her something, Herbert, pray do," said Clara, with her whole face suffused with tears.

"You know that we cannot give away money," said Herbert, arguing with Bridget Sheehy, and not
answering Clara at the moment. "You understand enough of what is being done to know that. Why
do you not go into the Union?"

"Shure thin an' I'll jist tramp on as fur as Hap House, I and my childher; that is av' they
do not die by the road-side. Come on, bairns. Mr. Owen won't be afther sending me to the Kanturk
union when I tell him that I've travelled all thim miles to get a dhrink of milk for a sick
babe; more by token when I tells him also that I'm one of the Desmond tinantry. It's he that
loves the Desmonds, Lady Clara,--loves them as his own heart's blood. And it's I that wish
him good luck with his love, in spite of all that's come and gone yet. Come on, bairns, come
along; we have seven weary miles to walk."

And then, having rearranged her burden on her back, she prepared again to start.

Herbert Fitzgerald, from the first moment of his interrogating the woman, had of course known
that he would give her somewhat. In spite of all his political economy, there were but few
days in which he did not empty his pocket of his loose silver, with these culpable deviations
from his theoretical philosophy. But yet he felt that it was his duty to insist on his rules,
as far as his heart would allow him to do so. It was a settled thing at their relief committee
that there should be no giving away of money to chance applicants for alms. What money each
had to bestow would go twice further by being brought to the general fund--by being expended
with forethought and discrimination. This was the system which all attempted, which all resolved
to adopt who were then living in the south of Ireland. But the system was impracticable, for
it required frames of iron and hearts of adamant. It was impossible not to waste money in almsgiving.

"Oh, Herbert!" said Clara, imploringly, as the woman prepared to start.

"Bridget, come here," said Herbert, and he spoke very seriously, for the woman's allusion to
Owen Fitzgerald had driven a cloud across his brow. "Your child is very ill, and therefore
I will give you something to help you," and he gave her a shilling and two sixpences.

"May the God in heaven bless you thin, and make you happy, whoever wins the bright darling
by your side; and may the good days come back to yer house and all that belongs to it. May
yer wife clave to you all her days, and be a good mother to your childher." And she would have
gone on further with her blessing had not he interrupted her.

"Go on now, my good woman," said he, "and take your children where they may be warm. If you
will be advised by me, you will go to the Union at Kanturk." And so the woman passed on still
blessing them. Very shortly after this none of them required pressing to go to the workhouse.
Every building that could be arranged for the purpose was filled to overflowing as soon as
it was ready. But the worst of the famine had not come upon them as yet. And then Herbert rode
back to Castle Richmond.

CHAPTER XVII

FATHER BARNEY

Mick O'Dwyer's public-house at Kanturk was by no means so pretentious an establishment as that
kept by his brother in South Main Street, Cork, but it was on the whole much less nasty. It
was a drinking-shop and a public car office, and such places in Ireland are seldom very nice;
but there was no attempt at hotel grandeur, and the little room in which the family lived behind
the bar was never invaded by customers.

On one evening just at this time--at the time, that is, with which we have been lately concerned--three
persons were sitting in this room over a cup of tea. There was a gentleman, midddle-aged, but
none the worse on that account, who has already been introduced in these pages as Father Bernard
M'Carthy. He was the parish priest of Drumbarrow; and as his parish comprised a portion of
the town of Kanturk, he lived, not exactly in the town, but within a mile of it. His sister
had married Mr. O'Dwyer of South Main Street, and therefore he was quite at home in the little
back parlour of Mick O'Dwyer's house in Kanturk. Indeed Father Bernard was a man who made himself
at home in the houses of most of his parishioners,--and of some who were not his parishioners.

His companions on the present occasion were two ladies who seemed to be emulous in supplying
his wants. The younger and more attractive of the two was also an old friend of ours, being
no other than Fanny O'Dwyer from South Main Street. Actuated, doubtless, by some important
motive she had left her bar at home for one night, having come down to Kanturk by her father's
car, with the intention of returning by it in the morning. She was seated as a guest here on
the corner of the sofa near the fire, but nevertheless she was neither too proud nor too strange
in her position to administer as best she might to the comfort of her uncle.

The other lady was Mistress O'Dwyer, the lady of the mansion. She was fat, very; by no means
fair, and perhaps something over forty. But nevertheless there were those who thought that
she had her charms. A better hand at curing a side of bacon there was not in the county Cork,
nor a woman who was more knowing in keeping a house straight and snug over her husband's head.
That she had been worth more than a fortune to Mick O'Dwyer was admitted by all in Kanturk;
for it was known to all that Mick O'Dwyer was not himself a good hand at keeping a house straight
and snug.

"Another cup of tay, Father Bernard," said this lady. "It'll be more to your liking now than
the first, you'll find." Father Barney, perfectly reliant on her word, handed in his cup.

"And the muffin is quite hot," said Fanny, stooping down to a tray which stood before the peat
fire, holding the muffin dish. "But perhaps you'd like a morsel of buttered toast; say the
word, uncle, and I'll make it in a brace of seconds."

"In course she will," said Mrs. O'Dwyer: "and happy too, av you'll only say that you have a
fancy, Father Bernard."

But Father Bernard would not own to any such fancy. The muffin, he said, was quite to his liking,
and so was the tea; and from the manner in which he disposed of these delicacies, even Mrs.
Townsend might have admitted that this assertion was true, though she was wont to express her
belief that nothing but lies could, by any possibility, fall from his mouth.

"And they have been staying with you now for some weeks, haven't they?" said Father Barney.

"Off and on," said Fanny.

"But there's one of them mostly there, isn't he?" added the priest.

"The two of them is mostly there, just now. Sometimes one goes away for a day or two, and sometimes
the other."

"And they have no business which keeps them in Cork?" continued the priest, who seemed to be
very curious on the matter.

"Well, they do have business, I suppose," said Fanny, "but av so I never sees it."

Fanny O'Dwyer had a great respect for her uncle, seeing that he filled an exalted position,
and was a connexion of whom she could be justly proud; but, though she had now come down to
Kanturk with the view of having a good talk with her aunt and uncle about the Molletts, she
would only tell as much as she liked to tell, even to the parish priest of Drumbarrow. And
we may as well explain here that Fanny had now permanently made up her mind to reject the suit
of Mr. Abraham Mollett. As she had allowed herself to see more and more of the little domestic
ways of that gentleman, and to become intimate with him as a girl should become with the man
she intends to marry, she had gradually learned to think that he hardly came up to her beau
ideal of a lover. That he was crafty and false did not perhaps offend her as it should have
done. Dear Fanny, excellent and gracious as she was, could herself be crafty on occasions.
He drank too, but that came in the way of her profession. It is hard, perhaps, for a barmaid
to feel much severity against that offence. But in addition to this Aby was selfish and cruel
and insolent, and seldom altogether good tempered. He was bad to his father, and bad to those
below him whom he employed. Old Mollett would give away his sixpences with a fairly liberal
hand, unless when he was exasperated by drink and fatigue. But Aby seldom gave away a penny.
Fanny had sharp eyes, and soon felt that her English lover was not a man to be loved, though
he had two rings, a gold chain, and half a dozen fine waistcoats.

And then another offence had come to light in which the Molletts were both concerned. Since
their arrival in South Main Street they had been excellent customers--indeed quite a godsend,
in this light, to Fanny, who had her own peculiar profit out of such house-customers as they
were. They had paid their money like true Britons,--not regularly indeed, for regularity had
not been desired, but by a five pound now, and another in a day or two, just as they were wanted.
Nothing indeed could be better than this, for bills so paid are seldom rigidly scrutinized.
But of late, within the last week, Fanny's requests for funds had not been so promptly met,
and only on the day before her visit to Kanturk she had been forced to get her father to take
a bill from Mr. Mollett senior for 20l. at two months' date. This was a great come-down, as
both Fanny and her father felt, and they had begun to think that it might be well to bring
their connexion with the Molletts to a close. What if an end had come to the money of these
people, and their bills should be dishonoured when due? It was all very well for a man to have
claims against Sir Thomas Fitzgerald, but Fanny O'Dwyer had already learnt that nothing goes
so far in this world as ready cash.

"They do have business, I suppose," said Fanny.

"It won't be worth much, I'm thinking," said Mrs. O'Dwyer, "when they can't pay their weekly
bills at a house of public entertainment, without flying their names at two months' date."

Mrs. O'Dwyer hated any such payments herself, and looked on them as certain signs of immorality.
That every man should take his drop of drink, consume it noiselessly, and pay for it immediately--that
was her idea of propriety in its highest form.

"And they've been down here three or four times, each of them," said Father Barney, thinking
deeply on the subject.

"I believe they have," said Fanny. "But of course I don't know much of where they've been to."

Father Barney knew very well that his dear niece had been on much more intimate terms with
her guest than she pretended. The rumours had reached his ears some time since that the younger
of the two strangers in South Main Street was making himself agreeable to the heiress of the
hotel, and he had intended to come down upon her with all the might of an uncle, and, if necessary,
with all the authority of the Church. But now that Fanny had discarded her lover, he wisely
felt that it would be well for him to know nothing about it. Both uncles and priests may know
too much--very foolishly.

"I have seen them here myself," said he, "and they have both been up at Castle Richmond."

"They do say as poor Sir Thomas is in a bad way," said Mrs. O'Dwyer, shaking her head piteously.

"And yet he sees these men," said Father Barney. "I know that for certain. He has seen them,
though he will rarely see anybody now-a-days."

"Young Mr. Herbert is a-doing most of the business up about the place," said Mrs. O'Dwyer.
"And people do say as how he is going to make a match of it with Lady Clara Desmond. And it's
the lucky girl she'll be, for he's a nice young fellow entirely."

"Not half equal to her other Joe, Mr. Owen that is," said Fanny.

"Well, I don't know that, my dear. Such a house and property as Castle Richmond is not likely
to go a-begging among the young women. And then Mr. Herbert is not so rampageous like as him
of Hap house, by all accounts."

But Father Barney still kept to his subject. "And they are both at your place at the present
moment, eh, Fanny?"

"They was to dine there, after I left."

"And the old man said he'd be down here again next Thursday," continued the priest. "I heard
that for certain. I'll tell you what it is, they're not after any good here. They are Protestants,
ain't they?"

"Oh, black Protestants," said Mrs. O'Dwyer. "But you are not taking your tay, Father Bernard,"
and she again filled his cup for him.

"If you'll take my advice, Fanny, you'll give them nothing more without seeing their money.
They'll come to no good here, I'm sure of that. They're afther some mischief with that poor
old gentleman at Castle Richmond, and it's my belief the police will have them before they've
done."

"Like enough," said Mrs. O'Dwyer.

"They may have them to-morrow, for what I care," said Fanny, who could not help feeling that
Aby Mollett had at one time been not altogether left without hope as her suitor.

"But you wouldn't like anything like that to happen in your father's house," said Father Barney.

"Bringing throuble and disgrace on an honest name," said Mrs. O'Dwyer.

"There'd be no disgrace as I knows of," said Fanny, stoutly. "Father makes his money by the
public, and in course he takes in any that comes the way with money in their pockets to pay
the shot."

"But these Molletts ain't got the money to pay the shot," said Mrs. O'Dwyer, causticly. "You've
about sucked 'em dhry, I'm thinking, and they owes you more now than you're like to get from 'em."

"I suppose father'll have to take that bill up," said Fanny, assenting. And so it was settled
down there among them that the Molletts were to have the cold shoulder, and that they should
in fact be turned out of the Kanturk Hotel as quickly as this could be done. "Better a small
loss at first, than a big one at last," said Mrs. O'Dwyer, with much wisdom. "They'll come
to mischief down here, as sure as my name's M'Carthy," said the priest. "And I'd be sorry your
father should be mixed up in it."

And then by degrees the conversation was changed, but not till the tea-things had been taken
away, and a square small bottle of very particular whisky put on the table in its place. And
the sugar also was brought, and boiling water in an immense jug, as though Father Barney were
going to make a deep potation indeed, and a lemon in a wine-glass; and then the priest was
invited, with much hospitality, to make himself comfortable. Nor did the luxuries prepared
for him end here; but Fanny, the pretty Fan herself, filled a pipe for him, and pretended that
she would light it, for such priests are merry enough sometimes, and can joke as well as other
men with their pretty nieces.

"But you're not mixing your punch, Father Bernard," said Mrs. O'Dwyer, with a plaintive melancholy
voice, "and the wather getting cowld and all! Faix then, Father Bernard, I'll mix it for ye,
so I will." And so she did, and well she knew how. And then she made another for herself and
her niece, urging that "a thimbleful would do Fanny all the good in life afther her ride acrass
them cowld mountains," and the priest looked on assenting, blowing the comfortable streams
of smoke from his nostrils.

"And so, Father Bernard, you and Parson Townsend is to meet again to-morrow at Gortnaclough."
Whereupon Father Bernard owned that such was the case, with a nod, not caring to disturb the
pipe which lay comfortably on his lower lip.

"Well, well; only to think on it," continued Mrs. O'Dwyer. "That the same room should hould
the two of ye." And she lifted up her hands and shook her head.

"It houlds us both very comfortable, I can assure you, Mrs. O'Dwyer."

"And he ain't rampageous and highty-tighty? He don't give hisself no airs?"

"Well, no; nothing in particular. Why should the man be such a fool as that?"

"Why, in course? But they are such fools, Father Bernard. They does think theyselves such grand
folks. Now don't they? I'd give a dandy of punch all round to the company just to hear you
put him down once; I would. But he isn't upsetting at all, then?"

"Not the last time we met, he wasn't; and I don't think he intends it. Things have come to
that now that the parsons know where they are and what they have to look to. They're getting
a lesson they'll not forget in a hurry. Where are their rent charges to come from-- can you
tell me that, Mrs. O'Dwyer?"

Mrs. O'Dwyer could not, but she remarked that pride would always have a fall. "And there's
no pride like Protesthant pride," said Fanny. "It is so upsetting, I can't abide it." All which
tended to show that she had given up her Protestant lover.

"And is it getthing worse than iver with the poor crathurs?" said Mrs. O'Dwyer, referring,
not to the Protestants, but to the victims of the famine.

"Indeed it's getting no betther," said the priest, "and I'm fearing it will be worse before
it is over. I haven't married one couple in Drumbarrow since November last."

"And that's a heavy sign, Father Bernard."

"The surest sign in the world that they have no money among them at all, at all. And it is
bad with thim, Mrs. O'Dwyer,--very bad, very bad indeed."

"Glory be to God, the poor cratures!" said the soft-hearted lady. "It isn't much the like of
us have to give away, Father Bernard; I needn't be telling you that. But we'll help, you know,--we'll
help."

"And so will father, uncle Bernard. If you're so bad off about here I know he'll give you a
thrifle for the asking." In a short time, however, it came to pass that those in the cities
could spare no aid to the country. Indeed it may be a question whether the city poverty was
not the harder of the two.

"God bless you both--you've soft hearts, I know." And Father Barney put his punch to his lips.
"Whatever you can do for me shall not be thrown away. And I'll tell you what, Mrs. O'Dwyer,
it does behove us all to put our best foot out now. We will not let them say that the Papists
would do nothing for their own poor."

"'Deed then an' they'll say anything of us, Father Bernard. There's nothing too hot or too
heavy for them."

"At any rate let us not deserve it, Mrs. O'Dwyer. There will be a lot of them at Gortnaclough
to-morrow, and I shall tell them that we, on our side, won't be wanting. To give them their
due, I must say that they are working well. That young Herbert Fitzgerald's a trump, whether
he's Protestant or Catholic."

"An' they do say he's a strong bearing towards the ould religion," said Mrs. O'Dwyer.

"God bless his sweet young face av' he'd come back to us. That's what I say."

"God bless his face any way, say I," said Father Barney, with a wider philanthropy. "He is
doing his best for the people, and the time has come now when we must hang together, if it
be any way possible." And with this the priest finished his pipe, and wishing the ladies good
night, walked away to his own house.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE RELIEF COMMITTEE

At this time the famine was beginning to be systematised. The sternest among landlords and
masters were driven to acknowledge that the people had not got food, or the means of earning
it. The people themselves were learning that a great national calamity had happened, and that
the work was God's work; and the Government had fully recognized the necessity of taking the
whole matter into its own hands. They were responsible for the preservation of the people,
and they acknowledged their responsibility.

And then two great rules seemed to get themselves laid down--not by general consent, for there
were many who greatly contested their wisdom--but by some force strong enough to make itself
dominant. The first was, that the food to be provided should be earned and not given away.
And the second was, that the providing of that food should be left to private competition,
and not in any way be undertaken by the Government. I make bold to say that both these rules
were wise and good.

But how should the people work? That Government should supply the wages was of course an understood
necessity; and it was also necessary that on all such work the amount of wages should be regulated
by the price at which provisions might fix themselves. These points produced questions which
were hotly debated by the Relief Committees of the different districts; but at last it got
itself decided, again by the hands of Government, that all hills along the country roads should
be cut away, and that the people should be employed on this work. They were so employed,--very
little to the advantage of the roads for that or some following years.

"So you have begun, my men," said Herbert to a gang of labourers whom he found collected at
a certain point on Ballydahan Hill, which lay on his road from Castle Richmond to Gortnaclough.
In saying this he had certainly paid them an unmerited compliment, for they had hitherto begun
nothing. Some thirty or forty wretched-looking men were clustered together in the dirt and
slop and mud, on the brow of the hill, armed with such various tools as each was able to find--with
tools, for the most part, which would go but a little way in making Ballydahan Hill level or
accessible. This question of tools also came to a sort of understood settlement before long;
and within three months of the time of which I am writing legions of wheelbarrows were to be
seen lying near every hill; wheelbarrows in hundreds and thousands. The fate of those myriads
of wheelbarrows has always been a mystery to me.

"So you have begun, my men," said Herbert, addressing them in a kindly voice. There was a couple
of gangsmen with them, men a little above the others in appearance, but apparently incapable
of commencing the work in hand, for they also were standing idle, leaning against a bit of
wooden paling. It had, however, been decided that the works at Ballydahan Hill should begin
on this day, and there were the men assembled. One fact admitted of no doubt, namely, this,
that the wages would begin from this day.

And then the men came and clustered round Herbert's horse. They were wretched-looking creatures,
half-clad, discontented, with hungry eyes, each having at his heart's core a deep sense of
injustice done personally upon him. They hated this work of cutting hills from the commencement
to the end,--hated it, though it was to bring them wages and save them and theirs from actual
famine and death. They had not been accustomed to the discomfort of being taken far from their
homes to their daily work. Very many of them had never worked regularly for wages, day after
day, and week after week. Up to this time such was not the habit of Irish cottiers. They held
their own land, and laboured there for a spell; and then they would work for a spell, as men
do in England, taking wages; and then they would be idle for a spell. It was not exactly a
profitable mode of life, but it had its comforts; and now these unfortunates who felt themselves
to be driven forth like cattle in droves for the first time, suffered the full wretchedness
of their position. They were not rough and unruly, or inclined to be troublesome and perhaps
violent, as men similarly circumstanced so often are in England;--as Irishmen are when collected
in gangs out of Ireland. They had no aptitudes for such roughness, and no spirits for such
violence. But they were melancholy, given to complaint, apathetic, and utterly without interest
in that they were doing.

"Yz, yer honer," said one man who was standing, shaking himself, with his hands enveloped in
the rags of his pockets. He had on no coat, and the keen north wind seemed to be blowing through
his bones; cold, however, as he was, he would do nothing towards warming himself, unless that
occasional shake can be considered as a doing of something. "Yz, yer honer; we've begun thin
since before daylight this blessed morning."

It was now eleven o'clock, and a pick-axe had not been put into the ground, nor the work marked.

"Been here before daylight!" said Herbert. "And has there been nobody to set you to work?"

"Divil a sowl, yer honer," said another, who was sitting on a hedge-bank leaning with both
his hands on a hoe, which he held between his legs, "barring Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady;
they two do be over us, but they knows nothin' o' such jobs as this."

Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady had with others moved up so as to be close to Herbert's horse,
but they said not a word towards vindicating their own fitness for command.

"And it's mortial cowld standing here thin," said another, "without a bit to ate or a sup to
dhrink since last night, and then only a lump of the yally mail." And the speaker moved about
on his toes and heels, desirous of keeping his blood in circulation with the smallest possible
amount of trouble.

"I'm telling the boys it's home we'd betther be going," said a fourth.

"And lose the tizzy they've promised us," said he of the hoe.

"Sorrow a tizzy they'll pay any of yez for standing here all day," said an ill-looking little
wretch of a fellow, with a black muzzle and a squinting eye; "ye may all die in the road first."
And the man turned away among the crowd, as an Irishman does who has made his speech and does
not want to be answered.

"You need have no fear about that, my men," said Herbert. "Whether you be put to work or no
you'll receive your wages; you may take my word for that."

"I've been telling 'em that for the last half-hour," said the man with the hoe, now rising
to his feet. "'Shure an' didn't Mr. Somers be telling us that we'd have saxpence each day as
long we war here afore daylight?' said I, yer honer; 'an' shure an' wasn't it black night when
we war here this blessed morning, and devil a fear of the tizzy?' said I. But it's mortial
cowld, an' it'd be asier fur uz to be doing a spell of work than crouching about on our hunkers
down on the wet ground."

All this was true. It had been specially enjoined upon them to be early at their work. An Irishman
as a rule will not come regularly to his task. It is a very difficult thing to secure his services
every morning at six o'clock: but make a special point,--tell him that you want him very early,
and he will come to you in the middle of the night. Breakfast every morning punctually at eight
o'clock is almost impossible in Ireland; but if you want one special breakfast, so that you
may start by a train at 4 A.M., you are sure to be served. No irregular effort is distasteful
to an Irishman of the lower classes, not if it entails on him the loss of a day's food and
the loss of a night's rest; the actual pleasure of the irregularity repays him for all this,
and he never tells you that this or that is not his work. He prefers work that is not his own.
Your coachman will have no objection to turn the mangle, but heaven and earth put together
won't persuade him to take the horses out to exercise every morning at the same hour. These
men had been told to come early, and they had been there on the road-side since five o'clock.
It was not surprising that they were cold and hungry, listless and unhappy.

And then, as young Fitzgerald was questioning the so-named gangmen as to the instructions they
had received, a jaunting car came up to the foot of the hill. "We war to wait for the ongineer,"
Shawn Brady had said, "an' shure an' we have waited." "An' here's one of Misther Carroll's
cars from Mallow," said Thady Molloy, "and that's the ongineer hisself." Thady Molloy was right;
this was the engineer himself, who had now arrived from Mallow. From this time forth, and for
the next twelve months, the country was full of engineers, or of men who were so called. I
do not say this in disparagement; but the engineers were like the yellow meal. When there is
an immense demand, and that a suddenly immense demand, for any article, it is seldom easy to
get it very good. In those days men became engineers with a short amount of apprenticeship,
but, as a rule, they did not do their work badly. In such days as those, men, if they be men
at all, will put their shoulders to the wheel.

The engineer was driven up to where they were standing, and he jumped off the car among the
men who were to work under him with rather a pretentious air. He had not observed, or probably
had not known, Herbert Fitzgerald. He was a very young fellow, still under one-and-twenty,
beardless, light-haired, blue-eyed, and fresh from England. "And what hill is this?" said he
to the driver.

"Ballydahan, shure, yer honer. That last war Connick-a-coppul, and that other, the big un intirely,
where the crass road takes away to Buttevant, that was Glounthauneroughtymore. Faix and that's
been the murthering hill for cattle since first I knew it. Bedad yer honer 'll make it smooth
as a bowling-green."

"Ballydahan," said the young man, taking a paper out of his pocket and looking up the names
in his list, "I've got it. There should be thirty-seven of them here."

"Shure an' here we are these siven hours," said our friend of the hoe, "and mighty cowld we are."

"Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady," called out the engineer, managing thoroughly to Anglicise the
pronunciation of the names, though they were not Celtically composite to any great degree.

"Yez, we's here," said Thady, coming forward. And then Herbert came up and introduced himself,
and the young engineer took off his hat. "I came away from Mallow before eight," said he apologetically;
"but I have four of these places to look after, and when one gets to one of them it is impossible
to get away again. There was one place where I was kept two hours before I could get one of
the men to understand what they were to do. What is it you call that big hill?"

"Glounthauneroughtymore, yer honer," said the driver, to whom the name was as easy and familiar
as his own.

"And you are going to set these men to work now?" said Herbert.

"Well, I don't suppose they'll do much to-day, Mr. Fitzgerald. But I must try and explain to
the head men how they are to begin. They have none of them any tools, you see." And then he
called out again. "Thady Molloy and Shawn Brady."

"We's here," said Thady again; "we did not exactly know whether yer honer'd be afther beginning
at the top or the botthom. That's all that war staying us."

"Never fear," said Shawn, "but we'll have ould Ballydahan level in less than no time. We're
the boys that can do it, fair and aisy."

It appeared to Herbert that the young engineer seemed to be rather bewildered by the job of
work before him, and therefore he rode on, not stopping to embarrass him by any inspection
of his work. In process of time no doubt so much of the top of Ballydahan Hill was carried
to the bottom as made the whole road altogether impassable for many months. But the great object
was gained; the men were fed, and were not fed by charity. What did it matter, that the springs
of every conveyance in the county Cork were shattered by the process, and that the works resulted
in myriads of wheelbarrows?

And then, as he rode on towards Gortnaclough, Herbert was overtaken by his friend the parson,
who was also going to the meeting of the relief committee. "You have not seen the men at Ballydahan
Hill, have you?" said Herbert.

Mr. Townsend explained that he had not seen them. His road had struck on to that on which they
now were not far from the top of the hill. "But I knew they were to be there this morning,"
said Mr. Townsend.

"They have sent quite a lad of a fellow to show them how to work," said Herbert. "I fear we
shall all come to grief with these road-cuttings."

"For heaven's sake don't say that at the meeting," said Mr. Townsend, "or you'll be playing
the priests' game out and out. Father Barney has done all in his power to prevent the works."

"But what if Father Barney be right?" said Herbert.

"But he's not right," said the parson, energetically. "He's altogether wrong. I never knew
one of them right in my life yet in anything. How can they be right?"

"But I think you are mixing up road-making and Church doctrine, Mr. Townsend."

"I hope I may never be in danger of mixing up God and the devil. You cannot touch pitch and
not be defiled. Remember that, Herbert Fitzgerald."

"I will remember nothing of the kind," said Herbert. "Am I to set myself up as a judge and
say that this is pitch and that is pitch? Do you remember St. Peter on the housetop? Was not
he afraid of what was unclean?"

"The meaning of that was that he was to convert the Gentiles, and not give way to their errors.
He was to contend with them and not give way an inch till he had driven them from their idolatry."
Mr. Townsend had been specially primed by his wife that morning with vigorous hostility against
Father Barney, and was grieved to his heart at finding that his young friend was prepared to
take the priest's part in anything. In this matter of the roads Mr. Townsend was doubtless
right, but hardly on the score of the arguments assigned by him.

"I don't mean to say that there should be no road-making," said Herbert, after a pause. "The
general opinion seems to be that we can't do better. I only say that we shall come to grief
about it. Those poor fellows there have as much idea of cutting down a hill as I have; and
it seems to me that the young lad whom I left with them has not much more."

"They'll learn all in good time."

"Let us hope it will be in good time."

"If we once let them have the idea that we are to feed them in idleness," said Mr. Townsend,
"they will want to go on for ever in the same way. And then, when they receive such immense
sums in money wages, the priests will be sure to get their share. If the matter had been left
to me, I would have paid the men in meal. I would never have given them money. They should
have worked and got their food. The priest will get a penny out of every shilling; you'll see
else." And so the matter was discussed between them as they went along to Gortnaclough.

When they reached the room in which the committee was held they found Mr. Somers already in
the chair. Priest M'Carthy was there also, with his coadjutor, the Rev. Columb Creagh--Father
Columb as he was always called; and there was a Mr. O'Leary from Boherbuy, one of the middlemen
as they were formerly named--though, by the way, I never knew that word to be current in Ireland;
it is familiar to all, and was I suppose common some few years since, but I never heard the
peasants calling such persons by that title. He was one of those with whom the present times
were likely to go very hard. He was not a bad man, unless in so far as this, that he had no
idea of owing any duty to others beyond himself and his family. His doctrine at present amounted
to this, that if you left the people alone and gave them no false hopes, they would contrive
to live somehow. He believed in a good deal, but he had no belief whatever in starvation,--none
as yet. It was probable enough that some belief in this might come to him now before long.
There were also one or two others; men who had some stake in the country, but men who hadn't
a tithe of the interest possessed by Sir Thomas Fitzgerald.

Mr. Townsend again went through the ceremony of shaking hands with his reverend brethren, and,
on this occasion, did not seem to be much the worse for it. Indeed, in looking at the two men
cursorily, a stranger might have said that the condescension was all on the other side. Mr.
M'Carthy was dressed quite smartly. His black clothes were spruce and glossy; his gloves, of
which he still kept on one and showed the other, were quite new; he was clean shaven, and altogether
he had a shiny, bright, ebon appearance about him that quite did a credit to his side of the
Church. But our friend the parson was discreditably shabby. His clothes were all brown, his
white neck-tie could hardly have been clean during the last forty-eight hours, and was tied
in a knot, which had worked itself nearly round to his ear as he had sat sideways on the car;
his boots were ugly and badly brushed, and his hat was very little better than some of those
worn by the workmen--so called--at Ballydahan Hill. But nevertheless, on looking accurately
into the faces of both, one might see which man was the better nurtured and the better born.
That operation with the sow's ear is, one may say, seldom successful with the first generation.

"A beautiful morning, this," said the coadjutor, addressing Herbert Fitzgerald, with a very
mild voice and an unutterable look of friendship; as though he might have said, "Here we are
in a boat together, and of course we are all very fond of each other." To tell the truth, Father
Columb was not a nice-looking young man. He was red-haired, slightly marked with the small-pox,
and had a low forehead and cunning eyes.

"Yes, it is a nice morning," said Herbert. "We don't expect anybody else here, do we, Somers?"

"At any rate we won't wait," said Somers. So he sat down in the arm-chair, and they all went
to work.

"I am afraid, Mr. Somers," said Mr. M'Carthy from the other end of the table, where he had
constituted himself a sort of deputy chairman, "I am afraid we are going on a wrong tack."
The priest had shuffled away his chair as he began to speak, and was now standing with his
hands upon the table. It is singular how strong a propensity some men have to get upon their
legs in this way.

"How so, Mr. M'Carthy?" said Somers. "But shan't we be all more comfortable if we keep our
chairs? There'll be less ceremony, won't there, Mr. Townsend?"

"Oh! certainly," said Townsend.

"Less liable to interruption, perhaps, on our legs," said Father Columb, smiling blandly.

But Mr. M'Carthy was far too wise to fight the question, so he sat down. "Just as you like,"
said he; "I can talk any way, sitting or standing, walking or riding; it's all one to me. But
I'll tell you how we are on the wrong tack. We shall never get these men to work in gangs on
the road. Never. They have not been accustomed to be driven like droves of sheep."

"But droves of sheep don't work on the road," said Mr. Townsend.

"I know that, Mr. Townsend," continued Mr. M'Carthy. "I am quite well aware of that. But droves
of sheep are driven, and these men won't bear it."

"'Deed an' they won't," said Father Columb, having altogether laid aside his bland smile now
that the time had come, as he thought, to speak up for the people. "They may bear it in England,
but they won't here." And the sternness of his eye was almost invincible.

"If they are so foolish, they must be taught better manners," said Mr. Townsend. "But you'll
find they'll work just as other men do-- look at the navvies."

"And look at the navvies' wages," said Father Columb.

"Besides, the navvies only go if they like it," said the parish priest.

"And these men need not go unless they like it," said Mr. Somers. "Only with this proviso,
that if they cannot manage for themselves they must fall into our way of managing for them."

"What I say, is this," said Mr. O'Leary. "Let 'em manage for 'emselves. God bless my sowl!
Why, we shall be skinned alive if we have to pay all this money back to Government. If Government
chooses to squander thousands in this way, Government should bear the brunt. That's what I
say." Eventually, Government, that is, the whole nation, did bear the brunt. But it would not
have been very wise to promise this at the time.

"But we need hardly debate all that at the present moment," said Mr. Somers. "That matter of
the roads has already been decided for us, and we can't alter it if we would."

"Then we may as well shut up shop," said Mr. O'Leary.

"It's all very aisy to talk in that way," said Father Columb; "but the Government, as you call
it, can't make men work. It can't force eight millions of the finest pisantry on God's earth--,"
and Father Columb was, by degrees, pushing away the seat from under him, when he was cruelly
and ruthlessly stopped by his own parish priest.

"I beg your pardon for a moment, Creagh," said he; "but perhaps we are getting a little out
of the track. What Mr. Somers says is very true. If these men won't work on the road--and I
don't think they will--the responsibility is not on us. That matter has been decided for us."

"Men will sooner work anywhere than starve," said Mr. Townsend.

"Some men will," said Father Columb, with a great deal of meaning in his tone. What he intended
to convey was this--that Protestants, no doubt, would do so, under the dominion of the flesh;
but that Roman Catholics, being under the dominion of the Spirit, would perish first.

"At any rate we must try," said Father M'Carthy.

"Exactly," said Mr. Somers; "and what we have now to do is to see how we may best enable these
workers to live on their wages, and how those others are to live, who, when all is done, will
get no wages."

"I think we had better turn shopkeepers ourselves, and open stores for them everywhere," said
Herbert. "That is what we are doing already at Berryhill."

"And import our own corn," said the parson.

"And where are we to get the money?" said the priest.

"And why are we to ruin the merchants?" said O'Leary, whose brother was in the flour-trade,
in Cork.

"And shut up all the small shopkeepers," said Father Columb, whose mother was established in
that line in the neighbourhood of Castleisland.

"We could not do it," said Somers. "The demand upon us would be so great, that we should certainly
break down. And then where would we be?"

"But for a time, Somers," pleaded Herbert.

"For a time we may do something in that way, till other means present themselves. But we must
refuse all out-door relief. They who cannot or do not bring money must go into the workhouses."

"You will not get houses in county Cork sufficient to hold them," said Father Bernard. And
so the debate went on, not altogether without some sparks of wisdom, with many sparks also
of eager benevolence, and some few passing clouds of fuliginous self-interest. And then lists
were produced, with the names on them of all who were supposed to be in want--which were about
to become, before long, lists of the whole population of the country. And at last it was decided
among them, that in their district nothing should be absolutely given away, except to old women
and widows,--which kind-hearted clause was speedily neutralised by women becoming widows while
their husbands were still living; and it was decided also, that as long as their money lasted,
the soup-kitchen at Berryhill should be kept open, and mill kept going, and the little shop
maintained, so that to some extent a check might be maintained on the prices of the hucksters.
And in this way they got through their work, not perhaps with the sagacity of Solomon, but
as I have said, with an average amount of wisdom, as will always be the case when men set about
their tasks with true hearts and honest minds.

And then, when they parted, the two clergy-men of the parish shook hands with each other again,
having perhaps less animosity against each other than they had ever felt before. There had
been a joke or two over the table, at which both had laughed. The priest had wisely shown some
deference to the parson, and the parson had immediately returned it, by referring some question
to the priest. How often does it not happen that when we come across those whom we have hated
and avoided all our lives, we find that they are not quite so bad as we had thought? That old
gentleman of whom we wot is never so black as he has been painted.

The work of the committee took them nearly the whole day, so that they did not separate till
it was nearly dark. When they did so, Somers and Herbert Fitzgerald rode home together.

"I always live in mortal fear," said Herbert, "that Townsend and the priests will break out
into warfare."

"As they haven't done it yet, they won't do it now," said Somers. "M'Carthy is not without
sense, and Townsend, queer and intolerant as he is, has good feeling. If he and Father Columb
were left together, I don't know what might happen. Mr. Prendergast is to be with you the day
after to-morrow, is he not?"

"So I understood my father to say."

"Will you let me give you a bit of advice. Herbert?"

"Certainly."

"Then don't be in the house much on the day after he comes. He'll arrive, probably, to dinner."

"I suppose he will."

"If so, leave Castle Richmond after breakfast the next morning, and do not return till near
dinner-time. It may be that your father will not wish you to be near him. Whatever this matter
may be, you may be sure that you will know it before Mr. Prendergast leaves the country. I
am very glad that he is coming."

Herbert promised that he would take this advice, and he thought himself that among other things
he might go over to inspect that Clady boiler, and of course call at Desmond Court on his way.
And then, when they got near to Castle Richmond, they parted company, Mr. Somers stopping at
his own place, and Herbert riding home alone.

CHAPTER XIX

THE FRIEND OF THE FAMILY

On the day named by Herbert, and only an hour before dinner, Mr. Prendergast did arrive at
Castle Richmond. The Great Southern and Western Railway was not then open as far as Mallow,
and the journey from Dublin was long and tedious. "I'll see him of course," said Sir Thomas
to Lady Fitzgerald; "but I'll put off this business till to-morrow." This he said in a tone
of distress and agony, which showed too plainly how he dreaded the work which he had before
him. "But you'll come in to dinner," Lady Fitzgerald had said. "No," he answered, "not to day,
love; I have to think about this." And he put his hand up to his head, as though this thinking
about it had already been too much for him.

Mr. Prendergast was a man over sixty years of age, being, in fact, considerably senior to Sir
Thomas himself. But no one would have dreamed of calling Mr. Prendergast an old man. He was
short of stature, well made, and in good proportion; he was wiry, strong, and almost robust.
He walked as though in putting his foot to the earth he always wished to proclaim that he was
afraid of no man and no thing. His hair was grizzled, and his whiskers were grey, and round
about his mouth his face was wrinkled; but with him even these things hardly seemed to be signs
of old age. He was said by many who knew him to be a stern man, and there was that in his face
which seemed to warrant such a character. But he had also the reputation of being a very just
man; and those who knew him best could tell tales of him which proved that his sternness was
at any rate compatible with a wide benevolence. He was a man who himself had known but little
mental suffering, and who owned no mental weakness; and it might be, therefore, that he was
impatient of such weakness in others. To chance acquaintances his manners were not soft, or
perhaps palatable; but to his old friends his very brusqueness was pleasing. He was a bachelor,
well off in the world, and, to a certain extent, fond of society. He was a solicitor by profession,
having his office somewhere in the purlieus of Lincoln's Inn, and living in an old-fashioned
house not far distant from that classic spot. I have said that he owned no mental weakness.
When I say further that he was slightly afflicted with personal vanity, and thought a good
deal about the set of his hair, the shape of his coat, the fit of his boots, the whiteness
of his hands, and the external trim of his umbrella, perhaps I may be considered to have contradicted
myself. But such was the case. He was a handsome man too, with clear, bright, gray eyes, a
well-defined nose, and expressive mouth--of which the lips, however, were somewhat too thin.
No man with thin lips ever seems to me to be genially human at all points.

Such was Mr. Prendergast; and my readers will, I trust, feel for Sir Thomas, and pity him,
in that he was about to place his wounds in the hands of so ruthless a surgeon. But a surgeon,
to be of use, should be ruthless in one sense. He should have the power of cutting and cauterizing,
of phlebotomy and bone-handling without effect on his own nerves. This power Mr. Prendergast
possessed, and therefore it may be said that Sir Thomas had chosen his surgeon judiciously.
None of the Castle Richmond family, except Sir Thomas himself, had ever seen this gentleman,
nor had Sir Thomas often come across him of late years. But he was what we in England call
an old family friend; and I doubt whether we in England have any more valuable English characteristic
than that of having old family friends. Old family feuds are not common with us now-a-days--not
so common as with some other people. Sons who now hated their father's enemies would have but
a bad chance before a commission of lunacy; but an old family friend is supposed to stick to
one from generation to generation.

On his arrival at Castle Richmond he was taken in to Sir Thomas before dinner. "You find me
but in a poor state," said Sir Thomas, shaking in his fear of what was before him, as the poor
wretch does before an iron-wristed dentist who is about to operate. "You will be better soon,"
Mr. Prendergast had said, as a man always does say under such circumstances. What other remark
was possible to him? "Sir Thomas thinks that he had better not trouble you with business to-night,"
said Lady Fitzgerald. To this also Mr. Prendergast agreed willingly. "We shall both of us be
fresher to-morrow, after breakfast," he remarked, as if any time made any difference to him,--as
though he were not always fresh, and ready for any work that might turn up.

That evening was not passed very pleasantly by the family at Castle Richmond. To all of them
Mr. Prendergast was absolutely a stranger, and was hardly the man to ingratiate himself with
strangers at the first interview. And then, too, they were all somewhat afraid of him. He had
come down thither on some business which was to them altogether mysterious, and, as far as
they knew, he, and he alone, was to be intrusted with the mystery. He of course said nothing
to them on the subject, but he looked in their eyes as though he were conscious of being replete
with secret importance; and on this very account they were afraid of him. And then poor Lady
Fitzgerald, though she bore up against the weight of her misery better than did her husband,
was herself very wretched. She could not bring herself to believe that all this would end in
nothing; that Mr. Prendergast would put everything right, and that after his departure they
would go on as happily as ever. This was the doctrine of the younger part of the family, who
would not think that anything was radically wrong. But Lady Fitzgerald had always at her heart
the memory of her early marriage troubles, and she feared greatly, though she feared she knew
not what.

Herbert Fitzgerald and Aunt Letty did endeavour to keep up some conversation with Mr. Prendergast;
and the Irish famine was, of course, the subject. But this did not go on pleasantly. Mr. Prendergast
was desirous of information; but the statements which were made to him one moment by young
Fitzgerald were contradicted in the next by his aunt. He would declare that the better educated
of the Roman Catholics were prepared to do their duty by their country, whereas Aunt Letty
would consider herself bound both by party feeling and religious duty, to prove that the Roman
Catholics were bad in everything.

"Oh, Herbert, to hear you say so!" she exclaimed at one time, "it makes me tremble in my shoes.
It is dreadful to think that those people should have got such a hold over you."

"I really think that the Roman Catholic priests are liberal in their ideas and moral in their
conduct." This was the speech which had made Aunt Letty tremble in her shoes, and it may, therefore,
be conceived that Mr. Prendergast did not find himself able to form any firm opinion from the
statements then made to him. Instead of doing so, he set them both down as "Wild Irish," whom
it would be insane to trust, and of whom it was absurd to make inquiries. It may, however,
be possibly the case that Mr. Prendergast himself had his own prejudices as well as Aunt Letty
and Herbert Fitzgerald.

On the following morning they were still more mute at breakfast. The time was coming in which
Mr. Prendergast was to go to work and even he, gifted though he was with iron nerves, began
to feel somewhat unpleasantly the nature of the task which he had undertaken. Lady Fitzgerald
did not appear at all. Indeed during the whole of breakfast-time and up to the moment at which
Mr. Prendergast was summoned, she was sitting with her husband, holding his hand in hers, and
looking tenderly but painfully into his face. She so sat with him for above an hour, but he
spoke to her no word of this revelation he was about to make. Herbert and the girls, and even
Aunt Letty, sat solemn and silent, as though it was known by them all that something dreadful
was to be said and done. At last Herbert, who had left the room, returned to it. "My father
will see you now, Mr. Prendergast, if you will step up to him," said he; and then he ran to
his mother and told her that he should leave the house till dinner-time.

"But if he sends for you, Herbert, should you not be in the way?"

"It is more likely that he should send for you; and, were I to remain here, I should be going
into his room when he did not want me." And then he mounted his horse and rode off.

Mr. Prendergast, with serious air and slow steps, and solemn resolve to do what he had to do
at any rate with justice, walked away from the dining-room to the baronet's study. The task
of an old friend is not always a pleasant one, and Mr. Prendergast felt that it was not so
at the present moment. "Be gentle with him," said Aunt Letty, catching hold of his arm as he
went through the passage. He merely moved his head twice, in token of assent, and then passed
on into the room.

The reader will have learnt by this time, with tolerable accuracy, what was the nature of the
revelation which Sir Thomas was called upon to make, and he will be tolerably certain as to
the advice which Mr. Prendergast, as an honest man, would give. In that respect there was no
difficulty. The laws of meum and tuum are sufficiently clear if a man will open his eyes to
look at them. In this case they were altogether clear. These broad acres of Castle Richmond
did belong to Sir Thomas--for his life. But after his death they could not belong to his son
Herbert. It was a matter which admitted of no doubt. No question as to whether the Molletts
would or would not hold their tongue could bear upon it in the least. Justice in this case
must be done, even though the heavens should fall. It was sad and piteous. Stern and hard as
was the man who pronounced this doom, nevertheless the salt tear collected in his eyes and
blinded him as he looked upon the anguish which his judgment had occasioned.

Yes, Herbert must be told that he in the world was nobody; that he must earn his bread, and
set about doing so right soon. Who could say that his father's life was worth a twelve-month's
purchase? He must be told that he was nobody in the world, and instructed also to tell her
whom he loved, an Earl's daughter, the same tidings; that he was nobody, that he would come
to possess no property, and that in the law's eyes did not possess even a name. How would his
young heart suffice for the endurance of so terrible a calamity? And those pretty girls, so
softly brought up--so tenderly nurtured; it must be explained to them too that they must no
longer be proud of their father's lineage and their mother's fame. And that other Fitzgerald
must be summoned and told of all this; he on whom they had looked down, whom the young heir
had robbed of his love, whom they had cast out from among them as unworthy. Notice must be
sent to him that he was the heir to Castle Richmond, that he would reign as the future baronet
in those gracious chambers. It was he who could now make a great county lady of the daughter
of the countess.

"It will be very soon, very soon," sobbed forth the poor victim. And indeed, to look at him
one might say that it would be soon. There were moments when Mr. Prendergast hardly thought
that he would live through that frightful day.

But all of which we have yet spoken hardly operated upon the baronet's mind in creating that
stupor of sorrow which now weighed him to the earth. It was none of these things that utterly
broke him down and crushed him like a mangled reed. He had hardly mind left to remember his
children. It was for the wife of his bosom that he sorrowed.

The wife of his bosom! He persisted in so calling her through the whole interview, and, even
in his weakness, obliged the strong man before him so to name her also. She was his wife before
God, and should be his to the end. Ah! for how short a time was that! "Is she to leave me?"
he once said, turning to his friend, with his hands clasped together, praying that some mercy
might be shown to his wretchedness. "Is she to leave me?" he repeated, and then sank on his
knees upon the floor.

And how was Mr. Prendergast to answer this question? How was he to decide whether or no this
man and woman might still live together as husband and wife? Oh, my reader, think of it if
you can, and put yourself for a moment in the place of that old family friend! "Tell me, tell
me; is she to leave me?" repeated the poor victim of all this misery.

The sternness and justice of the man at last gave way. "No," said he, "that cannot, I should
think, be necessary. They cannot demand that." "But you won't desert me?" said Sir Thomas,
when this crumb of comfort was handed to him. And he remembered as he spoke, the bloodshot
eyes of the miscreant who had dared to tell him that the wife of his bosom might be legally
torn from him by the hands of another man. "You won't desert me?" said Sir Thomas; meaning
by that, to bind his friend to an obligation that, at any rate, his wife should not be taken
from him.

"No," said Mr. Prendergast, "I will not desert you; certainly not that; certainly not that."
Just then it was in his heart to promise almost anything that he was asked. Who could have
refused such solace as this to a man so terribly overburthened?

But there was another point of view at which Mr. Prendergast had looked from the commencement,
but at which he could not get Sir Thomas to look at all. It certainly was necessary that the
whole truth in this matter should be made known and declared openly. This fair inheritance
must go to the right owner and not to the wrong. Though the affliction on Sir Thomas was very
heavy, and would be equally so on all the family, he would not on that account, for the sake
of saving him and them from that affliction, be justified in robbing another person of what
was legally and actually that other person's property. It was a matter of astonishment to Mr.
Prendergast that a conscientious man, as Sir Thomas certainly was, should have been able to
look at the matter in any other light; that he should ever have brought himself to have dealings
in the matter with Mr. Mollett. Justice in the case was clear, and the truth must be declared.
But then they must take good care to find out absolutely what the truth was. Having heard all
that Sir Thomas had to say, and having sifted all that he did hear, Mr. Prendergast thoroughly
believed, in his heart of hearts, that that wretched miscreant was the actual and true husband
of the poor lady whom he would have to see. But it was necessary that this should be proved.
Castle Richmond for the family, and all earthly peace of mind for that unfortunate lady and
gentleman, were not to be given up on the bare word of a scheming scoundrel, for whom no crime
would be too black, and no cruelty too monstrous. The proofs must be looked into before anything
was done, and they must be looked into before anything was said--to Lady Fitzgerald. We surely
may give her that name as yet.

But then, how were they to get at the proofs--at the proofs one way or the other? That Mollett
himself had his marriage certificate Sir Thomas declared. That evidence had been brought home
to his own mind of the identity of the man--though what was the nature of that evidence he
could not now describe--as to that he was quite explicit. Indeed, as I have said above, he
almost refused to consider the question as admitting of a doubt. That Mollett was the man to
whom his wife had been married he thoroughly believed; and, to tell the truth, Mr. Prendergast
was afraid to urge him to look for much comfort in this direction. The whole manner of the
man, Mollett, had been such as to show that he himself was sure of his ground. Mr. Prendergast
could hardly doubt that he was the man, although he felt himself bound to remark that nothing
should be said to Lady Fitzgerald till inquiry had been made. Mr. Mollett himself would be
at Castle Richmond on the next day but one, in accordance with the appointment made by himself;
and, if necessary, he could be kept in custody till he had been identified as being the man,
or as not being the man, who had married Miss Wainwright.

"There is nobody living with you now who knew Lady Fitzgerald at ----?" asked Mr. Prendergast.

"Yes," said Sir Thomas, "there is one maid servant." And then he explained how Mrs. Jones had
lived with his wife before her first marriage, during those few months in which she had been
called Mrs. Talbot, and from that day even up to the present hour.

"Then she must have known this man," said Mr. Prendergast.

But Sir Thomas was not in a frame of mind at all suited to the sifting of evidence. He did
not care to say anything about Mrs. Jones; he got no crumb of comfort out of that view of the
matter. Things had come out, unwittingly for the most part, in his conversations with Mollett,
which made him quite certain as to the truth of the main part of the story. All those Dorsetshire
localities were well known to the man, the bearings of the house, the circumstances of Mr.
Wainwright's parsonage, the whole history of those months; so that on this subject Sir Thomas
had no doubt; and we may as well know at once that there was no room for doubt. Our friend
of the Kanturk Hotel, South Main Street, Cork, was the man who, thirty years before, had married
the child-daughter of the Dorsetshire parson.

Mr. Prendergast, however, stood awhile before the fire balancing the evidence. "The woman must
have known him," he said to himself, "and surely she could tell us whether he be like the man.
And Lady Fitzgerald herself would know; but then, who would have the hardness of heart to ask
Lady Fitzgerald to confront that man?"

He remained with Sir Thomas that day for hours. The long winter evening had begun to make itself
felt by its increasing gloom before he left him. Wine and biscuits were sent in to them, but
neither of them even noticed the man who brought them. Twice in the day, however, Mr. Prendergast
gave the baronet a glass of sherry, which the latter swallowed unconsciously; and then, at
about four, the lawyer prepared to take his leave. "I will see you early to-morrow," said he,
"immediately after breakfast."

"You are going then?" said Sir Thomas, who greatly dreaded being left alone.

"Not away, you know," said Mr. Prendergast. "I am not going to leave the house."

"No," said Sir Thomas; "no, of course not, but--" and then he paused.

"Eh!" said Mr. Prendergast, "you were saying something."

"They will be coming in to me now," said Sir Thomas, wailing like a child; "now, when you are
gone; and what am I to say to them?"

"I would say nothing at present; nothing to-day."

"And my wife?" he asked, again. Through this interview he studiously called her his wife. "Is--is
she to know it?"

"When we are assured that this man's story is true, Sir Thomas, she must know it. That will
probably be very soon,--in a day or two. Till then I think you had better tell her nothing."

"And what shall I say to her?"

"Say nothing. I think it probable that she will not ask any questions. If she does, tell her
that the business between you and me is not yet over. I will tell your son that at present
he had better not speak to you on the subject of my visit here." And then he again took the
hand of the unfortunate gentleman, and having pressed it with more tenderness than seemed to
belong to him, he left the room.

He left the room, and hurried into the hall and out of the house; but as he did so he could
see that he was watched by Lady Fitzgerald. She was on the alert to go to her husband as soon
as she should know that he was alone. Of what then took place between those two we need say
nothing, but will wander forth for a while with Mr. Prendergast into the wide-spreading park.

Mr. Prendergast had been used to hard work all his life, but he had never undergone a day of
severer toil than that through which he had just passed. Nor was it yet over. He had laid it
down in a broad way as his opinion that the whole truth in this matter should be declared to
the world, let the consequences be what they might; and to this opinion Sir Thomas had acceded
without a word of expostulation. But in this was by no means included all that portion of the
burden which now fell upon Mr. Prendergast's shoulders. It would be for him to look into the
evidence, and then it would be for him also--heavy and worst task of all--to break the matter
to Lady Fitzgerald.

As he sauntered out into the park, to wander about for half an hour in the dusk of the evening,
his head was throbbing with pain. The family friend in this instance had certainly been severely
taxed in the exercise of his friendship. And what was he to do next? How was he to conduct
himself that evening in the family circle, knowing, as he so well did, that his coming there
was to bring destruction upon them all? "Be tender to him," Aunt Letty had said, little knowing
how great a call there would be on his tenderness of heart, and how little scope for any tenderness
of purpose.

And was it absolutely necessary that that blow should fall in all its severity? He asked himself
this question over and over again, and always had to acknowledge that it was necessary. There
could be no possible mitigation. The son must be told that he was no son--no son in the eye
of the law; the wife must be told that she was no wife, and the distant relative must be made
acquainted with his golden prospects. The position of Herbert and Clara, and of their promised
marriage, had been explained to him,--and all that too must be shivered into fragments. How
was it possible that the penniless daughter of an earl should give herself in marriage to a
youth, who was not only penniless also, but illegitimate and without a profession? Look at
it in which way he would, it was all misery and ruin, and it had fallen upon him to pronounce
the doom!

He could not himself believe that there was any doubt as to the general truth of Mollett's
statement. He would of course inquire. He would hear what the man had to say and see what he
had to adduce. He would also examine that old servant, and, if necessary--and if possible also--he
would induce Lady Fitzgerald to see the man. But he did feel convinced that on this point there
was no doubt. And then he lifted up his hands in astonishment at the folly which had been committed
by a marriage under such circumstances--as wise men will do in the decline of years, when young
people in the heyday of youth have not been wise. "If they had waited for a term of years,"
he said, "and if he then had not presented himself!" A term of years, such as Jacob served
for Rachel, seems so light an affair to old bachelors looking back at the loves of their young
friends.

And so he walked about in the dusk by no means a happy man, nor in any way satisfied with the
work which was still before him. How was he to face Lady Fitzgerald, or tell her of her fate?
In what words must he describe to Herbert Fitzgerald the position which in future he must fill?
The past had been dreadful to him, and the future would be no less so, in spite of his character
as a hard, stern man.

When he returned to the house he met young Fitzgerald in the hall. "Have you been to your father?"
he asked immediately. Herbert, in a low voice, and with a saddened face, said that he had just
come from his father's room, but Mr. Prendergast at once knew that nothing of the truth had
been told to him. "You found him very weak," said Mr. Prendergast. "Oh, very weak," said Herbert.
"More than weak, utterly prostrate. He was lying on the sofa almost unable to speak. My mother
was with him, and is still there."

"And she?" He was painfully anxious to know whether Sir Thomas had been weak enough--or strong
enough--to tell his wife any of the story which that morning had been told to him.

"She is doing what she can to comfort him," said Herbert; "but it is very hard for her to be
left so utterly in the dark."

Mr. Prendergast was passing on to his room, but at the foot of the stairs Herbert stopped him
again, going up the stairs with him, and almost whispering into his ear--

"I trust, Mr. Prendergast," said he, "that things are not to go on in this way."

"No, no," said Mr. Prendergast.

"Because it is unbearable--unbearable for my mother and for me, and for us all. My mother thinks
that some terrible thing has happened to the property; but if so, why should I not be told?"

"Of anything that really has happened, or does happen, you will be told."

"I don't know whether you are aware of it, Mr. Prendergast, but I am engaged to be married.
And I have been given to understand--that is, I thought that this might take place very soon.
My mother seems to think that your coming here may--may defer it. If so, I think I have a right
to expect that something shall be told to me."

"Certainly you have a right, my dear young friend. But, Mr. Fitzgerald, for your own sake,
for all our sakes, wait patiently for a few hours."

"I have waited patiently."

"Yes, I know it. You have behaved admirably. But I cannot speak to you now. This time the day
after to-morrow, I will tell you everything that I know. But do not speak of this to your mother.
I make this promise only to you." And then he passed on into his bedroom.

With this Herbert was obliged to be content. That evening he again saw his father and mother,
but he told them nothing of what had passed between him and Mr. Prendergast. Lady Fitzgerald
remained in the study with Sir Thomas the whole evening, nay, almost the whole night, and the
slow hours as they passed there were very dreadful. No one came to table but Aunt Letty, Mr.
Prendergast, and Herbert, and between them hardly a word was spoken. The poor girls had found
themselves utterly unable to appear. They were dissolved in tears, and crouching over the fire
in their own room. And the moment that Aunt Letty left the table Mr. Prendergast arose also.
He was suffering, he said, cruelly from headache, and would ask permission to go to his chamber.
It would have been impossible for him to have sat there pretending to sip his wine with Herbert
Fitzgerald.

After this Herbert again went to his father, and then, in the gloom of the evening, he found
Mr. Somers in the office, a little magistrate's room, that was used both by him and by Sir
Thomas. But nothing passed between them. Herbert had nothing to tell. And then at about nine
he also went up to his bedroom. A more melancholy day than that had never shed its gloom upon
Castle Richmond.

CHAPTER XX

TWO WITNESSES

Mr. Prendergast had given himself two days to do all that was to be done, before he told Herbert
Fitzgerald the whole of the family history. He had promised that he would then let him know
all that there was to be known; and he had done so advisedly, considering that it would be
manifestly unjust to leave him in the dark an hour longer than was absolutely necessary. To
expect that Sir Thomas himself should, with his own breath and his own words, make the revelation
either to his son or to his wife, was to expect a manifest impossibility. He would, altogether,
have sank under such an effort, as he had already sank under the effort of telling it to Mr.
Prendergast; nor could it be left to the judgment of Sir Thomas to say when the story should
be told. He had now absolutely abandoned all judgment in the matter. He had placed himself
in the hands of a friend, and he now expected that that friend should do all that there was
to be done. Mr. Prendergast had therefore felt himself justified in making this promise.

But how was he to set about the necessary intervening work, and how pass the intervening hours?
It had already been decided that Mr. Abraham Mollett, when he called, should be shown, as usual,
into the study, but that he should there find himself confronted, not with Sir Thomas, but
with Mr. Prendergast. But there was some doubt whether or no Mr. Mollett would come. It might
be that he had means of ascertaining what strangers arrived at Castle Richmond; and it might
be that he would, under the present circumstances, think it expedient to stay away. This visit,
however, was not to take place till the second day after that on which Mr. Prendergast had
heard the story; and, in the meantime, he had that examination of Mrs. Jones to arrange and
conduct.

The breakfast was again very sad. The girls suggested to their brother that he and Mr. Prendergast
should sit together by themselves in a small breakfast parlour, but to this he would not assent.
Nothing could be more difficult or embarrassing than a conversation between himself and that
gentleman, and he moreover was unwilling to let it be thought in the household that affairs
were going utterly wrong in the family. On this matter he need hardly have disturbed himself,
for the household was fully convinced that things were going very wrong. Maid-servants and
men-servants can read the meaning of heavy brows and sad faces, of long meetings and whispered
consultations, as well as their betters. The two girls, therefore, and Aunt Letty, appeared
at the breakfast-table, but it was as though so many ghosts had assembled round the urn.

Immediately after breakfast, Mr. Prendergast applied to Aunt Letty. "Miss Fitzgerald," said
he, "I think you have an old servant of the name of Jones living here."

"Yes, sure," said Aunt Letty. "She was living with my sister-in-law before her marriage."

"Exactly,--and ever since too, I believe," said Mr. Prendergast, with a lawyer's instinctive
desire to divert suspicion from the true point.

"Oh yes, always; Mrs. Jones is quite one of ourselves."

"Then would you do me the favour to beg Mrs. Jones to oblige me with her company for half an
hour or so? There is an excellent fire in my room, and perhaps Mrs. Jones would not object
to step there."

Aunt Letty promised that Mrs. Jones should be sent, merely suggesting the breakfast-parlour,
instead of the bed-room; and to the breakfast-parlour Mr. Prendergast at once betook himself,
"What can she know about the London property, or about the Irish property?" thought Aunt Letty,
to herself; and then it occurred to her that, perhaps, all these troubles arose from some source
altogether distinct from the property.

In about a quarter of an hour, a knock came to the breakfast-parlour door, and Mrs. Jones,
having been duly summoned, entered the room with a very clean cap and apron, and with a very
low curtsey. "Good morning, Mrs. Jones," said Mr. Prendergast; "pray take a seat;" and he pointed
to an armchair that was comfortably placed near the fire, on the further side of the hearth-rug.
Mrs. Jones sat herself down, crossed her hands on her lap, and looked the very personification
of meek obedience.

And yet there was something about her which seemed to justify the soubriquet of duchess, which
the girls had given to her. She had a certain grandeur about her cap, and a majestical set
about the skirt of her dress, and a rigour in the lines of her mouth, which indicated a habit
of command, and a confidence in her own dignity, which might be supposed to be the very clearest
attribute of duchessdom.

"You have been in this family a long time. I am told, Mrs. Jones," said Mr. Prendergast, using
his pleasantest voice.

"A very long time indeed," said Mrs. Jones.

"And in a very confidential situation, too. I am told by Sir Thomas that pretty nearly the
whole management of the house is left in your hands?"

"Sir Thomas is very kind, sir; Sir Thomas always was very kind,--poor gentleman!"

"Poor gentleman, indeed! you may well say that, Mrs. Jones. This family is in great affliction;
you are no doubt aware of that." And Mr. Prendergast as he spoke got up, went to the door,
and saw that it was firmly closed.

Mrs. Jones acknowledged that she was aware of it. "It was impossible," she said, "for servants
to shut their eyes to things, if they tried ever so."

"Of course, of course," said Mr. Prendergast; "and particularly for a person so attached to
them all as you are."

"Well, Mr. Pendrergrass, I am attached to them, certainly. I have seed 'em all born, sir--that
is, the young ladies and Mr. Herbert. And as for her ladyship, I didn't see her born, in course,
for we're both of an age. But it comes much to the same thing, like."

"Exactly, exactly; you are quite one of themselves, as Sir Thomas's sister said to me just
now. 'Mrs. Jones is quite one of ourselves.' Those were her very words."

"I'm sure I'm much obliged to Miss Letty."

"Well, as I was saying, a great sorrow has come upon them all, Mrs. Jones. Now, will you tell
me this--do you know what it is? Can you guess at all? Do the servants know, down-stairs?"

"I'd rather not be guessing on any such matters, Mr. Pendrergrass. And as for them, if they
were impudent enough for the like, they'd never dare to tell me. Them Irish servants is very
impudent betimes, only they're good at the heart too, and there isn't one'd hurt a dog belonging
to the family."

"I am sure they would not," said Mr. Prendergast. "But you yourself, you don't know what this
trouble is?"

"Not a know," said Mrs. Jones, looking down and smoothing her apron.

"Well, now. Of course you understand, Mrs. Jones--and I must explain this to you to account
for my questions. Of course you understand that I am here as Sir Thomas's friend, to set certain
matters right for him if I can."

"I supposed as much as that, if you please, sir."

"And any questions that I may ask you, I ask altogether on his behalf--on his behalf and on
that of his wife, Lady Fitzgerald. I tell you, that you may have no scruples as to answering me."

"Oh, sir, I have no scruples as to that. But of course, sir, in anything I say I must be guided
by--by--"

"By your own judgment, you were going to say."

"Yes, sir; begging pardon for mentioning such a thing to the likes of you, sir."

"Quite right; quite right. Everybody should use their own judgment in everything they do or
say, more or less. But now, Mrs. Jones, I want to know this: you remember her ladyship's first
marriage, I dare say."

"Yes, sir, I remember it," said Mrs. Jones, shaking her head.

"It was a sad affair, wasn't it? I remember it well, though I was very young then. So were
you too, Mrs. Jones."

"Young enough, surely, sir; and foolish enough too. We were the most of us that, then, sir."

"True, true; so we were. But you remember the man, don't you--her ladyship's husband? Mr. Talbot,
he called himself." And Mr. Prendergast took some trouble to look as though he did not at all
wish to frighten her.

"Yes, I do remember him." This she said after a considerable pause. "But it is a very long
time ago, you know, Mr. Pendrergrass."

"A very long time. But I am sure you do remember. You lived in the house, you know, for some
months."

"Yes, I did. He was my master for three months, or thereabouts; and to tell the truth, I never
got my wages for those three months yet. But that's neither here nor there."

"Do you believe now, Mrs. Jones, that that Mr. Talbot is still alive?" He asked the question
in a very soft voice, and endeavoured not to startle her by his look as he did so. But it was
necessary to his purpose that he should keep his eye upon her. Half the answer to his question
was to be conveyed by the effect on the muscles of her face which that question would produce.
She might perhaps command her voice to tell a falsehood, but be unable to command her face
to support it.

"Believe what, sir?" said she, and the lawyer could immediately perceive that she did believe
and probably knew that that man who had called himself Talbot was still alive.

"Do you believe, Mrs. Jones, that he is alive--her ladyship's former husband, you know?"

The question was so terrible in its nature, that Mrs. Jones absolutely shook under it. Did
she think that that man was still alive? Why, if she thought that what was she to think of
her ladyship? It was in that manner that she would have answered the question, had she known
how; but she did not know; she had therefore to look about her for some other words which might
be equally evasive. Those which she selected served her turn just as well. "Lord bless you,
sir!" she said. It was not that the words were expressive, but the tone was decidedly so. It
was as though she said, "How can that man be alive, who has been dead these twenty years and
more?" But nevertheless, she was giving evidence all the time against the cause of her poor
mistress.

"You think, then, that he is dead?"

"Dead, sir! Oh, laws! why shouldn't he be dead?" And then there was a pause between them for
a couple of minutes.

"Mrs. Jones," said Mr. Prendergast, when he had well considered the matter, "my belief is that
your only object and wish is to do good to your master and mistress."

"Surely, sir, surely; it would be my bounden duty to do them good, if I knew how."

"I will tell you how. Speak out to me the whole truth openly and freely. I am here as the friend
of Sir Thomas and of her ladyship. He has sent to me that I may advise him what to do in a
great trouble that has befallen him, and I cannot give him good advice till I know the truth."

"What good could it do him, poor gentleman, to know that that man is alive?"

"It will do him good to know the truth; to know whether he be alive or no. Until he knows that
he cannot act properly."

"Poor gentleman! poor gentleman!" said Mrs. Jones, putting her handkerchief up to her eyes.

"If you have any information in this matter--and I think you have, Mrs. Jones--or even any
suspicion, it is your duty to tell me."

"Well, sir, I'm sure I don't say against that. You are Sir Thomas's friend to be sure, and
no doubt you know best. And I'm a poor ignorant woman. But to speak candidly, sir, I don't
feel myself free to talk on this matter. I haven't never made nor marred since I've been in
this family, not in such matters as them. What I've seed, I've kep' to myself, and when I've
had my suspecs, as a woman can't but have 'em, I've kep' them to myself also. And saving your
presence, sir, and meaning no offence to a gentleman like you," and here she got up from her
chair and made another curtsey, "I think I'd liefer hold my tongue than say anything more on
this matter." And then she remained standing as though she expected permission to retire.

But there was still another pause, and Mr. Pendergast sat looking at the fire. "Don't you know,
ma'am," at last he said, with almost an angry voice, "that the man was here, in this house,
last week?" And now he turned round at her and looked her full in the face. He did not, however,
know Mrs. Jones. It might be difficult to coax her into free communication, but it was altogether
out of his power to frighten her into it.

"What I knows, sir, I knows," said she, "and what I don't know, I don't know. And if you please,
sir, Lady Fitzgerald--she's my missus; and if I'm to be said anything more to about this here
matter, why, I'd choose that her ladyship should be by." And then she made a little motion
as though to walk towards the door, but Mr. Prendergast managed to stop her.

"But we want to spare Lady Fitzgerald, if we can--at any rate, for a while," said he. "You
would not wish to bring more sorrow upon her, would you?"

"God forbid, Mr. Pendrergrass; and if I could take the sorrow from her heart, I would willingly,
and bear it myself to the grave; for her ladyship has been a good lady to me. But no good never
did come, and never will, of servants talking of their missusses. And so if you please, sir,
I'll make bold to"--and again she made an attempt to reach the door.

But Mr. Prendergast was not yet persuaded that he could not get from the good old woman the
information that he wanted, and he was persuaded that she had the information if only she could
be prevailed upon to impart it. So he again stopped her, though on this occasion she made some
slight attempt to pass him by as she did so. "I don't think," said she, "that there will be
much use in my staying here longer."

"Wait half a minute, Mrs. Jones, just half a minute. If I could only make you understand how
we are all circumstanced here. And I tell you what; though you will trust me with nothing,
I will trust you with everything."

"I don't want no trust, sir; not about all this."

"But listen to me. Sir Thomas has reason to believe--nay, he feels quite sure--that this man
is alive."

"Poor gentleman! poor gentleman!"

"And has been here in this house two or three times within the last month. Sir Thomas is full
sure of this. Now, can you tell me whether the man who did come was this Talbot, or was not?
If you can answer that positively, either one way or the other, you will do a service to the
whole family,--which shall not go unrewarded."

"I don't want no reward sir. Ask me to tattle of them for rewards, after thirty years!" And
she put her apron up to her eyes.

"Well, then, for the good of the family. Can you say positively that the man who came here
to your master was Talbot, or that he was not?"

"Indeed then, sir, I can't say anything positively, nor for that matter, not impositively either."
And then she shut herself up doggedly, and sat with compressed lips, determined to resist all
the lawyer's arts.

Mr. Prendergast did not immediately give up the game, but he failed in learning from her any
more than what she had already told him. He felt confident that she did know the secret of
this man's existence and presence in the south of Ireland, but he was forced to satisfy himself
with that conviction. So he let her go, giving her his hand as she went in token of respect,
and receiving her demure curtsey with his kindest smile. "It may be," thought he to himself,
"that I have not done with her yet."

And then he passed another tedious day,--a day that was terribly tedious to them all. He paid
a visit to Sir Thomas; but as that arrangement about Mollett's visit had been made between
them, it was not necessary that anything should be done or said about the business on hand.
It was understood that further action was to be stayed till that visit was over, and therefore
for the present he had nothing to say to Sir Thomas. He did not see Lady Fitzgerald throughout
the whole day, and it appeared to him, not unnaturally, that she purposely kept out of his
way, anticipating evil from his coming. He took a walk with Herbert and Mr. Somers, and was
driven as far as the soup-kitchen and mill at Berry Hill, inquiring into the state of the poor,
or rather pretending to inquire. It was a pretence with them all, for at the present moment
their minds were intent on other things. And then there was that terrible dinner, that mockery
of a meal, at which the three ladies were constrained to appear, but at which they found it
impossible to eat or to speak. Mr. Somers had been asked to join the party, so that the scene
after dinner might be less painful; but even he felt that he could not talk as was his ordinary
wont. Horrible suspicions of the truth had gradually come upon him; and with a suspicion of
such a truth--of such a tragedy in the very household--how could he, or how could any one hold
a conversation? and then at about half-past nine, Mr. Prendergast was again in his bed-room.

On the next morning he was early with Sir Thomas, persuading him to relinquish altogether the
use of his study for that day. On that evening they were to have another interview there, in
which Mr. Prendergast was to tell his friend the result of what had been done. And then he
had to arrange certain manoeuvring with the servants in which he was forced to obtain the assistance
of Herbert. Mollett was to be introduced into the study immediately on his arrival, and this
was to be done in such a manner that Mrs. Jones might assuredly be ignorant of his arrival.
On this duty our old friend Richard was employed, and it was contrived that Mrs. Jones should
be kept upstairs with her mistress. All this was difficult enough, but he could not explain
even to Herbert the reason why such scheming was necessary. Herbert, however, obeyed in silence,
knowing that something dreadful was about to fall on them.

Immediately after breakfast Mr. Prendergast betook himself to the study, and there remained
with his London newspaper in his hand. A dozen times he began a leading article, in which the
law was laid down with great perspicuity and certainty as to the present state of Ireland;
but had the writer been treating of the Sandwich Islands he could not have attracted less of
his attention. He found it impossible to read. On that evening he would have to reveal to Herbert
Fitzgerald what was to be his fate!

Matthew Mollett at his last interview with Sir Thomas had promised to call on this day, and
had been counting the days till that one should arrive on which he might keep his promise.
He was terribly in want of cash, and as we all know Aby had entirely failed in raising the
wind--any immediate fund of wind--on the occasion of his visit to the baronet; and now, when
this morning came, old Mollett was early on the road. Aby had talked of going with him, but
Aby had failed so signally on the occasion of the visit which he did make to Castle Richmond,
that he had been without the moral strength to persist in his purpose.

"Then I shall write to the baronet and go alone to London," said Mollett, pere.

"Bother!" replied Mollett, fils. "You hain't got the cash, governor."

"I've got what'll take me there, my boy, whether you know it or not. And Sir Thomas'll be ready
enough to send me a remittance when I'm once out of this country."

And so Aby had given way,--partly perhaps in terror of Mr. Somers' countenance; and Matthew
Mollett started again in a covered car on that cold journey over the Boggeragh mountains. It
was still mid-winter, being now about the end of February, and the country was colder, and
wetter, and more wretched, and the people in that desolate district more ragged and more starved
than when he had last crossed it. But what were their rags and starvation to him? He was worse
off than they were. They were merely dying, as all men must do. But he was inhabiting a hell
on earth, which no man need do. They came out to him in shoals begging; but they came in vain,
getting nothing from him but a curse through his chattering teeth. What right had they to torment
with their misery one so much more wretched than themselves?

At a little before twelve the covered car was at the front door of Castle Richmond house, and
there was Richard under the porch. On former occasions Mr. Mollett had experienced some little
delay in making his way into the baronet's presence. The servants had looked cold upon him,
and he had felt as though there might be hot ploughshares under his feet at any step which
he took. But now everything seemed to be made easy. Richard took him in tow without a moment's
delay, told him confidentially that Sir Thomas was waiting for him, bade the covered car to
be driven round into the yard with a voice that was uncommonly civil, seeing that it was addressed
to a Cork carman, and then ushered Mr. Mollett through the hall and down the passage without
one moment's delay. Wretched as he had been during his journey--wretched as an infernal spirit--his
hopes were now again elated, and he dreamed of a golden paradise. There was something pleasant
in feeling his mastery over that poor old shattered baronet.

"The gentleman to wait upon Sir Thomas," said Richard, opening the study door; and then Mr.
Mollett senior found himself in the presence of Mr. Prendergast.

Mr. Prendergast was sitting in a high-backed easy-chair, facing the fire, when the announcement
was made, and therefore Mollett still fancied that he was in the presence of Sir Thomas until
he was well into the room and the door was closed upon him; otherwise he might probably have
turned on his heels and bolted. He had had three or four interviews with Mr. Prendergast, having
received different sums of money from that gentleman's hands, and had felt on all such occasions
that he was being looked through and through. Mr. Prendergast had asked but few questions,
never going into the matter of his, Mollett's, pecuniary connexion with Sir Thomas; but there
had always been that in the lawyer's eye which had frightened the miscreant, which had quelled
his bluster as soon as it was assumed, and had told him that he was known for a blackguard
and a scoundrel. And now when this man, with the terrible grey eye, got up from Sir Thomas's
chair, and wheeling round confronted him, looking him full in the face, and frowning on him
as an honest man does frown on an unconvicted rascal--when, I say, this happened to Mr. Mollett
senior, he thoroughly at that moment wished himself back in London. He turned his eye round
to the door, but that was closed behind him. He looked around to see whether Sir Thomas was
there, but no one was in the room with him but Mr. Prendergast. Then he stood still, and as
that gentleman did not address him, he was obliged to speak; the silence was too awful for
him--"Oh, Mr. Prendergast!" said he. "Is that you?"

"Yes, Mr. Mollett, it is I."

"Oh, ah--I suppose you are here about business of your own. I was wishing to see Sir Thomas
about a little business of my own; maybe he's not in the way."

"No, he is not; not exactly. But perhaps, Mr. Mollett, I can do as well. You have known me
before, you know, and you may say to me openly anything you have to say to Sir Thomas."

"Well; I don't know about that, sir; my business is with the baronet--particular." Mr. Mollett,
as he spoke, strained every nerve to do so without appearance of dismay; but his efforts were
altogether ineffectual. He could not bring himself to look Mr. Prendergast in the face for
a moment, or avoid feeling like a dog that dreads being kicked. All manner of fears came upon
him, and he would at the moment have given up all his hopes of money from the Castle Richmond
people to have been free from Mr. Prendergast and his influence. And yet Mollett was not a
coward in the ordinary sense of the word. Indeed he had been very daring in the whole management
of this affair. But then a course of crime makes such violent demands on a man's courage. Let
any one think of the difference of attacking a thief, and being attacked as a thief! We are
apt to call bad men cowards without much consideration. Mr. Mollett was not without pluck,
but his pluck was now quelled. The circumstances were too strong against him.

"Listen to me, Mr. Mollett--; and, look here, sir; never mind turning to the door; you can't
go now till you and I have had some conversation. You may make up your mind to this: you will
never see Sir Thomas Fitzgerald again--unless indeed he should be in the witness-box when you
are standing in the dock."

"Mr. Prendergast; sir!"

"Well. Have you any reason to give why you should not be put in the dock? How much money have
you got from Sir Thomas during the last two years by means of those threats which you have
been using? You were well aware when you set about this business that you were committing felony;
and have probably felt tolerably sure at times that you would some day be brought up short.
That day has come."

Mr. Prendergast had made up his mind that nothing could be gained by soft usage with Mr. Mollett.
Indeed nothing could be gained in any way, by any usage, unless it could be shown that Mollett
and Talbot were not the same person. He could afford therefore to tell the scoundrel that he
was a scoundrel, and to declare against him--war to the knife. The more that Mollett trembled,
the more abject he became, the easier would be the task Mr. Prendergast now had in hand. "Well,
sir," he continued, "are you going to tell me what business has brought you here to-day?"

But Mr. Mollett, though he did shake in his shoes, did not look at the matter exactly in the
same light. He could not believe that Sir Thomas would himself throw up the game on any consideration,
or that Mr. Prendergast as his friend would throw it up on his behalf. He, Mollett, had a strong
feeling that he could have continued to deal easily with Sir Thomas, and that it might be very
hard to deal at all with Mr. Prendergast; but nevertheless the game was still open. Mr. Prendergast
would probably distrust the fact of his being the lady's husband, and it would be for him therefore
to use the indubitable proofs of the facts that were in his possession.

"Sir Thomas knows very well what I've come about," he began, slowly; "and if he's told you,
why you know too; and in that case--"

But what might or might not happen in that case Mr. Mollett had not now an opportunity of explaining,
for the door opened and Mrs. Jones entered the room.

"When that man comes this morning," Mr. Prendergast had said to Herbert, "I must get you to
induce Mrs. Jones to come to us in the study as soon as may be." He had not at all explained
to Herbert why this was necessary, nor had he been at any pains to prevent the young heir from
thinking and feeling that some terrible mystery hung over the house. There was a terrible mystery--which
indeed would be more terrible still when it ceased to be mysterious. He therefore quietly explained
to Herbert what he desired to have done, and Herbert, awaiting the promised communication of
that evening, quietly did as he was bid.

"You must go down to him, Jones," he had said.

"But I'd rather not, sir. I was with him yesterday for two mortal hours; and, oh, Mr. Herbert!
it ain't for no good."

But Herbert was inexorable; and Mrs. Jones, feeling herself overcome by the weight of the misfortune
that was oppressing them all, obeyed, and descending to her master's study, knocked at the
door. She knew that Mr. Prendergast was there, and she knew that Sir Thomas was not; but she
did not know that any stranger was in the room with Mr. Prendergast. Mr. Mollett had not heard
the knock, nor, indeed, had Mr. Prendergast; but Mrs. Jones having gone through this ceremony,
opened the door and entered.

"Sir Thomas knows; does he?" said Mr. Prendergast, when Mollett ceased to speak on the woman's
entrance. "Oh, Mrs. Jones, good morning. Here is your old master, Mr. Talbot."

Mollett of course turned round, and found himself confronted with the woman. They stared at
each other for some moments, and then Mollett said, in a low dull voice, "Yes, she knows me;
it was she that lived with her at Tallyho Lodge."

"You remember him now, Mrs. Jones; don't you?" said Mr. Prendergast.

For another moment or two Mrs. Jones stood silent; and then she acknowledged herself overcome,
and felt that the world around her had become too much for her. "Yes," said she, slowly; "I
remembers him," and then sinking into a chair near the door, she put her apron up to her eyes,
and burst into tears.

"No doubt about that; she remembers me well enough," said Mollett, thinking that this was so
much gained on his side. "But there ain't a doubt about the matter at all, Mr. Prendergast.
You look here, and you'll see it all as plain as black and white." And Mr. Mollett dragged
a large pocket-book from his coat, and took out of it certain documents, which he held before
Mr. Prendergast's eyes, still keeping them in his own hand. "Oh, I'm all right; I am," said
Mollett.

"Oh, you are, are you?" said the lawyer, just glancing at the paper, which he would not appear
to heed. "I am glad you think so."

"If there were any doubt about it, she'd know," said he, pointing away up towards the body
of the house. Both Mr. Prendergast and Mrs. Jones understood well who was that she to whom
he alluded.

"You are satisfied, at any rate, Mrs. Jones," said the lawyer. But Mrs. Jones had hidden her
face in her apron, and would not look up. She could not understand why this friend of the family
should push the matter so dreadfully against them. If he would rise from his chair and destroy
that wretch who stood before them, then indeed he might be called a friend!

Mr. Prendergast had now betaken himself to the door, and was standing with his back to it,
and with his hands in his trousers-pockets, close to the chair on which Mrs. Jones was sitting.
He had resolved that he would get that woman's spoken evidence out of her; and he had gotten
it. But now, what was he to do with her next?--with her or with the late Mr. Talbot of Tallyho
Lodge? And having satisfied himself of that fact, which from the commencement he had never
doubted, what could he best do to spare the poor lady who was so terribly implicated in this
man's presence?

"Mrs. Jones," said he, standing over her, and gently touching her shoulder, "I am sorry to
have pained you in this way; but it was necessary that we should know, without a doubt, who
this man is,--and who he was. Truth is always the best, you know. So good a woman as you cannot
but understand that."

"I suppose it is, sir,--I suppose it is," said Mrs. Jones, through her tears, now thoroughly
humbled. The world was pretty nearly at an end, as far as she was concerned. Here, in this
very house of Castle Richmond, in Sir Thomas's own room, was her ladyship's former husband,
acknowledged as such! What further fall of the planet into broken fragments could terrify or
drive her from her course more thoroughly than this? Truth! yes, truth in the abstract, might
be very good. But such a truth as this! how could any one ever say that that was good? Such
was the working of her mind; but she took no trouble to express her thoughts.

"Yes," continued Mr. Prendergast, speaking still in a low voice, with a tone that was almost
tender, "truth is always best. Look at this wretched man here! He would have killed the whole
family--destroyed them one by one--had they consented to assist him in concealing the fact
of his existence. The whole truth will now be known; and it is very dreadful; but it will not
be so dreadful as the want of truth."

"My poor lady! my poor lady!" almost screamed Mrs. Jones from under her apron, wagging her
head, and becoming almost convulsive in her grief.

"Yes, it is very sad. But you will live to acknowledge that even this is better than living
in that man's power."

"I don't know that," said Mollett. "I am not so bad as you'd make me. I don't want to distress
the lady."

"No, not if you are allowed to rob the gentleman till there's not a guinea left for you to
suck at. I know pretty well the extent of the evil that's in you. If we were to kick you from
here to Cork, you'd forgive all that, so that we still allowed you to go on with your trade.
I wonder how much money you've had from him altogether?"

"What does the money signify? What does the money signify?" said Mrs. Jones, still wagging
her head beneath her apron. "Why didn't Sir Thomas go on paying it, and then my lady need know
nothing about it?"

It was clear that Mrs. Jones would not look at the matter in a proper light. As far as she
could see, there was no reason why a fair bargain should not have been made between Mollett
and Sir Thomas,--made and kept on both sides, with mutual convenience. That doing of justice
at the cost of falling heavens was not intelligible to her limited philosophy. Nor did she
bethink herself, that a leech will not give over sucking until it be gorged with blood. Mr.
Prendergast knew that such leeches as Mr. Mollett never leave the skin as long as there is
a drop of blood left within the veins.

Mr. Prendergast was still standing against the door, where he had placed himself to prevent
the unauthorized departure of either Mrs. Jones or Mr. Mollett; but now he was bethinking himself
that he might as well bring this interview to an end. "Mr. Mollett," said he, "you are probably
beginning to understand that you will not get much more money from the Castle Richmond family?"

"I don't want to do any harm to any of them," said Mollett, humbly; "and if I don't make myself
troublesome, I hope Sir Thomas will consider me."

"It is out of your power, sir, to do any further harm to any of them. You don't pretend to
think that after what has passed, you can have any personal authority over that unfortunate lady?"

"My poor mistress! my poor mistress!" sobbed Mrs. Jones.

"You cannot do more injury than you at present have done. No one is now afraid of you; no one
here will ever give you another shilling. When and in what form you will be prosecuted for
inducing Sir Thomas to give you money, I cannot yet tell. Now, you may go: and I strongly advise
you never to show your face here again. If the people about here knew who you are, and what
you are, they would not let you off the property with a whole bone in your skin. Now go, sir.
Do you hear me?"

"Upon my word, Mr. Prendergast, I have not intended any harm!"

"Go, sir!"

"And even now, Mr. Prendergast, it can all be made straight, and I will leave the country altogether,
if you wish it--"

"Go, sir!" shouted Mr. Prendergast. "If you do not move at once, I will ring the bell for the
servants!"

"Then, if misfortune comes upon them, it is your doing, and not mine," said Mollett.

"Oh, Mr. Pendrergrass, if it can be hushed up--" said Mrs. Jones, rising from her chair and
coming up to him with her hands clasped together. "Don't send him away in your anger; don't'ee
now, sir. Think of her ladyship. Do, do, do;" and the woman took hold of his arm, and looked
up into his face with her eyes swimming with tears. Then going to the door she closed it, and
returning again, touched his arm, and again appealed to him. "Think of Mr. Herbert, sir, and
the young ladies! What are they to be called, sir, if this man is to be my lady's husband?
Oh, Mr. Pendrergrass, let him go away, out of the kingdom; do let him go away."

"I'll be off to Australia by the next boat, if you'll only say the word," said Mollett. To
give him his due, he was not at that moment thinking altogether of himself and of what he might
get. The idea of the misery which he had brought on these people did, to a certain measure,
come home to him. And it certainly did come home to him also, that his own position was very
perilous.

"Mrs. Jones," said the lawyer, seeming to pay no attention whatever to Mollett's words, "you
know nothing of such men as that. If I were to take him at his word now, he would turn upon
Sir Thomas again before three weeks were over."

"By---, I would not! By all that is holy, I would not. Mr. Prendergast, do--."

"Mr. Mollett, I will trouble you to walk out of this house. I have nothing further to say to you."

"Oh, very well, sir." And then slowly Mollett took his departure, and finding his covered car
at the door, got into it without saying another word to any of the Castle Richmond family.

"Mrs. Jones," said Mr. Prendergast, as soon as Mollett was gone, "I believe I need not trouble
you any further. Your conduct has done you great honour, and I respect you greatly as an honest
woman and an affectionate friend."

Mrs. Jones could only acknowledge this by loud sobs.

"For the present, if you will take my advice, you will say nothing of this to your mistress."

"No, sir, no; I shall say nothing. Oh dear! oh dear!"

"The whole matter will be known soon, but in the mean time, we may as well remain silent. Good
day to you." And then Mrs. Jones also left the room, and Mr. Prendergast was alone.

CHAPTER XXI

FAIR ARGUMENTS

As Mollett left the house he saw two men walking down the road away from the sweep before the
hall door, and as he passed them he recognized one as the young gentleman of the house. He
also saw that a horse followed behind them, on the grass by the roadside, not led by the hand,
but following with the reins laid loose upon his neck. They took no notice of him or his car,
but allowed him to pass as though he had no concern whatever with the destinies of either of
them. They were Herbert and Owen Fitzgerald.

The reader will perhaps remember the way in which Owen left Desmond Court on the occasion of
his last visit there. It cannot be said that what he had heard had in any way humbled him,
nor indeed had it taught him to think that Clara Desmond looked at him altogether with indifference.
Greatly as she had injured him, he could not bring himself to look upon her as the chief sinner.
It was Lady Desmond who had done it all. It was she who had turned against him because of his
poverty, who had sold her daughter to his rich cousin, and robbed him of the love which he
had won for himself. Or perhaps not of the love--it might be that this was yet his; and if
so, was it not possible that he might beat the countess at her own weapons? Thinking over this,
he felt that it was necessary for him to do something, to take some step; and therefore he
resolved to go boldly to his cousin, and tell him that he regarded Lady Clara Desmond as still
his own.

On this morning, therefore, he had ridden up to the Castle Richmond door. It was now many months
since he had been there, and he was no longer entitled to enter the house on the acknowledged
intimate footing of a cousin. He rode up, and asked the servant with grave ceremony whether
Mr. Herbert Fitzgerald were at home. He would not go in, he said, but if Mr. Herbert were there
he would wait for him at the porch. Herbert at the time was standing in the dining-room, all
alone, gloomily leaning against the mantelpiece. There was nothing for him to do during the
whole of that day but wait for the evening, when the promised revelation would be made to him.
He knew that Mollett and Mrs. Jones were with Mr. Prendergast in the study, but what was the
matter now being investigated between them--that he did not know. And till he knew that, closely
as he was himself concerned, he could meddle with nothing. But it was already past noon and
the evening would soon be there.

In this mood he was interrupted by being told that his cousin Owen was at the door. "He won't
come in at all, Mr. Herbert," Richard had said; for Richard, according to order, was still
waiting about the porch; "but he says that you are to go to him there." And then Herbert, after
considering the matter for a moment, joined his cousin at the front entrance.

"I want to speak to you a few words," said Owen; "but as I hear that Sir Thomas is not well,
I will not go into the house; perhaps you will walk with me as far as the lodge. Never mind
the mare, she will not go astray." And so Herbert got his hat and accompanied him. For the
first hundred yards neither of them said anything. Owen would not speak of Clara till he was
well out of hearing from the house, and at the present moment Herbert had not much inclination
to commence a conversation on any subject.

Owen was the first to speak. "Herbert," said he, "I have been told that you are engaged to
marry Lady Clara Desmond."

"And so I am," said Herbert, feeling very little inclined to admit of any question as to his
privilege in that respect. Things were happening around him which might have--Heaven only knows
what consequence. He did fear--fear with a terrible dread that something might occur which
would shatter the cup of his happiness, and rob him of the fruition of his hopes. But nothing
had occurred as yet.

"And so I am," he said; "it is no wonder that you should have heard it, for it has been kept
no secret. And I also have heard of your visit to Desmond Court. It might have been as well,
I think, if you had stayed away."

"I thought differently," said Owen, frowning blackly. "I thought that the most straight-forward
thing for me was to go there openly, having announced my intention, and tell them both, mother
and daughter, that I hold myself as engaged to Lady Clara, and that I hold her as engaged to me."

"That is absurd nonsense. She cannot be engaged to two persons."

"Anything that interferes with you, you will of course think absurd. I think otherwise. It
is hardly more than twelve months since she and I were walking there together, and then she
promised me her love. I had known her long and well, when you had hardly seen her. I knew her
and loved her; and what is more, she loved me. Remember, it is not I only that say so. She
said it herself, and swore that nothing should change her. I do not believe that anything has
changed her."

"Do you mean to say that at present she cares nothing for me? Owen, you must be mad on this
matter."

"Mad; yes, of course; if I think that any girl can care for me while you are in the way. Strange
as it may appear, I am as mad even as that. There are people who will not sell themselves even
for money and titles. I say again, that I do not believe her to be changed. She has been weak,
and her mother has persuaded her. To her mother, rank and money, titles and property, are everything.
She has sold her daughter, and I have come to ask you, whether, under such circumstances, you
intend to accept the purchase."

In his ordinary mood Herbert Fitzgerald was by no means a quarrelsome man. Indeed we may go
further than that, and say that he was very much the reverse. His mind was argumentative rather
than impulsive, and in all matters he was readier to persuade than overcome. But his ordinary
nature had been changed. It was quite new with him to be nervous and fretful but he was so
at the present moment. He was deeply concerned in the circumstances around him, but yet had
been allowed no voice in them. In this affair that was so peculiarly his own,--this of his
promised bride, he was determined that no voice should be heard but his own; and now, contrary
to his wont, he was ready enough to quarrel with his cousin.

Of Owen we may say, that he was a man prone to fighting of all sorts, and on all occasions.
By fighting I do not mean the old-fashioned resource of putting an end to fighting by the aid
of two pistols, which were harmless in nineteen cases out of twenty. In saying that Owen Fitzgerald
was prone to fight, I do not allude to fighting of that sort; I mean that he was impulsive,
and ever anxious to contend and conquer. To yield was to him ignoble, even though he might
know that he was yielding to the right. To strive for mastery was to him noble, even though
he strove against those who had a right to rule, and strove on behalf of the wrong. Such was
the nature of his mind and spirit; and this nature had impelled him to his present enterprise
at Castle Richmond. But he had gone thither with an unwonted resolve not to be passionate.
He had, he had said to himself, right on his side, and he had purposed to argue it out fairly
with his more cold-blooded cousin. The reader may probably guess the result of these fair arguments
on such a subject. "And I have come to ask you," he said, "whether under such circumstances
you intend to accept the purchase?"

"I will not allow you to speak of Lady Desmond in such language; nor of her daughter," said
Herbert, angrily.

"Ah! but, Herbert, you must allow me; I have been ill used in this matter, and I have a right
to make myself heard."

"Is it I that have ill used you? I did not know before that gentlemen made loud complaints
of such ill usage from the hands of ladies."

"If the ill usage, as you please to call it--"

"It is your own word."

"Very well. If this ill usage came from Clara Desmond herself, I should be the last person
to complain of it; and you would be the last person to whom I should make complaint. But I
feel sure that it is not so. She is acting under the influence of her mother, who has frightened
her into this thing which she is doing. I do not believe that she is false herself."

"I am sure that she is not false. We are quite agreed there, but it is not likely that we should
agree further. To tell you the truth frankly I think you are ill-judged to speak to me on such
a topic."

"Perhaps in that respect you will allow me to think for myself. But I have not yet said that
which I came to say. My belief is that unfair and improper restraint is put upon Clara Desmond,
that she has been induced by her mother to accept your offer in opposition to her own wishes,
and that therefore it is my duty to look upon her as still betrothed to me. I do so regard
her, and shall act under such conviction. The first thing that I do therefore is to call upon
you to relinquish your claim."

"What, to give her up?"

"Yes, to give her up;--to acknowledge that you cannot honestly call upon her to fulfil her
pledge to you."

"The man must be raving," Herbert said.

"Very probably; but remember this, it may be that he will rave to some purpose, when such insolence
will be but of little avail to you. Raving! Yes, I suppose that a man poor as I am must be
mad indeed to set his heart upon anything you may choose to fancy."

"All that is nonsense; Owen, I ask for nothing but my own. I won her love fairly, and I mean
to keep it firmly."

"You may possibly have won her hand, but never her heart. You are rich, and it may be that
even she will condescend to barter her hand; but I doubt it; I altogether doubt it. It is her
mother's doing, as it was plain enough for me to see the other day at Desmond Court; but much
as she may fear her mother, I cannot think that she will go to the altar with a lie in her mouth."

And then they walked on in silence for a few yards. Herbert was anxious to get back to the
house, and was by no means desirous of continuing this conversation with his cousin. He, at
any rate, could get nothing by talking about Lady Clara Desmond to Owen Fitzgerald. He stopped
therefore on the path, and said, that if Owen had nothing further to say, he, Herbert, would
go back to the house.

"Nothing further! Nothing further, if you understand me; but you do not. You are not honest
enough in this matter to understand any purpose but your own."

"I tell you what, Owen: I did not come out here to hear myself abused; and I will not stand
it. According to my idea you had no right whatever to speak to me about Lady Clara Desmond.
But you are my cousin; and therefore I have borne it. It may be as well that we should both
understand that it is once for all. I will not listen to you again on the same subject."

"Oh, you won't. Upon my word you are a very great man! You will tell me next, I suppose, that
this is your demesne, and will warn me off!"

"Even if I did that, I should not be wrong, under such provocation."

"Very well, sir; then I will go off. But remember this, Herbert Fitzgerald, you shall live
to rue the day when you treated me with such insolence. And remember this also, Clara Desmond
is not your wife as yet. Everything now seems happy with you, and fortunate; you have wealth
and a fine house, and a family round you, while I am there all alone, left like a dog, as far
as my own relatives are concerned. But yet it may come to pass that the Earl of Desmond's daughter
will prefer my hand to yours, and my house to your house. They who mount high may chance to
get a fall." And then, having uttered this caution, he turned to his mare, and putting his
hand upon the saddle, jumped into his seat, and pressing her into a gallop, darted off across
the grass.

He had not meant anything specially by his threat; but his heart was sore within him. During
some weeks past, he had become sick of the life that he was leading. He had begun to hate his
own solitary house--his house that was either solitary, or filled with riot and noise. He sighed
for the quiet hours that were once his at Desmond Court, and the privilege of constant entrance
there, which was now denied him. His cousin Herbert had everything at his command--wealth,
station, family ties, society, and all the consideration of high place. Every blessing was
at the feet of the young heir; but every blessing was not enough, unless Clara Desmond was
also added. All this seemed so cruel to him, as he sat alone in his parlour at Hap House, meditating
on his future course of life! And then he would think of Clara's promise, of her assurance
that nothing should frighten her from her pledge. He thought of this as though the words had
been spoken to him only yesterday. He pondered over these things till he hated his cousin Herbert;
and hating him, he vowed that Clara Desmond should not be his wife. "Is he to have everything?"
he would say to himself. "No, by leavens! not everything. He has enough, and may be contented;
but he shall not have all." And now, with similar thoughts running through his mind, he rode
back to Hap House.

And Herbert turned back to Castle Richmond. As he approached the front door, he met Mr. Prendergast,
who was leaving the house; but they had no conversation with each other. Herbert was in hopes
that he might now, at once, be put out of suspense. Mollett was gone; and would it not be better
that the tale should be told? But it was clear that Mr. Prendergast had no intention of lessening
by an hour the interval he had given himself. He merely muttered a few words passing on, and
Herbert went into the house.

And then there was another long, tedious, dull afternoon. Herbert sat with his sisters, but
they had not the heart to talk to each other. At about four a note was brought to him. It was
from Mr. Prendergast, begging Herbert to meet him in Sir Thomas's study at eight. Sir Thomas
had not been there during the day; and now did not intend to leave his own room. They dined
at half-past six; and the appointment was therefore to take place almost immediately after dinner.

"Tell Mr. Prendergast that I will be there," he said to the servant. And so that afternoon
passed away, and the dinner also, very slowly and very sadly.

CHAPTER XXII

THE TELLING OF THE TALE

The dinner passed away as the former dinners had done; and as soon as Aunt Letty got up Mr.
Prendergast also rose, and touching Herbert on his shoulder, whispered into his ear, "You'll
come to me at eight, then." Herbert nodded his head; and when he was alone he looked at his
watch. These slow dinners were not actually very long, and there still remained to him some
three-quarters of an hour for anticipation.

What was to be the nature of this history? That it would affect himself personally in the closest
manner he could not but know. There seemed to be no doubt on the minds of any of them that
the affair was one of money, and his father's money questions were his money questions. Mr.
Prendergast would not have been sent for with reference to any trifle; nor would any pecuniary
difficulty that was not very serious have thrown his father into such a state of misery. Could
it be that the fair inheritance was absolutely in danger?

Herbert Fitzgerald was by no means a selfish man. As regarded himself, he could have met ruin
in the face with more equanimity than most young men so circumstanced. The gilt of the world
had not eaten into his soul; his heart was not as yet wedded to the splendour of pinchbeck.
This is saying much for him; for how seldom is it that the hearts and souls of the young are
able to withstand pinchbeck and gilding? He was free from this pusillanimity; free as yet as
regarded himself; but he was hardly free as regarded his betrothed. He had promised her, not
in spoken words but in his thoughts, rank, wealth, and all the luxuries of his promised high
position; and now, on her behalf, it nearly broke his heart to think that they might be endangered.

Of his mother's history, he can hardly be said to have known anything. That there had been
something tragic in her early life; that something had occurred before his father's marriage;
and that his mother had been married twice, he had learned,--he hardly knew when or from whom.
But on such matters there had never been conversation between him and any of his own family;
and it never occurred to him that this sorrow arose in any way from this subject. That his
father had taken some fatal step with regard to the property--had done some foolish thing for
which he could not forgive himself, that was the idea with which his mind was filled.

He waited, with his watch in his hand, till the dial showed him that it was exactly eight;
and then, with a sinking heart, he walked slowly out of the dining-room along the passage,
and into his father's study. For an instant he stood with the handle in his hand. He had been
terribly anxious for the arrival of this moment, but now that it had come, he would almost
fain have had it again postponed. His heart sank very low as he turned the lock, and entering,
found himself in the presence of Mr. Prendergast.

Mr. Prendergast was standing with his back to the fire. For him, too, the last hour had been
full of bitterness; his heart also had sunk low within him; his blood had run cold within his
veins: he too, had it been possible, would have put off this wretched hour.

Mr. Prendergast, it may be, was not much given to poetry; but the feeling, if not the words,
were there within him. The work which a friend has to perform for a friend is so much heavier
than that which comes in the way of any profession!

When Herbert entered the room, Mr. Prendergast came forward from where he was standing, and
took him by the hand. "This is a very sad affair," he said; "very sad."

"At present I know nothing about it," said Herbert. "As I see people about me so unhappy, I
suppose it is sad. If there be anything that I hate, it is a mystery."

"Sit down, Mr. Fitzgerald," said the other; "sit down." And Mr. Prendergast himself sat down
in the chair that was ordinarily occupied by Sir Thomas. Although he had been thinking about
it all the day, he had not even yet made up his mind how he was to begin his story. Even now
he could not help thinking whether it might be possible for him to leave it untold.

But it was not possible.

"Mr. Fitzgerald," said he, "you must prepare yourself for tidings which are very grievous indeed--very
grievous."

"Whatever it is I must bear it," said he.

"I hope you have that moral strength which enables a man to bear misfortune. I have not known
you in happy days, and therefore perhaps can hardly judge; but it seems to me that you do possess
such courage. Did I not think so, I could hardly go through the task that is before me."

Here he paused as though he expected some reply, some assurance that his young friend did possess
this strength of which he spoke; but Herbert said nothing--nothing out loud. "If it were only
for myself! if it were only for myself!" It was thus that he spoke to his own heart.

"Mr. Fitzgerald," continued the lawyer, "I do not know how far you may be acquainted with the
history of your mother's first marriage."

Herbert said that he was hardly acquainted with it in any degree; and explained that he merely
knew the fact that his mother had been married before she met Sir Thomas.

"I do not know that I need recount all the circumstances to you now, though doubtless you will
learn them. Your mother's conduct throughout was, I believe, admirable."

"I am quite sure of that. No amount of evidence could make me believe the contrary."

"And there is no tittle of evidence to make any one think so. But in her early youth, when
she was quite a child, she was given in marriage to a man--to a man of whom it is impossible
to speak in terms too black, or in language too strong. And now, this day--"

But here he paused. It had been his intention to say that that very man, the first husband
of this loved mother now looked upon as dead for so many years, this miscreant of whom he had
spoken--that this man had been in that room that very day. But he hardly knew how to frame
the words.

"Well," said Herbert, "well;" and he spoke in a hoarse voice that was scarcely audible.

Mr. Prendergast was afraid to bring out the very pith of his story in so abrupt a manner. He
wished to have the work over, to feel, that as regarded Herbert it was done,--but his heart
failed him when he came to it.

"Yes," he said, going back as it were to his former thoughts. "A heartless, cruel, debauched,
unscrupulous man; one in whose bosom no good thing seemed to have been implanted. Your father,
when he first knew your mother, had every reason to believe that this man was dead."

"And he was not dead?" Mr. Prendergast could see that the young man's face became perfectly
pale as he uttered these words. He became pale, and clutched hold of the table with his hand,
and there sat with mouth open and staring eyes.

"I am afraid not," said Mr. Prendergast; "I am afraid not."

"And--"

"I must go further than that, and tell you that he is still living."

"Mr. Prendergast, Mr. Prendergast!" exclaimed the poor fellow, rising up from his chair and
shouting out as though for mercy. Mr. Prendergast also rose from his seat, and coming up to
him took him by the arm. "My dear boy, my dear boy, I am obliged to tell you. It is necessary
that you should know it. The fact is as I say, and it is now for you to show that you are a man."

Who was ever called upon for a stronger proof of manhood than this? In nine cases out of ten
it is not for oneself that one has to be brave. A man, we may almost say, is no man, whose
own individual sufferings call for the exercise of much courage. But we are all so mixed up
and conjoined with others--with others who are weaker and dearer than ourselves, that great
sorrows do require great powers of endurance.

By degrees, as he stood there in silence, the whole truth made its way into his mind,--as he
stood there with his arm still tenderly pressed by that old man. No one now would have called
the lawyer stern in looking at him, for the tears were coursing down his cheeks. But no tears
came to the relief of young Fitzgerald as the truth slowly came upon him, fold by fold, black
cloud upon cloud, till the whole horizon of his life's prospect was dark as death. He stood
there silent for some few minutes hardly conscious that he was not alone, as he saw all his
joys disappearing from before his mind's eye, one by one; his family pride, the pleasant high-toned
duties of his station, his promised seat in Parliament and prosperous ambition, the full respect
of all the world around him, his wealth and pride of place--for let no man be credited who
boasts that he can part with these without regret. All these were gone. But there were losses
more bitter than these. How could he think of his affianced bride? and how could he think of
his mother?

No tears came to his relief while the truth, with all its bearings, burnt itself into his very
soul, but his face expressed such agony that it was terrible to be seen. Mr. Prendergast could
stand that silence no longer, so at last he spoke. He spoke,--for the sake of words; for all
his tale had been told.

"You saw the man that was here yesterday? That was he, who then called himself Talbot."

"What! the man that went away in the car? Mollett!"

"Yes; that was the man."

Herbert had said that no evidence could be sufficient to make him believe that his mother had
been in any way culpable: and such probably was the case. He had that reliance on his mother--that
assurance in his mind that everything coming from her must be good--that he could not believe
her capable of ill. But, nevertheless, he could not prevent himself from asking within his
own breast, how it had been possible that his mother should ever have been concerned with such
a wretch as that. It was a question which could not fail to make itself audible. What being
on earth was sweeter than his mother, more excellent, more noble, more fitted for the world's
high places, more absolutely entitled to that universal respect which seemed to be given to
her as her own by right? And what being could be more loathsome, more contemptible than he,
who was, as he was now told, his mother's husband? There was in it a want of verisimilitude
which almost gave him comfort, one--which almost taught him to think that he might disbelieve
the story that was told to him. Poor fellow! he had yet to learn the difference that years
may make in men and women--for better as well as for worse. Circumstances had given to the
poor half-educated village girl the simple dignity of high station; as circumstances had also
brought to the lowest dregs of human existence the man, whose personal bearing and apparent
worldly standing had been held sufficient to give warrant that he was of gentle breeding and
of honest standing; nay, her good fortune in such a marriage had once been almost begrudged
her by all her maiden neighbours.

But Herbert, as he thought of this, was almost discouraged to disbelieve the story. To him,
with his knowledge of what his mother was, and with knowledge as he also had of that man, it
did not seem possible. "But how is all this known?" he muttered forth at last.

"I fear there is no doubt of its truth," said Mr. Prendergast. "Your father has no doubt whatever;
has had none--I must tell you this plainly--for some months."

"For some months! And why have I not been told?"

"Do not be hard upon your father."

"Hard! no; of course I would not be hard upon him."

"The burden he has had to bear has been very terrible. He has thought that by payments of money
to this man the whole thing might be concealed. As is always the case when such payments are
made, the insatiable love of money grew by what it fed on. He would have poured out every shilling
into that man's hands, and would have died, himself a beggar--have died speedily too under
such torments--and yet no good would have been done. The harpy would have come upon you; and
you--after you had innocently assumed a title that was not your own and taken a property to
which you have no right, you then would have had to own--that which your father must own now."

"If it be so," said Herbert, slowly, "it must be acknowledged."

"Just so, Mr. Fitzgerald; just so. I know you will feel that--in such matters we can only sail
safely by the truth. There is no other compass worth a man's while to look at."

"Of course not," said Herbert, with hoarse voice. "One does not wish to be a robber and a thief.
My cousin shall have what is his own." And then he involuntarily thought of the interview they
had had on that very day. "But why did he not tell me when I spoke to him of her?" he said,
with something approaching to bitterness in his voice and a slight struggle in his throat that
was almost premonitory of a sob.

"Ah! it is there that I fear for you. I know what your feelings are; but think of his sorrows,
and do not be hard on him."

"Ah me, ah me!" exclaimed Herbert

"I fear that he will not be with you long. He has already endured till he is now almost past
the power of suffering more. And yet there is so much more that he must suffer!"

"My poor father!"

"Think what such as he must have gone through in bringing himself into contact with that man;
and all this has been done that he might spare you and your mother. Think of the wound to his
conscience before he would have lowered himself to an unworthy bargain with a swindler. But
this has been done that you might have that which you have been taught to look on as your own.
He has been wrong. No other verdict can be given. But you, at any rate, can be tender to such
a fault; you and your mother."

"I will--I will," said Herbert. "But if it had happened a month since I could have borne it."
And then he thought of his mother, and hated himself for what he had said. How could he have
borne that with patience? "And there is no doubt, you say?"

"I think none. The man carries his proofs with him. An old servant here in the house, too,
knows him."

"What, Mrs. Jones?"

"Yes; Mrs. Jones. And the burden of further proof must now, of course, be thrown on us,--not
on him. Directly that we believe the statement, it is for us to ascertain its truth. You and
your father must not be seen to hold a false position before the world."

"And what are we to do now?"

"I fear that your mother must be told, and Mr. Owen Fitzgerald; and then we must together openly
prove the facts, either in one way or in the other. It will be better that we should do this
together;--that is, you and your cousin Owen conjointly. Do it openly, before the world,--so
that the world may know that each of you desires only what is honestly his own. For myself
I tell you fairly that I have no doubt of the truth of what I have told you; but further proof
is certainly needed. Had I any doubt I would not propose to tell your mother. As it is I think
it will be wrong to keep her longer in the dark."

"Does she suspect nothing?"

"I do not know. She has more power of self-control than your father. She has not spoken to
me ten words since I have been in the house, and in not doing so I have thought that she was
right."

"My own mother; my dear mother!"

"If you ask me my opinion, I think that she does suspect the truth,--very vaguely, with an
indefinite feeling that the calamity which weighs so heavily on your father has come from this
source. She, dear lady, is greatly to be pitied. But God has made her of firmer material than
your father, and I think that she will bear her sorrow with a higher courage."

"And she is to be told also?"

"Yes, I think so. I do not see how we can avoid it. If we do not tell her we must attempt to
conceal it, and that attempt must needs be futile when we are engaged in making open inquiry
on the subject. Your cousin, when he hears of this, will of course be anxious to know what
his real prospects are."

"Yes, yes. He will be anxious, and determined too."

"And then, when all the world will know it, how is your mother to be kept in the dark? And
that which she fears and anticipates is as bad, probably, as the actual truth. If my advice
be followed nothing will be kept from her."

"We are in your hands, I suppose, Mr. Prendergast?"

"I can only act as my judgment directs me."

"And who is to tell her?" This he asked with a shudder, and almost in a whisper. The very idea
of undertaking such a duty seemed almost too much for him. And yet he must undertake a duty
almost as terrible, he himself--no one but him--must endure the anguish of repeating this story
to Clara Desmond and to the countess. But now the question had reference to his own mother.
"And who is to tell her?" he asked.

For a moment or two Mr. Prendergast stood silent. He had not hitherto, in so many words, undertaken
this task--this that would be the most dreadful of all. But if he did not undertake it, who
would? "I suppose that I must do it," at last he said, very gently.

"And when?"

"As soon as I have told your cousin. I will go down to him to-morrow after breakfast. Is it
probable that I shall find him at home?"

"Yes, if you are there before ten. The hounds meet to-morrow at Cecilstown, within three miles
of him, and he will not leave home till near eleven. But it is possible that he may have a
house full of men with him."

"At any rate, I will try. On such an occasion as this he may surely let his friends go to the
hunt without him."

And then between nine and ten this interview came to an end. "Mr. Fitzgerald," said Mr. Prendergast,
as he pressed Herbert's hand, "you have borne all this as a man should do. No loss of fortune
can ruin one who is so well able to endure misfortune." But in this Mr. Prendergast was perhaps
mistaken. His knowledge of human nature had not carried him sufficiently far. A man's courage
under calamity is only tested when he is left in solitude. The meanest among us can bear up
while strange eyes are looking at us. And then Mr. Prendergast went away, and he was alone.

It had been his habit during the whole of this period of his father's illness to go to Sir
Thomas at or before bedtime. These visits had usually been made to the study, the room in which
he was now standing; but when his father had gone to his bedroom at an earlier hour, Herbert
had always seen him there. Was he to go to him now--now that he had heard all this? And if
so, how was he to bear himself there, in his father's presence? He stood still, thinking of
this, till the hand of the clock showed him that it was past ten, and then it struck him that
his father might be waiting for him. It would not do for him now, at such a moment, to appear
wanting in that attention which he had always shown. He was still his father's son, though
he had lost the light to bear his father's name. He was nameless now, a man utterly without
respect or standing-place in the world, a being whom the law ignored except as the possessor
of a mere life; such was he now, instead of one whose rights and privileges, whose property
and rank all the statutes of the realm and customs of his country delighted to honour and protect.
This he repeated to himself over and over again. It as to such a pass as this, to this bitter
disappointment that his father had brought him. But yet it should not be said of him that he
had begun to neglect his father as soon as he had heard the story.

So with a weary step he walked upstairs, and found Sir Thomas in bed, with his mother sitting
by the bedside. His mother held out her hand to him, and he took it, leaning against the bedside.
"Has Mr. Prendergast left you?" she asked.

He told her that Mr. Prendergast had left him, and gone to his own room for the night. "And
have you been with him all the evening?" she asked. She had no special motive in so asking,
but both the father and the son shuddered at the question. "Yes," said Herbert; "I have been
with him, and now I have come to wish my father good night; and you too, mother, if you intend
to remain here." But Lady Fitzgerald got up, telling Herbert that she would leave him with
Sir Thomas; and before either of them could hinder her from departing, the father and the son
were alone together.

Sir Thomas, when the door closed, looked furtively up into his son's face. Might it be that
he could read there how much had been already told, or hew much still remained to be disclosed?
That Herbert was to learn it all that evening, he knew; but it might be that Mr. Prendergast
had failed to perform his task. Sir Thomas in his heart trusted that he had failed. He looked
up furtively into Herbert's face, but at the moment there was nothing there that he could read.
There was nothing there but black misery; and every face round him for many days past had worn
that aspect.

For a minute or two Herbert said nothing, for he had not made up his mind whether or no he
would that night disturb his father's rest. But he could not speak in his ordinary voice, or
bid his father good night as though nothing special to him had happened. "Father," said he,
after a short pause, "father, I know it all now."

"My boy, my poor boy, my unfortunate boy!"

"Father," said Herbert, "do not be unhappy about me, I can bear it." And then he thought again
of his bride--his bride as she was to have been; but nevertheless he repeated his last words,
"I can bear it, father!"

"I have meant it for the best, Herbert," said the poor man, pleading to his child.

"I know that; all of us well know that. But what Mr. Prendergast says is true; it is better
that it should be known. That man would have killed you had you kept it longer to yourself."

Sir Thomas hid his face upon the pillow as the remembrance of what he had endured in those
meetings came upon him. The blow that had told heaviest was that visit from the son, and the
threats which the man had made still rung in his ears--"When that youngster was born Lady F.
was Mrs. M., wasn't she?...My governor could take her away to-morrow, according to the law
of the land, couldn't he now?" These words, and more such as these, had nearly killed him at
the time, and now, as they recurred to him, he burst out into childish tears. Poor man! the
days of his manhood had gone, and nothing but the tears of a second bitter childhood remained
to him. The hot iron had entered into his soul, and shrivelled up the very muscles of his mind's
strength.

Herbert, without much thought of what he was doing, knelt down by the bedside and put his hand
upon that of his father which lay out upon the sheet. There he knelt for one or two minutes,
watching and listening to his father's sobs. "You will be better now, father," he said, "for
the great weight of this terrible secret will be off your mind." But Sir Thomas did not answer
him. With him there could never be any better. All things belonging to him had gone to ruin.
All those around him whom he had loved--and he had loved those around him very dearly--were
brought to poverty and sorrow, and disgrace. The power of feeling this was left to him, but
the power of enduring this with manhood was gone. The blow had come upon him too late in life.

And Herbert himself, as he knelt there, could hardly forbear from tears. Now, at such a moment
as this, he could think of no one but his father, the author of his being, who lay there so
grievously afflicted by sorrows which were in nowise selfish. "Father," he said at last, "will
you pray with me?" And then when the poor sufferer had turned his face towards him, he poured
forth his prayer to his Saviour that they all in that family might be enabled to bear the heavy
sorrows which God in his mercy and wisdom had now thought fit to lay upon them. I will not
make his words profane by repeating them here, but one may say confidently that they were not
uttered in vain.

"And now, dearest father, good night," he said as he rose from his knees, and stretching over
the bed, he kissed his father's forehead.

CHAPTER XXIII

BEFORE BREAKFAST AT HAP HOUSE

It may be imagined that Mr. Mollett's drive back to Cork after his last visit to Castle Richmond
had not been very pleasant; and indeed it may be said that his present circumstances altogether
were as unpleasant as his worst enemies could desire. I have endeavoured to excite the sympathy
of those who are going with me through this story for the sufferings of that family of the
Fitzgeralds, but how shall I succeed in exciting their sympathy for this other family of the
Molletts? And yet why not? If we are to sympathise only with the good, or worse still, only
with the graceful, how little will there be in our character that is better than terrestrial?
Those Molletts also were human, and had strings to their hearts, at which the world would now
probably pull with sufficient vigour. For myself I can truly say that my strongest feeling
is for their wretchedness.

The father and son had more than once boasted among themselves that the game they were now
playing was a high one; that they were, in fact, gambling for mighty stakes. And in truth,
as long as the money came in to them--flowing in as the result of their own craft in this game--the
excitement had about it something that was very pleasurable. There was danger, which makes
all games pleasant; there was money in handfuls for daily expenses--those daily wants of the
appetite, which are to such men more important by far than the distant necessities of life;
there was a possibility of future grandeur, an opening out of magnificent ideas of fortune,
which charmed them greatly as they thought about it. What might they not do with forty thousand
pounds divided between them, or even with a thousand a-year each, settled on them for life?
and surely their secret was worth that money! Nay, was it not palpable to the meanest calculation
that it was worth much more? Had they not the selling of twelve thousand a-year for ever and
ever to this family of Fitzgerald?

But for the last fortnight things had begun to go astray with them. Money easily come by goes
easily, and money badly come by goes badly. Theirs had come easily and badly, and had so gone.
What necessity could there be for economy with such a milch-cow as that close to their elbows?
So both of them had thought, if not argued; and there had been no economy--no economy in the
use of that very costly amusement, the dice-box; and now, at the present moment, ready money
having failed to be the result of either of the two last visits to Castle Richmond, the family
funds were running low.

