Talbot thought of his words as the dark and silent world slid by. He glanced at the luminous
dial of his wrist-watch. Eleven-fifteen. The moon rose at eleven-twenty-four. He studied the
map. High over Mount Lemmon the craft soared. He touched the army pilot's arm. "All right,"
he said, "throttle her down." Their speed decreased. "Lower."

Swiftly they sank, until the dark bulk of hills and trees lay blackly beneath; so near as to
seem within the touch of a hand. Though he strained his ears, no alien sound came wafting upward.
"Keep circling here," he directed the pilot. "The moon'll be up in a minute and then we can
be sure of where we are." The pilot nodded. He was a phlegmatic young man. Not once during
the trip had he uttered a word.

The east glowed as if with red fire. Many a time before had Talbot watched the moon rise, but
never under stranger circumstances. Now the night was illuminated with mellow glory. "Hit the
nail on the head," he whispered. "Do you see that spot over there? To the left, yes. Can you
land us there?"

Without a word the pilot swung for the clearance. It was a close thing, requiring delicate
maneuvering, and only an auto-gyroscope could have made it without crashing. Hurriedly Manuel
and Talbot unloaded their gear.

"All right," said Talbot to the pilot. "No need to wait for us. If we are successful, we'll
send out the wireless signal agreed on, and if we aren't...." He shrugged his shoulders. "But
tell the General to be sure and allow us the time stipulated on before undertaking another attack."

Standing there on the bleak hillside, watching the auto-gyroscope run ahead for a few yards
and then take the air, Talbot experienced a feeling of desolation. Now he and Manuel were alone,
cut off from their own kind by barriers of impregnable jungle. And yet on that lonely hillside
there were no signs of an enemy. For a moment he wondered if he weren't asleep, dreaming; if
he wouldn't soon awake to find that all this was nothing but a nightmare.

But Manuel gathering up the tools aroused him from such thoughts. Not without difficulty were
the necessary things conveyed to the abandoned mine back of the old Wiley claim. Their course
lay along the bottom of a dry creek, over a ridge, and so to the shaft half-way down the side
of a hill. A second trip had to be made to bring the gas tube.

It was two o'clock in the morning when Manuel stood at the foot of the four-hundred-foot hole
and signaled up that the air was good. Talbot lowered the tools to him, and the gas container,
and lastly went down himself. As already stated, Talbot had explored the underground workings
of the mine not eighteen months before. Picking out the main tunnel and keeping a close watch
for rattlers with electric torches, the two men went cautiously ahead. In places earth had
fallen and had to be cleared away, but the formation for the most part was a soft rock and
shale. They went slowly, for fear of starting slides.

At a spot taking an abrupt turn--and it was here that the newer tunnel had broken through into
the older gallery of the Wiley claim--Manuel caught swiftly at Talbot's arm. "What is that?"
To straining ears came the unmistakable throb of machinery. They snapped off their torches
and crouched in Stygian darkness. Not a ray of light was to be seen. Talbot knew that in following
the ore stratum, the Wiley gallery took several twists. Laboriously he and Manuel advanced
with the gas tube. It was stiflingly close. He counted the turns, one, two, three. Now the
roar of machinery was a steady reverberation that shook the tunnel. He whispered to Manuel:

"Go back and wait for me at the mouth of the shaft. Only one of us must risk taking the gas
tube any nearer the enemy. Here, take my watch. It is now two-forty-five. If I don't rejoin
you by four o'clock touch off the explosive."

Manuel started to protest. "Do as I say," commanded Talbot. "The fate of the world is at stake.
Give me an hour; but no longer--remember!"

Left alone in the clammy darkness Talbot wiped the sweat from his face. Grabbing one end of
the rope sling in which the tube was fastened, he pulled it ahead. There was a certain amount
of unavoidable noise; rock rattled, earth fell; but he reasoned shrewdly enough that the roar
of the machinery would drown this. Beyond a crevice created by a cave-in he saw an intense
light play weirdly. He squirmed through the crevice and pulled the tube after him.

His mind reconstructed the mine ahead. He recollected that when the lead of this mine had petered
out, the owners had begun to sink the shaft deeper into the earth before abandoning the mine.
This meant that the foot of the shaft, with the addition of an encroaching twenty feet of the
southern gallery, was deeper by some several yards than the floor of the tunnel in which he
stood. Here was the logical place to set the gas tube, nose pointed ahead.

With trembling fingers he loosened the screwed-in nose of the tube with a wrench. A slight
hiss told of the deadly gas's escape. It would inevitably flow towards the shaft, drawn by
the slight suction of machinery, following the easiest direction of expansion. Now Talbot's
work was done, and if he had immediately retreated all would have been well, but the weird
light fascinated him. Here he was, one man in the bowels of earth pitting his strength, his
ingenuity against something incredible, unbelievable. Beings from an atomic universe, from
a world buried within the atom; beings attacking his own earth with uncanny methods of destruction.
Oh, it was impossible, absurd, but he must look at them, he must see.

Scarcely daring to breathe, he squirmed, he crawled, and suddenly he saw. He was looking down
into an underground crypt flooded with brilliant light. That crypt had been altered out of
all recognition, its greater expanse of roof supported with massive pillars, the light screened
away from the shaft. But it was not all this which riveted his staring eyes. No--it was the
machines; strange, twisted things, glowing, pulsing, and--in the light of his knowledge--menacing
and sinister.

Talbot gasped. Almost at once he observed the birds, twelve of them, two standing in front
of what appeared to be a great square of polished crystal, wearing metal caps and goggles,
heads cocked forward intently. The others also perched in front of odd machines like graven
images. That was the uncanny thing about the birds: they appeared to be doing nothing. Only
the occasional jerk of a head, the filming of a hard golden eye, gave them a semblance of life.
But, none the less, there could be no mistaking the fact that they were the guiding, the directing
geniuses back of all the pulsing, throbbing mechanisms.

Half mesmerized by the sight, forgetful of time and place, Talbot leaned forward in awe. There
was a great funnel, a shallow cabinet, and out of the cabinet poured an intense reddish beam,
and out of the beam....

It was a minute before he understood, and then comprehension came to him. Those dark spots
shooting from the cabinet, no larger than peas, were the mysterious drifting globes whose scattered
seed was fast covering miles of Arizonian soil with impenetrable jungle. From a universe in
a piece of matter no larger than a pin-head, from a sub-atomic world, the weapons of an alien
intelligence were ruthlessly being hurled against man, to conquer, to destroy him.

And now it was made plain to him why the drifting globes had seemed to materialize out of thin
air. Being infinitesimally small parts of an atom, these globes were released from the cabinet
and soon assumed the size of peas; they were guided across the crypt, up the old Wiley shaft,
and high in the air, somewhere in space, enlarged to immense proportions. How? Talbot could
not guess. By some manipulation of science and machinery beyond that of earth.

Engrossed, he moved an inch forward, craned his head, and in that moment it happened. Beneath
his weight a section of earth and rock crumbled, cracked, slid forward, and he plunged headlong
to the floor below, striking his skull with stunning force!

He came to himself, staring up into the dour-looking face of a tall man. He recollected pitching
forward among the birds and the machines. But the birds and the machines had disappeared and
he was lying in an odd room without windows but lit with a soft radiance. Bewildered, he sat up.

"Who are you?" he demanded.

The man's beard looked straggly, untrimmed.

"My name," he said, "is Reubens--Professor Reubens."

Professor Reubens! Talbot gasped. "Not the scientist who disappeared?"

"Yes--as you've disappeared."

"What!"

"Through the machine."

It was a moment before Talbot understood. "You mean...."

"That you are a prisoner in a sub-atomic world."

Talbot now realized with startling clearness what had happened to him. When he had fallen into
the crypt the weird birds had directly placed him in the cabinet and transported him to their
own world. In other words, he and Reubens and everything he saw about him were infinitely small
creatures in an atom-world. He and the Professor were trapped! And when Manuel blew up the
only means of return....

"How long have I been here?" Talbot asked hoarsely.

"Five minutes at the most."

Then, at the shortest, the way to earth would exist twenty minutes longer. Twenty minutes....
Incoherently he told Reubens of what had happened in Arizona since his disappearance, of his
own misadventure.

"Aye," said the Professor, "I knew as much. Nor do these inhuman birds intend stopping with
the use of seed globes. More devilish weapons than that they plan using against earth. Oh,
they are fiends, fiends! Already have they wiped out civilization and intelligent life on other
planets in this sub-atomic system and introduced their own."

He stopped, shuddering. "Nor is it to be wondered at that no birds were seen after the first
attack on Oracle," he went on. "They do not fight in person, as do we ourselves, but through
proxy, directing machines from centers of control. In powers of destruction, they are immeasurably
ahead of man. Thank God you discovered their headquarters in the deserted mine and have spread
the gas for its destruction. But the rage of the birds at such a defeat will be terrible. They
will undoubtedly torture me in an effort to make me reveal the basis of my invention so that
they can resume the attack on earth. So we must escape."

"But how--where?"

"I have thought that out. It is one chance in a thousand. Undoubtedly we will be killed. But
that is better than being tortured or living in this world. Look."

He held up a pearl-handled pen-knife. "The birds are smart, all right, but they don't quite
understand clothes, wearing none themselves. They found your revolver, but overlooked this."

"Of what good is it?"

"To cut our way out of this cell."

Talbot laughed incredulously. The walls of the room were smooth, and hard to the touch. "They're
as solid as concrete," he said.

"But cut like cheese under a steel blade. I found that out. Watch."

