On our way to the station, and in our drives about the town, we had an opportunity of seeing
the City of Washington. The town was originally laid out by Washington himself, and divided
off into streets, or rather wide avenues, which are crossed by other streets of great breadth;
but though the streets are named, in many of them no houses are yet built, and those that are
have a mean appearance, owing to their being unsuited in height to the great width of the streets,
which are in many cases, I should think, three times the width of Portland Place, and long
in proportion. Notwithstanding, therefore, the beauty of the public buildings, the town greatly
disappointed us.

On our arrival at Baltimore this evening, Mr. Garrett, the principal director of the Baltimore
and Ohio Railway, called upon us and brought with him Mr. Henry Tyson, the chief engineer,
or as he is called, the master of machinery of the road, whom he was kind enough to appoint
to go with us as far as Wheeling, the western terminus of the line.

This is the most remarkable railway in America for the greatness of the undertaking and the
difficulties encountered in passing the Alleghanies, which the projectors of the road could
only do by crossing the range at a height of 2700 feet, a project that most people looked upon
as visionary. We are to start to-morrow morning at eight o'clock.

Wheeling, Oct. 21st.--We have accomplished the great feat of passing the Alleghanies, and Mr.
Tyson has proved a Cicerone of unequalled excellence, from his great attention to us, added
to his knowledge of the country, and his talents, which are of no ordinary kind. He is the
engineer who has invented, or at least constructed on a new plan, the locomotives which are
used upon this road: but besides being a very clever engineer, he is remarkably well read in
general literature, and has a wonderful memory for poetry and a great knowledge of botany.

Though Mr. Garrett talked of the directors' car, we presumed it was only a common carriage
such as we had been accustomed to, but appropriated to their use; instead of this we found
a beautiful car, forty feet long by eight wide, of which the accompanying diagram shows a plan
drawn to scale. Outside: painted maroon, highly varnished with Canada balsam: the panels picked
out with dark blue. Inside: painted pure white, also varnished. Ceiling the same, divided into
small narrow panels, with excellent ventilators at each end. Round the car there were twenty-two
windows, not shown in the plan, and three brilliant lamps in the sitting-room and hall, and
one in the bed-room; these were lighted when passing through the tunnels. There were three
hooks in the wall serving for hat pegs, and at the same time to support two flags for signals.
A large map of the mountain pass from Cumberland to Wheeling hung over the sofa opposite the
table. The table was covered with green baize stretched tightly over it. On the table were
placed a large blotting-book, ink, and pens, three or four daily newspapers which were changed
each day, the yearly report of the railway, a peculiar time-table book, containing rules for
the guidance of the station men, times of freight and passenger trains meeting and passing
each other, &c. Papa has these. The sofas are covered with a pretty green Brussels carpet (small
pattern) quilted like a mattress with green buttons, chairs covered with corded wollen stuff,
not a speck or spot of ink or smut on anything. A neat carpet, not a speck or spot on it, a
sheet of tin under and all round the stove. Pantry cupboard containing knives and forks, spoons,
and mugs. Bed-room berths much higher and wider than in a ship. Red coloured cotton quilts,
with a shawl pattern, two pillows to each bed, pillowcases of brilliant whiteness, sofa bed
larger and longer than a German bed. White Venetian blinds occupied the places usually filled
by the door panels and window shutters. Green Brussels carpet like the cover of the sofa; three
chairs to match. The windows in the sitting-room had grey holland curtains running on wires
with very neat little narrow strips of leather, and a black button to fasten them, and a button
and well made button-hole below to keep them from blowing about when the window is open. Looking-glass
in neat gilt frame, hung over a semicircular console in the bed-room, another near the washhandstand,
where a towel also hangs. Two drawers for clothes, &c. under berths. Table-cloth for meals,
light drab varnished cloth, imitating leather, very clean and pretty, china plates, and two
metal plates in case of breakages. Luncheon consisted of excellent cold corned beef, tongue,
bread and butter, Bass's ale, beer, whiskey, champagne, all Mr. Tyson's. We supplied cold fowls,
bread, and claret. The door at the end opens on a sort of platform or balcony, surrounded by
a strong high iron railing, with the rails wide enough apart to admit a man to climb up between
them into the car, which the workmen always do to speak to Mr. Tyson. Usual step entrance at
the other end. The platform can hold three arm chairs easily, and we three sat there yesterday
evening, talking and admiring the view. The door was always open and we were in and out constantly.
Thrower and Gaspar, a capital German man-servant, sat in the hall. Carpet swept by Gaspar after
dinner to remove crumbs. I wear neither bonnet nor shawl, but sit at the table and work, make
mems., dry red leaves, and learn their names from Mr. Tyson. Papa is always moving about, and
calling me out constantly to admire the view from the balcony. Yesterday on the lower ground
it was much too hot in the middle of the day to be there, and we were glad to be within the
car, and to shade the glare of the sun by means of our pretty grey curtains, though it was
cooler on the mountain.

But I must begin to describe our road more methodically. As we wished to get over the early
part of it as expeditiously as possible, we started by the mail train at 8.30. It will be impossible
to describe at length all the pretty places we passed, respecting each of which Mr. Tyson had
always something to say. Soon after leaving the Washington junction, we came to a sweet spot
called Ellicott's Mills, where he had spent his boyhood, and where every rock was familiar
to him. The family of Ellicotts, who had resided there from the settlement of the country,
were his mother's relations, and by his father's side he was descended from Lord Brooke, who
was likewise one of the original settlers, the Warwick branch of the family having remained
in England.

We first came in sight of the Blue Ridge at about forty miles from Baltimore. During the greater
part of this distance we had been following up the Patapaco river; but soon after this, at
the Point of Rocks, we came upon the Potomac. Here the Baltimore and Ohio canal, a work of
prodigious magnitude, and the railway run side by side between the river and very high cliffs,
though the space apparently could afford room only for one of them. We reached Harper's Ferry
a little after twelve, and the view is certainly splendid. Mr. Tyson had made arrangements
to give the passengers a little extra time for dinner, that he might take us to see the view
from the heights above without materially detaining the train; but the sun was so powerful
that we were glad to limit our walk in order to see a little in detail the bridge over which
we had just passed in the railway cars. It is a very wonderful work, but not so remarkable
for its length as for its peculiar structure, the two ends of it being curved in opposite directions,
assuming the form of the letter S. It passes not only over the river but over the canal, and
before it reaches the western bank of the river it makes a fork, one road going straight on,
and the other, which we went upon, forming the second bend of the S.

The curves in the railway are very sharp, and a speed of thirty-five miles an hour is kept
up in going round those which have a radius of 600 feet. This, and repeatedly recurring ascents
of a very steep grade, require engines which unite great power with precision in the movements,
and these are admirably combined in Mr. Tyson's engines; which, moreover, have the advantage
of entirely consuming their own smoke, and we had neither sparks nor cinders to contend with.
The common rate of travelling, where the road is level, is forty miles an hour, and at this
rate each engine will take eighteen cars with 2600 passengers.

The difficulties they have to contend with on this road are greatly increased by the snow drifts
in winter. Mr. Tyson told us that on one occasion the snow had accumulated in one night, by
drifts, to fourteen feet in the cuts, and it required ten freight engines of 200-horse power
each, or 2000-horse power altogether, to clear it away. Three hundred men were employed, and
the wind being bitterly cold, hardly any escaped being frost-bitten. One of the tenders was
completely crushed up by the force applied; and in the middle of the night, with the snow still
driving, and in a piercing wind, they had to clear away the wreck: nineteen engines, called
snow ploughs, are kept solely to clear away the snow.

At five o'clock we reached Cumberland, where we slept. After dinner we walked out in the most
lovely night possible to see the town, and the moon being nearly full, we saw the valley as
distinctly almost as by daylight. There is a great gap here in the mountain, which forms a
prominent feature in the landscape, and a church on the summit of a high hill rendered the
picture almost perfect. We here saw the comet for the last time.

Next morning, the 20th October, we started early, in order to be able to take the mountain
pass more leisurely, attached ourselves at 6.15 to the express train, and reached Piedmont
at 7.30. During this part of our journey we continued to follow up the Potomac, but here we
left it to follow up the Savage river, and for seventeen miles continued to ascend to Altamont,
where we attained the summit level of 2700 feet above the sea. We cast ourselves off from the
express at Piedmont, and afterwards tacked ourselves on to a train which left Piedmont at eight
o'clock, and got to Altamont at 9.45; these seventeen miles occupied an hour and three quarters,
the grade for eleven miles out of the seventeen being 116 feet per mile.

It is almost impossible to describe the beauty of the scenery here. The road goes in a zig-zag
the whole way. We passed several substantial viaducts across the Savage river, often at a great
height above the valley, and on many occasions, when the road made one of its rapid turns,
a vista of many miles up the gorges was obtained.

Of course the greatest skill is required in driving the engine up what is called the "Mountain
Division." We mounted on the locomotive, to have a more perfect view of the ascent. This locomotive
is very different to an English one, as the place where the driver sits is enclosed on three
sides with glass, so as to shelter him and those with him from the weather. Mr. Tyson thought
it necessary to drive a small part of the way himself; but after that, he resigned his position,
as will be seen by the following certificate, to one equally qualified for an emergency, though
hitherto his peculiar talent in that line had not been developed.

                   "Baltimore and Ohio Railway, Machinery Department.
                               "Baltimore, Oct. 21st, 1858.

     "This is to certify that Mr. A. T. has occupied the position of
     'Locomotive Engineer,' on the Mountain Division (3rd) of the
     Baltimore and Ohio Railroad.

     "The term of his occupation has been characterised by a close
     attention to his duties, and consequent freedom from accidents.

                           (Signed)        "HENRY TYSON,
                                              "Master of Machinery,
                                       "Baltimore and Ohio R. R. Co."

Papa, in fact, drove the engine a considerable way up the steepest part of the ascent, and
as the driver must command an uninterrupted view of the road before him, he had a capital opportunity
of seeing the country. Thrower and I sat on a seat behind him; but he alone had the full view,
as the chimney of the engine rather obstructed ours in front, though on each side we saw perfectly.
The whistle of the engine, when so close to our ears, was splendid, or perhaps you would have
said, terrific.

From Altamont to Cranberry Summit, where the descent begins, there is a comparatively level
country, called the Glades, which are beautiful natural meadows undulating and well cultivated,
with high ranges of mountains, generally at no great distance from the road, but varying a
good deal in this respect, so as sometimes to leave a considerable plain between it and the
range. From these glades numerous valleys diverge, and, in looking down these, splendid vistas
are obtained. The verdure even now is very bright, and the streams, which are everywhere to
be seen, are remarkably clear and pure; so that although the interest of the road was less
absorbing than when we were ascending the mountains, it was still very great. From Cranberry
Summit the distant views to the westward were quite magnificent.

We now entered on what is called the "Cheat River Region," and the descent to Grafton (a distance
of thirty miles) is even more beautiful than the ascent to Altamont. To give you some slight
idea of the nature of the road and of the scenery, I enclose a photograph of one of the bridges
over the Cheat River. This is called the Tray Run Viaduct, and it is 640 feet long; the masonry
is seventy-eight feet high, and the iron-work above that is eighty feet. The road here is about
seven hundred feet above the river, which runs in the valley below. This river, the Cheat,
is a dark, rapid, mountain stream, the waters of which are almost of a coffee-colour, owing,
it is said, to its rising in forests of laurel and black spruce, with which the high lands
here abound.

We passed hereabouts many curious-looking log houses, a photograph of one of which we enclose.[7]
You will observe the man with a cradle by his side, and his whip, gun, bottle, jar, &c., also
the chimney, which is a remarkable structure, consisting of a barrel above a heap of stones,
showing the resources of the West.

Before reaching Grafton, we passed the Great Kingwood tunnel, which is much thought of in America,
being 4100 feet in length, though it is greatly beat by many of our tunnels in England; but
tunnels are rare in America, as the roads generally run through the valleys.

We reached Grafton at four o'clock, and had a lovely afternoon to explore the beauties of the
neighbourhood. We went into a number of cottages and log-huts, and were delighted with the
people; but the details of our Grafton visit must be given to you vivâ voce on our return.
The night was brilliant, and it was one o'clock in the morning before we took our last look
of the moonlit valley, and of the rivers which here joined their streams almost under the windows
of our rooms.

We may mention that in this day's journey, we passed the source of the Monongahela, the chief
branch of what afterwards becomes the Ohio. It is here a tiny little clear stream, winding
through the glades we have spoken of.

On Thursday morning, though it was past one before we went to bed, I was up at six, as soon
as it was light, to make a sketch from our bed-room window, which will give you hereafter some
notion of the scene, though neither description nor drawing can convey any real idea of it.
After breakfast, papa and I and Thrower went up a tolerably steep hill to the cottage of three
old ladies, whose characters I had an opportunity of studying while papa went on with the guide
to the Great National or State Turnpike Road, or "Pike Road" as they called it, which used
to be the connecting link between Washington and Southern Virginia. Though much disused it
is still well kept up. After going along it for some distance, papa struck up to the top of
a high hill, from whence he had a magnificent view of the valleys on both sides of the ridge
he was on, and he was surprised to find what large tracts of cultivated ground were visible,
while to those below there seemed nothing but forest-covered mountains, but between these he
could see extensive glades, where every patch was turned to account. This we afterwards saw
from other parts of the road.

While papa was taking his hasty walk, Thrower and I sat down in the log-hut where these three
old spinster sisters had lived all their lives. They were quite characters, and cultivated
their land entirely with their own hands; though, when we asked their ages, two of them said
they were "in fifty," and one "in sixty;" they were most intelligent and agreeable, and two
looked very healthy; but the third had just had a severe illness, and looked very ill. One
was scraping the Indian corn grains off the cob, using another cob to assist her in the work;
we watched the beautifully-productive plant, and admired its growth. Their cottage or hut looked
quite comfortable, and there were substantial log stables and farm-buildings adjoining. When
the weather permitted, they got down the hill to Grafton to the Methodist meeting. There is
no Episcopal church there yet, excepting a Roman Catholic one, to which they will not go, though
they speak with thankfulness of the kindness they have received from the priest.

They said their father used to tell them to read their Bible, do their duty, and learn their
way to heaven, and this they wished to do. They were honest, straightforward good women, and
ladies in their minds, though great curiosities to look at.

This walk, and our subsequent explorings in Grafton, occupied the whole forenoon, the temptation
to pick the red leaves and shake the trees for hickory nuts being very great, and having greatly
prolonged the time which our walk occupied. But the village itself, for it is no more, though,
having a mayor, it calls itself a city, had great objects of interest, and is a curious instance
of what a railway will do in America to make a town; for it scarcely had any existence three
years ago, and is now full of artificers and others employed in the railway works, all fully
occupied, and earning excellent wages.

The people marry so early that the place was almost overflowing with children, who certainly
bore evidence in their looks to the healthiness of the climate.

This being a slave state, there was a sprinkling of a black population; and among the slaves
we were shocked by observing a little girl, with long red ringlets and a skin exquisitely fair,
and yet of the proscribed race, which made the institution appear more revolting in our eyes
than anything we have yet seen. The cook at the hotel was a noble-looking black, tall and well-made,
and so famous for his skill at omelettes, that we begged him to give us a lesson on the subject,
which he willingly did. I asked him if he were a slave, and he replied, making me a low bow,
"No, ma'am, I belong to myself." The little red-haired girl was a slave of the mistress of
the hotel.

We again linked ourselves on to a train which came up at about one o'clock, and at Benton's
Ferry, about twenty miles from Grafton, we crossed the Monongahela, over a viaduct 650 feet
long; the iron bridge, which consists of three arches of 200 feet span each, being the longest
iron bridge in America. Though the water was not very deep, owing to a recent drought, it was
curious to see the little stream of yesterday changed into an already considerable river, almost
beating any we can boast of in England.

We now began to wind our way down the ravine called Buffalo Creek, which we passed at Fairmont,
over a suspension bridge 1000 feet long. The road still continued very beautiful, and was so
all the way to this place, Wheeling, which we reached at about six o'clock. The last eleven
miles was up the banks of the real Ohio, for the Monongahela, after we last left it, takes
a long course northward, and after being joined at Pittsburg by the Alleghany, a river as large
as itself, the two together there, form the Ohio. From Pittsburg to where we first saw it,
it had come south more than 100 miles, and at Wheeling it is so broad and deep as to be covered
with magnificent steamers; there were five in front of our hotel window, and most singular-looking
they were, with their one huge wheel behind, scarcely touching the water, and their two tall
funnels in front. They tower up to a great height, and are certainly the most splendid-looking
steamers we ever saw.

We here left our valued friend Mr. Tyson, who after calling on us at the hotel in the evening,
was to return at ten o'clock to Baltimore. We certainly never enjoyed a journey more. He is
the most entertaining man you can imagine, full of anecdotes and good stories; and, as we have
said before, with such a marvellous memory, that he could repeat whole passages of poetry by
heart. His knowledge too of botany was delightful, for there was not a plant or weed we passed
of which he could not only tell the botanical and common name, but its history and use. He
has travelled much, having been employed in mining business in the Brazils. He has also been
in the West Indies, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and on the Continent of Europe.

We had a pleasing variety in occasional visitors to the car; for not only the work-people on
the road, as I have said, got up behind to speak to Mr. Tyson, and were always received by
him in the most friendly manner, being men of high calibre in point of intelligence, but we
had at different times a Dr. Orr, a physician and director of the railway, who was on the engine
with us to set our bones, if papa had capsized us and the doctor had escaped; also a Dr. Gerbard,
a German surgeon, with a scar on his cheek from a duel at college in his youth. Dr. Orr was
accompanied by a lady, with whom I conversed a good deal, and found she was the owner of many
slaves; but I must write you a chapter on slavery another time. All the last day of our journey
from Grafton to Wheeling, was through Virginia, and the rural population were chiefly slaves.
The two doctors I have mentioned were our visitors yesterday. To-day, we had throughout with
us Mr. Rennie (Mr. Tyson's assistant), and also Major Barry, an agent of the Company, and an
officer in the United States service, who in the last Indian war captured with his own hand,
Black Hawk, the great Indian Chief, in Illinois. He is an Irishman by birth, and had been in
our service at the battle of Waterloo, but he left the British army, and entered the United
States service in 1818. He was very intelligent and agreeable. Our last visitor was Colonel
Moore, also an agent of the company; a most gentleman-like man. This will show you what a superior
set of men are employed on American railways.

Among the men who spoke to us as we stood on our balcony, was a delightful character, a nigger.
I heard Mr. Tyson look over and say, "Jerry, why did you not tell me you were going to get
married?" Up came Jerry, looking the very picture of a happy bridegroom, having been married
the evening before to a dark widow considerably older than himself. He was quite a "get up"
in his dress, with boots of a glistening blackness. He answered, "I sent you an invitation,
Mr. Tyson, and left it at your office." He was nothing daunted by his interesting position
in life, and had a week's holiday in honour of the event. He was, to use his own expression,
a "'sponsible nigger," though he was actually only cleaner up, and carpet sweeper in the office,
negroes never being allowed to have any charge in the working of the line, or a more "'sponsible"
station than that connected with the office work, though in that they are often confidentially
employed in carrying money to the bank, &c.

Columbus, Friday 22nd.--It began to rain last night, and continued to pour to-day till ten
o'clock, so that we had no opportunity of seeing much of the town of Wheeling, but our rooms
looked on to the Ohio, and were within a stone's throw of it. Another great steamer had come
up in the night, so there were six now lying in front of the windows, looking like so many
line-of-battle ships.

We found that Jerry and his lady slept at our hotel, and I sent for them next morning to speak
to us. She was smartly dressed in a dark silk, with a richly embroidered collar and pocket
handkerchief, which she carefully displayed, and a large brooch. He wore a turn-down collar
to his shirt, of the most fashionable cut; the shirt itself had a pale blue pattern on it,
and a diamond (?) shirt pin, the shirt having a frill en jabot. His face was shining and glistening
with cleanliness and happiness, and she looked up to him as if she were very proud of her young
husband. He said he was very happy, and I complimented her on her dress, and asked her if she
had bought much for the occasion, and she admitted that she had. I asked her where they went
to church (all niggers are great worshippers somewhere, and generally are Methodists); and
he said he went to the "Methodist Church," that his wife was a member, and I encouraged him
to continue going regularly. He said he had married her for the purpose of doing so, and evidently
looked up to her as a teacher in these matters. They said they could both read printed characters,
but not writing, and that they read their Bibles. I asked him if there were any other cars
on the line like Mr. Tyson's, and he said, "Yes, several, miss." "Are they handsomer than his?"
"Some are, they are all different in their fancy principle." He told us, of his own accord,
that they had both been slaves. He bought his freedom for five hundred dollars. They both had
been kindly treated as slaves, but he said, not only the hickory stick, but the "raw hide,"
was frequently used by unkind masters and mistresses; and, on my asking him whether slaves
had any redress in such cases, he said their free friends may try to get some redress for them,
but it does no good. This was his testimony on the subject, and I shall give you the testimony
of every one as I gather it for you to put together, that you may be able to form your own
deductions. Mr. Tyson had told us they had redress, though he is an enemy to the "institution"
of slavery, as it is here called, but still maintains, what is no doubt the case, that they
are oftener much happier in America than the free negro. Indeed he told us a well-treated slave
will look down on a freeman, and say, "Ah! yes, he's only some poor free trash. He's a poor
white free trash." It was curious to notice Jerry's sayings, only some of which I can remember.
Mr. Tyson looked down the line from the balcony yesterday, and said, to Jerry, who had got
out of a passenger car for a minute, "Jerry, do you see the train coming?" "Yes, sir; it blowed
right up there;" meaning it had whistled. I will write to you more at large ere long about
slavery, when I have not topics pressing on time and pen.

We left our hotel this morning at eight o'clock, and even in the omnibus noticed the improved
and very intelligent appearance of the men. They answered us quickly, cheerfully, and to the
purpose; many wore large picturesque felt hats of various forms. It is true that, on starting,
we were still in Virginia, of which Wheeling is one of the largest towns; but the bulk of our
fellow-passengers were evidently from the West; they are chiefly descendants of the New Englanders,
and partake of their character, with the exception of the nasal twang, which is worse in New
England than anywhere else in America, and we are now losing the sound of it. The omnibus made
a grand circuit of the town to pick up passengers, and thus gave us the only opportunity we
had of seeing something of it. It rained in torrents, and this probably made it look more dismal
than usual, but it certainly is much less picturesque and more English-looking than any town
we have yet seen. The coal and iron, which constitute its chief trade, give it a very dirty
appearance; but its natural situation, stretching along the banks of the Ohio, which are here
very high on both sides, is very beautiful. The omnibus at last crossed the river by a very
fine suspension bridge, and, having left the slave states behind us, we found ourselves in
the free State of Ohio.

On the opposite side of the river we entered the cars of the Ohio Central Railroad, but alas!
we had no Mr. Tyson, and no sofas or tables or balconies, and were again simple members of
the public, destined to enjoy all the tortures of the common cars. These however were in first-rate
style, with velvet seats, and prettily painted, with brilliant white panelled ceilings; and
we here fell in again, to my no small comfort, with the venders of fruit and literature, or
"pedlaring," as it is called, which forms a pleasant break in the tedium of a long journey.
I have been often told the reverse, but the literature sold in this way is, as far as we have
seen, rather creditable than otherwise to the country, being generally of an instructive and
useful character. Many works published quite recently in England, could be bought either in
the cars or at the stores; and some of the better class of English novels are reprinted in
America, and sold at the rate of two or three shillings a volume. The daily newspapers, sold
on the railways, are numerous; but these, with very few exceptions, are quite unworthy of the
country. In general there are no articles worth reading, for they are filled with foolish and
trashy anecdotes, written, apparently, by penny-a-liners of the lowest order of ability. The
magazines, and some of the weekly illustrated papers, are a degree better, but a great deal
of the wit in these is reproduced from "Punch."

The first eighty-two miles to Zanesville were through a pretty and hilly country. The hills
were as usual covered with woods of every hue, so that though the scenery was inferior to what
we had been passing through for the last few days, it was still very beautiful. Zanesville,
which is a considerable town, is situated on the Muskingham river. This fine broad stream must
add considerably to the waters of the Ohio, into which it falls soon after leaving Zanesville.

At Zanesville, after partaking of an excellent dinner, we were joined by an intelligent woman,
returning home, with her little baby of ten weeks old, from a visit she had just been making
to her mother. Her own home is in Missouri, and her husband being the owner of a farm of 500
acres, she was able to give us a good deal of information about the state of agriculture in
the Far West. I learnt much from her on various subjects, and was much surprised at the quick
sharp answers she gave to all my questions. She was well dressed, something in the style of
the English lady's maid, was evidently well to do, and was travelling night and day with her
merry little baby. She possesses one slave of fourteen, for whom she gave four hundred dollars,
whom she has had from infancy; she brings her up as her own, and this black girl is now taking
care of her other children in her absence. I asked, "What do the slaves eat?" "Everything:
corn-bread, that's the most." Papa said, "It is a great shame making Missouri a slave state."

Woman. "Ah yes; keeps it back."

Self. "Have you good health?"--many parts being said to be unhealthy.

Woman. A quick nod. "First-rate."

Self. "Did your mother give you the hickory stick?"

Woman. "No: the switch:--raised me on the rod of correction."

Self. "Had your husband the farm before you married?"

Woman. "His father had 'entered it,' and he gave my husband money, and my mother gave me money,
and then we married and 'entered it' ourselves."

All these answers came out with the utmost quickness and intelligence. She is an Irish Roman
Catholic, her mother having brought her as a baby from Ireland, her husband is also Irish;
but they are now Americans of the Far West in their manner and singular intelligence, beating
even the clever Irish in this respect.

I said: "Do you pray much to the Virgin Mary in your part of America?"

Woman. "No: don't notice her much."

Self. "I am glad of that."

Woman. "We respect her as the mother of God."

She said the corn on the road-side we were then passing was far inferior to western produce,
that it ought to be much taller, and that if it were so, the ear would be much larger and fuller.
Our English wheat is never called corn, but simply wheat; and the other varieties oats, rye,
&c., are called by their different names, but the generic term corn, in America, always means
Indian corn. It is necessary to know this in order to prevent confusion in conversation. This
woman's name was Margaret M.; she was twenty-seven years of age, but looked younger; her husband,
James M., was thirty-six.

I asked her whether he was tall or short. "Oh tall, of course. I wouldn't have had a poor short
man." So we looked at papa, and laughed, and said our tastes were the same. She was a most
agreeable companion. She noticed that I was reading a novel by the author of "John Halifax,"
which I had bought, the whole three volumes, for 1s. 6d., and said, "Ah! that's the sort of
reading I like. That's a novel; but my priest tells me not to read that kind, that it fills
me with silly thoughts; but to read something to make me more intelligent." I thought there
seemed no deficiency in this respect, but agreed that the advice was good, and said that I
had bought this for cheapness, and for being portable, it being in the pamphlet form; and that
I was so interrupted with looking at the lovely scenery when travelling, that I could not take
in anything deeper.

We wished each other good bye, and she wished me a happy meeting again with our children. And
now papa says this must be closed, and it certainly has attained to no mean length, so I will
not begin another sheet, and hope you will not be wearied with this long chapter.

FOOTNOTE:

[7] These photographs cannot be reproduced here, which I regret, as they were very well done.

                                           Columbus, Oct. 23rd, 1858.

The letter which I sent you from this place this morning will have told you of our arrival
here, but it was closed in such haste that I omitted many things which I ought to have mentioned.
It, moreover, carried us only to Zanesville, and I ought to have told you that the view continued
very pretty all the way to this place, and the day having cleared up at noon, we had a brilliant
evening to explore this town.

Before describing Columbus, however, I shall go back to some omissions of a still older date;
for I ought to have told you of a grand sight we saw the day we passed the Alleghany Ridge.
On the preceding evening Mr. Tyson received a telegraphic message to say that an extensive
fire was raging in the forest; it is supposed to have been caused by some people shooting in
the woods. It must have been a grand sight to the passengers by the train from which we had
separated, and which went on during the night through the scene of the conflagration, for the
fire was much more extensive than those which are constantly taking place, and which are passed
by unheeded,--unhonoured with a telegraphic notice. When we passed by the place next morning
it was still burning vigorously, but the daylight rendered the flames almost imperceptible.
It was curious, however, to see the volumes of smoke, which we first perceived in a hollow.
The fire was then travelling down the side of the mountain; and long after we passed the immediate
spot we saw the fire winding about the mountains, spreading greatly, in the direction of the
wind and making its way even against it, though it was blowing with considerable violence.
The people in the neighbourhood were busily employed in trying to save their hayricks from
destruction. Mr. Tyson said they would probably succeed in this, though the whole of the forest
was likely to be burnt, as the fire would wind about among the mountains and pass from one
to another for perhaps two months, unless a heavy rain put it out. This we hope has been the
case, as it poured in torrents all the following night when we were at Wheeling.

Another circumstance we ought to have mentioned was our passing through a very long tunnel,
called the Board Tree Tunnel, about 340 miles from Baltimore. This tunnel, after having fallen
in, has only been repaired within the last two months. The history of this catastrophe, and
of the mode of remedying it, forms quite an incident in the history of the railway, and shows
with what resolution difficulties in this country are overcome. To reopen the tunnel it was
clear would be a work of time, so Mr. Tyson resolved to run a new temporary railway for three
miles over the mountain which had been tunnelled, and this was accomplished by 3000 men in
ten days. We saw the place where this road had passed, and the zig-zag line by which the mountain
was crossed. The road seems positively to overhang the precipice, and reminded me of a mountain
pass in Switzerland--as, indeed, the whole of the road here does. Mr. Tyson himself drove the
first train over, and he said his heart was in his mouth when, having got to the top, he saw
the descent before him, and the engine and train on a precipice where the least contretemps
would have plunged the whole into the abyss below; but happily all went right, and till within
the last two months this temporary road has been used. It was really quite frightful to look
up and think a train could pass over such a place, the grade being 420 feet in a mile, or 1
in 121/2; but you will one day be able to form some idea of it, as a photograph was taken,
and Mr. Tyson will give us a copy of it. This is certainly a wonderful country for great enterprises,
and the Pennsylvania Central Railway, by which we contemplate recrossing the Alleghanies, is
in some respects a still more remarkable undertaking, though the height at which the mountains
are crossed on that line is not so great as that on the Baltimore and Ohio line, which, as
I told you in my last, is at an elevation of 2700 feet. It was long supposed that such a feat
could not be surpassed, but Mr. Tyson says that, encouraged by this, a railway now crosses
the Tyrolean Alps at a somewhat higher level.

To return, however, to the Board Tree Tunnel: Mr. Tyson told us that the difficulty of restoring
it to a safe condition was so great as almost to dishearten him till he had arched it completely
over from one end to the other with solid stone masonry, which has rendered the recurrence
of the accident impossible; but the disheartening circumstance, while the work was in progress,
was the danger to which the men employed in the work were exposed, from the constant falling
in of the roof. During its progress no less than forty-five men were killed, and about 400
severely wounded. They were chiefly Roman Catholics, and were it not for the encouragement
given by an energetic Roman Catholic priest, he hardly thinks the men would have continued
the work. The doctor, too, who attended the wounded, and whom we saw at breakfast at Grafton,
was also most devoted to them. It was quite touching to hear the tender-hearted way in which
Mr. Tyson spoke of the poor sufferers, for he was constantly there, and often saw them go in
to almost certain death. He mentioned one poor widow to whom he had just sent three hundred
dollars as a gift from the railway.

Before leaving the subject of Mr. Tyson, I must tell you one or two of his good stories. I
had been telling him of the negro meeting, which I described to you in my last. In it I told
you how the negroes had cried out "glory! glory!" from which it appears it is almost impossible
that they can refrain. In corroboration of this he told us of a nigger woman who was sold from
a Baptist to a Presbyterian family. In general slaves adopt, at once, the habits and doctrines
of their new owners; but this poor woman could not restrain herself, and greatly disturbed
the Presbyterian congregation, by shouting out "glory! glory!" in the middle of the service.
Next morning the minister sent for her and rebuked her for this unseemly interruption of his
sermon; but she said doggedly, "Can't help it, sir; I'm all full of glory; must shout it out."
Many of his amusing stories were about Irish labourers employed on the road. One of these,
whose duty it was to show a light at the station as the train passed, failed one night to do
so, and was seen asleep. The man who drove the engine threw a cinder at him as he passed, to
awake him; but, instead of hitting him, the cinder broke his lamp glass. All this was told
to Mr. Tyson, and also that the man was very angry at his lamp being broken. When Mr. T. went
down the line next day, he stopped to lecture him, and the following colloquy ensued:--

Mr. Tyson. "Well, your lamp was broke, I hear, yesterday."

Irishman. "O, yes sir;" (terrified out of his life at the scolding he feared was coming, for
he saw that Mr. Tyson knew all about it;) "but I forgive the blackguards intirely, sir, I quite
forgive them."

Mr. T. kept his counsel, said nothing more, and the lamp has never failed since; but half the
merit of this story depended on Mr. Tyson's way of telling it. He was deliciously graphic also,
and full of witty sayings of his own. When, for example, I showed him my photograph of your
little brother, he exclaimed, "Well, he is a fine fellow; HE don't mind if corn is five dollars
a bushel." I think you will all appreciate this as a perfect description of the unconcern of
a healthy intelligent-looking child, unconscious of the anxieties of those about him; but I
must reserve his other good sayings and stories till we meet.

To-day we have been most busily employed, for Mr. Garrett, our railway friend at Baltimore,
not only did us the good service of sending us by the car under Mr. Tyson's auspices, but gave
us letters of introduction both to this place and to Cincinnati; and his letters here to Mr.
Neil and Mr. Dennison have been of great use to us, as one or the other of them has been in
attendance upon us since 11 o'clock this morning, together with a very pleasing person, a widow,
niece of Mr. Neil, and they have shown us the town in first-rate style.

Columbus is built on the banks of the Sciota, about 90 miles from the point where it falls
into the Ohio. It is the capital of the State, and its streets, like those of Washington, have
been laid out with a view to its becoming one day a town of importance; but as the preparations
for this, though on a considerable scale, are not so great as at Washington, the non-completion
of the plan in its full extent produces no disagreeable effect. In fact, the streets where
finished are completely so, and the unfinished parts consist of an extension of these, in the
shape of long avenues of trees. In the principal streets the houses are not continuous, but
in detached villas, and, judging by the one in which Mr. Neil lives, appear to be very comfortable
residences. He and his niece called upon us yesterday evening, and, although he is an elderly
gentleman, he was here by appointment this morning at half-past 8, and took papa to call on
Mr. Dennison, when they arranged together the programme for the day.

At 11 o'clock Mr. Dennison called, and took us to the Penitentiary, where nearly 700 prisoners
are confined. I think he said 695, although it will hold the full number of 700 if need be.
For the credit of the sex, I must say that only ten out of the whole are females. These ten
are lodged each in a small room, for it can scarcely be called a cell, very well furnished,
and opening into a large sitting-room, of which they all have the unrestrained use, although
the presence of a matron puts a restraint on their tongues. They were employed in needlework.
The cells of the men are arranged in tiers, and are certainly very different looking habitations
to those of the women, and greatly inferior in size and airiness to the cells at Philadelphia,
where, in addition to the grating in front of the cell, there was a door behind leading into
a small enclosure or court. Here the only opening in the cell is by a door into a long gallery,
and the cells were much smaller than either at Philadelphia or at Kingston; but the prisoners
only inhabit these cells at night, the solitary system not being adopted or approved of here.

The silent system, however, is practised here as at Kingston, and the prisoners are employed
in large workshops, chiefly in making agricultural instruments, hoops for casks, saddles, carpenters'
tools, and even rocking horses and toys, which must be rather heart-breaking work for those
who have children. The men have certain tasks allotted them, and when the day's work is done,
may devote the rest of their time to working on their own account, which most of them do; the
chief warden told us that he had lately paid a man, on his leaving the prison, a hundred and
twenty-five dollars for extra work done in this way. The warden told us that the men, when
discharged, were always strongly urged to return to their own homes instead of seeking to retrieve
their characters elsewhere, and that their doing so was generally attended with a better result
than when they went to a new place and had no check on their proceedings. This does away with
the chief argument of our quaker friend at Philadelphia, in favour of the solitary system,
which was, that the prisoner's return to his friends became more easy, when none of them knew
that he had been in prison, of which they could not well be ignorant if he had mixed with other
prisoners in a public jail. It must be borne in mind, however, that the great demand in this
country for work renders it much more easy for a person so circumstanced to obtain employment,
even with a damaged character, than in England, where our ticket-of-leave men find this almost
impossible. There is also, we are told, a kinder feeling towards prisoners here on their leaving
the jail than in England, and this saves them from the want and consequent temptation to which
our English ticket-of-leave men are exposed; the result is that a much less proportion of those
released in America are re-committed for new offences.

We visited the workshops, and afterwards went into a large court to see the men defile in gangs,
and march into their dining hall, in which we afterwards saw them assembled at dinner, and
a capital savoury dinner it seemed to be. They have as much bread as they choose to eat, and
meat twice a day; their drink is water, except when the doctor orders it otherwise. There are
chaplains, called here Moral Instructors, who visit them and perform the service in the chapel,
and evening schools are provided, at which the chaplains attend to teach reading, writing,
and arithmetic. A library of books of general information is provided for the prisoner's use,
and to each a Bible is given, and they are allowed to buy sound and useful books. They have
each a gas lamp in their cell, which enables them to read there when their work is done, and
they are allowed to see their friends in the presence of an officer. Sixty of the prisoners
were Negroes, which is a large proportion when compared with the total numbers of the white
and black population, especially as the blacks are often let off, owing to the leniency of
the committing magistrates who have compassion on their inferior intelligence; and it is owing,
it is said, to a like leniency that there are so few females, though certainly not for the
same reason. There are a large number of Irish in the prison.

Our next visit, still under Mr. Dennison's escort, was to the Capitol or State House, a very
fine building of white limestone. The façade is more than 300 feet long, and the height nearly
160 feet to the top of the dome. This however has not yet been completed. The architecture
is Grecian. Here, as at Washington, are Halls for the Senate and House of Representatives,
in equally good taste and somewhat similarly arranged. Mr. Dennison, who had once been a member
of the Senate, was repudiating the accounts so commonly given of the behaviour of the senators,
when Mr. Niel came in, and over-hearing what he was saying, begged to remark that when they
"went to work" they usually divested themselves of their coats without substituting any senatorial
garment in its place; and putting his legs on the desk before the chair, he declared that such
was the usual posture in which they listened to the oratory of the place.[8]

We afterwards went through the apartments appropriated to the Treasurer and Auditor of the
State, the two chief officers of the Government, which are very capacious and well fitted up--and
we were specially introduced to both these functionaries; Mr. Neil, who is somewhat of a wag,
was rather jocose with them, and high as their position here is, they very cordially retaliated
on him. We next went to those appropriated to the Governor of the State, General Chase, in
order that we might be introduced to him, but he was out, which we regretted. He is a candidate
to succeed Mr. Buchanan as President. The remainder of the building was occupied by numerous
committee-rooms, by the courts of law, the judges' apartments, a law library, and a beautiful
room intended for a general library, but in which the collection of books at present is very
small. On the whole the building and its contents are very creditable to this, the largest
and wealthiest of the States in the West, considering that forty years ago the country here
was a wild forest region where no tree had been cut down.

25th October.--We have seen Columbus well, and it has much to attract attention. On Saturday
we went from the Capitol to the Lunatic Asylum, but excepting in its being more pleasingly
arranged than the one at Utica, there was nothing very striking in its appearance. The galleries
in which the patients were walking were prettily decorated with flowers cut out in paper, giving
it a very gay appearance; and when the patients become desponding, they have a dance in the
great hall, to revive them. The matron who went round with us said that the men and women conduct
themselves on these occasions with perfect propriety. The men and women are otherwise so entirely
separated in this Asylum that papa went round to the men's wards with the doctor, while I was
taken round by the matron to those appropriated to the women. We thought it a pleasant, cheerful-looking
place, considering the melancholy object to which it is devoted.

The next sight we saw was, the Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb: being Saturday, we could not see
the mode of tuition, but we have gone through it this morning, and yesterday we attended the
afternoon service there, so that in our three visits we have been able to form a pretty good
idea of the system carried out. They have an alphabet by which they can spell words, which
they do by using one hand only. They speak thus with considerable rapidity, but this method
is confined almost entirely to express proper names and words of uncommon use, as the whole
conversation is carried on in general by signs, and it was most beautiful to see the graceful
manner in which the matron spoke to them. As this system of signs does not represent words,
but things and ideas, it has the great advantage of being universally understood when taught,
and as the same system is adopted in several countries of Europe, in Norway and Sweden for
example, a Norwegian and American child can converse easily together without either knowing
a syllable of the other's language. It seems quite as rapid as talking.

We were present at the afternoon sermon, which lasted about half an hour, the subject being
that of Simeon in the Temple, and except to express Simeon's name, there was no use at all
made of the fingers. Dr. Stone, the principal, had preached in the morning on the subject of
Daniel's interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, and when we went, the children were being
examined on the subject of this lecture. We saw a number of questions asked, but in this case
the words were spelled in order that Dr. Stone, who was teaching them, might be satisfied that
they understood the full meaning of the question in its grammatical sense, as well as its general
signification, and the answers were all written down on large black boards. They wrote with
prodigious rapidity in large distinct writing--and the answers, which were all different and
showed they were not got up by rote, were in most cases very good. This was being done by the
eldest class, and some of the elder boys and girls seemed full of intelligence. We saw minutely
only what was going on in this and in the youngest class, which was no less remarkable, considering
that some of the children had not been more than two or three months in the Asylum, and when
they came there had no idea of either reading or writing.

When I say the youngest class, it is not with reference to the age of the pupils, but to the
recent period of their admission, for some of them were as old in years as in the first class,
while others were very young; one of them, a very pretty little Jewish girl with sparkling
intelligent eyes, was indeed a mere child. We had on Sunday seen this little girl being taught
her lesson, which consisted of the simple words, "I must be kind," and it was very pretty to
see the way in which the notion of kindness was conveyed by signs. This morning she was writing
this on the slate, and she afterwards wrote in a very neat handwriting a number of short words--cat,
dog, horse, &c.--which were dictated to her by signs which were of so simple a nature that
we could understand many of them; a goat, for example, was represented by the fingers being
stuck on each side of the head as horns, and then by the man drawing his hand down from his
chin to indicate the beard. They thus became acquainted by signs with almost every object in
the first instance, and are led on by degrees to complex ideas of every kind. Dr. Stone says
that the use of signs is known in England, but he believes is never practised to any extent,
and certainly not in giving religious instruction. No attempt is made here, as in England,
to teach them to articulate, as he considered the attempt to do this to be a great mistake,
it being a painful effort to the child, which never leads to any good practical result. In
some cases where deafness has been accidentally brought on after children have learned to speak,
it is then as far as possible kept up; but even then the effort, as we saw, was very painful.

Our next visit was to the Blind Institution, but here there was nothing very remarkable, though
owing to the children not being in school we saw the Institution very imperfectly. Raised characters
are used here, as I believe everywhere else; one little girl who was called up read and pronounced
very well; we also heard some of them sing and play for a considerable time. The bulk of the
children, or rather young people, for they keep them here till they are one or two and twenty,
were walking about the gardens invariably in pairs, which seems an excellent preservative against
accidents: this they do of their own accord.

We next went to the Idiot Asylum, but the children being, as usual on Saturday, out of doors,
we merely took a general look at the place, and returned there this morning to see the system
pursued for them more in detail. Dr. Patterson, the superintendent, is a man of wonderful energy;
and two young women and a matron, the two young teachers especially, must be exemplary characters,
for they appear to devote themselves to their work with an energy and kindness which is perfectly
marvellous, considering the apparently hopeless task they are engaged in. However, when taken
young, from six to seven years of age, the capabilities of these poor children for improvement
seem in general great, unless the infirmity is occasioned by epileptic fits, when the cure
is considered almost hopeless. We were entertained by a story told by Dr. Patterson of a boy
brought to him by the Mayor of C., who told him it was a bad case, but that he would be satisfied
if he could fit him to be a missionary. Dr. P. replied that he could not answer for that, but
that he could at all events fit him to be Mayor of C.

The great means resorted to for improvement is constant occupation, changed every quarter of
an hour through out the day. By this means their physical power at night is nearly exhausted,
and they invariably sleep well; where no greater improvement is arrived at, they can in all
cases gain cleanly habits, and get entirely rid of that repulsive appearance which an idiot
left to himself is almost sure at last to acquire. Active exercises are what they resort to
in the first instance; they have a large school-room fitted up with ladders and gymnastic apparatus
of all kinds. We saw little boys, who shortly before were scarcely able to stand alone, climbing
places which made me tremble for their safety, but it was curious to observe with what caution
they did it.

When we entered the room the youngest class were all standing round a piano, at which one of
the teachers was playing, whilst she and the other teacher were leading them on in singing
a cheerful song, and it was really quite touching to hear and see them; they sang very fairly,
not worse than children usually do at that age. After a quarter of an hour of this they went
through their Calisthenic exercises, marching in perfect time, clapping their hands, and going
through different gestures with great accuracy, and these poor children a very few months ago
had hardly any control over their actions.

Another thing taught is, to distinguish colour and form--for which purpose they have cards
cut out into circles, squares, and octagons--and other marked shapes, of every variety and
shade of colour. Five or six of these of different sorts were spread on the table, and a large
unsorted pack was placed before a little boy five or six years old, and it was quite interesting
to see him proceed to sort them by placing each one on the top of the counterpart which had
been placed at first on the table. As there were many more kinds in the pack than those spread
out on the table, when he came to a new one he first placed it in contact with the others to
see if it suited, and after going round them all and seeing that none were the same, he appeared
puzzled, and at last set it down in a place by itself. Although there was a certain degree
of vacancy in the expression of the child, it seemed quite to brighten up at each successive
step, and the occupation was evidently a source of considerable enjoyment to him. This little
fellow had been a very short time in the Asylum, and when admitted had not the slightest idea
of form, colour, or size.

Another mode adopted is, to take little blocks of wood of different sizes and forms, which
the child is required to fit into corresponding holes cut out in a board. All this is for the
least advanced pupils. They learn afterwards to read and write, and some of the very little
ones traced lines upon a board as well as most children could do with all their senses about
them. The elder ones could write short words and read easy books; they are taught to read by
having short words like cow, dog, ox, printed on cards, and are then shown by a picture what
the words represent, and they are not taught their letters or to spell words till they begin
to learn to write; the elementary books therefore consist chiefly of words representing ideas
quite independently of the letters of which the words are formed. Many, however, can never
fully obtain the power of speech, and that without any physical defect in their organs, and
without the accompaniment of deafness, for they hear perfectly. In these instances to teach
them to speak is very difficult, and sometimes hopeless. The poor little boy whom we saw sorting
his cards, was one of those cases in which no articulate sound had ever been uttered, or could
be produced by any teaching. At the same time the development of his head, and that of many
others, was almost perfect and quite a beau ideal of what a head should be.

I forgot in speaking of the deaf and dumb to mention that their crying and laughter were quite
like those of other children, and it appears to be the same with the idiots, even though they
cannot speak. There was among the idiots one boy in irons to support his legs, which were otherwise
quite without power, and he seemed under this treatment to be rapidly improving. They all have
meat twice a day, and great care is taken to feed them generously. The only other sight in
Columbus is the Medical College, which, however, we had no time to go over. We must, however,
except the Governor's house, not forgetting its inmates, Governor Chase himself, and his interesting
daughter. We had been introduced to the Governor by Mr. Dennison, after missing him on Saturday
at the Capitol, and he most kindly asked us to drink tea and spend the evening with him, apologising
for time not permitting his daughter to call upon us. He is Governor of the State of Ohio,
an office that is held for two years. He is a first-rate man in talent and character,--a strong
abolitionist, and a thorough gentleman in his appearance--showing that the active and adventurous
habits of his nation are quite consistent with the highest polish and refinement. He is deeply
involved in the politics of his country, and, as I said before, is a candidate for the next
presidentship. His strong views on the question of slavery will probably be a bar to his success,
but unfortunately another hindrance may be that very high social character for which he is
so remarkable. To judge at least by the treatment of such men as Henry Clay, and others of
his stamp, it would appear as if real merit were a hindrance rather than a help to the attainment
of the highest offices in America.[9]

The Governor's house looked externally something like an English rectory standing in a little
garden, and we were at first shown into a small sitting-room. It seems the fashion all over
America, as it is abroad, to leave the space open in the middle of the room, and the chairs
and sofas arranged round the walls, but there is always a good carpet of lively colours or
a matting in summer, and not the bare floor so constantly seen in France and Germany. The little
gathering consisted of the Governor, his two daughters (his only children), his niece, and
his sister, Mr. Dennison, and Mr. Barnay, a clever New York lawyer, with whom we had crossed
the Atlantic. But if the Governor recommended himself to us as a gentleman, what am I to say
of his daughter? Papa has gone out and has left her description to me, whereas he could give
a much more lively one, as he at once lost his heart to her. Her figure is tall and slight,
but at the same time beautifully rounded; her neck long and graceful, with a sweet pretty brunette
face. I seldom have seen such lovely eyes and dark eyelashes; she has rich dark hair in great
profusion, but her style and dress were of the utmost simplicity and grace, and I almost forgave
papa for at once falling in love with her. Her father has been three times a widower, though
not older-looking than papa, and with good reason he worships his daughter. She has been at
the head of her father's house for the last six months, and the naïve importance she attached
to her office gave an additional attraction to her manners. While we sat talking in the little
room the Governor handed me a white and red rose as being the last of the season. He had placed
them ready for me in a glass, and I have dried them as a memorial of that pleasant evening.
We soon went into the dining-room, where tea and coffee were laid out on a light oak table,
with an excellent compôte of apples, a silver basket full of sweet cakes, of which the Americans
are very fond: bread--alas! always cut in slices whether at the hotels or in private, fresh
butter,--an improvement on the usual salt butter of the country, and served, as it generally
is, in silver perforated dishes to allow of the water from the ice to drain through, and a
large tureen of cream toast. This is also a common dish, being simply slices of toast soaked
in milk or cream and served hot. It often appears at the hotels, but there it is milk toast,
and is not so good. I thought the cream toast excellent, and a great improvement on our bread
and milk in England, but papa did not like it. The Governor and his fair daughter presided
at the table, the Governor first saying grace very reverently, and we had a very pleasant repast.

After this we were conducted to the drawing-room. Such a bijou of a room! The size was about
twenty feet by eighteen, and the walls and ceiling, including doors, window-frames, and shutters--there
were no curtains, might have been all made of the purest white china. It is a most peculiar
and desirable varnish which is used on their wood-work that gives this effect. Mr. Tyson told
us that it is made of Canada balsam, and that it comes therefore from our own territory, so
that it is very stupid of Cubitt and others not to make use of it. The effect is like what
the white wood-work of our drawing-room was when it was first finished, and you may imagine
the appearance of the whole room being done with this fine white polish everywhere. We see
it in all the hotels and railway carriages, so that it cannot be expensive. The windows were
pointed, and the shutters were made to slide into the walls. They were shut on that evening,
and were made, as they often are, with a small piece of Venetian blind-work let into them,
also painted white. If we had called in the morning we should probably have found the room
in nearly total darkness, as we found to be the case at Mr. Neil's, for the dear Americans
seem too much afraid of their sun. There was a white marble table in the centre of this drawing-room,
and the room was well lighted with gas. The only ornament was a most lovely ideal head in marble
by Power, the sculptor of the Greek slave. The simplicity and beauty of the room could not
be surpassed, and we spent a most interesting evening.

The father and daughter we found to be full of intelligence and knowledge of our best authors,
though neither of them has ever been in England. Miss Chase is much interested in a new conservatory,
took me over it, and gave me several very pretty things to dry. I shall endeavour to get cuttings
or seeds of them. I was generous enough to allow papa afterwards to go over the conservatory
alone with her. She is longing to come and see England, but her father is too busy at present
to leave the country. She expressed such sorrow not to know more of us, that we promised to
call this morning after our "asylum" work was done, when she showed us over the house, which
is very pretty, and nicely arranged throughout.

I think I have nothing more to say of Columbus, except that we heard two sermons and saw one
on Sunday; for, besides the morning sermon at the Episcopal Church, and the sign one to the
deaf and dumb, we looked in at another where a negro was preaching to his fellow niggers with
great energy and life; but the ladies were quiet, and restrained their agonies and their "glory."

Cincinnati, Oct. 27th.--We left Columbus at forty minutes past twelve yesterday. Mr. Dennison
and Mr. Neil's son met us at the station, and Mr. Neil gave me some dried red leaves he had
promised me, which have kept their colour tolerably well. Mr. D. is president of the railroad
on which we were about to travel, and wished to give us free tickets to this place, but papa
declined with many thanks. Papa has no sort of claim or connection with this railway, and I
only mention the circumstance to show the extreme kindness and liberality of these gentlemen,
who knew nothing of us, and probably had never heard our names until they had received letters
of introduction about us from others, who were themselves equally strangers to us a few days
ago. They introduced us to the freight agent of the Ohio and Mississippi Railway, who travelled
with us, as did also a clever handsome widow. She seemed to be well connected, being related
to General Cass and other people of note. She reminds me a little of Mrs. B. in style and manner,
and it is pleasant to have some one to talk to, for we do not find people in general communicative
in travelling, though papa says the fault may be ours.

There was nothing particularly pretty on the road, as the trees are, I grieve to say, losing
their leaves in this neighbourhood; but on approaching this great city, "the Queen of the West,"
we came again on the Ohio. The water is now very low, but the bed of the river shows how great
its width is when full; and even now there is a perfect navy of splendid steamers floating
on its waters, many of which we saw as our train drove through the suburban streets of the
city. Unhappily the rain poured down upon us as we got into the omnibus, but we were soon consoled
by finding ourselves in this most magnificent hotel, the finest I have yet seen. The drawing
room, is I should think, unsurpassed in beauty by any hotel anywhere, and I shall endeavour
to make a drawing of it before I leave. The hotel at Columbus was tolerably large, as you may
suppose, when I tell you that our dining room there was about ninety feet by thirty. This one,
however, has two dining rooms of at least equal dimensions, which together can dine 1000 persons,
and it makes up 600 beds. We sat in the drawing room yesterday evening, for we could not reconcile
ourselves to leave it, even to write this journal. There were various ladies and gentlemen
laughing and talking together, but no evening dresses, and nothing of any importance to remark
about them. One young lady only was rather grandly dressed in a drab silk; she afterwards sat
down to the piano, and began the usual American jingle, for I cannot call it music; and I have
since been told she was the daughter of the master of the house. "Egalité" is certainly the
order of the day here, and this young lady was treated quite on an equality with the other
ladies in the room. The food is excellent, and we are very thankful to have so luxurious a
resting place if we are at all detained here. We have several friends in the hotel, who are
here to meet papa on business.

This morning we have had a visit from Mr. Mitchell, the astronomer, and author of the work
on Astronomy, which I remember reading with pleasure just before I left England. His daughter
is to call on me and drive us out, and we are to pay a visit to his observatory. We went this
afternoon to leave some letters, which Mr. Dennison had given us for Mr. Rufus King and Mr.
Lars Anderson. We found Mrs. King at home; her husband is much devoted to educational subjects
and to the fine arts. There were some very good pictures and engravings in the drawing room,
and amongst the latter two of Sir Robert Strange's performances. We found both Mr. and Mrs.
Anderson at home; they live in a splendid house, but as it was getting dark we could not see
the details. We sent in our cards with our letter, and the room being full of people, Mr. Anderson
introduced papa to each one separately, and me as Mrs. S----. As these guests went out others
came in, and fresh introductions took place, but still always Mr. T---- and Mrs. S----, and
he so addressed me during the visit. As we were going away papa said that he was making some
strange mistake about my name, but he insisted upon it that we had so announced it; and on
looking at our cards I found the card of a very vulgar lady at New York, which I had given
by mistake as my own.

As we were leaving the room, a very amiable and pleasing person asked me if I would not call
upon Mr. Longworth, the most celebrated character in this country, who she said was her father
and the father of Mrs. Anderson. I said that we had letters to him from Mr. Jared Sparks, and
that we had meant to call on him the next day, but she said we had better return with her then.
We accordingly accompanied her through Mr. Anderson's garden, and through an adjoining one
which led to her father's house, likewise a very large one, though not presenting such an architectural
appearance as Mr. Anderson's. The old gentleman soon made his appearance, and afterwards Mrs.
Longworth. They were a most venerable couple, who had a twelve-month ago celebrated their golden
marriage, or fiftieth anniversary of their wedding day. We were invited to stay and drink tea,
which we did, and met a large assemblage of children and grand-children; a great-grand-child
who had been present at the golden wedding, was in its nursery.

Mr. Longworth, among other things remarkable about him, is the proprietor of the vineyards
from which the sparkling champagne is produced, known, from the name of the grape, as the sparkling
Catawba; but he seems no less remarkable from the immense extent of his strawberry beds, which
cover, I think he said, 60 acres of ground. He told us the number of bushels of fruit they
daily produce in the season; but the number is legion, and I dare not set it down from memory.
He showed papa a book he had written about his grapes and strawberries, and is very incredulous
as to any in the world being better than his. This led to a discussion upon the relative size
of trees and plants on the two sides of the Atlantic; and in speaking of the Indian corn, he
tells us he has seen it standing, in Ohio, eighteen feet high, and he says it has been known,
in Kentucky, to reach as high as twenty-five feet, and the ear eighteen inches long.

The old gentleman is a diminutive-looking person, with a coat so shabby that one would be tempted
to offer him a sixpence if we met him in the streets; indeed a story is told of a stranger,
who, going into his garden, and being shown round it by Mr. Longworth, gave him a dollar, which
the latter good-humouredly put into his pocket, and it was not till he was asked to go into
the house that the stranger discovered him to be the owner.[10] He is, however, delightfully
vivacious, and full of agricultural hobbies. His wife is a very pleasing, primitive-looking
person. We tasted at their house some of the ham for which this city, called by the wits Porkopolis,
is so remarkable. The maple sugar is used in curing it, and improves the flavour very much.

October 28th.--I must bring this letter to a rapid close, for it must be posted a day earlier
than we expected. We intend to start in two days for St. Louis, and there I will finish my
account of Cincinnati. To-day we have seen a great many schools, which have given us considerable
insight into the state of education in America. My next letter will probably bring us to our
most western point, though we have not yet quite settled whether we shall go to the Falls of
St. Anthony, or to Chicago. Papa says I must close, and I must obey.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] Though this description of the Senate was meant as a good-humoured satire on the absence
of etiquette in their assemblies, it is probably no very exaggerated account of what is sometimes
seen there; but it would be most unfair to draw any conclusion from this as to the behaviour
in general society of well-educated gentlemen in America, there being as much real courtesy
among these as is found in any other country, though certainly not always accompanied by the
refinements of polished society in Europe.

[9] It is not meant here to obtrude special views of politics, or to maintain that democratic
principles have naturally this tendency; but it may help to explain why so little is heard
or known in England of the better class of Americans. Their unobtrusive mode of life entirely
accounts for this, and it is to be regretted that it is the noisy demagogue who forms the type
of the American as known to the generality of the European public.

[10] I should not have taken the liberty of printing this account of Mr. Longworth were he
not, in a manner, a public character, well known throughout the length and breadth of the land,
and his eccentricities are as familiar to every one at Cincinnati as his goodness of heart.
In speaking, too, of his family, it is most gratifying to be able to record the patriarchal
way in which we found him and Mrs. Longworth, surrounded by their descendants to the third
generation.

If any apology is required, the same excuse--of his being a well-known public character--may
be made for saying so much of Governor Chase and of his family.

                                 Vincennes, Indiana, Nov. 1st, 1858.

My last letter brought us up to our arrival at Cincinnati, and our passing the evening at Mr.
Longworth's on the following day. Next day, Wednesday the 27th, Mrs. Anderson, Mr. Longworth's
daughter, called and asked us to spend that evening also at her mother's house. She took me
out in her carriage in the morning to see some of the best shops, which were equal to some
of our best London ones in extent and in the value of the goods; and in the course of the day
we called at Monsieur Raschig's; he not being at home, we made an appointment to call there
late in the evening.

The party at the Longworths was confined to the members of their large family, all of whom
are very agreeable. There were two married daughters, Mrs. Flagg and Mrs. Anderson, and the
grandson and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Stettinius; and we also saw the little great-grand-daughter,
who is a pretty child of eighteen months. The dining-room not being long enough to accommodate
us all at tea, the table was placed diagonally across the room, and it was surprising to see
Mrs. Longworth pouring out tea and coffee for the whole party as vigorously as if she were
eighteen years old, her age being seventy-two. She is remarkably pretty, with a fair complexion,
and a very attractive and gentle manner and face.

We had quails and Cincinnati hams, also oysters served in three different ways--stewed, fried
in butter, and in their natural state, but taken out of their shells and served en masse in
a large dish. Our friends were astonished that we did not like these famous oysters of theirs
in any form, which we did not, they being very huge in size and strong in flavour. We said,
too, we did not like making two bites of an oyster; they pitied our want of taste, and lamented
over our miserably small ones in England. After tea we saw some sea-weed and autumnal leaves
beautifully dried and preserved by Mrs. Flagg, and we also looked over an illustrated poem
on the subject of Mr. and Mrs. Longworth's golden wedding, the poem being the composition of
Mr. Flagg. Towards ten o'clock a table was laid out in the drawing-room with their Catawba
champagne, which was handed round in tumblers, followed by piles of Vanilla ice a foot and
a half high. There were two of these towers of Babel on the table, and each person was given
a supply that would have served for half a dozen in England; the cream however is so light
in this country that a great deal more can be taken of it than in England; ices are extremely
good and cheap all over America; even in very small towns they are to be had as good as in
the large ones. Water ices or fruit ices are rare; they are almost always of Vanilla cream.
In summer a stewed peach is sometimes added.

We left the Longworths that evening in a down pour of rain, so that papa only got out for a
minute at the door of Miss Raschig's uncle, and asked him to breakfast with us next morning.
He accordingly came; we found him a most quick, lively, and excellent man, full of intelligence,
and he received us with the warmth and ardour of an old friend, having during the twenty-five
years he has been in America scarcely ever seen any one who knew any of his relatives. He is
a Lutheran minister, and has a large congregation of Germans. He said a good deal had been
going on during the revivals at Cincinnati, and he thought the feeling shown was of a satisfactory
kind; there had been preaching in tents opposite his church.

The part of the town where he resides beyond the Miami Canal, which divides it into two portions,
is known by the name of "Over the Rhine," and is inhabited almost entirely by Germans, of whom
there are no less than 60,000 in the town. Mr. Raschig's own family consists of nine sons and
one daughter, the youngest child being a fortnight old. We went to see them before we left
the place, and found the mother as excellent and agreeable as himself, with her fine little
baby in her arms. She said that boys were much easier disposed of than girls in this country,
and their three eldest sons are already getting their livelihood, the eldest of all being married.
We saw the third son, a very intelligent youth, who is a teacher in one of the schools in the
town, and the daughter, a pleasing girl of fourteen, sung to us. She promises to have a good
voice, though it will never equal her cousin's.

On the evening of the 28th we went by invitation to Mr. and Mrs. King's. He is a lawyer, and
they are connected by marriage with the Neils of Columbus and with the Longworths. The Andersons
were there, and we again had a liberal supply of ices. The following evening, the 29th, we
went to the Andersons, where there was a large party consisting of the Directors of the Ohio
and Mississippi Railway, with whom, by the bye, I had dined that day at the hotel, there being
ten gentlemen and myself, the only lady, at table. The party at the Andersons was also an assemblage
of some of the beau monde of Cincinnati. The ladies were all dressed in high silk dresses remarkably
well made, and looking as if they all had come straight from Paris. I never saw a large party
of prettier or better chosen toilettes. The dresses were generally of rich brocaded silk, but
there was nothing to criticise, and all were in perfect taste. We assembled in a long drawing-room
carpeted, and sufficiently supplied with chairs, but there being neither tables nor curtains,
the room had rather a bare appearance, though it was well lighted and looked brilliant. Towards
ten o'clock we were handed into the dining-room, where there was a standing supper of oysters,--the
"institution" of oysters as they justly call it,--hot quails, ham, ices, and most copious supplies
of their beloved Catawba champagne, which we do not love, for it tastes, to our uninitiated
palates, little better than cider. It was served in a large red punch-bowl of Bohemian glass
in the form of Catawba cobbler, which I thought improved it; but between the wine and the quails,
which, from over hospitable kindness, were forced on poor papa, he awoke the next morning with
a bad headache, and did not get rid of it all day.

The weather during our stay at Cincinnati was so wet that, with the exception of a drive which
Mr. Anderson took us to some little distance on the heights above, and a long visit which we
paid to the school under Mr. King's auspices, we had little out-door work to occupy us. I once,
however, and papa twice, crossed the Ohio in a steamboat, and took a walk in the opposite slave
state of Kentucky. The view thence of the town and its fleet of steamboats is very striking.
The opposite hills, with the observatory perched on the highest summit, were very fine.

Mr. Anderson one day took us a long drive to the top of these hills; the whole country, especially
near a village called Clifton, about six miles from the town, is studded with villas. We drove
through the grounds of two which overlooked splendid views of the neighbouring country; each
of them being situated at the end of a sort of natural terrace projecting into the valley,
and thus commanding a panoramic view all round.

The grounds attached to these villas are of considerable extent, but nothing has surprised
us more than the poverty of the gardens in America. It may, however, be accounted for by the
difficulty and expense of obtaining labour in this country, and by the consequent facility
with which men who show any talent, and are really industrious, can advance themselves. A scientific
gardener, therefore, if any such there be, would not long remain in that capacity. One of the
houses had a really fine-looking conservatory attached to it, but, like others we have seen
in the course of our travels, it was almost entirely given up to rockery and ferns. This is
a degree better than when the owners indulge in statuary. We were made by the driver on another
occasion to stop at a garden ornamented in this way, but certainly Hiram Power's talents had
not been called into request, and the statues were of the most common-place order.

It is not only in their gardens, however, but in the general ornamental cultivation of their
grounds, that the Americans are deficient, for even at Newport, where we greatly admired, as
I think I mentioned, the greenness of the grass, it was coarse in quality, and bore no sort
of resemblance to a well-trimmed English lawn. Nor have we ever seen any fruit, with the exception
of their apples, to compare to ours in England. These are certainly very fine. I hardly know
the weight of an English apple, but at Columbus we got some which were brought from the borders
of Lake Erie which are called the twenty-ounce apple. The one we ate weighed about sixteen
ounces, and measured thirteen inches round. They are said to weigh sometimes as much as twenty-seven
ounces. It is what they call a "fall," meaning an autumnal, apple.[11]

Next to their apples their pears deserve notice; but, though better than ours, they are not
superior to those produced in France. The quantity of fruit, however, is certainly great, for
the peaches are standard and grown in orchards; but they are quite uncultivated, and the greater
part that we met with were hardly fit to eat. They are, notwithstanding, very proud of their
fruit, especially of these said peaches and of their grapes, which, to our minds, were just
as objectionable productions. There is one kind called the Isabella, which we thought most
disagreeable to eat, for the moment the skin is broken by the teeth and the grape squeezed
the whole inner part pops out in a solid mass into the mouth. We are past the season of wild
flowers; but these must make the country very beautiful in the early spring, to judge from
the profusion of rhododendron and other shrubs, which were most luxuriant, especially where
we crossed the Alleghanies and along the banks of the Connecticut. To return, however, to our
drive.

After visiting these villas we passed a great number of charitable institutions for the relief
of the poor, who are remarkably well looked after in this country. One of these institutions
was the Reformatory, a large building, where young boys are sent at whatever age they may prove
delinquents, and are kept and well educated till they are twenty-one. But the grand mode in
which the state provides against crime of all kinds is the system of education for all classes.

I have said we went under Mr. King's guidance to see the common schools of Cincinnati. These
are divided into three classes, called the district schools, the intermediate schools, and
the high schools; we went through each grade, and were much pleased with the proficiency of
the pupils. The examinations they went through in mental arithmetic were very remarkable, and
the questions put to the boys of the intermediate class, who were generally from eleven to
thirteen years old, were answered in a very creditable manner.

In the high school, the teaching is carried on till the pupils reach the age of sixteen or
seventeen, and even eighteen, after which they either leave school altogether or go to college.
They are generally the children of artisans or mechanics, but boys of all ranks are admitted,
and are moved on from one grade to another. The schools are entirely free, and girls are admitted
as well as boys, and in about equal numbers. The girls and boys are taught, for the most part,
in separate rooms, but repeat their lessons and are examined together, so that there is a constant
passing in and out from one class-room to another, but still great order is preserved. This
assembling together, however, of large numbers of boys and girls, for so considerable a portion
of the day, did not strike us as so desirable as it is there said to be. The advocates of the
system say it refines the rough manners of the boys; but it is more than questionable if the
characters of the girls are improved by it, and if the practice, in its general results, can
be beneficial.

The subjects taught to both boys and girls are invariably the same; and it was curious to hear
girls translating Cicero into excellent English, and parsing most complicated sentences, just
like the boys, and very often in better style, for they often answered when the boys could
not. They seemed chiefly girls from sixteen to eighteen. They answered, also, most difficult
questions in logic, and they learn a good deal of astronomy, chemistry, &c., and have beautiful
laboratories and instruments. Music is also taught in a very scientific way, so as to afford
a knowledge of the transpositions of the keys, but in spite of this, their music and singing
are very American. German and French are also taught in the schools when required.

The teachers, both men and women, have very good salaries; the youngest women beginning with
60l. and rising to 120l. a year, while the men's salaries rise up to 260l. a year, and that
in the intermediate or second class schools. This style of education may appear too advanced
for girls in their rank of life, but in this country, where they get dispersed, and may attain
a good position in a distant district, the tone thus given by education to the people, is of
great importance. The educating of the females in this way must give them great powers, and
open to them a field of great usefulness in becoming teachers themselves hereafter. The education
given is altogether secular, and they profess to try and govern "by appeals to the nobler principles
of their nature," as we gather from a report which was put into our hands at leaving.

This is but a weak basis for a sound education, and I cannot but think its insufficiency is
even here practically, and perhaps unconsciously, acknowledged; for, though no direct religious
instruction is professedly given, a religious tone is nevertheless attempted to be conveyed
in the lessons. At the opening of the school, a portion of the Bible is read daily in each
class; and the pupils are allowed to read such versions of the Scriptures as their parents
may prefer, but no marginal readings are allowed, nor may any comments be made by the teachers.[12]

We left Cincinnati this morning in the car appropriated to the use of the Directors of the
Ohio and Mississippi Railway, on which line we are travelling. It is neatly fitted up with
little "state" rooms, with sofas all round. There were four of these, besides a general saloon
in the middle; but the whole was greatly inferior to the elegance of Mr. Tyson's car on the
Baltimore and Ohio Railway. Our party consisted of about thirty persons, of whom four were
judges, and about a third of the number were ladies, accompanying their liege lords, and chiefly
asked in honour of me, to prevent my being "an unprotected female" among such a host of gentlemen.
An ordinary car was attached to that of the Directors, for the use of any smokers of the party.
We left Cincinnati at half-past eight, and reached this place, Vincennes, where we are to sleep,
at about six o'clock. The road was very pretty, though the leaves were nearly all off the trees;
the forms of the trees were, however, lovely, and it was quite a new description of country
to us, the clearings being recent and still very rough in appearance, and the log-houses, in
most places, of a most primitive kind. Vincennes, where we are to sleep, is an old town of
French origin, prettily situated on the river Wabash, which we can see from our windows.

St. Louis, November 4th.--We came on here on the 2nd instant, and soon after leaving Vincennes
found ourselves in a prairie, but it was not till after sixty miles that we got to the Grand
Prairie, which we traversed for about sixty more. The vastness, however, of this prairie, consists
in its length from north to south, in which it stretches through nearly the whole length of
the State. These prairies are enormous plains of country, covered, at this time, by a long
brown grass, in which are the seed-vessels and remains of innumerable flowers, which are said
to be most lovely in their form and colour in the spring. It was disappointing only to see
the dark remains of what must have been such a rich parterre of flowers. One of our party,
Colonel Reilly, of Texas, who had seen our Crystal Palace gardens at Sydenham, in full flower,
said that they reminded him of the prairies in the spring. The ground is so level, that the
woods on the horizon had the effect that the first sight of the dark line of land has at sea.
In many places near the road on each side, small farms were established, and good-sized fields
of Indian corn were growing; and wherever there was a railway station, a town, or even a "city"
with one or two churches, and an hotel, besides grocery stores and wooden buildings of various
kinds, were in progress in this immense wilderness.

The rain poured down incessantly, giving the country a melancholy and forlorn appearance. Towards
the latter part of our journey, we descended into and traversed the great valley of the Mississippi.
We passed several coal-mines, and here, where the vein of coal is eight feet thick, the land,
including the coal, may be bought for one pound an acre. The country soon assumed the appearance
of a great swamp, and is most unhealthy, being full of fever and ague.

At length our train stopped, and we were ushered into omnibuses of enormous length, drawn by
four horses, and two of these caterpillar-like looking vehicles were driven on to the steam-ferry,
and in this unromantic way we steamed across the great Father of Waters, and a most unpoetic
and unromantic river it appeared to be. There is nothing in its width here to strike the eye
or the imagination, though its depth is very great, and it has risen ten feet within the last
week. But it appeared to us ugly and inconsiderable after the wide, rapid, clear, and magnificent
St. Lawrence. We were driven through a sea of mud and mire to this large and comfortable hotel,
and were shortly afterwards seated at table with the rest of our party.

I forgot to mention that, at Vincennes, seven sportsmen had been out all day, before we arrived,
to procure game for us, and were much disappointed at not being able to get us any prairie
hens, which are a humble imitation of grouse, though Americans are pleased to consider them
better than that best of birds; but "comparisons are odious," and the prairie-hens are very
praiseworthy and good in their way. We had, however, abundance of venison and quails, and the
same fare met us here, with large libations of champagne. The owner of our hotel at Cincinnati
travelled with us, and looked as much like a gentleman as the rest of the party; and we have
been joined here in our private drawing-room by the landlord and landlady of this hotel. Not
knowing at first who they were, papa turned round to the former, and asked him if he knew St.
Louis, and had been long here, to which our friend replied, "Yes, sir; I have lived here eighteen
years, and am the master of this hotel." Yesterday our dinner was even better than on the day
of our arrival, closing with four or five omelettes soufflées, worthy of Paris, and the same
number of pyramids of Vanilla ice. So much for the progress of civilisation across the Mississippi.

We paddled about in the muddy streets yesterday, and looked in at the shop-windows. We found
even here plenty of hoop petticoats, and of tempting-looking bookseller's shops. Our hotel
is close to the Court-house, a handsome building of limestone, with a portico and a cupola
in process of building, being a humble imitation of the one at Washington. Yesterday evening,
one or two of the gentlemen amused us after dinner with some nigger songs, ending, I suppose
out of compliment to us, with "God save the Queen." I studied the toilette of one of our party
this morning--the only young unmarried lady among us. I had often seen the same sort of dress
at the hotels, but never such a good specimen as this. It is called here the French morning
robe or wrapper, and this one was made of crimson merino, with a wide shawl bordering half-way
up the depth of the skirt. The skirt is quite open in front, displaying a white petticoat with
an embroidered bordering. The body of the wrapper was formed in the old-fashioned way, with
a neck-piece, with trimmings of narrow shawl borderings; there was no collar at all, the crimson
merino coming against the neck without any break of even a frill of white. The sleeves were
very large, of the latest fashion, with white under sleeves, and the waist was very short,
confined with a red band of merino. These dresses are very common in the morning, and are,
I believe, thought to be very elegant. They are frequently made like this, of some violent
coloured merino, and often of silk, with trimmings of another coloured ribbon.

Having digressed so far from my account of St. Louis, I will go back for a few minutes to Cincinnati,
to describe the grand fire-engines we saw there, with horses all ready harnessed. One particular
engine, in which the water was forced up by steam, could have its steam up and be ready for
action in three minutes from its time of starting, and long, therefore, in all probability
before it reached the place where its services were required. These engines all had stags'
horns placed in a prominent position in front, as a sign of swiftness, and on this particular
one there was printed under the horns, "Sure Thing, 287 feet," meaning that it could throw
the water that height. Another had on it, "243 feet. Beat that!" the Americans being very laconic
in all their public communications. The regular plan on which most of the American towns are
built and the division into wards, give great facilities for showing where a fire takes place;
balls are shown from the top of a high tower to direct the engines where to go, the number
of balls pointing out the ward where the fire exists.

Another grand invention, which we found here as well as everywhere else, is their sewing machine.
These sewing machines wearied us very much when we landed at New York, for they seemed to be
the one idea of the whole country; and I am afraid we formed some secret intentions to have
nothing to do with them. I had seen them in a shop window in the City, in London, but knowing
nothing of their merits, almost settled in my own mind they had none. At last I found how blind
I had been, and what wonderful machines they are. There are numbers of them of various degrees
of excellence. They are so rapid in their work, that if a dress without flounces is tacked
together, it can be made easily by the machine in a morning: a lady here showed me how the
machine is used; she told me it is so fascinating that she should like to sit at it all day.
She works for her family, consisting of a husband and nine sons, and takes the greatest pleasure
in making all their under clothing; and working as she does, not very constantly, she can easily
do as much as six sempstresses, while the machine, constantly worked, could do as much as twelve.
The work is most true and beautiful and rapid, and the machine must be an invaluable aid where
there is a large family. It is much used also by tailors and shoemakers, for it can be used
with all qualities of materials, whether fine or thick. The price of one is from 15l. to 25l.
It requires a little practice to work at it, but most American ladies who have large families
possess one, and dressmakers use them a great deal.

November 4th.--To return to this town of mud and mire, we have been nearly up to our knees
in both to-day, and went on board one of the large steamers, but found it was not nearly so
grandly fitted up as the one in which we went from New York to Newport. There is an enormous
fleet of steamers here, but the Mississippi still looked most dingy, muddy, and melancholy.
We were given tickets this evening, to hear a recitation by a poet named Saxe, of a poem of
his own, on the Press, and we soon found ourselves in an enormous hall about 100 feet by 80,
nearly filled by a very intelligent-looking audience. A man near us told us that Mr. Saxe had
a European reputation, which made us feel much ashamed of our ignorance, in never having heard
of him before, and, unhappily, we came away no wiser than we went as regards the merits of
his poetry; for though our seats were near him, there was something either in the form of the
hall, or in the nature of his voice and pronunciation, which made us unable to hear what he
said. There were bursts of laughter and applause at times from the audience, but we took the
first opportunity of leaving.

As we walked home, we passed a brilliantly-lighted confectioner's shop, where we each had an
ice, but they were too sweet, and after eating and criticising them, we came to another confectioner's,
when papa insisted upon going in, and ordered two more ices, which were very good. We were
presented here with filtered water, the usual drinking water in this town being something of
the colour of dingy lemonade, though its taste is good.

We purpose going to-morrow.... I turn to ask papa where--and he shakes his head, and says he
does not know. On my pressing for a more distinct answer, he says, "Up the Missouri at all
events." This sounds vague, but I believe before night we shall be on our way to Chicago, and
shall thus have taken leave of the "far west." And now I must take my leave of you for the
present, though I fear this is but a dull chapter of the journal.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] As an instance of the ingenious devices used to save labour in this country, we may mention
a machine for paring apples, which we bought in the streets at Boston for twenty cents, or
about 10d. English. By turning a handle it can perform, simultaneously, the operations of peeling
the apple, cutting out the core, and slicing it.

[12] For fear that we may have misinterpreted what is said above, we think it advisable, as
the matter is a most important one, and one that may interest others, to extract from the report
the passage on which these observations were founded; for it is not a clear specimen of American
composition, and might, therefore, easily become a subject of misrepresentation:--

"The Opening Exercises in every Department shall commence by the reading of a portion of the
Bible, by or under the direction of the teacher, and appropriate singing by the pupils.

"The pupils of the Common Schools may read such version of the Sacred Scriptures as their parents
or guardians may prefer, provided that such preference of any version except the one now in
use be communicated by the parents or guardians to the Principal Teachers, and that no notes
or marginal readings be read in the school, or comments made by the Teachers on the text of
any version that is or may be introduced."

                               Jefferson City, on the Missouri,
                                         Nov. 6th, 1858.

Here we are really in the Far West, more than 150 miles from the junction of the Missouri with
the Mississippi, though still 2950 from the source of this great-grandfather of waters--for
I can give it a no less venerable name. We first caught sight of it, or struck the river, as
the phrase is here, about 98 miles below this city, and for a long time we followed its banks
so closely, that we could at any point have thrown a stone from the car into the river. At
Hermann, a little German settlement on its banks, we stopped and had an excellent dinner, but
it was so late before we left St. Louis, that we passed the greater part of what seemed very
pretty scenery in the dark, so that I shall defer any further description of it till we return
over the ground on Monday.

We were most unfortunate in our weather during our stay at St. Louis, and I had no opportunity
of seeing the beauties of the neighbourhood, which we hear much extolled, but respecting which
we are rather sceptical. The only drive we took, was to a new park being made outside the town,
called Lafayette Park, which gave us anything but a pleasant impression of the entourage of
St. Louis; we must admit, however, that a very short distance by railway brought us into a
very pretty country, and no doubt the dismal weather and bad roads made our drive very different
to what it might have been on a fine day. Still, with the impression fresh in our memory of
our drive in the neighbourhood of Cincinnati in much the same sort of weather, we are compelled
to think that the country about the Queen of the West and the banks of the Ohio greatly surpasses
in beauty St. Louis and the muddy river which has so great a reputation in the world.

Springfield, Illinois, November 9th.--Although our damp disagreeable weather has not left us,
we have contrived to see a good deal of Jefferson City. We made a dash a short way up the Missouri
in a steamboat, and landed and took a walk on the northern side of the river, and as we exchanged
a mud for a sandy soil, it was less disagreeable than on the south side. The northern shore,
which from the opposite side seemed hilly and well wooded, is very pretty, but on landing the
hills had receded to a distance, and we found a considerable plain between them and the river.
Up to the water's edge, however, the country is well wooded. On the spot where we landed we
saw a large tree, at least ten feet in diameter, burnt almost to its centre, and its fine head
destroyed by fire; and on asking some bystanders if any one had intended to burn it down, they
said, "Oh, no, some one has merely made a fire there to warm himself;" a strong proof of the
little value put here on fine timber.

The view of Jefferson City from the opposite bank, looking down the river, is very striking.
Being the capital of the state of Missouri, there was the usual Capitol or state-house, and,
unlike most others that we have seen, the building with its large dome was completed. It is
a fine edifice of white stone, standing at a great height above the river, on what is here
called a bluff, namely, a rock rising perpendicularly from the water's edge. The principal
part of the town is built along the heights, but the ground slopes in places, and the houses
are then carried down to the river side. The railway runs under the cliff, and can be seen
winding along up and down the river, for some distance each way; it has not yet been carried
much further, as this is the last large town to which railways in the west reach; but, as its
name, the Pacific Railway, implies, it is intended ultimately to be carried "right away" west
till it joins the ocean. We went on Sunday to the Episcopal church. There was the Communion
service, and a very good sermon on the subject of that ordinance.

We yesterday returned to St. Louis, and after a brief halt came on here. As our journey back
to St. Louis was in the daytime, we had an opportunity of seeing the very interesting country
which we passed on Saturday in the dark. The most remarkable feature of the road was crossing
the Osage within 200 or 300 yards of its confluence with the Missouri. It is about 1,200 feet
broad, and we saw in it one of those beautiful steamboats which give so much character here
to the rivers. The Osage is navigable for these large boats for 200 miles above this place.
We passed various other rivers, among others the Gasconade, at a spot memorable for a terrible
catastrophe which happened on the day of the opening of the railway, when the first bridge
which crossed it gave way as the train was passing, and nine out of thirteen cars were precipitated
into the bed of the river; thirty people, chiefly leading characters of St. Louis, were killed,
and many hundreds desperately hurt.

We have little more to say of St. Louis, as the museum was the only public building we visited.
The great curiosity there is the largest known specimen of the mastodon. It is almost entire
from the tip of its nose to the tip of its tail, and measures ninety-six feet in length. We
left St. Louis, and were glad to escape for a time at least out of a slave state. The "institution"
was brought more prominently before us there than it has yet been, as St. Louis is the first
town where we have seen it proclaimed in gold letters on a large board in the street, "Negroes
bought and sold here." In the papers, also, yesterday, we saw an advertisement of a "fine young
man" to be sold, to pay a debt.

We took our departure in the Alton steamboat, in order to see the first twenty-four miles of
the Upper Mississippi, and the junction of that river and the Missouri, which takes place about
six miles below Alton; both rivers, however, are very tame and monotonous, and it was only
as we were reaching Alton, that the banks of the Mississippi assumed anything like height.
Alton itself stands very high, and as it was getting dark when we arrived, the lights along
the hills had a fine effect. We are told it is a pretty town, but it was dark when we landed,
and we had to hurry into the train that brought us to this place. The steamboat in which we
went up the river was a very fine one, but not at all fitted up in the sumptuous manner of
our Newport boat. Papa paced the cabin, and made it 276 feet long, beyond which there was an
outside smoking cabin, and then the forecastle.

Springfield is in the midst of the Grand Prairie, and, as we are not to leave it till the afternoon,
we have been exploring the town, and, as far as we could, the prairie which comes close up
to it; but the moment the plank pavement ceased, it was hopeless to get further, owing to the
dreadfully muddy state of the road. This mud must be a great drawback to residing in a prairie
town, as the streets are rendered impassable for pedestrians, unless at the plank crossings.
On our way back to the hotel, we accosted a man standing at his door, whose strong Scotch accent,
in reply to a question, told us at once where he came from. He asked us into his house, and
gave us a good deal of information about the state of the country. He was originally a blacksmith
at Inverary, and had after that pursued his calling in a very humble way in Fife and in Edinburgh,
and came out here penniless twenty-six years ago, when there were only a few huts in the place;
but he has turned his trade to better account here, for he lives in a comfortable house, and
has $50,000, or 10,000l. invested in the country. He seemed very pleased to see us, and talked
of the Duke of Argyle's family, as well as of the Durhams, Bethunes, Anstruthers, &c. Having
lived when in Fife, at Largo, he seemed quite familiar with the Durhams, with the General's
little wife, and with Sir Philip's adventures, from the time of the loss of the Royal George
downwards.

This is the capital of Illinois, and the state-house here, too, is finished, and is a fine
building. The governor has a state residence, which is really a large and handsome building,
but is altogether surpassed by the private residence of an ex-governor, who lives in a sumptuous
house, to judge from its external accompaniments of conservatory, &c.; it is nearly opposite
our Scotch friend's abode, but the ex-governor dealt in "lumber" instead of iron, and from
being a chopper of wood, has raised himself to his present position.

Chicago, Nov. 10th.--We did not reach Chicago last night till 12 o'clock, our train, for the
first time since we have been in America, having failed to reach its destination at the proper
time; but the delay of two hours on this occasion was fairly accounted for by the bad state
of the rails, owing to the late rains. Before it became dark we saw one or two wonderful specimens
of towns growing up in this wilderness of prairie. The houses, always of wood and painted white,
are neat, clean, and well-built. There is, generally, a good-looking hotel, and invariably
a church, and often several of these, for although one would probably contain all the inhabitants,
yet they are usually of many denominations, and then each one has its own church. About twenty
or thirty miles from Chicago, we saw a very extensive tract of prairie on fire, which quite
illuminated the sky, and, as the night was very dark, showed distinctly the distant trees and
houses, clearly defining their outline against the horizon. On the other side of us, there
was a smaller fire, but so close as to allow us to see the flames travelling along the surface
of the ground. These fires are very common; we saw no less than five that night in the course
of our journey.

We have been busily employed to-day in going over Chicago. The streets are wide and fine, but
partake too abundantly of prairie mud to make walking agreeable: some of the shops are very
large; a bookseller's shop, to which papa and I made our way, professes to be the largest in
the world, and it is certainly one of the best supplied I ever saw with all kinds of children's
books. From the bookseller's we went to papa's bankers, Messrs. Swift and Co.; Mr. Swift took
us to the top of the Court-house, a wonderful achievement for me, but well worth the trouble,
as the view of the town was very surprising. We went afterwards to call on William's friend,
Mr. Wilkins, the consul, where we met Lord Radstock. Mr. Wilkins kindly took us to see Mr.
Sturge's great granary; there are several of these in the town, but this, and a neighbouring
one, capable of holding between them four or five million bushels of corn, are the two largest.
The grain is brought into the warehouse, without leaving the railway, the rails running into
the building. It is then carried to the top of the warehouse "in bulk," by means of hollow
cylinders arranged on an endless chain. The warehouse is built by the side of the river, so
that the vessels which are to carry the corn to England or elsewhere, come close under the
walls, and the grain is discharged into the vessels by means of large wooden pipes or troughs,
through which it is shot at once into the hold. Mr. Wilkins has seen 80,000 bushels discharged
in this manner, in one day.

We afterwards drove about six miles into the country, through oceans of mud, to see one of
the great slaughter and packing-houses. I did not venture out of the carriage, but the proprietor
took Mr. Wilkins, Lord Radstock, and papa through every part of the building. In a yard below
were a prodigious number of immense oxen, and the first process was to see one of these brought
into the inside of the building by means of a windlass; which drew it along by a rope attached
to its horns and passing through a ring on the floor.

The beast, by means of men belabouring it from behind, and this rope dragging it in front,
was brought in and its head drawn down towards the ring, when a man with a sledge-hammer felled
it instantaneously to the ground; and without a struggle it was turned over on its back by
the side of eight or ten of its predecessors who had just shared the same fate, and were already
undergoing the various processes to which they had afterwards to be subjected. The first of
these was to rip up and remove the intestines of the poor beast, and it was then skinned and
cut lengthways into two parts, when the still reeking body was hung up to cool. The immense
room was hung with some hundreds of carcases of these huge animals thus skinned and cleft in
two. The process, from the time the animal leaves the yard alive till the time it is split
and hung up in two pieces, occupied less than a quarter of an hour. At the end of two days
they are dismembered, salted, packed in casks, the best parts to be shipped to England, and
the inferior parts to be eaten by the free and enlightened citizens of this great continent.
The greater number of these beasts come from Texas, and have splendid horns, sometimes three
feet long.

The next thing they saw was the somewhat similar treatment of the poor pigs; but these are
animals, of which for size there is nothing similar to be seen in England, excepting, perhaps,
at the cattle show. At least, one which papa saw hanging up weighed 400 lbs., and looked like
a young elephant. In the yard below there was a vast herd of these, 1500 having arrived by
railway the night before; the number killed and cut up daily averages about 500. It takes a
very few minutes only from the time the pig leaves the pen to its being hung up, preparatory
to its being cut up and salted. They first get a knock on the head like the more noble beasts
already mentioned; they are then stuck, in order to be thoroughly bled; after this they are
plunged headlong into a long trough of boiling water, in which they lie side by side in a quiescent
state, very different to the one they were in a few minutes before, when they were quarrelling
in a most unmannerly manner in the yard below. From this trough the one first put in is, by
a most ingenious machine, taken up from underneath, and tossed over into an empty trough, where
in less than a minute he is entirely denuded of his bristles, and passed over to be cleft and
hung up. The trough holds about eight or ten thus lying side by side, and the moment one is
taken out at one end, another is put in at the other, and they thus all float through the length
of the trough, and are taken out in order; but so rapid is the process, that no one pig is
long in; in fact, the whole business occupies only a very few minutes per pig. Every part is
turned to account, the mass of bristles being converted into tooth brushes, &c. In the huge
larder, in the story next above the oxen, there were about 1500 unhappy pigs hung up to cool,
before being cut up, salted, packed, and sent off. There are several establishments of this
nature in Chicago, but only one of equal extent to the one papa saw. About 400,000 pigs are
shipped every year from Chicago. I do not know the total number of cattle, but this house alone
slaughters and sends away 10,000. There were places on an enormous scale for preparing tallow
and lard, and there were many other details equally surprising, which I have not now time to
describe; but papa says that the smells were most offensive, and that it was altogether a very
horrible sight, and it was one I was well pleased to escape.

Among the other wonders of Chicago, I must do honour to its hotel, which I should say was as
good as any we have yet seen in America. These American hotels are certainly marvellous "institutions,"
though we were getting beyond the limits of the good ones when we reached Jefferson City. That,
however, at St. Louis is a very fair sample of a good one.

Indianapolis, Nov. 11th.--We arrived here late this afternoon, and have not been able as yet
to see anything of the town, I shall therefore defer a description of it to my next. The road
from Chicago was not without its interest, though we are becoming very tired of the prairies.
At first starting we went for many miles along the borders of Lake Michigan, which we again
came upon at a very remarkable spot, Michigan city, about sixty miles from Chicago. Along the
first part of the lake, in the neighbourhood of Chicago, the shore consists of fine sand, in
strips of considerable width, and flat like an ordinary sea beach; but at Michigan city the
deep sand reached to a considerable distance inland, and then rose into high dunes, precisely
like those on the French coast. As we had to wait an hour there, papa and I scrambled up one
of these, and although below there was deep loose sand, yet above it was hard and solid, and
bound together with little shrubs like the French dunes. The view of the lake from the top
was very pretty, and boundless towards the north, we being at the southern extremity. I picked
up a few stones on the beach as a memorial of this splendid lake. We were very much tempted,
when at Chicago, to see more of it, and to go to Milwaukee and Madison, but we were strongly
advised by Mr. Wilkins not to go further north at this season. The wreaths of snow which during
the night have fallen in patches along the road, and greeted our eyes this morning, confirmed
us in the wisdom of this advice, and we are now bending our steps once more towards the south.
We are still here in the midst of prairie, but more wooded than in our journey of Tuesday.
We crossed to-day, at Lafayette, the Wabash, which we had crossed previously at Vincennes,
and here, as there, it is a very noble river. This must end my journal for the present.

                               Lexington, Kentucky, Nov. 13th, 1858.

My last letter was closed at Indianapolis, but despatched from Louisville. On the morning after
I wrote we had time, before starting for Louisville, to take a walk through the principal streets
of Indianapolis. The Capitol or state-house is the only remarkable building; and here, as in
most other towns in America, we were struck by the breadth of the streets. In the centre of
Indianapolis there is a large square, from which the four principal streets diverge, and from
the centre of this, down these streets, there are views of the distant country which on all
sides bounds the prospect. This has a fine effect, but all these capital cities of states have
an unfinished appearance: great cities have been planned, but the plans have never been adequately
carried out. The fact is, they have all a political, and not a commercial origin, and they
want the stimulus of commercial enterprise to render them flourishing towns, or to give them
the finished appearance of cities of much more recent date, such as Chicago and others.

We left Indianapolis at about half-past ten, and reached Jeffersonville, on the north side
of the Ohio at four. The country at first was entirely prairie, but became a good deal wooded
as we journeyed south. It is much more peopled than the wide tracts which we have been lately
traversing, for neat towns with white wooden houses and white wooden churches here succeeded
each other at very short distances; we crossed several large rivers, tributaries of the Wabash;
one, the White river, was of considerable size, and the banks were very prettily wooded. At
Jeffersonville we got into a grand omnibus with four splendid white horses, and drove rapidly
down a steepish hill, straight on board the steamboat which was to carry us across the Ohio.
The horses went as quietly as on dry land, and had to make a circuit on the deck, as we were
immediately followed by another similar equipage, four in hand, for which ours had to make
room. This was followed by two large baggage waggons and a private vehicle; and all these carriages
were on one side of the engine-room. At the other end there was space for as many more, had
there been any need for it; and all this on a tiny little steamboat compared with the Leviathans
that were lying in the river.

On reaching Louisville we were comfortably established in a large handsome hotel. As there
was still daylight, we took a walk through the principal streets, and found ourselves, as usual,
in a bookseller's shop; for not only are these favourite lounges of papa's, but we generally
find the booksellers intelligent and civil people, from whom we can learn what is best worth
seeing in the town. The one at Louisville lauded very much the pork packing establishments
in this town, and said those at Chicago, and even those of Cincinnati, are not to be compared
with them; but without better statistics we must leave this question undecided, for papa saw
quite enough at Chicago to deter him from wishing to go through the same sight at Louisville;
we, however, availed ourselves of the address he gave us of the largest slave-dealer, and went
to-day to see a slave-pen.

We have lately been reading a most harrowing work, called the "Autobiography of a Female Slave,"
whose experience was entirely confined to Kentucky--indeed, to Louisville and the adjoining
country within a few miles of the Ohio. She describes Kentucky as offering the worst specimen
of a slave's life, and gives a horrid account of the barbarity of the masters, and of the almost
diabolical character of the slave-dealers, and of those who hold subordinate situations under
them. We were hardly prepared, therefore, on reaching this pen to be received, in the absence
of the master, by a good-looking coloured housekeeper, with a face as full of kindness and
benevolence as one could wish to see, but "the pen" had yesterday been cleared out, with the
exception of one woman with her six little children, the youngest only a year old, and two
young brothers, neither of whom the dealer had sold, as he had been unable to find a purchaser
who would take them without separating them, and he was determined not to sell them till he
could. In the case both of the woman and of the two boys, their sale to the dealer had been
caused by the bankruptcy of the owner. The woman had a husband, but having a different master,
he retained his place, and his master promised that when his wife got a new home he would send
him to join her.

No doubt this separation of families is a crying evil, and perhaps the greatest practical one,
as respects hardship, to which the system is necessarily subject; but certainly, from what
we have seen and heard to-day, it does not seem to be harshly done, and pains are taken to
avoid it: the woman said she had been always kindly treated, and there was not the slightest
difficulty made by the dark duenna to our conversing with the slaves as freely as we liked,
and she left us with the whole group. The woman took us to see her baby, and we found it in
a large and well ventilated room, and she said they had always as much and as good food as
they could wish. She said she was forty-five years old, and had ten children living, but the
four eldest were grown up. The eldest of those she had with her was a little girl of about
thirteen; she said, in answer to a question from papa, that the children had made a great piece
of work at parting with their father, but the woman herself seemed quite cheerful and satisfied
with her prospects.

On our journey here there were a great many slaves in the car with us, coming to pass their
Sunday at Lexington. They seemed exceedingly merry, and one, whom papa sat next, said he had
accumulated $950, and that when he got $1900, he would be able to purchase his freedom. He
said his master was a rich man, having $300,000, and that he was very well treated; but that
some masters did behave very badly to their slaves, and often beat them whether they deserved
it or not. From the specimen we had of those in the cars, they seemed well-conditioned men,
and all paid the same fare that we did, and were treated with quite as much attention. They
seem to get some sort of extra wages from their masters besides their food and raiment, out
of which they can lay by if they are provident, so as to be able to purchase their freedom
in time; but they do not seem always to care about this, as one man here has $4000, which would
much more than suffice to buy his freedom; but he prefers remaining a slave. We shall probably
see a good deal more of the condition of the slaves within the next few days, so I shall say
no more upon the subject at present, excepting that all this does not alter the view which
we cannot help taking of the vileness of the institution, though it certainly does not appear
so very cruel in practice as it is often represented to be by the anti-slavery party.

There are only two great sights to be seen at Louisville. One, the famous artesian well, 2086
feet deep, bored to reach a horrid sulphur spring, which is, however, a very strong one as
there are upwards of 200 grains of sulphates of soda and magnesia in each gallon of water,
and upwards of 700 grains of chlorides of sulphur and magnesia. There is a fountain over the
well, in which the water rises 200 feet, but whether by external pressure or by the natural
force of the water, the deponent sayeth not. It comes out in all sorts of forms, sometimes
imitating flowers, and sometimes a shower of snow, on which the negro who showed it to us expatiated
with great delight. When I said there were only two sights to see, I alluded to this well,
and to the magnificent steam vessel, the "Pacific," which was lying at Portland, about three
miles down the Ohio, below the Falls; but I forgot altogether the Falls themselves, and the
splendid canal described in papa's book, through which vessels are obliged to pass to get round
them, which I ought not to pass without some notice. The river here is upwards of a mile wide,
but the falls are most insignificant; and though the Guide Book describes them as "picturesque
in appearance," and that the islands give the Ohio here "the appearance of a great many broken
rivers of foam, making their way over the falls, while the fine islands add greatly to the
beauty of the scene;" neither papa with his spectacles, nor I with my keen optics, could see
more than a ripple on the surface of the water. These falls, however, are sufficient to prevent
vessels of any great burden ascending or descending beyond this point of the river, and hence
the necessity of the canal: but this splendid work, about which papa's interest was very great,
in consequence of what he had written about it, proved as great a disappointment as the falls
themselves. It must, however, have been a work of great difficulty, as it is cut through a
solid bed of rock.[13] The locks are sufficiently capacious to allow of the passage of steamers
180 feet long by 40 feet in breadth, one of which we saw in the lock, and there were three
others waiting to pass through.

These, to our eyes, seemed large and beautiful vessels; but they were altogether eclipsed and
their beauty forgotten, when we found ourselves on board the "Pacific." This vessel was to
sail in the evening, and is one of the most splendid steamers on the river; certainly nothing
could exceed her comfort, infinitely beyond that of the Newport boat, as the saloon was one
long room, unbroken by steam-engine or anything else, to obstruct the view from one end to
the other. Brilliant fires were burning in two large open stoves, at equal distances from either
end, and little tables were set all down the middle of the room, at which parties of six each
could sit and dine comfortably. The vessel was upwards of 300 feet long, the cabin alone being
about that length. On each side of the cabin were large, comfortable sleeping berths, and on
the deck below, adjoining the servants' room, was a sweet little nursery, containing, besides
the beds and usual washing apparatus, four or five pretty little rocking-chairs, for the children.
We were shown over the kitchen, and everything looked so complete and comfortable that we longed
to go down in her to New Orleans, whither she is bound, and which she will reach in six days.
Everything was exquisitely clean, the roof and sides of the cabin being of that beautiful white
varnish paint which I have before described, which always looks so pure and lovely. There was
not much ornament, but all was in good taste.

On leaving the "Pacific," we drove to the inn at Portland. The Kentuckians are a fine tall
race of men; but, tall as they are in general, the landlord, Mr. Jim Porter, surpassed them
all in height, standing 7 feet 9 inches without his shoes. This is the same individual of whom
Dickens gave an amusing account in his American notes fifteen years ago.

We left Louisville at two o'clock, and came on to Lexington this afternoon. The country is
much more like England than anything we have yet seen, being chiefly pasture land. The grass
is that known here, and very celebrated as the "blue grass" of Kentucky; though why or wherefore
it is so called we cannot discover. It is of prodigiously strong growth, sometimes attaining
two feet in height; but it is generally kept low, either by cropping or cutting, and is cut
sometimes five times a year. The stock raised upon it is said to be very fine, and the animals
are very large and fine looking; but either from the meat not being kept long enough, or from
some cause which we cannot assign, the beef, when brought to table, is very inferior to the
good roast beef of Old England.

The road from Louisville to this place is pretty throughout, and seemed quite lovely as we
approached Frankfort, though it was getting too dark as we passed that town to appreciate its
beauties thoroughly. For some miles before reaching it, the road passes through a hilly country,
with beautiful rounded knolls at a very short distance. The town is situated on the Kentucky
river, the most beautiful, perhaps, in America. In crossing the long bridge, we had a fine
view down its steep banks, with the lights of the town close on its margin. The state Capitol
which we passed, is close to the railway, and is a marble building, with a handsome portico.
We were very sorry not to have stopped to pass to-morrow, Sunday, at this place, but we were
anxious to reach Lexington, in order to get our letters. We have no great prospects here, as
the hotel, excepting the one at Jefferson City, is the worst we have found in America. We had
hardly set foot in it, when General Leslie Combe called upon us, having been on the look-out
for our arrival. He claimed cousin-ship, having married a Miss T----, but we must leave it
to Uncle Harry to determine to which branch of the T---- family she can claim kindred.

November 15th.--The weather has been unpropitious, and instead of starting to explore the Upper
Kentucky, which we had meant to do, we are returning this afternoon to Cincinnati. We have,
however, been able to see all the sights here that are worth seeing, besides having been edified
yesterday by a nigger sermon, remarkable, even among nigger sermons, for the wonderful stentorian
powers of the preacher. The great object of interest here is Ashland, so called from the ash
timber with which the place abounds. This was the residence of Henry Clay, the great American
statesman. General Combe gave us a letter of introduction to Mr. James B. Clay, his eldest
son, who is the present proprietor of the "location." The house is very prettily "fixed up,"
to use another American phrase; but we were disappointed with the 200 acres of park, which
Lord Morpeth, who passed a week at Ashland, is said to extol as being like an English one.
We saw nothing, either of the "locust cypress, cedar, and other rare trees, with the rose,
the jasmine, and the ivy, clambering about them," which the handbook beautifully describes.
The fact is, the Americans, as I have before observed, have not the slightest idea of a garden;
and on papa's venturing to insinuate this to Mr. Clay, he admitted it, and ascribed it to its
undoubted cause, the expense of labour in this country.

From Ashland we went to what is really a Kentucky sight, the Fair Ground. On an eminence at
about a mile from the town, surrounded by beautiful green pastures, there stands a large amphitheatre,
capable of holding conveniently 12,000 spectators. In the centre is a large grass area, where
the annual cattle show is held, and when filled it must be a remarkable sight. From this we
went to the Cemetery, which, like all others in this country, is neatly laid out, and kept
in very good order. The grave-stones and monuments are invariably of beautiful white marble,
with the single exception of a very lofty monument which is being raised to the memory of Mr.
Clay. It is not yet finished, but to judge either from what has been accomplished, or from
a drawing papa saw of it on a large scale, in a shop window, it is not likely to prove pretty,
and the yellowish stone of which it is being built, contrasts badly with the white marble about it.

We went next to see a very large pen, in which there were about forty negroes for sale; they
had within the last few days, sold about 100, who had travelled by railway chained together.
Those we saw, were divided into groups, and we went through a variety of rooms in which they
were domiciled, and were allowed to converse freely with them all. This is one of the largest
slave markets in the United States, and is the great place from which the South is supplied.
There are, in this place, five of these pens where slaves are kept on sale, and, judging from
this one, they are very clean and comfortable. But these pens give one a much more revolting
idea of the institution than seeing the slaves in regular service. There was one family of
a man and his wife and four little children, the price of "the lot" being $3500, or 700l. sterling,
but neither the man nor the woman seemed to care much whether they were sold together or not.
There was one poor girl of eighteen, with a little child of nine weeks old, who was sold, and
she was to set off to-night with her baby, for a place in the State. The slave-dealer himself
was a civil, well-spoken man, at least to us, and spoke quite freely of his calling, but we
thought he spoke harshly to the poor negroes, especially to the man with the wife and four
children. It appears he had bought the man separately from the woman and children, in order
to bring them together, but the man had attempted to run away, and told us in excuse he did
not like leaving his clothes behind him; whereupon papa asked him if he cared more for his
clothes than his wife, and gave him a lecture on his domestic duties. The dealer said they
sometimes are much distressed when separated from their wives, or husband and children, but
that it was an exception when this was so. One can hardly credit this, but so far as it is
true it is one of the worst features of slavery that it can thus deaden all natural feelings
of affection. We have spoken a good deal to the slaves here, and they seem anxious to obtain
their freedom. The brother of one of the waiters at our hotel had twice been swindled by his
master of the money he had saved to purchase his freedom. I spoke to the housemaid at our hotel,
also a slave, who shuddered with horror when she described the miseries occasioned by the separation
of relations. She had been sold several times, and was separated from her husband by being
sold away from him. She said the poor negroes are generally taken out of their beds in the
middle of the night, when sold to the slave-dealers, as there is a sense of shame about transacting
this trade in the day-time. From what the slaves told us, they are, no doubt, frequently treated
with great severity by the masters, though not always, as they sometimes fall into the hands
of kind people; but though they may have been many years in one family, they never know from
hour to hour what may be their fate, as the usual cause for parting with slaves is, the master
falling into difficulties, when he sells them to raise money, or to pay his debts. The waiter
told us, he would rather starve as a freeman than remain a slave, and said this with much feeling
and energy.

Cincinnati, Nov. 15th, 9 P.M.--We arrived here again this evening at about seven o'clock. The
road, the whole way from Lexington, 100 miles, is very pretty, following the course of the
Licking for a long way, with high steep banks on both sides, sometimes rising into high hills,
but opening occasionally into wide valleys, with distant views of great beauty. In many places
the trees here have still their red, or rather brown leaves, which formed a strange contrast
with the thick snow covering their branches and the ground beneath. The snow storm last night,
of which we had but the tail at Lexington, was very heavy further north, and the snow on the
ground lighted up by the moon, enabled us to see and enjoy the beauty of the scenery as we
approached Covington, at which place we embarked on board the steamboat to cross the Ohio.
I omitted, when we were here before, to mention that in our Sunday walk at Covington, when
we first crossed over to Kentucky, we witnessed on the banks of the river a baptism by immersion,
though the attending crowd was so large that we could not distinctly see what was going on.
We are told, that on these occasions, the minister takes the candidate for baptism so far into
the river, that they are frequently drowned. I forget if I mentioned before that Covington
is built immediately opposite Cincinnati, at the junction of the Ohio and the Licking, which
is here a considerable river, about 100 yards wide, and navigable for steamboats sixty miles
further up. The streets of Covington are all laid out in a direct line with the corresponding
streets in Cincinnati, and as the streets on both sides mount up the hills on which the towns
are built, the effect is very pretty, especially at night, when the line of lamps, interrupted
only by the river, appears of immense length. When the river is frozen over, the streets of
the two cities may be said to form but one, as carts and carriages can then pass uninterruptedly
from the streets of Cincinnati, to those on the opposite side, and vice versâ. This snow storm,
which has made us beat a rapid retreat from the cold and draughty hotels in Kentucky, makes
us feel very glad to be back in this comfortable hotel.

Pittsburgh, Nov. 17th.--Lord Radstock made his appearance at Cincinnati yesterday, having come
from Louisville in a steamer. The day was very bright and beautiful, though intensely cold;
and as papa was very anxious to show Lord Radstock the view of Clifton from the heights above,
we hired a carriage and went there. We were, however, somewhat disappointed, for the trees
were entirely stripped of the beautiful foliage which clothed them when we saw them three weeks
ago, and were laden with snow, with which the ground also was deeply covered; and although
the effect was still pretty, this gave a harshness to the scene, the details being brought
out too much in relief. The same cause detracted, no doubt, from the beauty of the scenery
we passed through to day on our way here, and greatly spoilt the appearance of the hills which
surround Pittsburgh.

But I must not anticipate a description of our journey here, but first tell you of our further
proceedings at Cincinnati. Lord Radstock is much interested in reformatories and houses of
refuge, and we were glad to visit with him the one situated at about three miles from the town,
the exterior only of which we had seen in our drive with Mr. Anderson. The building is very
large and capacious, having cost 2700l. It is capable of holding 200 boys and 80 girls, and
the complement of boys is generally filled up; but there are seldom above 60 girls. The whole
establishment seems admirably conducted. The boys and girls are kept apart, and each one has
a very nice, clean bed-room, arranged in prison fashion, and opening on to long galleries;
but with nothing to give the idea of a cell, so perfectly light and airy is each room. There
is an hospital for the boys and one for the girls, large and well ventilated rooms; that of
the girls is beautifully cheerful, with six or eight nice clean beds; but it says a good deal
for the attention paid to their health, that out of the whole number of boys and girls, there
was only one boy on the sick list, and he did not appear to have much amiss with him. This
is somewhat surprising, as the rooms in which they work are heated by warm water, to a temperature
which we should have thought must be very prejudicial to their health, but with this exception,
they have every advantage. A large playground, a very large chapel, where they meet for prayers
and reading the Bible, the boys below, and the girls in a gallery, and large airy schoolrooms.
The children are admitted from the age of 7 up to 16, and the boys are usually kept till 21,
and the girls till they are 18. The girls are taught needlework and household work, or rather
are employed in this way, independently of two hours and a half daily instruction in the school,
and the boys are brought up to a variety of trades, either as tailors, shoemakers, workers
of various articles in wire, or the like. The proceeds of their work go in part to pay the
expenses of the establishment, but the cost is, with this small exception, defrayed by the
town, and amounts to about 20l. annually for each boy. These poor children are generally sent
there by the magistrates on conviction of some crime or misdemeanour, but are often sent by
parents when they have troublesome or refractory children, and the result is, in most cases,
very satisfactory. They all seemed very happy, and the whole had much more the appearance of
a large school, than of anything partaking of the character of a prison. Having called in the
afternoon and taken leave of the Longworths, Andersons, and others, who had shown us so much
kindness when we were last here, we started at half-past ten at night for this place.

As we were already acquainted with the first part of the road to Columbus, we thought we should
not lose much by this plan, and we wished besides to try the sleeping cars, which has not proved
altogether a successful experiment as far as papa is concerned, for he had very little sleep,
and is very headachy to-day in consequence. Thrower, too, was quite knocked up by it; my powers
of sleeping at all times and places prevented my suffering in the same way, and I found these
sleeping cars very comfortable. They are ingeniously contrived to be like an ordinary car by
day; but by means of cushions spread between the seats and a flat board let down half way from
the ceiling, two tiers of very comfortable beds are made on each side of the car, with a passage
between. The whole looks so like a cabin of a ship, that it is difficult not to imagine oneself
on board a steamboat. Twenty-four beds, each large enough to hold two persons, can be made
up in the cars, and the strange jumble of ladies and gentlemen all huddled together was rather
ludicrous, and caused peals of laughter from some of the laughter-loving American damsels.
The cots are provided with pillows and warm quilted counter-panes and curtains, which are all
neatly packed away under the seats in the daytime. The resemblance to the steamboat in papa's
half-waking moments seemed too much for his brain to be quite clear on the subject of where
he was. Thrower, who had shared my couch, got up sea sick at about four in the morning, the
motion of the carriage not suiting her while in a recumbent position, and retired to a seat
at one end of the carriage. As we neared Columbus, papa became very restless, and made a descent
from over my head, declaring the heat was intolerable. "Where," said I, "is your cloth cap?"
"Oh!" he answered, "I have thrown that away long ago; that's gone to the fishes." He said he
had so tossed himself about, that he did not think he had a button left on his coat; things
were not, however, quite so bad as this, and on finding my couch too cold for him, I at last
succeeded in making your dear restless fidgetty papa mount up again to his own place, where,
to my comfort, and no doubt to his own also, he soon fell asleep. I got up at five and sat
by poor Thrower, and watched the lights of the rising sun on hills, valleys, and rivers for
an hour; when in came the conductor, and thrusting his lamp into the face of the sleepers,
and giving them a shake, told them to get up, a quarter of an hour being allowed them for breakfast.
In one second the whole place was alive; down came gentlemen without their boots, and ladies
with their night caps, and in a few minutes all were busily employed in the inn, breakfasting.
I had said we did not care about missing the first part of the road which we had seen before;
but the joint light of a brilliant full moon and the snow on the hills, made us see the dear
old Ohio and the bold Kentucky banks as clearly, almost, as if it had been daylight, till we
retired to our beds; and, even then, I could not help lying awake to view the glorious scene
out of my cabin window.

When we got up this morning we were entering a new country, and for many miles went along a
beautiful valley of one of the tributaries of the Ohio. We again fell in with the Ohio at Steubenville,
having traced the tributary down to its mouth. Our road then lay along the bank of the Ohio
for about seventy miles, and anything more perfect in river scenery it would be difficult to
imagine. Many large tributaries fell into it, the mouths of which we crossed over long bridges,
and from these bridges had long vistas up their valleys. For about thirty miles we had the
bold banks of Virginia opposite to us; but, after that, we quitted the state of Ohio, and for
forty miles the course of the river was through the state of Pennsylvania. A number of steamboats
enlivened the scene, with their huge stern wheels making a great commotion in the water. The
river too was studded with islands, and the continuous bend, the river taking one prolonged
curve from Steubenville to Pittsburg, added greatly to the beauty of the scene. On approaching
Pittsburg we crossed the Alleghany, which is a fine broad stream. The Monongahela, which here
meets it, is a still finer one, and the two together, after their junction, constitute the
noble river which then, for the first time, takes the name of the Ohio, or, as it is most appropriately
called by the French, "La belle rivière"--for anything more beautiful than the seventy miles
of it which we saw to-day it would be difficult to imagine.

We are lodged here at a very comfortable hotel, facing the Alleghany river. The town forms
a triangle, situated between this river and the Monongahela, and after dinner, having arrived
here early, we took a walk from the hotel, across the town, until we arrived at the latter
river. The opposite bank here is of great height, and we crossed a bridge, 1500 feet long,
with the magnanimous intention of going to the top of the hill to see the magnificent prospect
which the summit is said to afford. But our strength, and breath, and courage failed us before
we had ascended a third of the height, although there is a good carriage road up and in good
condition, from the hard frost which still prevails. The view, however, even at that height,
was very fine, although it was greatly marred by the smoky atmosphere which hangs over the
city. After recrossing the bridge we went to the point forming the apex of the triangle, to
see the confluence of the two rivers, and, as we could from there look up both rivers and down
the Ohio, the view is very remarkable. The town itself disappointed us; but, perhaps, we expected
more than we ought reasonably to have done from a great and dirty manufacturing town.

Harrisburgh, Nov. 18th.--We started this morning by the six o'clock train in order to see the
wonderful Pennsylvania railroad by daylight. It is the great rival of the Baltimore and Ohio
railway, on which we travelled with Mr. Tyson, and we were rather anxious to have an opportunity
of comparing the two, which, having now seen them both, we feel competent to do. The great
change which nature presents now, to what it did when the leaves were in full foliage, may
make us underrate the beauties of the road we passed over to-day, but, notwithstanding this,
we think there can be no doubt that the Baltimore and Ohio, taken as a whole, is by far the
most picturesque and beautiful. The length of the two roads is very nearly the same; but, while
the whole of the Baltimore and Ohio was beautiful, one side of the mountain being as much so
as the other, the first part of the road to-day, till we reached the summit level, was very
much of the same character as many other mountain regions we have passed. For many miles the
road followed the course of the Conemaugh, crossing and recrossing the river, but without any
very striking feature. But the moment we had passed through a tunnel, 3612 feet long, and began
the descent of 2200 feet, on the eastern side of the Alleghany chain, the scene quite baffled
description. The summit level of the Baltimore and Ohio is 500 feet higher; but the descent
occupies a distance of seventeen miles, while the descent to-day was effected in eleven, so
that, with all our partiality for the Baltimore and Ohio, it must be confessed there is nothing
on it so wonderful and sublime as this. One curve was quite appalling, and it was rendered
more so by the slow rate at which the train moved--not more, I should think, than at the rate
of two miles an hour--certainly not nearly so fast as we could have walked, so that we had
full leisure to contemplate the chasm into which we should have been plunged headlong had the
slightest slip of the wheels occurred. How they can ever venture to pass it at night is quite
surprising. The curve is like a horse shoe, and goes round the face of a rock which has been
cut away to make room for the road. Another superiority in the road we travelled to-day is
the much greater height of the surrounding mountains, and the extent of the distant views;--but
the greater height of the mountains had the attendant disadvantage of the trees being chiefly
pines, instead of the lovely forest trees, of every description, which adorned the hills amongst
which we travelled in Maryland and Virginia, by the Baltimore and Ohio railway.

I must, however, do justice here to the eastern side of the mountains. For more than 100 miles
we closely followed the course of the Juniata, from its source to where it ends its career
by falling, quite a magnificent river, into the Susquehanna, about twenty-two miles above this
place. After the junction, the noble Susquehanna was our companion for that distance, this
town being situated upon it. The source of the Juniata is seen very soon after passing Altamont,
and perhaps we were more disposed to do justice to the beauty of the river, from the happy
frame of body and mind we were in, owing to the excellent dinner we had just partaken of at
that place, consisting of roast beef, roast turkey, apple tart, cranberry preserve, and a most
superlative Charlotte Russe--pretty good fare for an hotel in a mountain pass! No wine or stimulants
of any kind were allowed, or what the consequence might have been on papa's restless state
of mind it would be difficult to say; as it was, I counted that he rose from his seat to look
at the view from the other side of the car, thirty times in the space of an hour and a half,
making a move, therefore, upon an average, of once in every three minutes; and this he afterwards
continued to do as often as the road crossed the river. I foolishly, at first, partook of his
locomotive propensities, but my exhausted frame soon gave way, so that he declares I only saw
one half of its beauties, namely, the half on the side where I was seated; but this half was
ample to satisfy any reasonable mortal. I am at a loss to imagine what our fellow-travellers
could have thought of him, as they lounged on their seats, and scarcely ever condescended to
look out of window.

We arrived here, not the least tired with our long journey, though it occupied twelve hours,
and were so fresh afterwards, that we started after tea, this being the great annual Thanksgiving-day,
to the nearest place of worship we could find, which turned out to be a Baptist "Church," as
it is called here, where we heard a most admirable sermon, and felt we had reason to offer
up our thanks with as much earnestness as any one of the congregation, for having been spared
to make this journey to the Far West, and to have returned to civilised life, without encountering
a single difficulty or drawback of any kind. I may as well state, that this Thanksgiving-day
was established by the Puritans, and is still kept up throughout the whole of the United States,
its object being to return thanks for the blessings of the year, and more especially for the
harvest. There are services in all the churches, and we much regretted not finding out till
late yesterday, that this was the day set apart for it, for had we known this, we should not
have travelled to-day; but once on our journey, with the fear of snow accumulating in the mountains,
we were afraid of stopping on the road, and we were very glad to be able to attend the service
this evening. There is something very beautiful, I think, in thus setting apart one day in
the year for such a purpose, and it is interesting too, as being a relic left by the Puritans.

November 19th.--We are quite charmed with this place, which is a rare exception to all the
other capitals we have seen, inasmuch as more has not been undertaken than has been carried
out; in fact, it has much more the appearance of a village than of a large city. The beauty
of the river surpasses all description. It is a mile wide, and bends gracefully towards the
direction of the mountains through the gorge from which it issues forth in its course towards
Chesapeake Bay, and here, where the hills recede to a distance, it expands into a great width,
and its face is covered with islands. The only drawback to its being a grand river is its shallowness,
and want of adaptation, therefore, to the purpose of navigation. There are no splendid steamboats
to be seen here as on the Ohio, which make one feel that river, at the distance of more than
2000 miles from the sea, to be a noble highway of commerce, linking together with a common
interest distant portions of this vast continent. In the Susquehanna, one feels that there
is nothing but its beauty to admire, but this is perfect.

Two bridges connect the town with the opposite shore, each of them being about a mile long.
The weather is so piercingly cold, that we did not venture across, but we took a long walk
up the banks, of the river. The town of Harrisburgh is very small, consisting of only three
or four streets parallel to the river, intersected by about a dozen others at right angles
to it. The centre one of these is a fine broad street, closed in at the further end by the
Capitol. This is a handsome, but unpretending building of red brick, adorned by a portico,
and, as usual, surmounted by a dome. On entering at the top of a flight of stairs, there is
a circular area, covered in by the dome. Out of this, on one side, is a very neat Senate House,
and on the opposite side is the House of Representatives. The State library, a very good one,
is upstairs. The flight of stairs up to this, which is continued up to the dome, is wide and
handsome, and of such easy ascent, that I ventured up to the top, in order to take a bird's-eye
view of the scenery we so much enjoyed below. We were very well repaid for the trouble, especially
as the gallery was glazed, so that we could see the view without being exposed to the cutting
wind which was blowing outside.

The houses here are generally of brick, painted a deep red colour, which, not being in too
great masses, and picked out with a good deal of white, has a very good effect. Some few houses,
however, especially towards the outskirts of the town, were of wood, painted white. We yesterday
passed many villages and towns of these pretty houses, but with the snow lying around them,
scarcely whiter than the houses themselves, they had a very chilly appearance, and looked far
less tempting than the houses of this description in New England when we first saw them, each
in its pretty clean lawn, and surrounded by a lovely foliage. To return to this town--and,
as a climax to its perfection, it has, out and out, the most comfortable hotel we have seen
in America. It is quite a bijou, with a very pretty façade, and, being new last year, everything
is in the best style. The ground floor, as is generally the case in this country, consists,
like the Hôtel du Louvre in Paris, of good shops, which gives a gayer appearance to the whole
than if it were one mass of dwelling rooms. We find it so comfortable that, instead of going
on this afternoon to Philadelphia, we mean to remain here to-night, and to go on to-morrow
to New York.

New York, Nov. 22nd.--We took one more walk at Harrisburgh, before starting on Saturday. The
morning was lovely, and from the hill above the town, which we had time to reach, the view
was very beautiful. But, of all the picturesque things that I have lately seen, I think the
scene which presented itself this morning, when I opened our bedroom shutters at six o'clock,
was the most striking. The night, on which I had looked out before going to bed, was clear
and most beautiful; but a few stars now only remained as the day had begun to dawn, and the
east was reddened by the approaching sunrise. Below the window was a very large market-place,
lighted up and crowded with buyers and sellers. The women all had on the usual bonnet worn
by the lower classes in this country,--a sun-bonnet, made of coloured cotton, with a very deep
curtain hanging down the back. They wore besides warm cloaks and coloured shawls, and the men
large wide-awakes. I have already described the brilliantly red houses, and the day being sufficiently
advanced to bring out the colour very conspicuously, I think I never saw a prettier or busier
scene, nor one which I could have wished more to have drawn, but there was no time even to
attempt it.

After leaving Harrisburgh our road lay for some miles along the course of the Susquehanna,
and papa, who had bought a copy of Gertrude of Wyoming, made me read it aloud to him, to the
great astonishment of our fellow-travellers and at the expense of my lungs, the noise of a
railway carriage in America not being much suited for such an occupation. The river presented
a succession of rich scenery, being most picturesquely studded with islands. We were quite
sorry to take leave of it; but after these few miles of great beauty, the road made a dash
across the country to Philadelphia. Papa, during the whole of the morning, had been most wonderfully
obtuse in his geography, and was altogether perplexed when, before reaching Philadelphia, we
came to the margin of the river we had to cross to reach that town. He had been quite mystified
all the morning at Harrisburg, and at fault as to the direction in which the river was running,
and as to whether the streets we were in were at right angles or parallel to it. This state
of confusion became still worse when we got into the carriage, as he had miscalculated on which
side, after leaving the town, we should first see the river, and had placed me on the left
side of the car, when it suddenly appeared, in all its glory, on the right. He almost lost
his temper, we all know how irritable he can become, and exclaimed impatiently,--"Well, are
we now on this side of the river or the other?" but his puzzle at Philadelphia was from the
river which we then came upon, being the Schuylkill, while he thought we had got, in some mysterious
way, to the Delaware, on the west bank of which the town is situated, as well as on the east
of the Schuylkill. The discovery of the river it really was of course solved the puzzle; but
for a long time he insisted that the steamboat we were to embark upon, later in the day, on
the Delaware, must be the one we now saw, and it was all the passengers could do to persuade
him to sit still. He exclaimed, "But why not stay on this side, instead of crossing the river
to cross back again to take the cars?" It was altogether a ludicrous state of confusion that
poor Papa was in; but it ended, not only in our crossing the river, but in our traversing the
whole town of Philadelphia, at its very centre, in the railway cars, going through beautiful
streets and squares; and, as we went at a slow pace, we had a capital view of the shops and
of the town, which was looking very clean and brilliant, the day being fine and frosty.

We made no stay at Philadelphia, but at length taking the cars on the east side of the Delaware,
we proceeded in them to South Amboy; where, embarking again, we had a fine run of twenty-four
miles between Staten Island and the coast of New Jersey, and reached this place in time for
dinner. We regretted thus turning our backs on Philadelphia, and Baltimore, and Washington,
without seeing more of them; but the time we have spent in the west has exceeded what we had
counted on this part of our journey occupying, and we are anxious to get home to you all.

On our railway and on the steamer, we had with us a body of the firemen of Philadelphia, who
were on their way to pay to their brother-firemen here one of those complimentary visits we
have spoken of. There was loud cheering from their cars as we left Philadelphia, and as we
passed through the different towns on the road, which was well responded to by the bystanders
who had collected to witness the sight. The men were dressed in a most picturesque uniform,
and had a good brass band, which played during the whole time that we were on board the steamer.
On landing, there were bonfires on the quay, and rockets let off in honour of their arrival;
but, though the crowd was great, we had not the slightest difficulty in landing, for all these
matters are carried on with the greatest order in this country, which is the more remarkable,
as the people have very excitable natures. Late at night, when we were going to bed, a company
of firemen crossed this street with lights and torches, with a band playing, and dragging a
fire-engine covered with lamps; forming quite a moving blaze of light.

We yesterday spent our first Sunday in New York, having hitherto been always away on that day;
and we heard a wonderfully impressive and admirable sermon from Dr. Tyng. The church in which
he preached was of very large dimensions, but his voice penetrated it throughout; he stood
on a small platform instead of a pulpit, with a low desk in front, so that his whole figure
could be seen. He had a good deal of action, but it was in very good taste, and the matter
of his sermon was beyond all praise. The text was from the latter part of Col. i. 17, "And
by Him all things consist." In the afternoon we heard a good, but not so striking a sermon,
from Dr. Bedell; and it was suggested to us to go in the evening to the Opera-house to hear
a great Presbyterian preacher, Mr. Alexander; but this we did not feel disposed to do. The
Opera-house is being made use of, as our Exeter Hall is, for Special Services.

I think I may as well fill up the rest of this sheet by describing the arrangements of American
hotels. There are frequently two entrances, one for ladies and the other for gentlemen. That
for the ladies leads by a private staircase to the ladies' drawing-room; and the gentlemen's
entrance opens upon what is called the office. Whether there are separate entrances or not,
the gentleman is at once conducted to the office, which is usually crowded with spitters and
smokers; and there he enters his name in the travellers' book. This done, the waiter shows
him to the drawing-room, where the lady has been requested, in the meantime, to wait, and they
are then taken, often through long and wide passages, to their bedrooms. A private drawing-room
may be had by paying extra for it; but the custom is to do without one, and to make use of
the ladies' drawing-room, which is always a pretty room, and often a very handsome one. In
it are invariably to be found a piano, at which the ladies frequently perpetrate most dreadful
music; a marble table, in the centre of which always stand a silver tray and silver tankard
and goblets containing iced water, a rocking chair, besides other easy-chairs and sofas, and
a Bible. It is a rare thing not to find a Bible, the gift of a Society, in every bedroom and
drawing-room in the hotel. The bedrooms never have bed-curtains, and sometimes no window-curtains;
but the windows usually have Venetian or solid shutters.

The dining-hall is a spacious apartment, often 80 or sometimes 100 feet long, and in some large
hotels there are two of these, one used for railway travellers, and the other for the regular
guests. The meals are always at a table-d'hôte, with printed bills of fare; the dishes are
not handed round, as in Germany, but the guests are required to look at the bill of fare and
name their dishes, which does not seem a good plan, as one's inclination is always to see how
the dish looks before ordering it. Everything comes as soon as asked for, and there is a great
choice of dishes. There is very little wine drunk at table, but to every hotel there is appended
a bar, where, we are told, the gentlemen make amends for their moderation at table by discussing
gin sling, sherry cobbler, &c.; but of course I know nothing of this, excepting from hearsay.
The utmost extent of Papa's excesses on the rare occasions when he went into these bars, was
to get a glass of Saratoga water; but he has failed to give me any description of what he saw.
The breakfasts are going on usually from seven till nine. The general dinner-hour is one; but
there is sometimes a choice of two hours, one and three. Tea, consisting of tea, coffee, and
sweet cakes and preserves, takes place at six; and there is a cold meat supper at nine. Meals
are charged extra if taken in private. It is a good plan in travelling never to reserve oneself
at the end of the day's journey for the hotel dinner, as there is a chance of arriving after
it is over, when the alternative is to go without; the railway dinners are quite as good, find
often better, than those at the hotel. The use of the ladies' drawing-room is restricted to
ladies and gentlemen accompanying them; no single gentleman, is allowed to sit in it unless
invited by a lady; but there is a separate reading-room for gentlemen, supplied with newspapers,
and there is generally another room reserved for smoking, but the accommodation in these rooms
is, in general, very inferior to those set apart for the ladies. In the hall of the hotel there
is frequently a counter for the sale of newspapers, books, and periodicals, and all hotels
have a barber's shop, which is a marvellous part of the establishment. The fixed charge at
the hotels is generally from 8s. to 10s. per day for each person.

We have just settled to sail for England on the 1st December, so I shall have only one more
journal letter to write to you, and shall be myself the bearer of it.

FOOTNOTE:

[13] The account referred to was written as far back as 1839, and is so much more accurate
a description of the Falls, and of the canal, than that given in the Railway Guide, that I
must here extract it.

"The falls of the Ohio are occasioned by an irregular ledge of rock stretching across the river.
They are only perceptible at low water, the whole descent being but twenty-two feet, while
the difference of level between the highest and lowest stages of the water is about sixty feet.
When the river is full, they present, therefore, no serious obstruction to the navigation.
To obviate the inconvenience, however, at low water, a canal, called the Louisville and Portland
Canal, has been constructed round the falls, which is deserving of notice, as being, perhaps,
the most important work of the kind ever undertaken. The cross section of the canal is 200
feet at the top of the bank, 50 feet at the bottom, and 42 feet deep, making its capacity about
fifteen times greater than that contemplated for the Erie Canal after its enlargement is completed:
its sides are sloping and paved with stone. The guard lock contains 21,775 perches of masonry,
being equal to that of fifteen locks on the New York Canals; and three others contain 12,300
perches. This canal is capable of admitting steamboats of the largest class. It is scarcely
two miles in length; but, considering the quantity of mason work, and the difficulty of excavating
earth and rock from so great a depth, together with the contingencies attending its construction,
from the fluctuations in the depth of the river, it is probably no over-statement when it is
said, that the work in it is equal to that of seventy or seventy-five miles of an ordinary canal."

                                              Albany, Nov. 27th, 1858.

My last letter was despatched to you on the 23rd inst.;--that evening we dined at Mr. Aspinwall's.
He has a handsome house in New York, and a large picture gallery, and as we wished to see this
by daylight, we called on him after breakfast on the following morning, and had an opportunity
of examining the pictures, many of which are very good, especially some by early Dutch masters.

Mr. Aspinwall afterwards took us to the Astor Library. This library was founded by the munificence
of the late Mr. Astor, a very rich merchant, who bequeathed a large sum of money for the purpose.
It is remarkably well arranged and pretty, and capable of containing about 300,000 volumes.
Mr. Cogswell, the librarian, showed us some of the most valuable books. He was acquainted with
Papa's name, as he had bought his book in London for the library, and appeared familiar with
its contents. He said he valued it as filling up a gap in the financial history of America
that was not supplied by any work in this country.

Mr. Aspinwall took us afterwards to the Cooper Institute, founded by Mr. Peter Cooper, another
very eminent citizen of New York, who has done this good deed in his lifetime. He happened
to be there, and as Mr. Aspinwall introduced us to him, he showed us round the building himself.
He is a rich ironmonger, and an eccentric man. The building has cost 100,000l.; it is intended
for public lectures and for a school of design. At the time we were there, some specimens of
drawings, penmanship, &c., by the scholars of the Free Schools in New York were being exhibited,
and were, in general, very creditable performances. We went to the top of the building, and,
the weather being remarkably clear and fine, we had a good view of the town and of the surrounding
country. Anything like country, however, can only be seen on one side across the Hudson, although,
on the opposite side of New York Bay, Staten Island can be seen stretching "right away" to
the south; but the wonderful sight is the immense city itself, extending for miles in a northern
direction.

We rather crowded into this last day all the sights that we had hitherto omitted to see at
New York; for we went also to the Bible House, a very large building near the Cooper Institute.
In this Bible House not only are copies of the Bible sold, as in our corresponding institution
in London, but the whole process of printing, making up, and binding the Bible is carried on.
The number of Bibles and Testaments issued by the establishment is very great, amounting, during
the last year, to 712,045. During that period there were 250,000 Bibles printed and 381,000
Testaments, besides 500 books for the blind printed in raised types, making a total of 631,500
volumes; and this, owing to a scarcity of funds, arising out of the late pecuniary pressure,
is a decrease from the year before of 110,000 volumes, so that it was from the store in hand
that the excess of the volumes issued above the number printed was taken. These Bibles and
Testaments are in every language, and in every form and size. The machinery is worked by steam,
and the immense building is warmed from the same source. Some idea of its extent may be conceived
by the fact that there are twelve miles of pipes used in this warming process.[14]

After this hard day's work we dined at Mr. Russell's, to meet Dr. Rae, the Arctic traveller,
and in the evening we went to the Geographical Society to hear a lecture on his last northern
expedition, when he gained all the information known respecting poor Sir John Franklin, in
search of whom he had been sent by the British Government. He showed us many relics of that
unfortunate party, consisting of spoons, watch-cases, &c.; the lecture was very interesting,
especially with regard to the origin and transportation of boulders. He produced an enormous
head of a deer, which had a curious horn in front between the two side ones; this is a common
appendage to the antlers of the deer of that region. He told us an amusing anecdote of his
having been present when Professor Owen was lecturing on this strange appearance, and described
the wisdom of this provision, to enable the animal to clear its way in the snow in search of
its food below it; but Dr. Rae was able entirely to overset this theory, by stating that the
whole horny appendages of this deer are always shed before any snow makes its appearance on
the ground.

At dinner we met Mr. Rutherford, who begged us to go after the lecture to see his observatory,
in which, he said, he had the best and largest telescope in America, not excepting the one
at Washington; we went therefore to see it, though the lecture was not over till half-past
ten, and were repaid by a sight of Jupiter, and his belts and satellites: but though the telescope
was larger than the one at Washington, being of the same focal length, and having an object
glass nearly two inches wider, it did not strike us as being so clear and good an instrument.
It is undoubtedly, however, a very fine one, and entirely of American make. Much as we have
had to record this day, there was more jumbled into it; but instead of going to see the last
sight I have to record, it obtruded itself upon us at every turn. This was a military procession,
flags flying, &c., to commemorate the evacuation of the town of New York by the British, after
the first war of Independence. A great dinner is always given on this day by the members of
the Order of Cincinnati, and Papa was asked to go to it, but our engagement to Mr. Russell
prevented his accepting the invitation.

I think the only further thing of interest which I have to record about our visit this time
to New York, was our calling on Dr. Tyng; he is a most interesting person, and talked much
about revivals and slavery. He said there was undoubtedly a greater degree of serious feeling
gradually spreading in New York, especially among the artisans and labouring classes; but he
could see nothing of that work of the Spirit on the large scale which others speak of, and
he thinks the nature and extent of the revivals have been over-estimated.

With regard to slavery, Dr. Tyng is a very good judge, as, for the first six years of his ministry,
he had a considerable parish in the slave state of Maryland, extending over a large tract of
plantation lands, cultivated entirely by slaves. The slave population in this parish was about
8000, and he says the treatment of the slaves was almost all that could be desired for their
temporal comfort, as far as good clothing, good food, and kind treatment went, and he had known
but very few cases of slaves being ill-treated or even flogged during his six years' residence
there: still no one can condemn more strongly than he does the whole system, as lowering and
degrading the moral tone, both of the white and the black population.

As I shall probably have no occasion to allude again to slavery, as the rest of our short stay
on this continent will now be among the free states, I may say I have seen nothing to lessen,
and everything to confirm, the strong impression I have always entertained respecting it. Besides
what we have seen, we have read as much as we could on the subject, and must record a little
book called "Aunt Sally, or the Cross the Way to Freedom," as being the most faithful account
of the evils of slavery we have met with. It is the story of a female slave's life, and is
said to be strictly true and devoid of all exaggeration, and it is a most touching account
of the power of religion in her case, in upholding her through a long life of trials and degradation.[15]

On Friday, the 26th instant, we took our final leave of New York. We left it by the Hudson
River Railway, the same by which we went to West Point two days after our arrival in America,
and it was curious to contrast our feelings on getting into the cars now with those which we
experienced when we first set our foot into them; we thought at first that we never could encounter
a long journey in them, and dreaded all sorts of disasters. Yet now, independently of steamboat
travelling, we have travelled altogether in railways over more than 5500 miles, and it is somewhat
singular that in the great number of separate journeys we have taken, we have only on one occasion
been late on arriving at our destination, which was on reaching Chicago. The train was then
two hours late in a journey of 281 miles, and that not owing to any accident, but solely to
the slippery state of the rails, after a heavy rain, which rendered caution necessary. The
only hitch from accident (if it was one), was for five minutes at Rome, on the New York Central
Railway, when we were delayed for that time, on account of what William told us was "something
wrong with the engine." We have only 200 miles left to travel between this and Boston, and
we have great reason to be thankful for having performed so long a journey not only in perfect
safety, but without any anxiety, and scarcely any fatigue.[16]

One marked improvement in the eastern over the western railways, is in the gentlemen's special
accomplishment of spitting being much less active in the east, owing to their chewing tobacco
less vigorously. In the west it is dreadful to see and hear how this habit goes on during the
whole day, not out of window, but on the floors of the cars and omnibuses, and all over the
hall and passages of the hotels.

But to return to our journey from New York on the Hudson. It was a beautiful day, and the scenery
quite lovely. We had only twenty-seven miles to go to Mr. Bartlett's, to whom we had brought
letters from England, and who asked us to pass the first night of our journey at his country
place near Tarrytown. On arriving at the station there, he drove us to his house, which stands
on an eminence three miles higher up the river. The river here is rather more than three miles
in width, but the atmosphere was so clear that every house on the opposite bank could be distinctly
seen, and the opposite shore is so high, that we could hardly imagine the river to be as wide
as it is. The view from the house is perfectly magnificent. The eye takes in a distance of
thirty miles up and down the river, there being here a long reach, having almost the appearance
of a lake, the river above and below not being more than from a mile to a mile and a half in
width. Immediately opposite Tarrytown is the town of Nyach, which is connected with Tarrytown
by a steam ferry. In passing from Tarrytown to Mr. Bartlett's house, we drove through the Sleepy
Hollow, the scene of one of Washington Irving's tales, and passed the old Dutch church, which
is mentioned by him in the legend, as the place of sanctuary where Ichabod took refuge. In
fact, the whole scenery is classic ground here; and Mr. Irving himself, who has rendered it
so, lives only two miles off, at Sunnyside.

After giving us some luncheon, Mr. Bartlett took Papa a walk up a high hill behind the house,
the view from which he describes as perfectly enchanting; but it would be difficult for anything
to surpass the one seen from the house, combining every possible feature of wood, hill, dale,
and water; but if I cannot describe this, it would be equally impossible to describe the perfect
taste and beauty of the house itself. The chief features are the carving of the wooden staircase,
the chimney-pieces in the library and dining-room, and of the book-cases in the library. The
carpet of the drawing-room was Aubusson tapestry, and the furniture was entirely from French
patterns or imported from Paris, where it was made on purpose for the different rooms; every
part of the house, including the bed-rooms, was filled with choice engravings. One bed-room
specially struck us, the paper and chintz furniture of which were exactly of the same pattern
of roses on a white ground, and the effect was beautiful; but there were many others in equally
good taste, all with French papers. Hot and cold water were laid on in the rooms, and hot air
likewise, though not so as to be in the least oppressive. Mrs. Bartlett's bed-room and dressing-room
were the climax of all. The woodwork throughout the house was varied in every story: there
was black oak, red pine, and white pine, all of very fine grain; the hall was covered with
encaustic tiles from Minton's; the offices were in keeping, dairy, laundry, &c. Papa went over
the farm and gardens, which were in the same exquisite order; and there were greenhouses and
hothouses, which looked at a distance like a little Crystal Palace. Mrs. Bartlett is a very
amiable person, but a great invalid, and seldom leaves her room.

This morning we proceeded on our way to this place; before getting into the train at twelve
o'clock, we drove over to Sunnyside; but, alas! Mr. Irving was out, and we could only walk
about his grounds, and peep in at his study window. As this brought us to Tarrytown sooner
than we counted upon, I had time to climb up one of the hills, and much enjoyed the view, although
it was not so extensive as the one Papa saw yesterday. As we got northward, on our way to Albany,
the snow, which had almost disappeared at Tarrytown, became very deep, the land was covered
with a white garment, and the river partially with a coating of ice. At Hudson, opposite the
Catskill mountains, we, for the first time, saw sledging, sledges having there taken the place
of the usual carriages which come to meet the train. There were many carts, also, and an omnibus,
all on sledges, and the whole had a singularly wintry appearance.

We are housed again at the Delavan House, and find the twenty-four damsels have donned long
sleeves to their gowns, which are now of dark cotton instead of pink; but their hoops are as
large, and their faces as impudent as ever, forcing Papa to restrain his grin, particularly
when they stand in double file on each side of the table, all in the same pose, with their
arms crossed before them, when we enter the dining-room.

We are glad to find ourselves again here, for this hotel bears away the palm from all others
we have seen in America, with the exception of that at Harrisburgh, which can alone compare
with it in the general beauty of the rooms. To describe, for instance, the bedroom in which
we are now sitting. The room is about twenty-four feet square, having two large windows looking
to the street, and a mirror and handsome marble consol-table between them. The windows have
very handsome gilt cornices, with tamboured muslin curtains, and others of a blue and gold
coloured damask; there are two large sofas, and four small chairs of dark walnut wood, carved
and covered with the same material as the curtains, and a smaller chair with a tapestry seat--also
a large rocking-chair covered with Utrecht velvet. The bed is of prettily carved black walnut,
the wash-hand-stand the same, with marble slab; there is a very handsome Brussels carpet, a
large round table, at which I am now writing, a very handsome bronze and ormolu lustre, with
six gaslights, and two ormolu candelabra on the chimney-piece. The chimney-piece is of white
marble, and over it is a most gorgeously carved mirror. The room is about fourteen feet high;
the ceiling slightly alcoved and painted in medallions of flowers on a blue ground, with a
great deal of very well painted and gilt moulding, which Papa at first thought was really in
relief. The paper is a white ground, with a gold pattern, and a coloured border above, and
below, and at the angles of the room; the door leads into a very fine wide passage, and there
are two others, each leading into an adjoining room, all painted pure white; so is the skirting-board;
and the door handles are white porcelain. Thrower's room, next ours, is much the same, but
of about half the size. There are Venetian blinds to the windows, not made to draw up, but
folding like shutters, and divided into several small panels. Our two windows look into a broad
cheerful street, in which the snow is lying deep, and the whole scene is enlivened, every now
and then, by the sleighs and their merry bells as they pass along.

Nov. 29th.--Yesterday the morning was very brilliant. Being desirous of seeing a Shaker village,
and the nature of their service, we had ordered a vehicle over night to be ready at nine o'clock,
when a sleigh made its appearance at the door, with skins of fur and every appliance to keep
us warm. These sleighs are most elegant machines, and this one had a hood, though this is not
a common appendage. It was drawn by a pair of horses, the driver standing in front. The road
was, at first, up a steep hill, but the horses seemed as if they had no weight behind them.
On reaching the high land the view, looking back upon the river, was very pretty. The whole
country was deeply covered with snow, and in many places, where it had drifted, it had the
appearance of large waves, of which the crests curled gracefully over, and looked as if they
had been frozen in the act of curling: some of these crests or waves were four or five feet
above the level of the road. We were about an hour reaching the village, and were much disappointed
to find the gate at the entrance closed, and a painted board hung on it, to announce there
would be no meeting that day. Nothing could exceed the apparent order and decorum of the place;
but we could not effect a closer approach, though our driver tried hard to gain admittance
for us. We therefore returned to Albany, but took a different road home, and enjoyed our sleighing
much; and the cheerful sound of the bells round our horses' necks was quite enlivening; still,
in spite of our wraps, we must confess that we were not sorry when it was over. On our return
to the town we entered a church and heard the end of a sermon. It was a large Baptist church;
but we were rather late, for we were told, by a boy at the door, that "the text had been on
about forty minutes;" but, to judge from the sample we had of the discourse, we were probably
no great losers. The church was a handsome building, but we were chiefly attracted by the following
notice, in large letters, at the entrance.

               UNION PRAYER MEETING DAILY IN THIS CHURCH,

                     FROM TWELVE TO ONE O'CLOCK.

         "Come in, if only for a few moments; all are welcome."

After leaving the church we walked towards the Capitol, which is situated at the end of a very
wide street, State Street, and, as this street rises by a tolerably steep ascent from the river,
there is an extensive view over the river and the adjacent country from the plateau on which
the Capitol stands. There are two very handsome buildings adjoining, of fine white stone, with
Greek porticoes; but the Capitol itself, which is a considerably older building than the others,
is of red brick. We had not time to explore further, for a heavy snow storm came on, which
lasted for the rest of the day.

Boston, Nov. 30th.--Yesterday morning we started early for this place, and the journey occupied
the whole day. We had travelled this road before when the country was rich in its summer clothing,
and the contrast was very strange as we saw it to-day. The heavy fall of snow the night before
had covered not only the ground but the trees of the forests and the ponds and lakes, which
were all frozen over. The Connecticut, however, glided calmly along, though it too was frozen
over above the places where falls in the river obstructed the current. We passed several of
these, which had a curious appearance, long and massive icicles hanging along the whole crest
of the fall, and curiously intermingling with the water which was pouring over the rocks. The
beautiful New England villages were as white as ever, the white snow scarcely detracting from
the purity of the whiteness of the buildings. It was a splendid day, without a cloud in the
sky, and the sun shining on the snow gave it a most brilliant and sparkling appearance.

To-day we have been chiefly engaged in shopping; but we contrived, besides, to see the public
Library and Athenæum, as well as the Hospital and Prison, which Papa went over with Lord Radstock
when we were first here, both of which fully bear out the account he gave me of them. We feel
quite sad to think that this is our last day in America, for we have enjoyed ourselves much;
Papa has, indeed, up till late this evening, been engaged in business; but you are not to suppose
from this that he has never had any relaxation; I am most thankful to say, on the contrary,
that much of our time has been a holiday, and I trust his health has much benefited by our
travels. But, whatever our regrets may be at leaving this interesting country, I need scarcely
say with what delight we look forward to a return home to our dear children, where, I trust,
a fortnight hence, to find you all well and prospering. We embark, at nine to-morrow morning,
in the "Canada" for Liverpool, where I shall hope to add a few lines to this on landing.

December 11th, off Cape Clear.--As it may be late to-morrow before we land, and we may not
have time to write from Liverpool, I shall close this now, or at all events only add a line
from that place. Barring a severe gale of wind, our voyage has been tolerably prosperous since
we left Halifax; but I must not anticipate, as I wish to say a little more about Boston, for
I omitted in my last day's Journal to mention the admirable arrangement on the Western Railway,
by which we came from Albany, as regards checking the luggage. This practice, as I have already
told you, is universal, but, generally speaking, one of the employés of the Packet Express
Company takes charge of the checks before the passengers leave the cars, and for a trifling
charge the luggage is delivered at any hotel the passenger may direct; where this is not done,
the checks are usually given to the conductor of the omnibus, of which almost every hotel sends
its own to the station. But this latter practice leads to much noise, each conductor shouting
out the name of his hotel, as is done at Boulogne and elsewhere on the arrival of the packets.
On gliding into the spacious station at Boston we were prepared to encounter this struggle,
our checks not having been given up in the car; but, to our surprise, there was a total absence
of this noisy scene, and on looking out we saw along the platform a range of beautiful gothic
recesses, over each of which was written the name of an hotel, and we had only to walk along
till we came to "Tremont House," when, without a word passing, we slipped into the hand of
a man stationed within, the checks for our baggage, he simply indicating "No. 2" as the omnibus
we were to get into. Walking to the end of the platform, we found a complete row of omnibuses,
all consecutively numbered, and marched in silence to No. 2, which in a minute or two drove
off with us and the other passengers destined for the Tremont House; we found this, as before,
a very comfortable hotel, and our luggage was there within a few minutes after our arrival.

Before quitting the subject of the American hotels, we ought to state that, from what we hear,
unhappy single gentlemen meet with a very different fate to that of persons travelling in company
with ladies. One poor friend greatly bewailed his lot after he had left his wife at Toronto;
on presenting himself at the "office" of the hotel he used to be eyed most suspiciously, especially
when they saw his rough drab coloured travelling dress, for the criterion of a genteel American
is a black coat and velvet collar. He was accordingly sent in general to a garret, and other
travellers have told us the same; one on board the steamers quite confirmed this account, and
told us he considered it a piece of great luxury when he had a gaslight in his room. He made
this remark on our reading to him the account I have given of our room in Albany and its splendid
six-light candelabra.

But to go on with our adventures: we embarked on board the steamer at 9 A.M. on Wednesday,
the 1st December. The view of the harbour of Boston, formed by a variety of islands, was most
beautiful, in spite of the deep snow which covered them. The day was brilliantly sunny, but
intensely cold, and it continued bitterly cold till we reached Halifax on Thursday night. The
Boston steamers always touch at that place, and the liability to detention by fogs in making
the harbour, renders this passage often a disagreeable one in the foggy season; but when the
weather is as cold as now, it is invariably clear, and we steered up the beautiful harbour
of Halifax with no interruption but that caused by the closing in of the day, rendering it
necessary to slacken our speed as we neared the town. It was dark when we arrived, but having
two hours to spare, we took a walk, and after passing through the town-gate, saw what we could
of the place, respecting which I felt great interest, from my father having been Chief-justice
there many years; his picture by West, of which we have a copy in D. P. H. by West himself,
is at the Court House; but of course we could not see it so late at night; and, in fact, could
only go to one or two shops to make some purchases as memorials of the place. It began to snow
hard before we returned on board, and the cold was so intense, though less so since the snow
began, that the upper part of the harbour above where we stopped was frozen over.

We took Sir Fenwick Williams, of Kars, and a great many other officers, on board at Halifax,
and sailed again at midnight. Next day the intense cold returned, and a severe north-wester
made it almost impossible to keep on deck. Every wave that dashed over us, left its traces
behind in a sheet of ice spread over the deck, and in the icicles which were hanging along
the bulwarks, and formed a fringe to the boats which were hanging inside the ship; one poor
passenger, with a splendid beard, told us he found it quite hard and stiff, and we could have
told him how much we admired the icicles which were hanging to it. The thermometer, however,
was only at 15°, it being the wind that made it so intensely cold. I did not get on deck, for,
owing to the coating of ice, walking on it became a service of some danger; and I did my best
to keep Papa from going up, though he often insisted on doing so, to enjoy the beauty of the
scene. The captain says that it is sometimes most trying to be on this coast in winter, as
the thermometer, instead of being 15° above zero as it was then, is often 15° below, when the
ropes and everything become frozen. This cold lasted till Monday, when we were clear of "the
banks," and fairly launched into the wide Atlantic. The wind continued to blow strongly from
the north-west, with a considerable amount of sea, which put an end to my even thinking of
going on deck, but Papa persevered, and every day passed many hours there, walking up and down
and enjoying it much, especially as it was daily getting warmer. I wished much I could have
accompanied him, but by this time I was completely prostrated by sea-sickness.

The weather, though blowy, continued very fine till Tuesday at four o'clock, when Papa came
down and told me to prepare for a gale; an ominous black cloud had shown itself in the north-west
horizon; this would not of itself have created much sensation, had it not been accompanied
by an extraordinary fall in the barometer; it had, in fact, been falling for twenty-four hours,
for at noon on Monday it stood rather above 30, and at midnight was as low as 29·55, which,
in these latitudes, is a great fall. But on Tuesday, at nine A.M., it had fallen to 28·80,
when it began rapidly to sink, till at half-past three it stood at 28·40, showing a fall of
more than an inch and a half since the preceding day at noon. It seems that this is almost
unprecedented, so that when the little black cloud appeared, every sail was taken in, and the
main topmast and fore top-gallantmast lowered down on deck, and this was not done a bit too
soon, for by half-past four, it blew a hurricane. The captain told a naval officer on board,
that he had thought of putting the ship's head towards the gale, to let it blow past, but on
further consideration, he put her right before it, though at the expense of losing a good deal
of ground, as it made us go four points out of our course. Papa, who was on deck, said it was
most magnificent to hear the fierce wind tearing past the vessel, and to see the ship not swaying
in the least one way or another, but driving forwards with the masts perpendicular, as if irresistibly
impelled through the water, without appearing to feel the waves. But alas, alas, this absence
of motion, which was a paradise to me, lasted but some twenty minutes, while the fury of the
blast continued. We ran before the gale for the next four hours, when it sufficiently moderated
to enable us to resume our proper course.

The gale continued, however, till four next morning, and such a night I never passed. The doctor
said, neither he nor any officer in the ship could sleep, and next morning the poor stewardess
and our peculiar cabin boy mournfully deplored their fate, the former being forced to confess
that, though for years accustomed to the sea, she had been desperately sick. In fact no one
had ever known the vessel to roll before as she did this night, and the sounds were horrible.
The effect of one sea, in particular, striking the ship was appalling, from the perfect stillness
which followed it. The vessel seemed quite to stagger under the blow and to be paralysed by
it, so that several seconds must have elapsed before the heavy rolling recommenced. This, and
the creaking and groaning of the vessel, had something solemn about it; but some minor sounds
were neither so grand nor so philosophically borne by either Papa or myself. One of the most
persevering of these arose from my carelessness in having forgotten to bolt the door of a cupboard
which I made use of, in our cabin, the consequence of which was that, with every lurch of the
vessel, the door gave a violent slam, and our lamp having been put out at midnight, as it invariably
was, we were in total darkness, and without the means of ascertaining whether the irritating
noise proceeded, as we suspected, from the cupboard door, or from one of the doors having been
left open in the passage adjoining our cabin. It would have been dangerous to have got up in
the dark, and with a violent lurching of the vessel, to discover the real cause of this wearisome
noise. I had a strong feeling of self-reproach in my own mind at having brought such a calamity
on poor Papa, when it could have been avoided if I had been a little more careful before going
to bed. On, therefore, the noise went, for the rest of that night, with great regularity--slam--slam--slam--defying
every attempt to obtain even five minutes of sleep. With the first gleam of dawn I plainly
saw that our own peccant door was the cause, and I was able by that time, with some caution,
to rise and secure the bolt, and thus relieve ourselves, and probably our neighbours, from
the weary sound.

Sleep, however, on my part was, under any circumstances, out of the question, for I was under
great anxiety lest Papa should be pitched out of his berth, as he slept in the one above mine.
Before retiring for the night I had consulted the surgeon on the subject, having heard that
a steward had been once thrown out of his berth in this vessel under similar circumstances.
The surgeon assured me that he had never heard of such an accident, and Papa reminded me that
his height would save him from such a calamity, for the berths being only six feet long he
could, by stretching himself out to his full length, wedge himself in and hold on by his head
and heels, and so, in fact, he did; but many passed the night on the floors in their cabin,
particularly the children, who had not the advantage of being six feet three. Next morning
the surgeon said he would not himself have slept where Papa did, and I suspect few of the upper
berths were occupied. So much for the value of a medical opinion!

I was very sorry I could not go on deck on either of the following days, for though the gale
had abated, the wind continued sufficiently strong to keep up a splendid sea. Papa, however,
says that it was more the force of the wind when the gale first began, than the height of the
sea that was remarkable, as the gale did not last long enough to get up a proper sea, though
what that would have been I cannot imagine, as the effects, such as they were, were sufficiently
serious for me. Since then, things have gone on prosperously, but we have only to-night come
in sight of the lights on Cape Clear. The sea mercifully is somewhat smoother, and has allowed
me to write this long story; and I am going to bed with a fairer prospect of sleep than I have
had for the last few nights.

Sunday night, Sept. 12th.--The wind got up again in the night, and has delayed us much, so
that we are still outside the bar of the Mersey: for some hours it has been doubtful whether
we should land to-night in Old England, or pass another night on board. The uncertainty of
our fate has caused an evening of singular excitement, owing to several of the passengers going
perpetually on deck and bringing down news, either that we were in the act of crossing the
bar, or that we had crossed it, or that all this was wrong and that we were still outside.
As often as it was announced, and that with the most positive assertion, that we should land
to-night, there was great joy and glee among all the passengers, excepting ourselves and a
few others who had visions of a late Custom House examination in a dark and dismal night with
pouring rain, and a conviction that landing before morning would not bring us to London any
sooner than doing so early to-morrow, and so we secretly hoped all the time that we were neither
on nor over the bar. Betting, as usual, began on the subject, and the excitement was still
at its height when official information was brought to us that we neither had attempted nor
meant to attempt to cross the bar till five o'clock to-morrow morning. We have therefore easily
made up our minds to what I fear is a disappointment to many. We trust now to have a quiet
night, for we are lying-to, and are as still as at anchor, and hope on awaking to-morrow morning,
to find ourselves in the dock at Liverpool; in which case we shall rush up by an early train
to London.

Here, therefore, ends our Journal; but before closing it, I must add a few lines to say what
cause we have had to feel deeply thankful for all the mercies that have followed us by land
and by sea. We have travelled a distance of nearly 6000 miles, in a country where accidents
frequently occur, both on the railways and in steam-boats, and have never for one moment been
exposed to peril, or experienced one feeling of anxiety. We have met everywhere with great
attention, kindness, and hospitality, and have been preserved in perfect health. Besides our
land and river journeys, we have made two long voyages across the wide Atlantic, and in the
midst of a tempest, which was a very severe one, the Hand of God protected us and preserved
us from danger, and, better still, kept our minds in peace and confidence, and in remembrance
that He who ruleth the waves, could guide and succour us in every time of need, so that even
I felt no fear; Papa has had more experience of storms at sea, and was less likely to feel
any, but his confidence, too, was in knowing that we were under Divine protection, and that
our part was to TRUST; and in this we had our reward.

In thus enumerating the many subjects of thankfulness during our absence from home, I must
reckon as one of the chief of our blessings, the comfort we have experienced in so constantly
receiving the very best accounts of you all; and when we think of the many thousands of miles
that have separated us, we may indeed feel full of gratitude that, neither on one side of the
ocean nor the other, have we had any reason for anxiety concerning each other. In a few hours
more, we shall, I trust, have the joy and gladness of seeing all your dear faces again, and
be rejoicing together over our safe return from our interesting and delightful expedition to
the NEW WORLD.

FOOTNOTES:

[14] The issues of the British and Foreign Bible Society during the same period were 1,517,858;
but the circulation of the American Bible Society is almost entirely limited to the American
continent, and for their foreign Missions, while a large portion of ours goes to supply the
Colonies.

[15] Aunt Sally is a real person still living at Detroit on Lake Michigan, with her son, the
Rev. Isaac Williams, who is the minister there of the Methodist church.

[16] We must admit that our experience differs greatly from that of many; and, looking at the
statistics of railway travelling, accidents do occur with frightful frequency. In a report
recently published by the Philadelphia and Reading Railway, the accidents which occurred on
that line alone in 1855, amounted to no less than 179 in a year, and this on a line where there
is no great press of traffic. In these accidents, 619 cars were broken, 29 people killed, and
7 wounded. Things are since a little improved; as, last year, 1858, there were only 26 cases
of killed and wounded, and, the Report adds, as if consolatory to the feelings of the natives,
"of these 18 were strangers."

THE END.

LONDON PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO. NEW-STREET SQUARE.

       *       *       *       *       *

A CATALOGUE

OF

NEW WORKS IN GENERAL LITERATURE

PUBLISHED BY

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, AND ROBERTS

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASSIFIED INDEX

+Agriculture and Rural Affairs.+

Bayldon on Valuing Rents, &c.                    5 Cecil's Stud Farm                      
8 Hoskyns's Talpa                                 11 Loudon's Agriculture                 
14 Low's Elements of Agriculture                   14 Morton on Landed Estates            
17

+Arts, Manufactures, and Architecture.+

Bourne on the Screw Propeller                    6
Brande's Dictionary of Science, &c.              6
  "      Organic Chemistry                       6
Chevreul on Colour                               8
Cresy's Civil Engineering                        8
Fairbairn's Information for Engineers            9
Gwilt's Encyclopædia of Architecture            10
Harford's Plates from M. Angelo                 10
Humphreys's Parables Illuminated              12
Jameson's Sacred and Legendary Art          12, 13
   "      Commonplace-Book                      13
Konig's Pictorial Life of Luther                10
Loudon's Rural Architecture                     14
Mac Dougall's Campaigns of Hannibal             15
     "        Theory of War                     15
Moseley's Engineering                           17
Piesse's Art of Perfumery                       18
Richardson's Art of Horsemanship                19
Scoffern on Projectiles, &c.                    20
Scrivenor on the Iron Trade                     20
Steam Engine, by the Artisan Club                6
Ure's Dictionary of Arts, &c.                   23

+Biography.+

Arago's Lives of Scientific Men                  5
Brialmont's Wellington                           6
Bunsen's Hippolytus                              7
Crosse's (Andrew) Memorials                      9
Gleig's Essays                                  10
Green's Princesses of England                   10
Harford's Life of Michael Angelo                10
Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopædia                    13
Maunder's Biographical Treasury                 15
Mountain's (Col.) Memoirs                       17
Parry's (Admiral) Memoirs                       18
Russell's Memoirs of Moore                      16
   "      (Dr.) Life of Mezzofanti              20
SchimmelPenninck's (Mrs.) Life                  20
Southey's Life of Wesley                        21
   "      Life and Correspondence               21
Stephen's Ecclesiastical Biography              22
Strickland's Queens of England                  22
Sydney Smith's Memoirs                          21
Symonds's (Admiral) Memoirs                     22
Taylor's Loyola                                 22
   "     Wesley                                 22
Uwins's Memoirs and Letters                     23
Waterton's Autobiography and Essays             34

+Books of General Utility.+

Acton's Bread-Book                               5
  "     Cookery-Book                             5
Black's Treatise on Brewing                      6
Cabinet Gazetteer                                7
   "    Lawyer                                   7
Cust's Invalid's Own Book                        9
Gilbart's Logic for the Million                 10
Hints on Etiquette                              11
How to Nurse Sick Children                      12
Hudson's Executor's Guide                       12
  "   on Making Wills                           12
Kesteven's Domestic Medicine                    13
Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopædia                    13
Loudon's Lady's Country Companion               14
Maunder's Treasury of Knowledge                 15
   "      Biographical Treasury                 15
   "      Geographical Treasury                 16
   "      Scientific Treasury                   15
   "      Treasury of History                   16
   "      Natural History                       16
Piesse's Art of Perfumery                       18
Pocket and the Stud                             10
Pycroft's English Reading                       19
Reece's Medical Guide                           19
Rich's Companion to Latin Dictionary            19
Richardson's Art of Horsemanship                19
Riddle's Latin Dictionaries                     19
Roget's English Thesaurus                       20
Rowton's Debater                                20
Short Whist                                     21
Thomson's Interest Tables                       22
Webster's Domestic Economy                      24
West on Children's Diseases                     24
Willich's Popular Tables                        24
Wilmot's Blackstone                             24

+Botany and Gardening.+

Hassall's British Freshwater Algæ               11
Hooker's British Flora                          11
   "     Guide to Kew Gardens                   11
   "       "   "  Kew Museum                    11
Lindley's Introduction to Botany                14
   "      Theory of Horticulture                14
Loudon's Hortus Britannicus                     14
   "     Amateur Gardener                       14
   "     Trees and Shrubs                       14
   "     Gardening                              14
   "     Plants                                 14
Pereira's Materia Medica                        18
Rivers's Rose Amateur's Guide                   19
Wilson's British Mosses                         24

+Chronology.+

