There is, of course, also the suggestion that an English Academy of Letters might be of great
service in discounting vulgar "successes" and directing respect and attention to literary achievements.
One may doubt whether such an Academy as a Royal Charter would give the world would be of any
service at all in this connection. But Mr. Herbert Trench has suggested recently that it might
be possible to organize a large Guild of literary men and women, which would include all capable
writers, and from which a sort of Academy could be elected, either by a general poll or, I
would suggest, by a Jury of Election or successive Juries confirming one another. The New Republican
would like to see such a Guild not purely English, but Anglo-American, or in duplicate for
the two countries. With a very carefully chosen nucleus and some little elaboration in the
admission of new members--whose works might be submitted to the report of a critical jury--such
a Guild might be made fairly representative of literary capacity. Election, one may suggest,
should be involuntary. There would be a number of literary men, one fears--great men some of
them--who would absolutely refuse to work with any such body, and from the first the Guild
would have to determine to make such men unwilling members, members to whom all the honours
and privileges of the Guild would be open whenever they chose to abandon their attitude of
scorn or distrust. Such a Guild would furnish a useful constituency, a useful jury-list. It
could be used to recommend writers for honours, to check the distribution of public pensions
for literary services, perhaps even to send a member or so to the Upper Chamber. It is, at
any rate, an experiment worth trying.

But such a Guild at best is only one of many possible expedients in this matter. Another is
for a few people of means to subsidize a magazine for the exhaustive criticism of contemporary
work for a few years. Quite a small number of people, serious in this matter, a couple of thousand
or so, could float such a magazine by the simple expedient of guaranteeing subscriptions. [Footnote:
It may be suggested that among other methods of putting the criticism of contemporary literature
upon a better footing is one that might conceivably be made to pay its own expenses. There
is so much room for endowments nowadays that where one can get at the purse of the general
public one should certainly prefer it to that of the generous but overtaxed donor. The project
would require a strong endowment, but that endowment might be of the nature of a guarantee
fund, and might in the end return unimpaired to the lender. The suggestion is the establishment
of a well-planned and reasonably cheap monthly or weekly critical magazine, written on a level
at present unattainable--chiefly because of the low rate of payment for all literary criticism. In
this sense, according to the English point of view, must be understood the treaty by which a
Court of Arbitration between the two countries was established.

England wishes, in any case, to avert the danger of a war with America. The natural opposition
of the two rival States may, however, in the further development of things, be so accentuated
that England will be forced to assert her position by arms, or at least to maintain an undisputed
naval supremacy, in order to emphasize her diplomatic action. The relations of the two countries
to Canada may easily become strained to a dangerous point, and the temporary failure of the
Arbitration Treaty casts a strong light on the fact that the American people does not consider
that the present political relations of the two nations are permanent.

There is another danger which concerns England more closely and directly threatens her vitality.
This is due to the nationalist movement in India and Egypt, to the growing power of Islam,
to the agitation for independence in the great colonies, as well as to the supremacy of the
Low-German element in South Africa.

Turkey is the only State which might seriously threaten the English position in Egypt by land.
This contingency gives to the national movement in Egypt an importance
which it would not otherwise possess; it clearly shows that England
intensely fears every Pan-Islamitic movement. She is trying with all
the resources of political intrigue to undermine the growing power
of Turkey, which she officially pretends to support, and is endeavouring
to create in Arabia a new religious centre in opposition to the Caliphate.

The
same views are partially responsible for the policy in India, where
some seventy millions of Moslems live under the English rule. They would
deal with contemporary fiction, with contemporary speculative literature, and with the style,
logic, methods and vocabulary of scientific and philosophical writers. Their work would form
the mass of the magazine, but there would also be (highly paid) occasional writers, towards
whose opinions the regular staff would very carefully define their attitude. The project, of
course, in foolish hands, might be very foolishly misinterpreted. It might be quite easy to
drive a team of egregious asses in this way over contemporary work, leaving nothing but hoof-marks
and injuries, but we are assuming the thing to be efficiently done. It is submitted that such
a magazine, patiently and generously sustained for a few years, would at last probably come
to pay its way. Unless the original selection of the staff was badly done, it would by sheer
persistent high quality win its way to authority with the reading public, and so fill its covers
with a swelling mass of advertisement pages. And once it paid, then forthwith a dozen rivals
would be in the field, all of them, of course, also paying highly for critical matter and competing
for critics of standing. Such an enterprise would be a lever for criticism through the whole
of our literary world.]

Then it should also be possible to endow university lectureships and readerships in contemporary
criticism, lectureships and readerships in which questions of style and method could be illustrated
by quotation (not necessarily of a flattering sort) from contemporary work. Why should there
not be an endowment which would enable a man of indisputable critical capacity to talk through
an illuminating course, to sit before a little pile of marked books and reading sometimes here
and sometimes there and talking between, to distinguish the evil from the good? What a wholesome
thing to have Mr. Henley, for example, at that in the place of some of the several specialists
who will lecture you so admirably on the Troubadours! How good to hear Mr. Frederic Harrison
(with some one to follow) adjusting all our living efforts to the scale of the divine Comte,
and Mr. Walkley and Mr. Herbert Paul making it perfectly clear that a dead dog is better than
a living lion, by demonstrations on the lion. Criticism to-day is all too much in the case
of that doctor whose practice was deadly, indeed, but his post- mortems admirable! No doubt
such lectures would consist at times of highly contentious matter, but what of that? There
could be several chairs. It would not be an impossible thing to set a few Extension Lecturers
afloat upon the same channel. We have now numerous courses of lectures on the Elizabethan Dramatists
and the evolution of the Miracle Play, and the people who listen to this sort of thing will
depart straight away to recreate their souls in the latest triumph of vehement bookselling.
Why not base the literary education of people upon the literature they read instead of upon
literature that they are scarcely more in touch with than with Chinese metaphysics? A few carefully
chosen pages of contemporary rubbish, read with a running comment, a few carefully chosen pages
of what is, comparatively, not rubbish, a little lucid discussion of effects and probabilities,
would do more to quicken the literary sense of the average person than all the sham enthusiasm
about Marlowe and Spenser that was ever concocted. There are not a few authors who would be
greatly the better and might even be subsequently grateful for a lecture upon themselves in
this style. Let no one say from this that the classics of our tongue are depreciated here.
But the point is, that for people who know little of history, little of our language, whose
only habitual reading is the newspaper, the popular novel, and the sixpenny magazine, to plunge
into the study of works written in the language of a different period, crowded with obsolete
allusions, and saturated with obsolete ideas and extinct ways of thinking, is pretentious and
unprofitable, and that most of such Extension Lecturing is fruitless and absurd. And I appeal
to these two facts in confirmation, to the thousands of people who every year listen to such
lectures and to the hundreds of thousands of copies of our national classics sold by the booksellers,
on the one hand, and on the other to the absolute incapacity of our public to judge any new
literary thing or to protect itself in any way from violently and vulgarly boomed rubbish of
the tawdriest description. Without a real and popular criticism of contemporary work as a preliminary
and basis, the criticism and circulation of the classics is quite manifestly vain.

By such expedients very much might be done for the literary atmosphere. On the contrary, we must
strain our financial resources in order to carry on, and if possible to accelerate, the expansion
of our fleet, together with the fortification of our coast. It would be justifiable, under
the conditions, to meet our financial requirements by loans, if no other means can be found; for here
questions of the greatest moment are at stake--questions, it may fairly be said, of existence.

Let
us imagine the endless misery which a protracted stoppage or definite destruction of our oversea
trade would bring upon the whole nation, and, in particular, on the masses of the industrial classes
who live on our export trade. This consideration by itself shows the absolute necessity of strengthening
our naval forces in combination with our coast defences so thoroughly that we can look forward
to the decisive campaign with equanimity. Even the circumstance that we cannot, perhaps, find crews
at once for the ships which we are building need not check the activity of our dockyards; for these
ships will be valuable to replace the loss in vessels which must occur in any case.

The rapid completion of the Kaiser-Wilhelm Canal is of great importance, in order that our largest
men-of-war may appear unexpectedly in the Baltic or in the North Sea.

But it does not meet all military requirements. It is a question whether it is not expedient
to obtain secure communication by a canal between the mouth of the Ems, the Bay of Jahde, and
the mouth of the Elbe, in order to afford our fleet more possibilities
of concentration. Upon such a basis it becomes possible
to consider the practicability of the endowment of general literature. For to that at last
we come. I submit that it is only by the payment of authors, and if necessary their endowment
in a spacious manner, and in particular by the entire separation of the rewards of writing
from the accidents of the book market, that the function of literature can be adequately discharged
in the modern state. The laws of supply and demand break down altogether in this case. We have
to devise some means of sustaining those who discharge this necessary public function in the
progressive state.

There are several general propositions in this matter that it may be worth while to state at
this point. The first is that both scientific generalization and literature proper have been
and are and must continue to be the product of a quite exceptionally heterogeneous aggregation
of persons. They are persons of the most various temperaments, of the most varied lop-sidedness,
of the most various special gifts, and the most various social origins, having only this in
common, the ability to add to the current of the world's thought. They are not to be dealt
with as though they were a class of persons all of exceptional general intelligence, of exceptional
strength of character, or of exceptional sanity. To do that, would be to hand over literature
from the man of genius to the man of talent. A single method of selection, help, honour, and
payment, measurement by one general standard cannot, therefore, be accepted as a solution.
There must not be any one single central body, any authoritative single control, for such a
body or authority would inevitably develop a "character" in its activity and greet with especial
favour (or with especial disfavour) certain types. In this case, at any rate, organization
is not centralization, and it is also not uniformity. The proposition may indeed be thrown
out that the principle of Many Channels (a principle involving the repudiation both of the
monarchical and the democratic idea) is an essential one to go upon in all questions of honour
and promotion in the modern state. And not only Many Channels, but Many Methods. Whatever the
value of that as a universally valuable proposition, it certainly applies here.

And next we may suggest that we must take great care that we pay for the thing we need and
not for some subsidiary qualification of less value. The reward must be directly related to
the work, and independent of all secondary considerations. It must have no taint of charity.
The recipient must not have to show that he is in want. Because a writer or investigator is
a sober, careful body and quite solvent in a modest way, that is no reason why we should not
pay him stimulatingly for his valuable contributions to the general mind, or because he is
a shiftless seeker of misfortunes, why we should pay him in excess. But pay him anyhow. Almost
scandalous private immorality, I submit, should not bar the literary worker from his pay any
more than it justifies our stealing his boots. We must deal with immorality as immorality,
and with work as work. Above all, at the present time, we must keep clearly in view that popularity
has no relation to literary, philosophic or scientific value, it neither justifies nor condemns.
At present, except in the case of certain forms of research and in relation to the altogether
too charitable-looking British Civil List, we make popularity the sole standard by which a
writer may be paid. The novelist, for example, gets an income extraordinarily made up of sums
of from sixpence to two shillings per person sufficiently interested to buy his or her books.
The result is entirely independent of real literary merit. The sixpences and shillings are,
of course, greatly coveted, and success in getting them on anything like a magnificent scale
makes a writer, good or bad, vehemently hated and abused, but the hatred and abuse--unaccompanied
as they are by any proposals for amelioration--are hardly less silly than the system. And for
our present purpose it really does not matter if the fortunate persons who interest the great
public are or are not overpaid. Our concern is with the underpaid, and with all this affair
of mammoth editions and booming only as it affects that aspect. We are concerned with the exceptional
man's necessities and not with his luxuries. The fly of envy in the True Artist's ointment
may, I think, very well stop there until magnanimity becomes something more of a cult in the
literary and artistic worlds than it is at the present time.

This, perhaps, is something of a digression from our second general proposition, that we must
pay directly for the work itself. But it leads to a third proposition. The whole history of
literature and science abundantly shows that no critical judgment is more than an approximation
to the truth. Criticism should be equal to the exposure of the imitator and the pure sham,
of course, it should be able to analyze and expose these types, but above that level is the
disputed case. At the present time in England only a very few writers or investigators hold
high positions by anything approaching the unanimous verdict of the intelligent public--of
that section of the public that counts. In the department of fiction, for example, there is
a very audible little minority against Mr. Kipling, and about Mr. George Moore or Mr. Zangwill
or Mr. Barrie one may hear the most diverse opinions. By the test of blackballing, only the
unknown would survive. The valuation is as erratic in many branches of science. Nothing can compel
a State to act counter to its own interests, on which those of its citizens depend. This consideration,
however, imposes on the honest State the obligation of acting with the utmost caution when concluding
a political arrangement and defining its limits in time, so as to avoid being forced into a breach
of its word. Conditions may arise which are more powerful than the most honourable intentions.
The country's own interests--considered, of course, in the highest ethical sense--must then
turn the scale. "Frederick the Great was all his life long charged with treachery, because no treaty
or alliance could ever induce him to renounce the right of free self-determination."[A]

The great statesman, therefore, will conclude political ententes or alliances, on whose continuance
he wishes to be able to reckon, only if he is convinced that each of the contracting parties will
find such an arrangement to his true and unqualified advantage. Such an alliance is, as I have
shown in another place, the Austro-German.

The two States, from the military no less than from the political aspect, are in the happiest
way complements of each other. The German theatre of war in the east will be protected by Austria
from any attempt to turn our flank on the south, while we can guard the northern frontier of Austria
and outflank any Russian attack on Galicia.

Alliances in which each contracting party has different interests will never hold good under
all conditions, and therefore cannot represent a permanent political system.

"There is no alliance or agreement in the world that can be regarded as effective if it is
not fastened by the bond of the common and reciprocal interests; if in any treaty the advantage is
all on one side and the other gets nothing, this disproportion destroys the obligation." These
are the words of Frederick the Great, our foremost political teacher pace Bismarck.

We must not be blinded in politics by personal wishes and hopes, but must look things calmly
in the face, and try to forecast the probable attitude of the other States by reference to their
own interests. Bismarck tells us that "Illusions are the greatest danger to the diplomatist.
He must take for granted that the other, like himself, seeks nothing but his own advantage."
It will prove waste labour to attempt to force a great State by diplomatic arrangements to
actions or an attitude which oppose its real interests. When a crisis arises, the weight of
these interests will irresistibly turn the scale.

When Napoleon III. planned war against Prussia, he tried to effect an alliance with Austria
and Italy, and Archduke Albert was actually in Paris to conclude the military negotiations.[B]
These probably were going on, as the French General Lebrun was in Vienna on the same errand.
Both countries left France in the lurch so soon as the first Prussian flag flew victoriously
on the heights of the Geisberg. A statesman less biassed than Napoleon would have foreseen
this, since neither Austria nor Italy had sufficient interests at stake to meddle in such a
war under unfavourable conditions.

[Footnote B: When Colonel Stoffel, the well-known French Military Attaché in Berlin, returned
to Paris, and was received by the Emperor, and pointed out the danger of the position and the probable
perfection of Prussia's war preparations, the Emperor declared that
he was better informed.

He proceeded to take from his desk a memoir on the conditions of the Prussian army apparently
sent to him by Archduke Albert, which came to quite different conclusions. The Emperor had made
the facts therein stated the basis of his political and military calculations. (Communications
of Colonel Stoffel to the former Minister of War, v. Verdy, who put them at the service of the
author.)]

France, in a similar spirit of selfish national interests, unscrupulously brushed aside the Conventions
of Algeciras, which did not satisfy her. She will equally disregard all further diplomatic arrangements
intended to safeguard Germany's commercial interests in Morocco so soon as she feels strong enough,
since it is clearly her interest to be undisputed master in Morocco
and to exploit that country for herself. France, when she no longer
fears the German arms, will not allow any official document in the
world to guarantee German commerce and German enterprise any scope
in Morocco; and from the French standpoint she is right.

The political
behaviour of a State is governed only by its own interests, and the
natural antagonism and grouping of the different Great Powers must
be judged by that standard. There is no doubt, however, that it is
extraordinarily difficult to influence the political grouping with
purely selfish purposes; such influence becomes possible only by the
genuine endeavour to further the interests of the State with which
closer relations are desirable and to cause actual injury to its opponents.
 The average Whitechapel Jew could cheat
a Shakespeare into the workhouse in no time, and our idea is rather to make the world easy
for Shakespeares than to hand it over to the rat activities of the "smart" business man.

Freedom of Contract is an idea no one outside a debating society dreams of realizing in the
state. We protect tenants from landlords in all sorts of ways, our law overrides all sorts
of bargains, and in the important case of marriage we put almost all the conditions outside
bargaining and speculative methods altogether by insisting upon one universal contract or none.
We protect women who are physically and economically weak in this manner, not so much for their
own good as the good of the race. The state already puts literary property into a class apart
by limiting its duration. At a certain point, which varies in different circumstances, copyright
expires. It is possible for an author, whose fame comes late, to be present as a row of dainty
volumes in half the comfortable homes in the world, while his grandchildren beg their bread.
The author's blood is sacrificed to the need the whole world has of cheap access to his work.
And since we do him this injury for the sake of our intellectual life, it is surely not unreasonable
to interfere for his benefit also if that subserves the greater end.

Now there are two ways at least in which the author may be and should be protected from the
pressure of immediate necessities. The first of these is to render his copyright in his work
inalienably his, to forbid him to make any bargain by which the right to revise, abbreviate,
or alter what he has written passes out of his hands, and to make every such bargain invalid.
He would be free himself to alter or to endorse alterations, but to yield no carte blanche
to others. He would be free also to make whatever bargain he chose for the rights of publication.
But, and this is the second proposal, no bargain he made should be valid for a longer period
than seven years from the date of its making. Every seven years his book would come back into
his control, to suppress, revise, resell, or do whatever he liked to do with it. Only in one
way could he escape this property, and that would be by declaring it void and making his copyright
an immediate present to the world. And upon this proposal it is possible to base one form--
and a very excellent form--of paying for the public service of good writing and so honouring
men of letters and thought, and that is by buying and, more or less, completely extinguishing
their copyrights, and so converting them into contemporary classics.

Throughout these papers a disposition to become concrete has played unchecked. Always definite
proposals have been preferred to vague generalizations, and here again it will be convenient
to throw out an almost detailed scheme--simply as an illustration of the possibilities of the
case. I am going to suggest to the reader that to endow a thousand or so authors, as authors,
would be a most wise and admirable proceeding for a modern statesman, and I would ask him before
he dismisses this suggestion as absurd and impossible, to rest contented with no vague rejection
but to put to himself clearly why the thing should under present conditions be absurd and impossible.
Always in the past the need of some organ for the establishment and preservation of a common
tone and substance of thought in the state has been recognized; commonly this organ has taken
the form of a Church, a group of Churches (as in America) or an educational system (as in China).
But all previous schemes of social and political organization have been static, have aimed
at a permanent state. Our modern state we know can only live by adaptation, and we have to
provide not a permanent but a developing social, moral and political culture. Our new scheme
must include not only priests and teachers but prophets and seekers. Literature is a vitally
necessary function of the modern state.

Let us waive for the moment the subtle difficulty that arises when we ask who are the writers
of literature, the guides and makers of opinion, the men and women of wisdom, insight, and
creation, as distinguished from those who merely resonate to the note of the popular mind;
let us assume that this is determined, and let us make a scheme in the air to support these
people under such conditions as will give us their best. Suppose the thing done boldly, and
that for every hundred thousand people in our population we subsidize an author--if we can
find as many. Suppose we give him some sort of honour or title and the alternative of going
on writing under copyright conditions--which many popular favourites would certainly prefer--or
of giving up his copyrights to the public and receiving a fixed income, a respectable mediocre
income, L800 or L1000 for example.

That means four hundred or more subsidized authors for Great Britain, which would work out,
perhaps, as eighteen or twenty every year, and a proportionate number for America and the Colonial
States of the British Empire. Suppose, further, that from this general body of authors we draw
every year four or five of the seniors to form a sort of Academy, a higher stage of honour
and income; this would probably give something under a hundred on this higher stage. Taking
the income of the two stages as L1000 and L2000 respectively, this would work out at about
L500,000 a year for Great Britain--a quite trivial addition to what is already spent on educational
work. A scheme that would provide for widows and children whose education was unfinished, and
for the official printing and sale of correct texts of the books written, would still fall
within the dimensions of a million pounds. I am assuming this will be done quite in addition
to the natural growth of Universities and Colleges, to the evolution of great text-books and
criticism, and to the organization and publication of special research in science and letters.
This is to be an endowment specifically for unspecialized literature, for untechnical philosophy
that is, and the creative imagination.

It must not be imagined that such an endowment would be a new payment, by the community. In
all probability we are already paying as much, or more, to authors, in the form of royalties,
of serial fees, and the like. We are paying now with an unjust unevenness--we starve the new
and deep and overpay the trite and obvious. Moreover, the community would have something in
exchange for its money; it would have the copyright of the works written. It may be suggested
that by a very simple device a large proportion of these payments could be recovered. Suppose
that all books, whether copyright or not, and all periodicals sold above a certain price--sixpence,
let us say--had to bear a defaced stamp of--for example--a halfpenny for each shilling of price.
This would probably yield a revenue almost sufficient to cover these literary pensions. In
addition the books of the pensioned authors might bear an additional stamp as the equivalent
of the present royalty.

The annual selection of eighteen or twenty authors might very well be a dispersed duty. One
or two each might be appointed in some way by grouped Universities, or by three or four of
the Universities taken in rotation, by such a Guild of Authors as we have already considered,
by the British Academy of History and Philosophy, by the Royal Society, by the British Privy
Council. The Jury system would probably be of very great value in making these appointments.

That is a rough sketch of a possible scheme--presented in the most open-minded way. It would
not meet all conceivable cases, so it would need to be supplemented in many directions; moreover,
it is presented with hideous crudity, but for all that, would not something of the sort work
well? How would it work? There would certainly be a great diminution in the output of written
matter from the thousand or more recognized writers this would give us, and almost as certainly
a great rise in effort and deliberation, in distinction, quality, and value in their work.
This would also appear in the work of their ambitious juniors. Would it extinguish anything?
I do not see that it would. Those who write trivially for the pleasure of the public would
be just as well off as they are now, and there would be no more difficulty than there is at
present for those who begin writing. Less, indeed; for the thousand subsidized writers, at
least, would not be clamorously competing to fill up magazines and libraries; they might set
a higher and more difficult standard, but they would leave more space about them. The thing
would scarcely affect the development of publishing and book distribution, nor injure nor stimulate--except
by raising the standard and ideals of writing--newspapers, magazines, and their contributors
in any way.

I do not believe for one moment the thing would stop at such a subsidized body of authors,
such a little aristocracy of thought, as this project presents. But it would be an efficient
starting-point. There are those who demand a thinking department for Army and Navy; and that
idea admits of extension in this direction, this organized general literature of mine would
be the thinking organization of the race. Once this deliberate organization of a central ganglion
of interpretation and presentation began, the development of the brain and nervous system in
the social body would proceed apace. Each step made would enable the next step to be wider
and bolder. The general innervation of society with books and book distributing agencies would
be followed by the linking up of the now almost isolated mental worlds of science, art, and
political and social activity in a system of intercommunication and sympathy.

We have now already in the history of the world one successful experiment in the correlation
of human endeavour. Compare all that was accomplished in material science by the isolated work
of the great men before Lord Verulam, and what has been done since the system of isolated inquiry
gave place to a free exchange of ideas and collective discussion. And this is only one field
of mental activity and one aspect of social needs. The rest of the intellectual world is still
unorganized. The rest of the moral and intellectual being of man is dwarfed and cowed by the
enormous disproportionate development of material science and its economic and social consequences.
What if we extend that same spirit of organization and free reaction to the whole world of
human thought and emotion? That is the greater question at which this project of literary endowment
aims.

It may seem to the reader that all this insistence upon the supreme necessity for an organized
literature springs merely from the obsession of a writer by his own calling, but, indeed, that
is not so. We who write are not all so blinded by conceit of ourselves that we do not know
something of our absolute personal value. We are lizards in an empty palace, frogs crawling
over a throne. But it is a palace, it is a throne, and, it may be, the reverberation of our
ugly voices will presently awaken the world to put something better in our place. Because we
write abominably under pressure and for unhonoured bread, none the less we are making the future.
We are making it atrociously no doubt; we are not ignorant of that possibility, but some of
us, at least, would like to do it better. We know only too well how that we are out of touch
with scholarship and contemplation. We must drive our pens to live and push and bawl to be
heard. We must blunder against men an ampler training on either side would have made our allies,
we must smart and lose our tempers and do the foolish things that are done in the heat of the
day. For all that, according to our lights, we who write are trying to save our world in a
lack of better saviours, to change this mental tumult into an order of understanding and intention
in which great things may grow. The thought of a community is the life of that community, and
if the collective thought of a community is disconnected and fragmentary, then the community
is collectively vain and weak. That does not constitute an incidental defect, but essential
failure. Though that community have cities such as the world has never seen before, fleets
and hosts and glories, though it count its soldiers by the army corps and its children by the
million, yet if it hold not to the reality of thought and formulated will beneath these outward
things, it will pass, and all its glories will pass, like smoke before the wind, like mist
beneath the sun; it will become at last only one more vague and fading dream upon the scroll
of time, a heap of mounds and pointless history, even as are Babylon and Nineveh.

XI.

THE MAN'S OWN SHARE

In this manner it is that the initial proposition of New Republicanism works itself out. It
shapes into the rough outline of an ideal new state, a New Republic, a great confederation
of English-speaking republican communities, each with its non-hereditary aristocracy, scattered
about the world, speaking a common language, possessing a common literature and a common scientific
and, in its higher stages at least, a common educational organization, and it indicates in
crude, broad suggestions the way towards that state from the present condition of things. It
insists as a cardinal necessity, not indeed as an end but as an indispensable instrument by
which this world state must be made and sustained, upon a great, a contemporary, and a universally
accessible literature, a literature not simply of thought and science but of power, which shall
embody and make real and living the sustaining dreams of the coming time, and which shall draw
together and bring into intelligent correlation all those men and women who are working now
discontentedly and wastefully towards a better order of life. For, indeed, a great number of
men and women are already working for this New Republic, working with the most varied powers
and temperaments and formulae, to raise the standard of housing and the standard of living,
to enlarge our knowledge of the means by which better births may be attained, to know more,
to educate better, to train better, to write good books for teachers, to organize our schools,
to make our laws simpler and more honest, to clarify our political life, to test and reorganize
all our social rules and conventions, to adjust property to new conditions, to improve our
language, to increase intercourse of all sorts, to give our ideals the justice of a noble presentation;
at a thousand points the New Republic already starts into being. And while we scattered pioneers
and experimenters piece together our scattered efforts into a coherent scheme, while we become
more and more clearly conscious of our common purpose, year by year the old order and those
who have anchylosed to the old order, die and pass away, and the unhampered children of the
new time grow up about us.

In a few years this that I call New Republicanism here, under I know not what final name, will
have become a great world movement conscious of itself and consistent within itself, and we
who are making now the crude discovery of its possibility will be working towards its realization
in our thousand different ways and positions. And coming to our help, to reinforce us, to supersede
us, to take the growing task out of our hands will come youth, will come our sons and daughters
and those for whom we have written our books, for whom we have taught in our schools, for whom
we have founded and ordered libraries, toiled in laboratories, and in waste places and strange
lands; for whom we have made saner and cleaner homes and saner and cleaner social and political
arrangements, foregoing a hundred comfortable acquiescences that these things might be done.
Youth will come to take over the work from us and go on with it in a bolder and ampler manner
than we in these limited days dare to attempt.

Assuredly youth will come to us, if this is indeed to be the dawn of a new time. Without the
high resolve of youth, without the constant accession of youth, without recuperative power,
no sustained forward movement is possible in the world. It is to youth, therefore, that this
book is finally addressed, to the adolescents, to the students, to those who are yet in the
schools and who will presently come to read it, to those who being still plastic can understand
the infinite plasticity of the world. It is those who are yet unmade who must become the makers.
After thirty there are few conversions and fewer fine beginnings; men and women go on in the
path they have marked out for themselves. Their imaginations have become firm and rigid even
if they have not withered, and there is no turning them from the conviction of their brief
experience that almost all that is, is inexorably so. Accomplished things obsess us more and
more. What man or woman over thirty in Great Britain dares to hope for a republic before it
is time to die? Yet the thing might be. Or for the reunion of the English- speaking peoples?
Or for the deliverance of all of our blood and speech from those fouler things than chattel
slavery, child and adolescent labour? Or for an infantile death-rate under ninety in the thousand
and all that would mean in the common life? These and a hundred such things are coming now,
but only the young know how near they may be brought to us. As for us others, we plant a tree
never believing we shall eat the fruit, we build a house never hoping to live therein. The
desert, we believe in our hearts, is our home and our destined grave, and whatever we see of
the Promised Land we must see through the eyes of the young.

With each year of their lives they come more distinctly into conscious participation with our
efforts. Those soft little creatures that we have figured grotesquely as dropping from an inexorable
spout into our world, those weak and wailing lumps of pink flesh more helpless than any animal,
for whom we have planned better care, a better chance of life, better conditions of all sorts,
those laval souls who are at first helpless clay in our hands, presently insensibly have become
helpers beside us in the struggle. In a little while they are beautiful children, they are
boys and girls and youths and maidens, full of the zest of new life, full of an abundant, joyful
receptivity. In a little while they are walking with us, seeking to know whither we go, and
whither we lead them, and why. Our account of the men-makers is not complete until we add to
birth and school and world, the increasing element of deliberate co-operation in the man or
woman we are seeking to make. In a little while they are young men and women, and then men
and women, save for a fresher vigour, like ourselves. For us it comes at last to fellowship
and resignation. For them it comes at last to responsibility, to freedom, and to introspection
and the searching of hearts. We must if we would be men-makers, as the first and immediate
part of the business, correct and finish ourselves. A glance at the Imperial Manoeuvres of 1909
is sufficient to show that many of the operations could never have been carried out had it been
a question of the troops being fed under the conditions of war. It is an absolute necessity that
our officers should learn to pay adequate attention to these points, which are the rule in warfare
and appreciably cramp the power of operations. In theory, of course, the commissariat waggons
are always taken into account; they are conscientiously mentioned in all orders, and in theory
are posted as a commissariat reserve between the corps and the divisions. That they would in
reality all have to circulate with a pendulum-like frequency between the troops and the magazines,
that the magazines would have to be almost daily brought forward or sent farther back, that the
position of the field bakeries is of extreme importance--these are all points which are inconvenient
and troublesome, and so are very seldom considered.

In great strategic war-games, too, even in a theatre of war selected in Russia which excludes
all living upon the country, the commissariat arrangements are rarely worked out in detail; I should
almost doubt whether on such occasions the possibility of exclusive "magazine feeding" has ever
been entertained.

Even smaller opportunities of being acquainted with these conditions
are given to the officer in ordinary manoeuvres, and yet it is extremely
difficult on purely theoretical lines to become familiar with the
machinery for moving and feeding a large army and to master the subject
efficiently.

The friction and the obstacles which occur in reality cannot be brought
home to the student in theory, and the routine in managing such things
cannot be learnt from books.

These conditions, then, are a great check on the freedom of operations, but, quite apart from
the commissariat question, the movements of an army present considerable difficulties in themselves,
which it is obviously very hard for the inexperienced to surmount. When, in 1870, some rather
complicated army movements were contemplated, as on the advance to Sedan, it was at once seen
that the chief commanders were not masters of the situation, that only the fertility of the theatre
of war and the deficient attacking powers of the French allowed the operations to succeed, although
a man like Moltke was at the head of the army. All these matters have since been thoroughly
worked out by our General Staff, but the theoretical labours of the General Staff are by no means
the common property of the army.

On all these grounds I believe that first and foremost our manoeuvres must be placed on a new footing
corresponding to the completely altered conditions, and that we must leave the beaten paths of
tradition. The troops must be trained--as formerly--to the highest
tactical efficiency, and the army must be developed into the most
effective machine for carrying out operations; success in modern war
turns on these two pivots. There are a large number of such
questions concerning the constitution of the family upon which I retain an open and inquiring
mind, and to which I find the answers of the established order, if not always absolutely incorrect,
at any rate glaringly incomplete and totally inadequate; but I do not find the answers of these
Socialistic Communities in any degree more satisfactory.

There are, however, more limited Socialisms, systems which deal mainly with economic organizations,
which recognize the rights of individuals to possessions of a personal sort, and which assume
without detailed discussion the formation of family groups within the general community. There
are limited socialisms whose repudiation of property affects only the common interests of the
community, the land it occupies, the services in which all are interested, the necessary minimum
of education, and the sanitary and economic interaction of one person or family group upon
another; socialisms which, in fact, come into touch with an intelligent individualism, and
which are based on the attempt to ensure equality of opportunity and freedom for complete individual
development to every citizen. Such socialists look not so much to the abolition of property
as to the abolition of inheritance, and to the intelligent taxation of property for the services
of the community. It is among such moderate socialists that I would number myself. I would
make no hard and fast rule with regard to any portion of the material and apparatus used in
the service of a community. With regard to any particular service or concern, I would ask,
Is it more convenient, more likely to lead to economy and efficiency, to let this service rest
in the hands of some single person or group of persons who may offer to do the service or administer
the concern, and whom we will call the owners, or to place it in the hands of some single person
or group of persons, elected or chosen by lot, whom we will call the official or group of officials?
And if you were to suggest some method of election that would produce officials that, on the
whole, were likely to manage worse than private owners, and to waste more than the private
owner's probable profits, I should say then by all means leave the service or concern in private
hands.

You see upon this principle the whole question of the administration of any affair turns upon
the question, Which will give the maximum efficiency? It is very easy to say, and it stirs
the heart and produces cheering in crowded meetings to say, "Let everything be owned by all
and controlled by all for the good of all," and for the general purposes of a meeting it is
quite possible to say that and nothing more. But if you sit down quietly by yourself afterwards
and try and imagine things being "owned by all and controlled by all for the good of all,"
you will presently arrive at the valuable discovery in social and political science that the
phrase means nothing whatever. We must have the courage to attack, if necessary, with troops numerically
inferior but tactically superior and more efficient; we must attack in the consciousness that
tactical striking power and efficiency outweigh the advantages of greater numbers, and that with
the immense modern armies a victory in the decisive direction has more bearing on the ultimate issue
than ever before.

The decision depends on the regular troops, not on the masses which are placed at their side
on mobilization. The commander who acts on this principle, and so far restricts himself in
the employment of masses that he preserves the complete mobility of the armies, will win a strong advantage
over the one whose leader is burdened with inferior troops and therefore is handicapped generally, and
has paid for the size of his army by want of efficiency. The mass of reserves must, therefore,
be employed as subsidiary to the regular troops, whom they must relieve as much as possible from
all minor duties. Thus used, a superiority in the numbers of national reserves will secure
an undoubted superiority in the actual war.

It follows directly from this argument that we must do our best to render the regular army strong and
efficient, and that it would be a mistake to weaken them unnecessarily by excessive drafts upon
their personnel with the object of making the reserves tactically equal to them. This aim may sometimes
be realized; but the general level of efficiency throughout the troops would be lowered.

Our one object must therefore be to strengthen our regular army. An increase of the peace footing
of the standing army is worth far more than a far greater number
of badly trained special reservists. It is supremely important to
increase the strength of the officers on the establishment. The stronger
each unit is in peace, the more efficient will it become for war,
hence the vital importance of aiming at quality, not quantity. Concentration,
not dilution, will be our safeguard. And
my case to-night is, that the existing local government bodies, your town councils, borough
councils, urban district boards, and so forth, are, for the purposes of municipalization, far
from being the best possible bodies, and that even your county councils fall short, that by
their very nature all these bodies must fall far short of the highest possible efficiency,
and that as time goes on they must fail even more than they do now to discharge the duties
we Fabians would like to thrust upon them. And the general reason upon which I would have you
condemn these bodies and seek for some newer and ampler ones before you press the municipalization
of public concerns to its final trial, is this--that their areas of activity are impossibly small.

The areas within which we shape our public activities at present, derive, I hold, from the
needs and conditions of a past order of things. They have been patched and repaired enormously,
but they still preserve the essential conceptions of a vanished organization. They have been
patched and repaired first to meet this urgent specific necessity and then that, and never
with any comprehensive anticipation of coming needs, and at last they have become absolutely
impossible. They are like fifteenth-century houses which have been continuously occupied by
a succession of enterprising but short-sighted and close- fisted owners, and which have now
been, with the very slightest use of lath-and-plaster partitions and geyser hot-water apparatus,
converted into modern residential flats. These local government areas of to-day represent for
the most part what were once distinct, distinctly organized, and individualized communities,
complete minor economic systems, and they preserve a tradition of what was once administrative
convenience and economy. To-day, I submit, they do not represent communities at all, and they
become more wasteful and more inconvenient with every fresh change in economic necessity.

This is a double change. Let me first of all say a word in justification for my first assertion
that existing areas do not represent communities, and then pass to a necessary consequence
or so of this fact. I submit that before the railways, that is to say in the days in which
the current conception of local government areas arose, the villages, and still more the boroughs,
and even the counties, were practically complete minor economic systems. The wealth of the
locality was, roughly speaking, local; rich people resided in contact with their property,
other people lived in contact with their work, and it was a legitimate assumption that a radius
of a mile or so, or of a few miles, circumscribed most of the practical interests of all the
inhabitants of a locality. You got rich and poor in visible relationships; you got landlord
and tenant, you got master and workman all together. But now, through a revolution in the methods
of locomotion, and chiefly through the making of railways, this is no longer true. You can
still see the villages and towns separated by spaces of fields and physically distinct, but
it is no longer the case that all who dwell in these old limits are essentially local inhabitants
and mutually interdependent as once they would have been. A large proportion of our population
to-day, a large and an increasing proportion, has no localized interests at all as an eighteenth-century
person would have understood locality.

Take for example Guildford, or Folkestone, and you will find that possibly even more than half
the wealth in the place is non-local wealth--wealth, that is, having no relation to the local
production of wealth--and that a large majority of the more educated, intelligent and active
inhabitants derive their income, spend their energies, and find their absorbing interests outside
the locality. They may rent or own houses, but they have no reality of participation and little
illusion of participation in any local life. You will find in both towns a considerable number
of hotels, inns, and refreshment places which, although they are regulated by local magistrates
upon a basis of one license to so many inhabitants, derive only a small fraction of their profits
from the custom of the inhabitants. You find too in Folkestone, as in most seaside places,
a great number of secondary schools, drawing scarcely a pupil from the neighbourhood. And on
the other hand you will find labour in both towns, coming in by a morning train and going out
at night. And neither of these instances is an extreme type. As you come in towards London
you will find the proportion of what I would call non-local inhabitants increasing until in
Brixton, Hoxton, or West Ham you will find the really localized people a mere thread in the
mass of the population. Probably you find the thinnest sham of a community in the London boroughs,
where a clerk or a working man will shift his sticks from one borough to another and move on
to a third without ever discovering what he has done. It is not that all these people do not
belong to a community, but that they belong to a larger community of a new type which your
administrators have failed to discover, and which your working theory of local government ignores.
This is a question I have already written about with some completeness in a book published
a year or so ago, and called "Anticipations," and in that book you will find a more lengthy
exposition than I can give here and now of the nature of this expansion. But the gist of the
argument is that the distribution of population, the method of aggregation in a community,
is determined almost entirely by the available means of locomotion. The maximum size of any
community of regular daily intercourse is determined by the length of something that I may
best suggest to your mind by the phrase--the average possible suburban journey in an hour.
A town, for example, in which the only method of progression is on foot along crowded ways,
will be denser in population and smaller in area than one with wide streets and a wheeled traffic,
and that again will be denser and compacter than one with numerous tubes, trams, and light
railways. Every improvement in locomotion forces the suburban ring of houses outward, and relieves
the pressure of the centre. Now, this principle of expanding communities holds not only in
regard to towns, but also on the agricultural country side. There, also, facilities for the
more rapid collection of produce mean finally the expansion and coalescence of what were previously
economic unities.

Now if, while this expansion of the real communities goes on, you keep to the old boundary
lines, you will find an increasing proportion of your population straddling those lines. You
will find that many people who once slept and worked and reared their children and worshipped
and bought all in one area, are now, as it were, delocalized; they have overflowed their containing
locality, and they live in one area, they work in another, and they go to shop in a third.
And the only way in which you can localize them again is to expand your areas to their new scale.

This is a change in human conditions that has been a very distinctive event in the history
of the past century, and it is still in progress. But I think there is excellent reason for
supposing that for practical purposes this change, made by the railway and the motor, this
development of local locomotion, will reach a definite limit in the next hundred years. We
are witnessing the completion of a great development that has altered the average possible
suburban journey in an hour from one of four or five miles to one of thirty miles, and I doubt
very much whether, when every tendency of expansion has been reckoned with, this average hour
journey will ever get much beyond sixty or seventy miles an hour. A radius of four or five
miles marked the maximum size of the old community. A radius of a hundred miles will certainly
mark the maximum of the new community. And so it is no effectual answer to my general argument
to say that a revision of administrative areas always has been and always will be a public
necessity. To a certain extent that always has been and always will be true, but on a scale
in no way comparable to the scale on which it is true to-day, because of these particular inventions.
This need in its greatness is a peculiar feature of the present time, and a peculiar problem
of the present time. The municipal areas that were convenient in the Babylonian, ancient Egyptian,
or Roman empires were no larger and no smaller than those that served the purpose of seventeenth-
century Europe, and I believe it is highly probable--I think the odds are in favour of the
belief--that the most convenient administrative areas of the year 2000 will be no larger and
no smaller than those for many subsequent centuries. We are, in this respect, in the full flow
of a great and permanent transition. And the social and political aspect of the change, is
this steadily increasing proportion of people--more especially in our suburban areas--who are,
so far as our old divisions go, delocalized. They represent, in fact, a community of a new
sort, the new great modern community, which is seeking to establish itself in the room of the
dwindling, little, highly localized communities of the past.

Now what are the practical consequences of this large and increasing non-local element in your
old local government areas? First, there is this. The non-local people do not follow, have
neither the time, nor the freedom, nor the stimulus of sufficient interests to follow, local
politics. They are a sort of Outlanders. Local politics remain therefore more and more in the
hands of the dwindling section of people whose interests really are circumscribed by the locality.
These are usually the small local tradesmen, the local building trade, sometimes a doctor and
always a solicitor; and the most energetic and active and capable of these, and the one with
the keenest eye to business, is usually the solicitor. Whatever you put into the hands of a
local authority--education, lighting, communications--you necessarily put into the hands of
a group of this sort. Here and there, of course, there may be variations; an organized labour
vote may send in a representative, or some gentleman of leisure and philanthropic tastes, like
Mr. Bernard Shaw, may confer distinction upon local deliberations, but that will not alter
the general state of affairs. The state of affairs you must expect as the general rule, is
local control by petty local interests, a state of affairs that will certainly intensify in
the years to come, unless some revision of areas can be contrived that will overtake the amplifying
interests of the delocalized section of the population.

Let me point out what is probably the result of a dim recognition of this fact by the non-local
population, and that is the extreme jealousy of rates and municipal trading by the less localized
paying classes in the community. This is the only way by which we may hope so to weaken our proud
opponent, that we may in the end challenge him to a decisive engagement on the open sea.

In this war we must conquer, or, at any rate, not allow ourselves to be defeated, for it will
decide whether we can attain a position as a World Power by the side of, and in spite of, England.

This
victory will not be gained merely in the exclusive interests of Germany. We shall in this struggle,
as so often before, represent the common interests of the world, for it will be fought not only to
win recognition for ourselves, but for the freedom of the seas. "This was the great aim of Russia
under the Empress Catherine II., of France under Napoleon I., and spasmodically down to 1904
in the last pages of her history; and the great Republic of the United States of North America strives
for it with intense energy. It is the development of the right of nations for which every people
craves."

If the French fleet--as we may expect--combines with the English and takes part in the war,
it will be much more difficult for us to wage than a war with England alone. France's blue-water
fleet would hold our allies in the Mediterranean in check, and England could bring all her forces
to bear upon us. It would be possible that combined fleets of the two Powers might appear both
in the Mediterranean and in the North Sea, since England could hardly leave the protection of
her Mediterranean interests to France alone. The prospect of any ultimately successful issue
would thus shrink into the background. But we need not even then despair. On the contrary,
we must fight the French fleet, so to speak, on land--i.e., we must defeat France so decisively
that she would be compelled to renounce her alliance with England and withdraw her fleet to
save herself from total destruction. Just as in 1870-71 we marched to the shores of the Atlantic,
so this time again we must resolve on an absolute conquest, in order to capture the French
naval ports and destroy the French naval depots. It would be a war to the knife with France, one
which would, if victorious, annihilate once for all the French position as a Great Power. If France,
with her falling birth-rate, determines on such a war, it is at the risk of losing her place
in the first rank of European nations, and sinking into permanent political subservience.
Those are the stakes.

The participation of Russia in the naval war must also be contemplated.
That is the less dangerous, since the Russian Baltic fleet is at present
still weak, and cannot combine so easily as the English with the French.


Well, you may say, no doubt this is right so far as it goes; existing local government areas
do not represent real countries, but still these local government devices are of service for
cutting up and distributing administrative work. But that is exactly what they are not. They
are worse when you consider them in regard to function, than when you consider them in regard
to representation. Since our conceptions of what constitutes a local administrative area were
developed there has arisen the problems of water supply and of organized sewage, of railways,
tramways, and communications generally, and of lighting and telephonic intercourse; there hangs
over us, though the average local authority has no eyes to see it, the necessity of adapting
our roads to accommodate an increasing new traffic of soft-tyred vehicles, and it is not improbable
that heating by wholesale, either by gas or electricity, will presently be also possible and
desirable. For all these things we need wide views, wide minds and wide areas, and still more
do we want wide views for the business of education that is now also coming into the sphere
of local administration.

It happens that I have had an object-lesson in this matter of local government; and indeed
it is my object-lesson that has led to this paper to-night. I live upon the boundary line of
the Sandgate Urban District Board, a minute authority with a boundary line that appears to
have been determined originally about 1850 by mapping out the wanderings of an intoxicated
excursionist, and which--the only word is interdigitates--with the borough of Folkestone, the
Urban District of Cheriton, and the borough of Hythe. Each of these bodies is by way of being
a tramway authority, each is at liberty to secure powers to set up generating stations and
supply electricity, each is a water authority, and each does its own little drainage, and the
possibilities of friction and litigation are endless. The four places constitute an urban area
greatly in need of organized intercommunication, but the four authorities have never been able
to agree upon a scheme; and now Folkestone is concerning itself with the project of a little
internal tramway system all of its very own. Sandgate has succumbed to the spell of the South
Eastern Railway Company, and has come into line with a project that will necessitate a change
of cars at the Folkestone boundary. Folkestone has conceded its electrical supply to a company,
but Sandgate, on this issue, stands out gallantly for municipal trading, and proposes to lay
down a plant and set up a generating station all by itself to supply a population of sixteen
hundred people, mostly indigent. In the meanwhile, Sandgate refuses its inhabitants the elementary
convenience of the electric light, and when, quite inadvertently, I connected across the convolutions
of the boundary with the Folkestone supply, my life was darkened by the threat of impossible
litigation. But if Folkestone repudiates municipal enterprise in the matter of lighting, I
gather it does not do so in the matter of telephones; and there has been talk of a neat little
Folkestone telephonic system competing against the National Telephone Company, a compact little
conversazione of perhaps a hundred people, rate sustained. And how is the non-local inhabitant
to come into these things? The intelligent non-local inhabitant can only save his two or three
pounds of contribution to this folly or that by putting in twenty or thirty pounds' worth of
work in local politics. He has no local connections, no local influence, he hasn't a chance
against the plumber. This is shown by the fact that precisely those Powers which, as the weaker, are
exposed to aggression, and therefore were in the greatest need of international protection, have
been completely passed over in the American proposals for Arbitration
Courts. I and my neighbours are by a special concession
permitted to have water from the Folkestone source. By incessant vigilance we do, I believe,
usually succeed in deducting the Folkestone water rate from the Sandgate general rate which
covers water, but the wear and tear is enormous. However, these are details, dear to my heart,
but the merest marginal comments to my argument. The essential fact is the impracticable silliness
of these little divisions, the waste of men, the waste of nervous energy, the waste of administrative
energy they involve. I am convinced that in the case of almost any public service in the Folkestone
district with our present boundaries, the administrative waste will more than equal the profit
of a private company with parliamentary powers overriding our local authorities; that if it
is simply a choice between these little bodies and a company (of the common type even), then
in lighting, locomotion, and indeed in almost any general public service, I would say, "give
me the company." With companies one may hope to deal later; they will not stand in the way
of developing saner areas, but an obstinate little authority clutching everything in its hands,
and led by a clerk naturally interested in litigation, and who is also something of an expert
in political organization, will be an altogether harder thing to supersede.

This difficulty in greater or lesser degree is everywhere. In the case of poor law administration
in particular, and also in the case of elementary education, the whole country displays what
is another aspect of this same general phenomenon of delocalization; the withdrawal of all
the wealthier people from the areas that are specializing as industrial centres, and which
have a rising population of poor workers, to areas that are specializing as residential, and
which have, if anything, a falling proportion of poor labourers. In a place like West Ham or
Tottenham you find starved schools and an abundant delocalized industrial population, and,
by way of contrast, at Guildford or Farnham for example, you will find enormously rich delocalized
people, belonging to the same great community as these workers, who pay only the most trivial
poor rate and school rate for the benefit of their few immediate neighbours, and escape altogether
from the burthens of West Ham. By treating these places as separate communities you commit
a cruel injustice on the poor. So far as these things go, to claim convenience for the existing
areas is absurd. And it is becoming more and more evident that with tramways, with lighting,
with electric heating and force supply, and with the supply of water to great populations,
there is an enormous advantage in large generating stations and large areas; that these things
must be handled in areas of hundreds of square miles to be efficiently done.

In the case of secondary and higher education one discovers an equal stress and incompatibility.
At present, I must point out, even the boundaries of the projected educational authority for
London are absurdly narrow. For example, in Folkestone, as in every town upon the south coast,
there are dozens of secondary schools that are purely London schools, and filled with London
boys and girls, and there are endless great schools like Tonbridge and Charterhouse outside
the London area that are also London schools. If you get, for example, a vigorous and efficient
educational authority for London, and you raise a fine educational system in the London area,
you will find it incomplete in an almost vital particular. The statesman who wishes to learn from
history should above all things recognize this one fact--that success is necessary to gain influence
over the masses, and that this influence can only be obtained by continually appealing to the
national imagination and enlisting its interest in great universal ideas and great national ambitions.
Such a policy is also the best school in which to educate a nation to great military achievements.
When their spirits are turned towards high aims they feel themselves compelled to contemplate war
bravely, and to prepare their minds to it:

"The man grows up, with manhood's nobler aims."

We may learn something from Japan on this head. Her eyes were fixed on the loftiest aims; she
did not shrink from laying the most onerous duties on the people, but she understood how to fill
the soul of the whole people with enthusiasm for her great ideals, and thus a nation of warriors
was educated which supplied the best conceivable material for the army, and was ready for
the greatest sacrifices.

We Germans have a far greater and more urgent duty towards civilization
to perform than the Great Asiatic Power. We, like the Japanese, can
only fulfil it by the sword.

Shall we, then, decline to adopt a bold
and active policy, the most effective means with which we can prepare
our people for its military duty? Such a counsel is only for those
who lack all feeling for the strength and honour of the German people. And now I pass on to the more
debatable question--the nature of the new divisions that are to replace the old. I would suggest
that this is a matter only to be answered in detail by an exhaustive analysis of the distribution
of population in relation to economic standing, but I may perhaps just indicate roughly what
at a first glance I imagine would be one suitable local government area. Let me remind you
that some years ago the Conservative party, in an outbreak of intelligence, did in a sort of
transitory way see something of what I have been trying to express to-night, and created the
London County Council--only to quarrel with it and hate it and fear it ever since. Well, my
proposal would be to make a much greater area even than the London County, and try to include
in it the whole system of what I might call the London- centred population. I believe If you
were to take the whole valley of the Thames and its tributaries and draw a line along its boundary
watershed, and then include with that Sussex and Surrey, and the east coast counties up to
the Wash, you would overtake and anticipate the delocalizing process almost completely. You
would have what has become, or is becoming very rapidly, a new urban region, a complete community
of the new type, rich and poor and all sorts and aspects of economic life together. I would
suggest that watersheds make excellent boundaries. Let me remind you that railways, tramways,
drain-pipes, water-pipes, and high-roads have this in common--they will not climb over a watershed
if they can possibly avoid doing so, and that population and schools and poor tend always to
distribute themselves in accordance with these other things. A great danger lies in this mechanical
conception.
For operations in the field we must employ, wherever possible, regulars
only, and rather limit our numbers than assign to inferior troops
tasks for which they are inadequate. I would suggest that for the regulation of sanitation, education, communications,
industrial control, and poor relief, and for the taxation for these purposes, this area should
be one, governed by one body, elected by local constituencies that would make its activities
independent of imperial politics. Even in neutral Switzerland the feeling that political independence
rests less on international treaties than on the possibility of self-defence is so strong and
widespread that the nation willingly supports heavy taxation for
its military equipment. For any purpose of a more local
sort, local water-supply systems, local tramway systems--the tramways between Brighton and
Shoreham, for example--this body might delegate its powers to subordinate committees, consisting,
it has been suggested to me by Mrs. Sidney Webb, of the members for the local constituencies
concerned, together with another member or so to safeguard the general interests, or perhaps
with an appointed expert or so in addition. These committees would submit their detailed schemes
for the approval of committees appointed by the general body, and they would be controllable
by that body. However, there is no need for detailed scheming here and now. Let us keep to
the main idea.

I submit that such a mammoth municipality as this will be, on the one hand, an enormously more
efficient substitute for your present little local government bodies, and on the other hand,
will be able to take over a considerable proportion of the detailed work and a considerable
proportion of the detailed machinery, of your overworked and too extensive central machinery,
your local government board, education department, and board of trade. It will be great enough
and fine enough to revive the dying sentiment of local patriotism, and it will be a body that
will appeal to the ambition of the most energetic and capable men in the community. Every treaty
of alliance presupposes the rebus sic stantibus; for since it must satisfy the interests of each
contracting party, it clearly can only hold as long as those interests are really benefited. This
is a political principle that cannot be disputed. And I venture to think that in such a body
you may confidently hope to find a collective intelligence that may be pitted against any trust
or board of directors the world is likely to produce.

I suggest this body as a sort of concrete sample of the thing I have in mind. I am quite open
to hear and accept the most far-reaching modification of this scheme; it is the idea of the
scale that I wish particularly to enforce. Municipalize on this scale, I would say, and I am
with you altogether. Here is something distinctly and clearly subserving that making of mankind
upon which all sane social and political proposals must ultimately base themselves. But to
put more power, and still more power in the hands of these petty little administrative bodies
that we have to-day, is, I submit, folly and darkness. [Footnote E: The Congo State was proclaimed
neutral, but without guarantees, by Acts of February 26, 1885.]

Again, the principle that no State can ever interfere in the internal affairs of another State
is repugnant to the highest rights of the State. This principle is, of course, very variously interpreted,
and powerful States have never refrained from a higher-handed interference
in the internal affairs of smaller ones. We daily witness instances
of such conduct..