THE ART
                      OF
              MODERN LACE-MAKING.

       *       *       *       *       *

                     PRICE:
         FIFTY CENTS OR TWO SHILLINGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

                  PUBLISHED BY
      The Butterick Publishing Co. (Limited).
             London and New York.

                     1891

              PRINTED IN NEW YORK.

INTRODUCTION.

Owing to the growing popularity of the fascinating art of lace-making and the appeals of our
readers to place it within their reach, we have prepared this pamphlet. In making it a perfect
instructor and a reliable exponent of the favorite varieties of lace, we have spared neither
time nor expense, and are most happy to offer to our patrons what a celebrated maker of Modern
Lace has pronounced as "the finest book upon lace-making to be found on either continent."

The illustrations, in the main, are direct reproductions from genuine, hand-made modern laces,
such as any lady may make who masters the instructions found upon these pages.

The beauty of these laces is beyond question, their durability all that can be desired, and
their textures may be varied from an extreme delicacy to a sumptuous opposite. In introducing
the art of modern lace-making into the realms of our readers, we feel all of the pleasure we
are sure we thus convey.

                                  The Butterick Publishing Co.,
                                                           Limited.

CONTENTS.

Pages 5 to 9--
    Lace-Making, Ancient and Modern Methods.

Pages 9 to 19--
    Stitches used in Modern Lace-Making.

Pages 19 to 22--
    Fancy Braids Cords, Rings and Buttons.

Pages 22 to 96--
    Designs, Lace Articles, Edgings, etc., etc., in Modern Lace.

Pages 96 to 125--
    Darned Net Samples, Kerchiefs, Tidies, Edgings, Insertions, etc.,
    etc., with Designs for the same and other Articles.

Lace-Making

ANCIENT AND MODERN METHODS.

The art of making lace in one form or another has existed from the earliest ages. There are
Scriptural references to various web-like fabrics, which were of rude construction, no doubt,
but whose general characteristics were identical with those productions of modern skill which
have for centuries been known as lace. Homer and other ancient writers constantly mention net-works
of fancifully embroidered materials; gold thread-work was known to the Romans; and as Egyptian
robes of state are depicted upon the tombs of the earlier dynasties as being fashioned from
a looped net-work or crochet, it is probable that the Israelites learned the art from the Egyptians.
Museums contain specimens of lace dating back to periods that to us of the present day seem
mere dreams of reigns and eras, and history includes a scattered literature of lace which proves
that the art must have been practised almost from the beginning.

Up to the Sixteenth Century, however, open work embroidery was the favorite decoration, and
from it the tangible origin of lace seems derived. During the Renaissance period the first
book of embroidery patterns and lace-work appeared. The earliest volume bearing a date was
printed at Cologne in 1527; and it was during the reign of Richard III. of England that the
word lace was first used in the descriptions of the royal wardrobe.

At first the best known laces were those of Venice, Milan and Genoa. The Italians claim the
invention of point or needle-made lace; but the Venetian point is now a product of the past,
and England and France supply most of the fine laces of the present time.

Lace-makers in the various European countries are trained to the work from childhood; but it
is said that the makers of Honiton lace, the fabric of which Queen Victoria's wedding gown
was made, are rapidly decreasing in numbers, so that there are few persons now living who understand
the construction of this exquisite "pillow" lace. The costly point and Honiton and the dainty
Mechlin and Valenciennes of bygone days can only be produced by trained lace-workers, whose
skilful fingers weave bobbins of cobweb-like thread to and fro over the "pillow" necessary
to antique methods; and for this reason fine lace-making is practically beyond the skill of
the amateur. Besides, some of the threads in the very filmy laces are so fine that they cannot
be successfully manipulated except in a moist atmosphere, such as that of Great Britain; and
even there some of the more exquisite specimens must perforce be made in underground rooms,
since it is only there that the proper degree of moisture can be obtained. In dry climates
these gossamer-like threads would roughen and break at almost the slightest touch.

Referring to the known origin of some of the earlier laces, a writer upon the subject says:

"They say it was a woman, Barbara Uttmann, who invented pillow lace in the 16th century. Women
have ever been patrons of lace-making. Victoria has kept the Honiton laces in fashion, and
it was the Duchess of Argyle who introduced lace-making in Scotland. The Countess of Erne and
Lady Denny and Lady Bingham began it in Ireland, and Lady De Vere gave her own Brussels point
for patterns when the first Irish point was made at Curragh. It was Elizabeth of Denmark who
introduced lace-making in that country, and the Archduchess Sophia who started lace schools
in Bohemia. "Now at least I can have laces," said Anne of Austria, when Louis XIII., her husband
died, and her court was famous for its cleanliness and its Spanish point. Colbert had three
women as coadjutors when he started lace-making in France. It was because Josephine loved point
d'Alençon that Napoleon revived it. Eugenie spent $5,000 for a single dress flounce, and had
$1,000,000 in fine laces."

Victoria's favorite, Honiton, is not considered a particularly beautiful lace, although its
weaving is so tedious and difficult. "Real Honiton laces," so says an authority, "are made
up of bits and bits fashioned by many different women in their own little cottages--here a
leaf, there a flower, slowly woven through the long, weary days, only to be united afterward
in the precious web by other workers who never saw its beginning. There is a pretty lesson
in the thought that to the perfection of each of these little pieces the beauty of the whole
is due--that the rose or leaf some humble peasant woman wrought carefully, helps to make the
fabric worthy the adorning of a queen or the decoration of an altar, even as the sweetness
and patient perfection in any life makes all living more worthy and noble. A single flower
upon which taste and fancy were lavished, and which sustained and deft labor brought to perfection,
represents the lives of many diligent women workers.

It has become so much the fashion to worship all things ancient that most lovers of fine lace
would prefer to have it a century old; and yet there never was a time when laces were more
beautiful, more artistic and more unique in design than just at the present day; for modern
laces preserve the best features of the laces that have gone before them, and have added so
many new inspirations that except for the sentiment, the romance or the history connecting
this scrap with a title, that with a famous beauty, and another with some cathedral's sacred
treasure, the palm would certainly be given to the gauze-like production of the poor flax thread
spinner of the present day."

Not all people know the difference between point lace which is made with the needle, and pillow
lace which is made with the bobbins--but much of the beautiful point lace of the present day
is made with the needle, and its beauty stands a favorable comparison with the more costly
pillow lace.

Strictly modern lace-making is a result of American ingenuity, and it has so simple a basis
and is so easy to learn that any woman of average skill may, with little difficulty, produce
by its different processes, laces that are really magnificent and quite as substantial and
useful as they are exquisitely beautiful. In America modern lace-making has been developed
to a high degree of perfection by its pioneer, Mrs. Grace B. McCormick, in whose designing
rooms at No. 923 Broadway, New York, may be seen specimens of modern laces of every variety,
from dainty needle-point to a very elaborate kind known as the Royal Battenburg. This English
name for an American production was selected in honor of the Battenburg nuptials, which occurred
about the time a patent for making the lace was applied for at Washington. Only a few years
have elapsed since this plucky little woman made a single piece of lace edging from common
braid as an experiment, and sold it for a trifling sum. Love for the work and perseverance
have enabled her to overcome obstacles that would have discouraged a woman of ordinary energy,
and she has gradually improved upon her earlier methods until modern lace occupies a front
rank among the numerous dainty forms of needle-work of the day.

One of the finest specimens lately placed on exhibition is a table-cloth intended for use at
elaborate dinners. It is made of the finest table linen and Royal Battenburg lace. The cloth
is, of course, very large, and the lace, in the form of wide insertion, is let in above the
border and is also arranged to divide the center into three squares. An outside border of edging
to match completes this exquisite production, which has been two years in course of construction,
and is valued at four hundred and seventy-five dollars. The same style of lace may be made
by any one who studies the art and in any width or form, and it may be produced in many textures,
although really intended for heavy effects. The making of such lace possesses a great charm
for womankind in general, and will undoubtedly retain favor as long as needlecraft remains
a pastime and employment with the gentler sex.

MATERIALS.

The requirements of modern lace-making are few. The products are classed as Honiton, Point,
Duchesse, Princesse, Royal Battenburg or Old English Point, etc., etc.; but all are made with
various braids arranged in different patterns and connected by numerous kinds of stitches,
many different stitches often appearing in one variety of lace.

The materials required are neither numerous nor expensive. The following is a complete list:
Tracing cloth, leather or toile cirée, lace braids of various kinds, linen thread, two or three
sizes of needles, a good thimble and a pair of fine sharp scissors.

For each kind of lace there is a special sort of braid in various patterns, and the selection
of the thread depends entirely upon the variety and quality of lace to be made. This selection
should be left to the decision of the teacher or the skilled maker of laces, as she knows from
experience the proper combinations of materials. Thus, in making Honiton and point lace, thread
in twelve different degrees of fineness is used; and as the braids also vary in size, the thread
must always be adapted to the braid. For Battenburg lace the thread is in eight sizes, the
finest being used only for "whipping curves" or drawing edges into the outlines required. The
"Ideal Honiton" is a new lace made with fancy Honiton braid and wash-silk floss in dainty colors,
and is exquisite for doilies, mats, table scarfs and center-pieces.

Designs sold by lace-makers are usually drawn upon tracing cloth, as this is flexible and much
more agreeable to work upon than any other material. The tracing cloth, when the braid is arranged,
is basted to a foundation of leather or toile cirée; or smooth wrapping-paper may be basted
under the design and will furnish all the support that is necessary, while being lighter than
the toile cirée.

It must be remembered that the work is really wrong side out while in progress, so that it
will not show its true beauty until finished and removed from the foundation or pattern. According
to the braid and thread selected, these laces may be made of fairy-like fineness or of massive
elegance--general results being dainty enough for the gown of a bride or sumptuous enough for
the adornment of an altar.

Lace-making establishments will furnish designs of any width or shape desired, and will also
originate designs for special articles for which there are only occasional calls. Regular edging
designs are ordinarily made in four widths--from quite narrow to very wide; and not infrequently
a handkerchief design is enlarged sufficiently to form a square for a table or a fancy stand.

In filling in the spaces of any design or pattern, the worker may choose the stitches that
please her best, if she does not like those accompanying the design that she has selected or
that has been sent her.

STITCHES USED IN MODERN LACE-MAKING.

As in all fancy work which has a set of foundation stitches peculiar to it that may be varied
according to the proficiency and ingenuity of the maker, so has Modern Lace a series of primary
stitches from which may be evolved many others. A large number of illustrations of stitches,
some of which are primary or foundation stitches, while others are combinations, are here presented,
with full instructions for making; and the entire series given will make perfectly plain to
the student the ease with which she may combine or invent stitches, when those of the design
she is to work are not to her liking. The first stitch given is the main foundation stitch.

PLAIN POINT STITCHES.

NOS. 1 AND 2.--POINT DE BRUXELLES OR BRUSSELS POINT.--Among the stitches most used in lace-making
is Point de Bruxelles or Brussels point. It is simply a button-hole stitch worked loosely,
and it must be done with regularity, as the beauty of the work depends almost wholly upon the
evenness of the stitches. Brussels point is occasionally used as an edge, but is more frequently
seen in rows worked back and forth to fill in spaces, or as a ground work. The illustrations
clearly represent the method of making this stitch.

NO. 3.--POINT DE VENISE, OR VENICE POINT.--This stitch is worked from left to right, like Brussels
point.

NO. 5.--ITALIAN LACE STITCH.--Commence at the right side and pass the thread to the left.

First row.--Make a loose button-hole stitch into the braid to form a loop, then pass the needle
under the line of thread, making the loops an eighth of an inch apart.

Second row.--Pass the thread back to the left, make a button-hole stitch in every loop, and
pass the needle under the line of thread after each button-hole stitch.

NO. 6.--COBWEB LACE STITCH.--Commence at the right side, pass the thread to the left, work
3 button-hole stitches, miss the space of 3, which will leave a small loop, and continue these
details to the end.

Second row.--Pass the thread back to the left side, work 3 button-hole stitches in each loop,
taking up the line of thread with the loop, as seen in the engraving.

NO. 7.--POINT BRABANÇON.--This stitch is worked as follows from left to right:

First row.--Make 1 long, loose point de Bruxelles, and 1 short loose one alternately, to end
of row.

Third row.--Same as first. Continue the rows until sufficient of the pattern is worked.

NO. 10.--GENOA LACE STITCH.--Commence at the right side, and work as follows:

First row.--Work 4 button-hole stitches, miss the space of 3, work 3, miss the space of 3,
work 4. Continue to the end.

Second row.--Work 9 stitches close together, 3 into the spaces of the 4, and 3 more into the
loop at each side of it. Miss the 3 stitches, and make 9 as before.

Third row.--Make 9 close stitches, 3 into the last 3 spaces of the 9, 3 into the loop, and
3 into the first spaces of the 9 next, and so on to the end.

Fourth row.--Repeat the first, making the 3 stitches into the loop, and the 4 into the center
spaces of the nine.

NO. 11.--FLEMISH LACE STITCH.--Commence at the right side, and work as follows:

First row.--Work 2 button-hole stitches close together, miss the space of 2, work 2, miss the
space of 8; this will leave a large loop and a small one alternately.

Second row.--Make 8 button-hole stitches in the larger loops and 2 in the small ones.

Third row.--Repeat the first row, making 2 stitches in each loop of the second row.

NO. 12.--POINT DE FILLET, OR NET GROUNDWORK STITCH.--This stitch is also represented at No.
21, on page 13, but the method of making the knot is here illustrated. This stitch is very
quickly worked.

First row.--Work a loop into the braid, bringing the thread from right to left, passing the
needle through the twist and through the loop (see engraving), draw up tight and repeat.

Second row.--1 straight thread from right to left.

NO. 15.--TREBLE POINT D'ESPAGNE.--This stitch is worked in exactly the same way as the open
and close varieties just mentioned, as follows: 3 close stitches, 1 open, 3 close to the end
of each row.

NO. 16.--POINT D'ESPAGNE (CLOSE).--This stitch is worked like open point d'Espagne (see No.
9, page 10) but so closely as to only allow the needle to pass through in the next row. It
is also worked from left to right, and is fastened to the braid at the end of each row.

NO. 17.--POINT DE GRECQUE OR GRECIAN POINT.--Point de Grecque is made from left to right, and
is worked backward and forward. It is begun by 1 stitch in loose point de Bruxelles and followed
by 3 of close point d'Espagne; then 1 Bruxelles, 3 point d'Espagne, to the end of the row;
in returning work in the same manner.

NO. 18.--POINT DE CORDOVA.--This stitch is useful as a variation, and resembles the point de
reprise of Guipure lace making. It is worked in a similar manner, over and under the sides
of squares formed by intersecting straight lines of the thread.

NO. 19.--POINT D'ALENÇON, WITH TWISTED STITCH.--This stitch is used to fill in narrow spaces
where great lightness of effect is desired, and is usually seen along the sides of insertions
and the tops of edgings. Plain point d'Alençon is worked over and under in bars in a sort of
herring-bone pattern, and a twisted stitch is made as seen in the engraving, by twisting the
thread three times around each bar and knotting it at the angles as pictured. The effect is
similar to one of the drawn-work hem-stitches.

NO. 21.--POINT DE FILLET AND POINT DE REPRISE.--The net-work seen in this engraving is the
first stitch mentioned, while the block-work is the second. Both are clearly illustrated and
need no written explanation of the methods employed in making them.

NO. 22.--POINT DE TULLE.--This stitch is used as a ground-work for very fine work, and is worked
in rows backward and forward in the same stitch as open point d' Espagne.

NO. 23. FAN LACE STITCH.--Commence at the right side, and work as follows:

First row.--Make 1 button-hole stitch and miss the space of 8, which will leave a long loop.

Second row.--Make 8 button-hole stitches in each loop.

Third row.--Make 7 stitches into the spaces between the 8, and so decrease one in every row
until only one remains, as may be seen by referring to the illustration.

NO. 24.--ROSE POINT LACE STITCH.--Make a foundation of single threads, crossing them to form
the large squares. Work a button-hole stitch at each crossing to make it firm. Now begin at
the top, at the right side and fill the first square with Brussels net stitches, finishing
at the lower left corner. Fill every alternate square in the same way as seen in the picture.

Now cross the open squares diagonally with two threads, twisting each thread around the adjoining
one as represented. (Carry one thread across all the squares from corner to corner first, then
twist back, fastening at the corner started from; cross these threads in the same way from
the opposite direction). When twisting the thread back from the last set of crossings, make
a rosette at each center crossing as follows: Keep the space open with a pin and trace round
it with a darning movement five or six times; commence at the single thread and work a close
button-hole stitch over the tracing entirely around, and then twist along the single thread
to the center of the next square. This is a very effective design for spaces.

WHEELS AND ROSETTES.

Wheels and rosettes are used to fill up spaces, or in combination, to form lace.

NOS.

NO. 29.--CLOSE ENGLISH WHEELS.--These wheels may be used in open spaces and may be very easily
made from the engraving. They are much like the wheels used in drawn work--indeed, many of
the stitches used in lace are identical with those used in drawn-work.

BARS AND PICOTS.

NOS. 31 AND 32.--RALEIGH BARS.--These bars are much used in making Battenburg lace and are
very effective. Work 5 tight point de Bruxelles stitches, and repeat.

NO. 33.--ITALIAN GROUND STITCH.--Commence at the left side, and work as follows:

First row.--Make a loose button-hole stitch to form a loop a quarter of an inch wide, and then
make a plain stitch into the loop to twist it, and continue to the end.

Second row.--Make two plain stitches into each loop, working back to the left.

Third row.--Repeat first row.

NO. 34.--OPEN LACE BARS.--Pass a thread from right to left. Make it firm by working a second
stitch into the braid; work 2 button-hole stitches on this line of thread, close together.
Then work 1 button-hole stitch on the lower thread at the left hand side, and draw it close
to the 2 stitches on the line of thread. Miss the space of 2 and repeat.

NOS. 35 AND 36.--SORRENTO BARS.--Each of the bars is worked from right to left, a straight
thread being carried across and fastened securely with a stitch. The thread is sewn carefully
over the braid in passing from one spot to another.

NOS. No. 38 shows the Venetian bar used as the veining of a leaf and worked upon Sorrento bars.

NO. 39.--POINT D'ANVERS BARS.--Two upright bars form the foundation. The thread is carried
over and under them as seen in the engraving, the side loops being added by the method depicted
at the top of the point.

The over and under work in point d'Anvers bars, without the side loops, is often used for plain
bars for filling in odd spaces or wheels in heavy lace.

NO. 40.--POINT GRECQUE BARS.--These bars are so simply made that they are great favorites with
beginners. They are begun at the top of the point, one straight thread being carried to the
bottom; then the cross bars are worked after the method seen in the illustration.

NO. 43.--D'ALENÇON AND SORRENTO BARS.--At Nos. 35 and 36 (page 16), a description of the method
of making Sorrento bars is given, while at No. 19 (page 12), is a description of plain and
fancy d'Alençon stitches. The two methods are combined in the work seen at No. 43 where the
process is so clearly illustrated that a mere novice in lace-work could not fail to produce
it perfectly. Then work 5 more stitches and repeat to end of row.

The making of the dots or purls before mentioned as picots, is an important feature in bar
work. All three names are employed for the same class of stitch.

NO. 48.--THIRD METHOD OF MAKING PICOTS OR DOTS.--This method has been fully described in connection
with the making of Raleigh Bars at Nos. 31 and 32 (page 15), and requires no further description
at this point. All dots and picots render work much more effective, and may be introduced at
will by the worker.

In making modern lace, the various kinds require appropriate braids. There are three classes
of these braids--those for Battenburg lace, those for plain Honiton and point, and those for
the newest kind of lace, which is called the "Ideal Honiton." Each class of braids contains
many designs and widths, and a large number of them, together with various cords, buttons and
rings also used are illustrated on following pages.

FANCY BRAIDS, CORDS, RINGS AND BUTTONS.

BRAIDS.

The braids, cords, rings and buttons illustrated upon the following two pages are all used
in modern lace-making. They are all made of pure linen thread, and according to the fancy,
the lace including them may be heavy or light. Royal Battenburg lace, as originated, was heavy--in
some cases massive; but at present many lighter varieties are made, as will be surmised upon
an inspection of the braids for its manufacture which are represented on the pages mentioned.
As shown by No. 1, these braids are about a third narrower than their actual width, and the
picot edges numbered 16 and 17 are plain tatting made for the purpose, as the picot edges woven
for lighter laces are not heavy enough for Battenburg lace. The numbers opposite the specimens
are simply for convenience in ordering, if the order is sent the lady mentioned in another
part of the book as the Pioneer of Lace-Making in America; but in ordering from other lace-makers
or manufacturers of braids, these numbers will be of little use, as every lace-maker or manufacturer
has his or her own individual identifications for materials. Almost any of the braids, or those
very similar, may be found at large fancy stores, but in buying them at such stores, be careful
to get linen braids, as cotton braids do not make pretty lace, neither do they wear or launder
well. In ordering these braids from other lace-makers or from fancy stores, it will be necessary
to forward the illustration of the kind wanted, as the braids cannot be described with sufficient
accuracy to obtain the desired varieties. Some are sold by the yard, some by the dozen yards
and others by the piece, according to the position to be occupied in the work.

The point, Honiton and Princess braids are represented full size, and are much daintier in
texture than the Battenburg braids. Of this class of braids (see No. 2) are made the plain
Honiton and point laces, and the braids for these two laces combined produce the Princess lace--a
creation whose beauty fully entitles it to its royal name.

The braids seen at No. 3, page 21, are those which are used in making the new "Ideal Honiton"
lace represented in another portion of the book. As illustrated, these braids are three-quarters
of their proper widths, the top braid, No. 38, being just one inch wide in the fabric itself.
The "Ideal Honiton" is one of the prettiest laces made, and is very appropriate for tidies,
doilies, squares and scarfs. It is daintily secured to the finest of lawn in charming designs,
and then the lawn is cut out from beneath it. (See doily, page 33).

The cords seen at No. 4 are used in making Battenburg laces, and greatly increase the beauty
of the work in addition to forming a distinctive species of lace. After the ordinary Battenburg
is worked with quite thick braid, the cord, in any size desired, is used to follow one edge
of the design, as will be seen from illustrations upon other following pages.

RINGS AND BUTTONS.

The rings and buttons illustrated, are made throughout of linen thread in layers of button-hole
stitches, and are sold by the dozen or gross. Buttons arranged as grapes (see No. 50, page
21), add greatly to the sumptuous effect of a heavy lace, and may be purchased already arranged
as illustrated, or they may be arranged by the purchaser of a quantity of them. The latter
method is a good plan if spaces are to be filled with clusters which must be of a certain shape.

