But notwithstanding it may safely be affirmed that a much greater quantity of fuel is at present
consumed, and more rubbish produced annually in Leicester, than at any other period whatever,
yet the seeming paradox may easily be proved, that little, if any alteration in the level of
the town is made now.  For the demand of all the refuse of the yards for the purposes of agriculture,
and the ordinary attention paid to sweeping the streets, prevent any accumulation of soil:
the change of level then, of which our churches afford such indubitable proofs, can only have
taken place when the streets were unpaved, and made the receptacle of every kind of offal from
the houses; and when the yards, uncleared for the purposes of improved agriculture, were choaked
by accumulated filth; the whole almost ever yielding in abundance those noxious steams, the
loathsome parent of pestilences, which, in former days, frequently proved the scourges of our
larger towns, and too often spread their contagion to the villages.  Hence the entrance into
our churches, among other good sentiments, may excite in the reflective mind a gratitude for
the improved comforts the inhabitants of large towns now enjoy; and the same circumstances
may also call forth the exertions of benevolence to promote still greater cleanliness, and
to remove from the habitations of man those effects of filthiness, which, in proportion to
their extent, are always offensive, and sometimes fatal.

Westward from this church-yard, extends a street strait and wide, but meanly built, called

SANVY-GATE.

Here nothing can be traced worthy of observation, except the etymologist stops to glean the
remark that Sanvy is derived from sancta via, the antient name of the street, so denominated
from the solemn procession that passed through it on Whitsun Monday, in its way from St. Mary's
to St. Margaret's.  In this procession the image of the Virgin was carried under a canopy,
with an attendant minstrel and harp, accompanied by representatives of the twelve apostles,
each denoted by the name of the sacred character he personated, written on parchment, fixed
to his bonnet; these were followed by persons bearing banners, and the virgins of the parish. And
we turned back and took our way down hill again.

It was none too soon: voices and alarm bells sounded; watchmen here
and there began to spring their rattles; it was plain the University
of Cramond would soon be at blows with the police of Edinburgh!

Byfield and I, running the semi-inanimate Rowley before us, made
good despatch, and did not stop till we were several streets away,
and the hubbub was already softened by distance.

'Well, sir,' said he, 'we are well out of that! Did ever any one see such a pack of young barbarians?'

'We
are properly punished, Mr. Byfield; we had no business there,' I
replied.

'No, indeed, sir, you may well say that! Outrageous! And my ascension
announced for Friday, you know!' cried the aeronaut.  The use of the arbalest,
or cross-bow, was certainly very antient in Europe, and was the weapon that proved fatal to
Harold at the battle of Hastings: but the long bow was not familiar to the English, or, perhaps,
not known in Europe, till the return of Edward the First from the Holy Land, where he became
sensible of its superior advantages from his conflicts with the Saracens.

From this period till the time of Charles the First, frequent orders were issued by the kings,
and acts of parliament were passed, enforcing and regulating the exercise of the long bow.
Persons of all ages, from seven years old and upwards, were obliged by penalties to appear
at stated times, each with his bow of a length equal to his own height, and, at least, a brace
of arrows, to try his skill and strength before the butts near their respective places of residence;
and by a statute of Henry the Eighth, no one under twenty-four was allowed to shoot at any
mark, at a less distance than eleven score, or 220 yards, a distance of greater length than
our Butt-close is at present; yet it is certain that the adjoining orchard once formed part
of it, and other encroachments may have been made on it, probably at the north end.

The great execution that may be done by the bow, from the rapidity of its discharges, and the
confusion a flight of arrows is likely to occasion, especially among cavalry, has inclined
some to contend that it is a weapon in excellence superior to the musket.  But the difficulty
of procuring, in any great quantity, the proper wood for the formation of bows, the expense
of arrows, and, above all, the long practice and training, even from infancy, necessary to
form an archer capable of drawing an arrow a cloth-yard long, {23} will ever secure the preference
to the latter weapon, which, though as commonly used, perhaps less certain of hitting the mark,
is however capable of doing much execution at double the distance to which the bow will carry {24}.

Crossing the Butt-close, to the alley on the right, we pass the Presbyterian, or GREAT MEETING
HOUSE, built, as appears by a date on the walls, 1708; the congregation of which was first
established in 1680. The seats are calculated to accommodate eight hundred persons.  An organ
was erected here in 1800, a valuable advantage to the choir, who form a musical society, cultivated
with great care, and justly celebrated for its excellence.

In an opposite lane, now called Causeway-lane, but formerly St. John's, leading to the Town
Goal, the scite of St. John's Chapel, is a small place of worship appropriated to the service
of the Romish Church.  It is secluded from observation, being situated behind the house of
the officiating priest, and is a neat miniature representation of the peculiar decorations
with which the members of that religion adorn the places where they offer up their public devotions.

Opposite the Great Meeting is a Meeting House newly erected by a society of Independents, which
will seat six hundred persons; and in the adjoining lane, which has undergone a nominal degeneracy
from St. Peter's to Woman's Lane, is another, erected 1803, by a society calling themselves
Episcopalian Baptists.  Between these two latter buildings, is an area used as a Bowling Green,
and Tea Garden, with many small structures erected for the general purposes of amusement; it
is known by the name of the New Vauxhall.  Among this various assemblage of edifices stands
one, which from its size will attract the attention of visitors; it is a spacious House for
the reception of Lunatics, under the direction of Dr. Arnold.  From hence we pass an irregular
street, now called the

SWINE MARKET,

formerly Parchment Lane; which may afford interest to the mind tho' not to the eye; for the
reflective Traveller will not regard as unimportant the humble dwellings of those Manufacturers
whose industry supplies the commercial wealth of the nation.

From this street we arrive at a spot still called the

EAST-GATES,

tho the gates of the ancient town were, some years ago, taken down to render the passage more
commodious.  In the massy wood of these gates were found balls of a large size, which probably
had lodged there ever since the assault made upon the town by king Charles's forces in 1695,
when according to a note in the pocket-book of one Simmonds, a quarter-master in the King's
army, which is now preserved in the Harleian library, "Col. Bard's Tertia fell on with scaling
ladders, some near a flanker, and others scaled the horne work before the draw-bridge on the
east side."

We now advance along the

HIGH-STREET,

observing on the right hand, about half way up, a lofty hexagon turret, whose top is glaz'd
for the purpose of a prospect seat.  It bears on the inside, marks of considerable antiquity,
and is a remain of the mansion of Henry Earl of Huntingdon, called Lord's Place.  It has a
winding stair-case of stone, with a small apartment on each story, and is now modernized with
an outward coating of brick. 

Gradually an inarticulate melancholy succeeded; he wept gently at times; would stop in the middle of the road,
say firmly 'No, no, no,' and then fall on his back: or else address me solemnly as 'M'lord' and fall
on his face by way of variety. I am afraid I was not always so gentle with the little pig as
I might have been, but really the position was unbearable.

We made no headway at all, and I suppose we were scarce gotten a
mile away from Cramond, when the whole Senatus Academicus was heard
hailing, and doubling the pace to overtake its.

Some of them were fairly presentable; and they were all Christian martyrs compared to Rowley;
but they were in a frolicsome and rollicking humour that promised danger as we approached the
town.


Some paces lower the massy stone front of an edifice adorned with rusticated pillars points
to the eye the County Goal, erected in the year 1791, at the expense of six thousand pounds.
The spectator may prehaps be led into a reflection on the violation of propriety, when he sees
the Roman Fasces and Pileus encircled by heavy chains decorating an English prison.  Under
these symbols the name of the Architect is fully conspicuous, and it may be observed as an
example of sudden vicissitude, that the builder of this fabrick became, as a debtor, its first
inhabitant.

This prison, to which the county bridewell is now added, was erected, upon the scite of the
old goal, some years after the benevolent Howard visited Leicester, and is built with solitary
cells after the plan recommended by that celebrated philanthropist. 

But I saw the lamps of Edinburgh draw near on their hill-top with a good deal of uneasiness,
which increased, after we had entered the lighted streets, to positive alarm. All the passers-by
were addressed, some of them by name. A worthy man was stopped by Forbes.


Separated from the county prison, by a lane called Free-School Lane, is a rude heavy building,
adorned with the Royal Arms.  This is the FREE GRAMMAR SCHOOL, the aera of whose original foundation
has been thought uncertain; but upon the authority of the learned topographer Leland, it is
ascertained to have been founded by one of the three Wigstons interred in the collegiate church
in the Newark, and who, according to the same writer, was a Prebendary of that church.  This,
if not the same person, was brother to him who founded the Hospital dedicated to St. Ursula,
now called Wigston's Hospital.  The master of that Hospital, had formerly the privilege of
recommending, if not appointing the master and usher of the school, but this right is now exercised
by the Mayor and senior Aldermen.--The present building was erected by the Mayor and Burgesses,
in the fifteenth of Elizabeth, who granted them for that purpose, the materials of the adjoining
church of St. Peter.

On the opposite side of the street projects the gabel end of a building once part of the Blue
Boar, afterwards Blue Bell inn, in ancient times undoubtedly the principal inn of the place.
The old over-hanging window gave light to a chamber in which stood the bedstead, which has
been celebrated by the name of King Richard's Bedstead, from the circumstance of his having
slept in it a few nights preceding Bosworth Fight.

