He stepped back from the window and looked at an icon of the Saviour in His crown of thorns.
'Lord, help me! Lord, help me!' he exclaimed, crossing himself and bowing low. Then he went
to the door, and opening it into the tiny porch, felt for the hook that fastened the outer
door and began to lift it. He heard steps outside. She was coming from the window to the door.
'Ah!' she suddenly exclaimed, and he understood that she had stepped into the puddle that the
dripping from the roof had formed at the threshold. His hands trembled, and he could not raise
the hook of the tightly closed door.

'Oh, what are you doing? Let me in! I am all wet. I am frozen! You are thinking about saving
your soul and are letting me freeze to death...'

He jerked the door towards him, raised the hook, and without considering what he was doing,
pushed it open with such force that it struck her.

'Oh--PARDON!' he suddenly exclaimed, reverting completely to his old manner with ladies.

She smiled on hearing that PARDON. 'He is not quite so terrible, after all,' she thought. 'It's
all right. It is you who must pardon me,' she said, stepping past him. 'I should never have
ventured, but such an extraordinary circumstance...'

'If you please!' he uttered, and stood aside to let her pass him. A strong smell of fine scent,
which he had long not encountered, struck him. She went through the little porch into the cell
where he lived. He closed the outer door without fastening the hook, and stepped in after her.

'Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me a sinner! Lord, have mercy on me a sinner!'
he prayed unceasingly, not merely to himself but involuntarily moving his lips. 'If you please!'
he said to her again. She stood in the middle of the room, moisture dripping from her to the
floor as she looked him over. Her eyes were laughing.

'Forgive me for having disturbed your solitude. But you see what a position I am in. It all
came about from our starting from town for a sledge-drive, and my making a bet that I would
walk back by myself from the Vorobevka to the town. But then I lost my way, and if I had not
happened to come upon your cell...' She began lying, but his face confused her so that she
could not continue, but became silent. She had not expected him to be at all such as he was.
He was not as handsome as she had imagined, but was nevertheless beautiful in her eyes: his
greyish hair and beard, slightly curling, his fine, regular nose, and his eyes like glowing
coal when he looked at her, made a strong impression on her.

He saw that she was lying.

'Yes... so,' said he, looking at her and again lowering his eyes. 'I will go in there, and
this place is at your disposal.'

And taking down the little lamp, he lit a candle, and bowing low to her went into the small
cell beyond the partition, and she heard him begin to move something about there. 'Probably
he is barricading himself in from me!' she thought with a smile, and throwing off her white
dogskin cloak she tried to take off her cap, which had become entangled in her hair and in
the woven kerchief she was wearing under it. She had not got at all wet when standing under
the window, and had said so only as a pretext to get him to let her in. But she really had
stepped into the puddle at the door, and her left foot was wet up to the ankle and her overshoe
full of water. She sat down on his bed--a bench only covered by a bit of carpet--and began
to take off her boots. The little cell seemed to her charming. The narrow little room, some
seven feet by nine, was as clean as glass. There was nothing in it but the bench on which she
was sitting, the book-shelf above it, and a lectern in the corner. A sheepskin coat and a cassock
hung on nails by the door. Above the lectern was the little lamp and an icon of Christ in His
crown of thorns. The room smelt strangely of perspiration and of earth. It all pleased her--even
that smell. Her wet feet, especially one of them, were uncomfortable, and she quickly began
to take off her boots and stockings without ceasing to smile, pleased not so much at having
achieved her object as because she perceived that she had abashed that charming, strange, striking,
and attractive man. 'He did not respond, but what of that?' she said to herself.

'Father Sergius! Father Sergius! Or how does one call you?'

'What do you want?' replied a quiet voice.

'Please forgive me for disturbing your solitude, but really I could not help it. I should simply
have fallen ill. And I don't know that I shan't now. I am all wet and my feet are like ice.'

'Pardon me,' replied the quiet voice. 'I cannot be of any assistance to you.'

'I would not have disturbed you if I could have helped it. I am only here till daybreak.'

He did not reply and she heard him muttering something, probably his prayers.

'You will not be coming in here?' she asked, smiling. 'For I must undress to dry myself.'

He did not reply, but continued to read his prayers.

'Yes, that is a man!' thought she, getting her dripping boot off with difficulty. She tugged
at it, but could not get it off. The absurdity of it struck her and she began to laugh almost
inaudibly. But knowing that he would hear her laughter and would be moved by it just as she
wished him to be, she laughed louder, and her laughter--gay, natural, and kindly--really acted
on him just in the way she wished.

'Yes, I could love a man like that--such eyes and such a simple noble face, and passionate
too despite all the prayers he mutters!' thought she. 'You can't deceive a woman in these things.
As soon as he put his face to the window and saw me, he understood and knew. The glimmer of
it was in his eyes and remained there. He began to love me and desired me. Yes--desired!' said
she, getting her overshoe and her boot off at last and starting to take off her stockings.
To remove those long stockings fastened with elastic it was necessary to raise her skirts.
She felt embarrassed and said:

'Don't come in!'

But there was no reply from the other side of the wall. The steady muttering continued and
also a sound of moving.

'He is prostrating himself to the ground, no doubt,' thought she. 'But he won't bow himself
out of it. He is thinking of me just as I am thinking of him. He is thinking of these feet
of mine with the same feeling that I have!' And she pulled off her wet stockings and put her
feet up on the bench, pressing them under her. She sat a while like that with her arms round
her knees and looking pensively before her. 'But it is a desert, here in this silence. No one
would ever know....'

She rose, took her stockings over to the stove, and hung them on the damper. It was a queer
damper, and she turned it about, and then, stepping lightly on her bare feet, returned to the
bench and sat down there again with her feet up.

There was complete silence on the other side of the partition. She looked at the tiny watch
that hung round her neck. It was two o'clock. 'Our party should return about three!' She had
not more than an hour before her. 'Well, am I to sit like this all alone? What nonsense! I
don't want to. I will call him at once.'

'Father Sergius, Father Sergius! Sergey Dmitrich! Prince Kasatsky!'

Beyond the partition all was silent.

'Listen! This is cruel. I would not call you if it were not necessary. I am ill. I don't know
what is the matter with me!' she exclaimed in a tone of suffering. 'Oh! Oh!' she groaned, falling
back on the bench. And strange to say she really felt that her strength was failing, that she
was becoming faint, that everything in her ached, and that she was shivering with fever.

'Listen! Help me! I don't know what is the matter with me. Oh! Oh!' She unfastened her dress,
exposing her breast, and lifted her arms, bare to the elbow. 'Oh! Oh!'

All this time he stood on the other side of the partition and prayed. Having finished all the
evening prayers, he now stood motionless, his eyes looking at the end of his nose, and mentally
repeated with all his soul: 'Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy upon me!'

But he had heard everything. He had heard how the silk rustled when she took off her dress,
how she stepped with bare feet on the floor, and had heard how she rubbed her feet with her
hand. He felt his own weakness, and that he might be lost at any moment. That was why he prayed
unceasingly. He felt rather as the hero in the fairy-tale must have felt when he had to go
on and on without looking round. So Sergius heard and felt that danger and destruction were
there, hovering above and around him, and that he could only save himself by not looking in
that direction for an instant. But suddenly the desire to look seized him. At the same instant
she said:

'This is inhuman. I may die....'

'Yes, I will go to her, but like the Saint who laid one hand on the adulteress and thrust his
other into the brazier. But there is no brazier here.' He looked round. The lamp! He put his
finger over the flame and frowned, preparing himself to suffer. And for a rather long time,
as it seemed to him, there was no sensation, but suddenly--he had not yet decided whether it
was painful enough--he writhed all over, jerked his hand away, and waved it in the air. 'No,
I can't stand that!'

'For God's sake come to me! I am dying! Oh!'

'Well--shall I perish? No, not so!'

'I will come to you directly,' he said, and having opened his door, he went without looking
at her through the cell into the porch where he used to chop wood. There he felt for the block
and for an axe which leant against the wall.

'Immediately!' he said, and taking up the axe with his right hand he laid the forefinger of
his left hand on the block, swung the axe, and struck with it below the second joint. The finger
flew off more lightly than a stick of similar thickness, and bounding up, turned over on the
edge of the block and then fell to the floor.

He heard it fall before he felt any pain, but before he had time to be surprised he felt a
burning pain and the warmth of flowing blood. He hastily wrapped the stump in the skirt of
his cassock, and pressing it to his hip went back into the room, and standing in front of the
woman, lowered his eyes and asked in a low voice: 'What do you want?'

She looked at his pale face and his quivering left cheek, and suddenly felt ashamed. She jumped
up, seized her fur cloak, and throwing it round her shoulders, wrapped herself up in it.

'I was in pain... I have caught cold... I... Father Sergius... I...'

He let his eyes, shining with a quiet light of joy, rest upon her, and said:

'Dear sister, why did you wish to ruin your immortal soul? Temptations must come into the world,
but woe to him by whom temptation comes. Pray that God may forgive us!'

She listened and looked at him. Suddenly she heard the sound of something dripping. She looked
down and saw that blood was flowing from his hand and down his cassock.

'What have you done to your hand?' She remembered the sound she had heard, and seizing the
little lamp ran out into the porch. There on the floor she saw the bloody finger. She returned
with her face paler than his and was about to speak to him, but he silently passed into the
back cell and fastened the door.

'Forgive me!' she said. 'How can I atone for my sin?'

'Go away.'

'Let me tie up your hand.'

'Go away from here.'

She dressed hurriedly and silently, and when ready sat waiting in her furs. The sledge-bells
were heard outside.

'Father Sergius, forgive me!'

'Go away. God will forgive.'

'Father Sergius! I will change my life. Do not forsake me!'

'Go away.'

'Forgive me--and give me your blessing!'

'In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost!'--she heard his voice from
behind the partition. 'Go!'

She burst into sobs and left the cell. The lawyer came forward to meet her.

'Well, I see I have lost the bet. It can't be helped. Where will you sit?'

'It is all the same to me.'

She took a seat in the sledge, and did not utter a word all the way home.

A year later she entered a convent as a novice, and lived a strict life under the direction
of the hermit Arseny, who wrote letters to her at long intervals.

IV

Father Sergius lived as a recluse for another seven years.

At first he accepted much of what people brought him--tea, sugar, white bread, milk, clothing,
and fire-wood. But as time went on he led a more and more austere life, refusing everything
superfluous, and finally he accepted nothing but rye-bread once a week. Everything else that
was brought to him he gave to the poor who came to him. He spent his entire time in his cell,
in prayer or in conversation with callers, who became more and more numerous as time went on.
Only three times a year did he go out to church, and when necessary he went out to fetch water
and wood.

The episode with Makovkina had occurred after five years of his hermit life. That occurrence
soon became generally known--her nocturnal visit, the change she underwent, and her entry into
a convent. From that time Father Sergius's fame increased. More and more visitors came to see
him, other monks settled down near his cell, and a church was erected there and also a hostelry.
His fame, as usual exaggerating his feats, spread ever more and more widely. People began to
come to him from a distance, and began bringing invalids to him whom they declared he cured.

His first cure occurred in the eighth year of his life as a hermit. It was the healing of a
fourteen-year-old boy, whose mother brought him to Father Sergius insisting that he should
lay his hand on the child's head. It had never occurred to Father Sergius that he could cure
the sick. He would have regarded such a thought as a great sin of pride; but the mother who
brought the boy implored him insistently, falling at his feet and saying: 'Why do you, who
heal others, refuse to help my son?' She besought him in Christ's name. When Father Sergius
assured her that only God could heal the sick, she replied that she only wanted him to lay
his hands on the boy and pray for him. Father Sergius refused and returned to his cell. But
next day (it was in autumn and the nights were already cold) on going out for water he saw
the same mother with her son, a pale boy of fourteen, and was met by the same petition.

He remembered the parable of the unjust judge, and though he had previously felt sure that
he ought to refuse, he now began to hesitate and, having hesitated, took to prayer and prayed
until a decision formed itself in his soul. This decision was, that he ought to accede to the
woman's request and that her faith might save her son. As for himself, he would in this case
be but an insignificant instrument chosen by God.

And going out to the mother he did what she asked--laid his hand on the boy's head and prayed.

The mother left with her son, and a month later the boy recovered, and the fame of the holy
healing power of the starets Sergius (as they now called him) spread throughout the whole district.
After that, not a week passed without sick people coming, riding or on foot, to Father Sergius;
and having acceded to one petition he could not refuse others, and he laid his hands on many
and prayed. Many recovered, and his fame spread more and more.

So seven years passed in the Monastery and thirteen in his hermit's cell. He now had the appearance
of an old man: his beard was long and grey, but his hair, though thin, was still black and curly.

V

For some weeks Father Sergius had been living with one persistent thought: whether he was right
in accepting the position in which he had not so much placed himself as been placed by the
Archimandrite and the Abbot. That position had begun after the recovery of the fourteen-year-old
boy. From that time, with each month, week, and day that passed, Sergius felt his own inner
life wasting away and being replaced by external life. It was as if he had been turned inside out.

Sergius saw that he was a means of attracting visitors and contributions to the monastery,
and that therefore the authorities arranged matters in such a way as to make as much use of
him as possible. For instance, they rendered it impossible for him to do any manual work. He
was supplied with everything he could want, and they only demanded of him that he should not
refuse his blessing to those who came to seek it. For his convenience they appointed days when
he would receive. They arranged a reception-room for men, and a place was railed in so that
he should not be pushed over by the crowds of women visitors, and so that he could conveniently
bless those who came.

They told him that people needed him, and that fulfilling Christ's law of love he could not
refuse their demand to see him, and that to avoid them would be cruel. He could not but agree
with this, but the more he gave himself up to such a life the more he felt that what was internal
became external, and that the fount of living water within him dried up, and that what he did
now was done more and more for men and less and less for God.

Whether he admonished people, or simply blessed them, or prayed for the sick, or advised people
about their lives, or listened to expressions of gratitude from those he had helped by precepts,
or alms, or healing (as they assured him)--he could not help being pleased at it, and could
not be indifferent to the results of his activity and to the influence he exerted. He thought
himself a shining light, and the more he felt this the more was he conscious of a weakening,
a dying down of the divine light of truth that shone within him.

'In how far is what I do for God and in how far is it for men?' That was the question that
insistently tormented him and to which he was not so much unable to give himself an answer
as unable to face the answer.

In the depth of his soul he felt that the devil had substituted an activity for men in place
of his former activity for God. He felt this because, just as it had formerly been hard for
him to be torn from his solitude so now that solitude itself was hard for him. He was oppressed
and wearied by visitors, but at the bottom of his heart he was glad of their presence and glad
of the praise they heaped upon him.

There was a time when he decided to go away and hide. He even planned all that was necessary
for that purpose. He prepared for himself a peasant's shirt, trousers, coat, and cap. He explained
that he wanted these to give to those who asked. And he kept these clothes in his cell, planning
how he would put them on, cut his hair short, and go away. First he would go some three hundred
versts by train, then he would leave the train and walk from village to village. He asked an
old man who had been a soldier how he tramped: what people gave him, and what shelter they
allowed him. The soldier told him where people were most charitable, and where they would take
a wanderer in for the night, and Father Sergius intended to avail himself of this information.
He even put on those clothes one night in his desire to go, but he could not decide what was
best--to remain or to escape. At first he was in doubt, but afterwards this indecision passed.
He submitted to custom and yielded to the devil, and only the peasant garb reminded him of
the thought and feeling he had had.

