THE

UNCONSTITUTIONALITY

OF

SLAVERY.

BY LYSANDER SPOONER.

DOW & JACKSON'S ANTI-SLAVERY PRESS.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.--WHAT IS LAW?                              PAGE 5

   "   II.--WRITTEN CONSTITUTIONS,                        18

   "  III.--THE COLONIAL CHARTERS,                        24

   "   IV.--COLONIAL STATUTES,                            36

   "    V.--THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE,              42

   "   VI.--THE STATE CONSTITUTIONS OF 1789.
              (MEANING OF THE WORD "FREE,")               46

   "  VII.--THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION,                61

   " VIII.--THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES,        65

   "   IX.--THE INTENTIONS OF THE CONVENTION,            135

   "    X.--THE PRACTICE OF THE GOVERNMENT,              145

   "   XI.--THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE PEOPLE,             147

   "  XII.--THE STATE CONSTITUTIONS OF 1845,             150

   " XIII.--THE CHILDREN OF SLAVES ARE BORN FREE,        153

THE UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF SLAVERY.

CHAPTER I.

WHAT IS LAW?

Before examining the language of the Constitution, in regard to Slavery, let us obtain a view
of the principles, by virtue of which law arises out of those constitutions and compacts, by
which people agree to establish government.

To do this it is necessary to define the term law. Popular opinions are very loose and indefinite,
both as to the true definition of law, and also as to the principle, by virtue of which law
results from the compacts or contracts of mankind with each other.

What then is LAW? That law, I mean, which, and which only, judicial tribunals are morally bound,
under all circumstances, to declare and sustain?

In answering this question, I shall attempt to show that law is an intelligible principle of
right, necessarily resulting from the nature of man; and not an arbitrary rule, that can be
established by mere will, numbers or power.

To determine whether this proposition be correct, we must look at the general signification
of the term law.

The true and general meaning of it, is that natural, permanent, unalterable principle, which
governs any particular thing or class of things. The principle is strictly a natural one; and
the term applies to every natural principle, whether mental, moral or physical. Thus we speak
of the laws of mind; meaning thereby those natural, universal and necessary principles, according
to which mind acts, or by which it is governed. We speak too of the moral law; which is merely
an universal principle of moral obligation, that arises out of the nature of men, and their
relations to each other, and to other things--and is consequently as unalterable as the nature
of men. And it is solely because it is unalterable in its nature, and universal in its application,
that it is denominated law. If it were changeable, partial or arbitrary, it would be no law.
Thus we speak of physical laws; of the laws, for instance, that govern the solar system; of
the laws of motion, the laws of gravitation, the laws of light, &c., &c.--Also the laws that
govern the vegetable and animal kingdoms, in all their various departments: among which laws
may be named, for example, the one that like produces like. Unless the operation of this principle
were uniform, universal and necessary, it would be no law.

Law, then, applied to any object or thing whatever, signifies a natural, unalterable, universal
principle, governing such object or thing. Any rule, not existing in the nature of things,
or that is not permanent, universal and inflexible in its application, is no law, according
to any correct definition of the term law.

What, then, is that natural, universal, impartial and inflexible principle, which, under all
circumstances, necessarily fixes, determines, defines and governs the civil rights of men?
Those rights of person, property, &c., which one human being has, as against other human beings?

I shall define it to be simply the rule, principle, obligation or requirement of natural justice.

This rule, principle, obligation or requirement of natural justice, has its origin in the natural
rights of individuals, results necessarily from them, keeps them ever in view as its end and
purpose, secures their enjoyment, and forbids their violation. It also secures all those acquisitions
of property, privilege and claim, which men have a natural right to make by labor and contract.

Such is the true meaning of the term law, as applied to the civil rights of men. And I doubt
if any other definition of law can be given, that will prove correct in every, or necessarily
in any possible case. The very idea of law originates in men's natural rights. There is no
other standard, than natural rights, by which civil law can be measured. Law has always been
the name of that rule or principle of justice, which protects those rights. Thus we speak of
natural law. Natural law, in fact, constitutes the great body of the law that is professedly
administered by judicial tribunals: and it always necessarily must be--for it is impossible
to anticipate a thousandth part of the cases that arise, so as to enact a special law for them.
Wherever the cases have not been thus anticipated, the natural law prevails. We thus politically
and judicially recognize the principle of law as originating in the nature and rights of men.
By recognizing it as originating in the nature of men, we recognize it as a principle, that
is necessarily as immutable, and as indestructible as the nature of man. We also, in the same
way, recognize the impartiality and universality of its application.

If, then, law be a natural principle--one necessarily resulting from the very nature of man,
and capable of being destroyed or changed only by destroying or changing the nature of man--it
necessarily follows that it must be of higher and more inflexible obligation than any other
rule of conduct, which the arbitrary will of any man, or combination of men, may attempt to
establish. Certainly no rule can be of such high, universal and inflexible obligation, as that,
which, if observed, secures the rights, the safety and liberty of all.

Natural law, then, is the paramount law. And, being the paramount law, it is necessarily the
only law: for, being applicable to every possible case that can arise touching the rights of
men, any other principle or rule, that should arbitrarily be applied to those rights, would
necessarily conflict with it. And, as a merely arbitrary, partial and temporary rule must,
of necessity, be of less obligation than a natural, permanent, equal and universal one, the
arbitrary one becomes, in reality, of no obligation at all, when the two come in collision.
Consequently there is, and can be, correctly speaking, no law but natural law. There is no
other principle or rule, applicable to the rights of men, that is obligatory in comparison
with this, in any case whatever. And this natural law is no other than that rule of natural
justice, which results either directly from men's natural rights, or from such acquisitions
as they have a natural right to make, or from such contracts as they have a natural right to
enter into. 

He must tear down that hateful flag. He must do it if he died and, springing forward before any
one could divine his purpose, he dragged the German banner to the floor and, standing on it, waved
a little American flag drawn from his pocket.

"Land where my fathers died, Land of the Pilgrims' pride!"

He shrilled out, singing all alone while the proud organ thundered forth its accompaniment.

As a match starts the powder train so this boyish act fired the whole gathering of dumb patriots
and straightway, Germans or no Germans, ten thousand American voices took up the words while
the youthful leader, with eyes flashing, held up the Stars and Stripes there by the eagle.

A
German officer, furious at this defiance, sprang toward the boy with lifted sword and would have
struck him down had not his Imperial master intervened and with his own weapon caught the descending
blow.

"Shame! Coward!" cried the Crown Prince. "We do not fight with children."

And the end of it was that no one was punished, although concerts
were forbidden after this in the Wanamaker store.

I have related this incident not only for its own sake, but because of its bearing on subsequent
events.

"I'm going to write a story about that boy", I said to W. Barran Lewis, who stood near me. "Do
you know his name?"

"Yes," said the editor. "He is Lemuel A. Widding, Jr. Makes a good story, doesn't it?"

Lemuel A. Widding! Where had I heard that name? Suddenly I remembered--Kingston, Jamaica, and Lieutenant
Ryerson and the lovely girl who had told me about her brother's ravings. That was the name he
had called out again and again in his delirium. Lemuel A. Widding!

In spite of my interest in this puzzling circumstance I was unable to investigate it, owing to the
fact that I was hurried off to Mount Vernon for the Peace Conference, but I wired Miss Ryerson
in Richmond of my discovery and gave her the boy's address in Camden, N. J. Then I thought
no more about the matter, being absorbed in my duties. The United States was represented by
General Leonard Wood, William H. Taft and Elihu Root; Germany by General von Hindenburg, General
von Kluck and Count von Bernstoff.

Although I was not personally present at these discussions I am able, thanks to the standing of the London
Times, to set forth the main points on the highest authority.

In the very first session the peace commissioners came straight to the main question.

"I am instructed by the President of the United States," began General Wood, "to ask your Excellency
if the German Imperial Government will agree to withdraw their armies
from America in consideration of receiving a money indemnity?"

"No, sir," replied General von Hindenburg. "That is quite out of the question."

"A large indemnity? I am empowered to offer three thousand million dollars, which is three times
as much, your Excellency will remember, as the Imperial German Government accepted for withdrawing
from France in 1870."

"Yes, and we always regretted it," snapped von Hindenburg. "We should have kept that territory,
or part of it. We are going to keep this territory. That was our original intention in coming
here. We need this Atlantic seaboard for the extension of the German idea, for the spread of German
civilisation, for our inevitable expansion as the great world power."

"Suppose we agreed to pay four billion dollars?" suggested the American commander.

Von Hindenburg shook his head and then in his rough, positive way: "No, General. What we have
taken by our victorious arms we shall hold for our children and our
grandchildren.

I am instructed to say, however, that the Imperial German Government will make one important
concession to the United States. We will withdraw our troops from the mouths of the Mississippi
which we now hold, as you know; we will withdraw from Galveston, New Orleans, Pensacola, Tampa, Key
West; in short, from all ports in the Gulf of Mexico and in Florida. If you will allow me, gentlemen,
I will show you on this map what we propose to surrender to you and what we propose to keep."

The venerable Field Marshal unrolled upon the broad surface of George Washington's desk a beautifully
shaded relief map of the United States, and General Wood, ex-President Taft and Elihu Root bent
over it with tense faces and studied a heavy black line that indicated the proposed boundary between
the United States and the territory claimed by the invaders.

This latter included all of New England, about one-third of New York and Pennsylvania (the southeastern
portions), all of New Jersey and Delaware, nearly all of Virginia and North Carolina and all of
South Carolina and Georgia.

"You observe, gentlemen," said von Hindenburg, "that our American province is to bear the name New
Germany. It is bounded on the north by Canada, on the east by the Atlantic Ocean, on the south
by Florida, and on the west by Alabama and the Allegheny Mountains. It is a strip of land; roughly
speaking, a thousand miles long and two hundred miles wide."

"About the area of the German Empire," said ex-President Taft.

"Possibly, but not one-tenth of the entire territory of the United States, leaving out Alaska. We
feel that as conquerors we are asking little enough." He eyed the Americans keenly.

"You are asking us to give up New York, Philadelphia and Washington and all of New England," said
Elihu Root very quietly.

"Does your Excellency realise what that means to us? New England is the cradle of our liberties.
New York is the heart of the nation. Washington is our capital."

"Washington was your capital," broke in General von Kluck, with a laugh.

"I can assure your Excellency," said General Wood, keeping his composure with an effort, "that
the American people will never consent to such a sacrifice of territory. You may drive us back to the
deserts of Arizona, you may drive us back to the Rocky Mountains, but we will fight on."

Von Hindenburg's eyes narrowed dangerously.

"Ah, so!" he smiled grimly.

"Do you know what will happen if you refuse our terms? In the next few months we shall land
expeditions from Germany with a million more soldiers.

That will give us a million and a half men on American soil. We shall then invade the Mississippi
Valley from New Orleans, and our next offer of terms will be made to you from St. Louis or Chicago,
and it will be a very different offer."

"If your Excellency will allow me," said Elihu Root in a conciliatory tone, "may I ask if the
Imperial German Government does not recognise that there will be great difficulties in the
way of permanently holding a strip of land along our Atlantic seaboard?"

"What difficulties? England holds Canada, doesn't she? Spain held Mexico, did she not?"

"But the Mexicans were willing to be held. Your Excellency must realise that in New England,
in New York, in New Jersey, you would be dealing with irreconcilable
hatred."

"Nothing is irreconcilable. Look at Belgium. They hated us in 1915, did they not? But sixty-five percent
of them accepted German citizenship when we offered it to them after
the peace in 1919, and they have been a well-behaved German province
ever since."

"You mean to say that New England would ever become a German province?"
protested William H. Taft.

"Do you think that New York and Virginia will ever take the oath of allegiance to the German Emperor?"

"Of
course they will, just as most of the Spaniards you conquered in the Philippine Islands took
the oath of allegiance to America. They swore they would not but they did. Men follow the laws
of necessity. Half of your population are of foreign descent. Millions of them are of German
descent. These people crowded over here from Europe because they
were starving and you have kept them starving.

They will come to us because we treat them better; we give them higher wages, cleaner homes,
more happiness. They have come to us already; the figures prove it. Not ten percent of the
people of New York and New England have moved away since the German occupation, although they
were free to go. Why is that? Because they like our form of government, they see that it insures
to them and their children the benefits of a higher civilisation."

My informant assured me that at this point ex-President Taft, in spite of his even temper, almost
exploded with indignation, while General Wood rose abruptly from
his seat.

For a time it looked as if this first Peace Conference session would break up in a storm of angry
recrimination; but Elihu Root, by tactful appeals, finally smoothed things over and an adjournment
was taken for forty-eight hours, during which it was agreed that both sides, by telegraph and cable,
should lay the situation before their respective governments in Chicago and Berlin.

I remained at Mount Vernon for two weeks while the truce lasted.

Every day the peace commissioners met for hours of argument and pleading, but the deadlock
of conflicting purposes was not broken. Both sides kept in touch with their governments and
both made concessions.

America raised her indemnity offer to five billion dollars, to six billion dollars, to seven
billion dollars, but declared she would never surrender one foot of the Atlantic seaboard. Germany
lessened her demands for territory, but refused to withdraw from
New York, New England and Philadelphia.

For some days this deadlock continued, then America began to weaken. She felt herself overpowered.
The consequences of continuing the war were too frightful to contemplate and, on September 8, I
cabled my paper that the United States would probably cede to Germany within twenty-four hours
the whole of New England and a part of New York State, including
New York City and Long Island.

This was the general opinion when, suddenly, out of a clear sky came a dramatic happening destined
to change the course of events and draw me personally into a whirlpool of exciting adventures.

It
was about three o'clock in the afternoon of September 9, a blazing hot day, and I was seated
on the lawn under one of the fine magnolia-trees presented years
before by Prince Henry of Prussia, wondering how much longer I must
swelter here before getting off my despatch to the Times, when I heard
the panting of a swiftly approaching automobile which presently drew
up outside the grounds.

A moment later a coloured chauffeur approached and asked if I was Mr. James Langston. I told him I
was, and he said a lady in the car wanted to speak to me.

"A lady?" I asked in surprise. "Did she give her name?"

The chauffeur broke into a beaming smile. "She didn't give no name, boss, but she sure is a
ve'hy handsome lady, an' she's powh'ful anxious to see you."

I lost no time in answering this mysterious summons, and a little later found myself in the
presence of a young woman whom I recognised, when she drew aside her veil, as Miss Mary Ryerson,
sister of Lieutenant Randolph Ryerson.

With her in the car were her brother and a tall, gaunt man with deep-set eyes. They were all
travel-stained, and the car showed the battering of Virginia mountain roads.

"Oh, Mr. Langston," cried the girl eagerly, "we have such wonderful
news!

The conference isn't over? They haven't yielded to Germany?"

"No," said I. "Not yet."

"They mustn't yield. We have news that changes everything. Oh, it's so splendid! America is going
to win."

Her lovely face was glowing with enthusiasm, but I shook my head.

"America's fleet is destroyed. Her army is beaten. How can she win?"

Miss Ryerson turned to her brother and to the other man.

"Go with Mr. Langston. Tell him everything. Explain everything. He will take you to General
Wood." She fixed her radiant eyes on me. "You will help us? I can count on you? Remember, it's
for America!"

"I'll do my best," I promised, yielding to the spell of her charm and spirit. "May I ask--" I glanced
at the tall man who was getting out of the car.

"Ah!

Now you will believe. You will see how God is guiding us. This is the father of the brave little
boy in Wanamaker's store. He has seen Thomas A. Edison, and Mr. Edison says his plan to destroy
the German fleet is absolutely sound.

Mr. Langston, Mr. Lemuel A. Widding. Now hurry!"

"What is it?" he asked.

"Good news, General," I whispered, but he shook his head wearily.

"No, it's all over. They have worn us down. Our fleet is destroyed, our army is beaten. We are
on the point of ceding New England and New York to Germany. There is nothing else to do."

"Wait! We have information that may change everything. Let me introduce Lieutenant Ryerson
and Mr. Widding--General Wood." They bowed politely. "Mr. Widding has just seen Thomas A. Edison."

That
was a name to conjure with, and the General's face brightened.

"I'm listening," he said.

We settled back in our chairs and Lemuel A. Widding, with awkward movements, drew from his pockets
some papers which he offered to the American commander.

"These speak for themselves, General," he began. "Here is a brief description of my invention
for destroying the German fleet.

Here are blueprints that make it clearer. Here is the written endorsement
of Thomas A. Edison."

For a long time General Wood studied these papers with close attention, then he sat silent, looking out over
the broad Potomac, his noble face stern with care.

I saw that his hair had whitened noticeably in the last two months.

"If this is true, it's more important than you realise. It's so important that--" He searched us
with his kind but keen grey eyes.

"Thomas A. Edison says it's true," put in Widding.

"That ought to be good enough evidence."

"And Lieutenant Ryerson tells me that Admiral Fletcher spoke favourably
of the matter," I added.

"He did, General," declared the lieutenant. "It was on the Pennsylvania
a few hours before we went into battle. The admiral had been looking
over Mr. Widding's specifications the night before and he said--I
remember his words: 'This is a great idea. If we had it in operation
now we could destroy the German fleet.'"

At this moment there came
a fateful interruption in the form of an urgent call for General Wood
from the conference hall and he asked us to excuse him until the next
day when he would take the matter up seriously.

We returned at once
to Washington and I spent that evening at the Cosmos Club listening
to a lecture by my oceanographical friend, Dr. Austin H. Clark, on
deep-sea lilies that eat meat. At about nine o'clock I was called
to the telephone, and presently recognised the agitated voice of Miss
Ryerson, who said that an extraordinary thing had happened and begged
me to come to her at once. She was stopping at the Shoreham, just
across the street, and five minutes later we were talking earnestly
in the spacious blue-and-white salon with its flowers and restful
lights. Needless to say, I preferred a talk with this beautiful girl
to the most learned discussion of deep-sea lilies.

Her message was
brief but important. She had just been telephoning in a drug-store
on Pennsylvania Avenue when she was surprised to hear the name of
Thomas A. Edison mentioned several times by a man in the next booth
who was speaking in German. Miss Ryerson understood German and, listening
attentively, she made out enough to be sure that an enemy's plot was
on foot to lay hold of the great inventor, to abduct him forcibly,
so that he could no longer help the work of American defence.

Greatly
alarmed she had called me up and now urged me to warn the military
authorities, without wasting a moment, so that they would take steps
to protect Mr. Edison.

In this emergency I decided to appeal to General
E.M. Weaver, Chief of Coast Artillery, whom I knew from having played
golf with him at Chevy Chase, and, after telephoning, I hurried to
his house in a taxicab. The general looked grave when I repeated Miss
Ryerson's story, and said that this accorded with other reports of
German underground activities that had come to his knowledge. Of course,
a guard must be furnished for Mr. Edison, who was in Baltimore at
the time, working out plans for the scientific defences of Washington
in the physical laboratories of the Johns Hopkins University.

"I
must talk with Edison," said the General. "Suppose you go to Baltimore
in the morning, Mr. Langston, with a note from me. It's only forty-five
minutes and--tell Mr. Edison that I will be greatly relieved if he
will return to Washington with you."

I had interviewed Thomas A.
Edison on several occasions and gained his confidence, so that he
received me cordially the next morning in Baltimore and, in deference
to General Weaver's desire, agreed to run down to Washington that
afternoon, although he laughed at the idea of any danger.

As we rode
on the train the inventor talked freely of plans for defending the
national capital against General von Mackensen's army which, having
occupied Richmond, was moving up slowly through Virginia. It is a
matter of familiar history now that these plans provided for the use
of liquid chlorine against the invaders, this dangerous substance
to be dropped upon the advancing army from a fleet of powerful aeroplanes.
Mr. Edison seemed hopeful of the outcome.

He questioned me about
Lemuel A. Widding and was interested to learn that Widding was employed
at the works of the Victor Talking Machine (Edison's own invention)
in Camden, N. J. His eyes brightened when I told him of young Lemuel's
thrilling act at Wanamaker's Philadelphia store which, as I now explained,
led to the meeting of the two inventors through the efforts of Miss
Ryerson.

"There's something queer about this," mused the famous electrician.
"Widding tells me he submitted his idea to the Navy Department over
a year ago. Think of that! An idea bigger than the submarine!"

"Is
it possible?"

"No doubt of it. Widding's invention will change the
condition of naval warfare--it's bound to. I wouldn't give five cents
for the German fleet when we get this thing working. All we need is
time.

"Mr. Langston, there are some big surprises ahead for the American
people and for the Germans," continued the inventor. "They say America
is as helpless as Belgium or China. I say nonsense. It's true that
we have lost our fleet and some of our big cities and that the Germans
have three armies on our soil, but the fine old qualities of American
grit and American resourcefulness are still here and we'll use 'em.
If we can't win battles in the old way, we'll find new ways.

"Listen
to this, my friend. Have you heard of the Committee of Twenty-one?
No? Very few have. It's a body of rich and patriotic Americans, big
business men, who made up their minds, back in July, that the government
wasn't up to the job of saving this nation. So they decided to save
it themselves by business methods, efficiency methods. There's a lot
of nonsense talked about German efficiency. We'll show them a few
things about American efficiency. What made the United States the
greatest and richest country in the world? Was it German efficiency?
What gave the Standard Oil Company its world supremacy? Was it German
efficiency? It was the American brains of John D. Rockefeller, wasn't
it?"

"Is Mr. Rockefeller one of the Committee of Twenty-one?"

"Of
course, he is, and so are Andrew Carnegie, James J. Hill, J. P. Morgan,
John Wanamaker, John H. Fahey, James B. Duke, Henry B. Joy, Daniel
B. Guggenheim, John D. Ryan, J. B. Widener, Emerson McMillin, Philip
D. Armour, Cornelius Vanderbilt, Elihu Root, George W. Perkins, Asa
G. Candler and two or three others, including myself.

"The Germans
are getting over the idea that America is as helpless as Belgium or
China. Von Mackensen is going slow, holding back his army because
he doesn't know what we have up our sleeve at the Potomac. As a matter
of fact, we have mighty little except this liquid chlorine and--well,
we're having trouble with the steel containers and with the releasing
device."

"You mean the device that drops the containers from the
aeroplanes?"

"That's it. We need time to perfect the thing. We've
spread fake reports about wonderful electric mines that will blow
up a brigade, and that helped some, and we delayed von Mackensen for
two weeks south of Fredericksburg by spreading lines of striped cheese-cloth,
miles of it, along a rugged valley. Jac. Law Dict.

"No law will make a construction to do wrong; and there are some things which the law favors,
and some it dislikes; it favoreth those things that come from the order of nature."--1 Inst.
183, 197.--Jac. Law Dict. 1, p. 41.

Mr. Christian, one of Blackstone's editors, in a note to the above passage, says:

"Lord Chief Justice Hobart has also advanced, that even an act of Parliament made against natural
justice, as to make a man judge in his own cause, is void in itself, for jura naturæ sunt immutabilia,
and they are leges legum"--(the laws of nature are immutable--they are the laws of laws.)--Hob. 87.

Mr. Christian then adds:

"With deference to these high authorities, (Blackstone and Hobart,) I should conceive that
in no case whatever can a judge oppose his own opinion and authority to the clear will and
declaration of the legislature. His province is to interpret and obey the mandates of the supreme
power of the state. And if an act of Parliament, if we could suppose such a case, should, like
the edict of Herod, command all the children under a certain age to be slain, the judge ought
to resign his office rather than be auxiliary to its execution; but it could only be declared
void by the same legislative power by which it was ordained. If the judicial power were competent
to decide that an act of parliament was void because it was contrary to natural justice, upon
an appeal to the House of Lords this inconsistency would be the consequence, that as judges
they must declare void, what as legislators they had enacted should be valid.

"The learned judge himself (Blackstone) declares in p. 91, if the Parliament will positively
enact a thing to be done which is unreasonable, I know of no power in the ordinary forms of
the constitution, that is vested with authority to control it."

It will be seen from this note of Mr. Christian, that he concurs in the opinion that an enactment
contrary to natural justice is intrinsically void, and not law; and that the principal, if
not the only difficulty, which he sees in carrying out that doctrine, is one that is peculiar
to the British constitution, and does not exist in the United States. That difficulty is, the
"inconsistency" there would be, if the House of Lords, (which is the highest law court in England,
and at the same time one branch of the legislature,) were to declare, in their capacity as
judges, that an act was void, which, as legislators, they had declared should be valid. And
this is probably the reason why Blackstone admitted that he knew of no power in the ordinary
forms of the (British) constitution, that was vested with authority to control an act of parliament
that was unreasonable, (against natural justice.) But in the United States, where the judicial
and legislative powers are vested in different bodies, and where they are so vested for the
very purpose of having the former act as a check upon the latter, no such inconsistency would
occur.

The constitutions that have been established in the United States, and the discussions had
on the formation of them, all attest the importance which our ancestors attached to a separation
of the judicial, from the executive and legislative departments of the government. And yet
the benefits, which they had promised to liberty and justice from this separation, have in
slight only, if any degree, been realized.--Although the legislation of the country generally
has exhibited little less than an entire recklessness both of natural justice and constitutional
authority, the records of the judiciary nevertheless furnish hardly an instance where an act
of a legislature has, for either of these reasons, been declared void by its co-ordinate judicial
department. There have been cases, few and far between, in which the United State's courts
have declared acts of state legislatures unconstitutional. But the history of the co-ordinate
departments of the same governments has been, that the judicial sanction followed the legislative
act with nearly the same unerring certainty, that the shadow follows the substance. Judicial
decisions have consequently had the same effects in restraining the actions of legislatures,
that shadows have in restraining the motions of bodies.

Why this uniform concurrence of the judiciary with the legislature? It is because the separation
between them is nominal, not real. The judiciary receive their offices and salaries at the
hands of the executive and the legislature, and are amenable only to the legislature for their
official character. They are made entirely independent of the people at large, (whose highest
interests are liberty and justice,) and entirely dependent upon those who have too many interests
inconsistent with liberty and justice. Could a real and entire separation of the judiciary
from the other departments take place, we might then hope that their decisions would, in some
measure, restrain the usurpations of the legislature, and promote progress in the science of
law and of government.

Whether any of our present judges would, (as Mr. Christian suggests they ought,) "resign their
offices" rather than be auxiliary to the execution of an act of legislation, that, like the
edict of Herod, should require all the children under a certain age to be slain, we cannot
certainly know. But this we do know--that our judges have hitherto manifested no intention
of resigning their offices to avoid declaring it to be law, that "children of two years old
and under," may be wrested forever from that parental protection which is their birthright,
and subjected for life to outrages which all civilized men must regard as worse than death.

To proceed with our authorities:--

"Those human laws that annex a punishment to murder, do not at all increase its moral guilt
or superadd any fresh obligation in the forum of conscience to abstain from its perpetration.
1, p. 42, 43. 1, p. 43. 1, p. 54. 1, p. 123. 1, p. 124. 1, p. 125.

"Moral or natural liberty, (in the words of Burlamaqui, ch. 3, s. 15,) is the right, which
nature gives to all mankind of disposing of their persons and property after the manner they
judge most consonant to their happiness, on condition of their acting within the limits of
the law of nature, and that they do not any way abuse it to the prejudice of any other men."--Christian's
note, Blackstone, Vol. 1, p. 126.

All the foregoing definitions of law, rights and natural liberty, although some of them are
expressed in somewhat vague and indefinite terms, nevertheless recognize the primary idea,
that law is a fixed principle, resulting from men's natural rights; and that therefore the
acknowledgment and security of the natural rights of individuals constitute the whole basis
of law as a science, and a sine qua non of government as a legitimate institution.

And yet writers generally, who acknowledge the true theory of government and law, will nevertheless,
when discussing matters of legislation, violate continually the fundamental principles with
which they set out. On some pretext of promoting a great public good, the violation of individual
rights will be justified in particular cases; and the guardian principle being once broken
down, nothing can then stay the irruption of the whole horde of pretexts for doing injustice;
and government and legislation thenceforth become contests between factions for power and plunder,
instead of instruments for the preservation of liberty and justice equally to all.

The current doctrine that private rights must yield to the public good, amounts, in reality,
to nothing more nor less than this, that an individual or the minority must consent to have
less than their rights, in order that other individuals, or the majority, may have more than
their rights. On this principle no honest government could ever be formed by voluntary contract,
(as our governments purport to be;) because no man of common sense would consent to be one
of the plundered minority, and no honest man could wish to be one of the plundering majority.

The apology, that is constantly put forth for the injustice of government, viz., that a man
must consent to give up some of his rights, in order to have his other rights protected--involves
a palpable absurdity, both legally and politically. It is an absurdity in law, because it says
that the law must be violated in some cases, in order that it may be maintained in others.
It is an absurdity politically, because a man's giving up one of his rights has no tendency
whatever to promote the protection of others. On the contrary, it only renders him less capable
of defending himself, and consequently makes the task of his protection more burdensome to
the government. At the same time it places him in the situation of one who has conceded a part
of his rights, and thus cheapened the character of all his rights in the eyes of those of whom
he asks assistance. There would be as much reason in saying that a man must consent to have
one of his hands tied behind him, in order that his friends might protect the rest of his body
against an enemy, as there is in saying that a man must give up some of his rights in order
that government may protect the remainder. Let a man have the use of both his hands, and the
enjoyment of all his rights, and he will then be more competent to his own defence; his rights
will be more respected by those who might otherwise be disposed to invade them; he will want
less the assistance and protection of others; and we shall need much less government than we
now have.

If individuals choose to form an association or government, for the mutual protection of each
other's rights, why bargain for the protection of an indefinite portion of them, at the price
of giving to the association itself liberty to violate the equally indefinite remainder? By
such a contract, a man really surrenders every thing, and secures nothing. Such a contract
of government would be a burlesque on the wisdom of asses. Such a contract never was, nor ever
will be voluntarily formed. Yet all our governments act on that principle; and so far as they
act upon it, they are as essentially usurping and tyrannical as any governments can be. If
a man pay his proportion of the aggregate cost of protecting all the rights of each of the
members of the association, he thereby acquires a claim upon the association to have his own
rights protected without diminution.

The ultimate truth on this subject is, that man has an inalienable right to so much personal
liberty as he will use without invading the rights of others. This liberty is an inherent right
of his nature and his faculties. It is an inherent right of his nature and his faculties to
develope themselves freely, and without restraint from other natures and faculties, that have
no superior prerogatives to his own. And this right has only this limit, viz., that he do not
carry the exercise of his own liberty so far as to restrain or infringe the equally free developement
of the natures and faculties of others. The dividing line between the equal liberties of each
must never be transgressed by either. This principle is the foundation and essence of law and
of civil right. And legitimate government is formed by the voluntary association of individuals,
for the mutual protection of each of them in the enjoyment of this natural liberty, against
those who may be disposed to invade it. Each individual being secured in the enjoyment of this
liberty, must then take the responsibility of his own happiness and well-being. If his necessities
require more than his faculties will supply, he must depend upon the voluntary kindness of
his fellow-men; unless he be reduced to that extremity where the necessity of self-preservation
over-rides all abstract rules of conduct, and makes a law for the occasion--an extremity, that
would probably never occur but for some antecedent injustice.]

CHAPTER II.

WRITTEN CONSTITUTIONS.

Taking it for granted that it has now been shown that no rule of civil conduct, that is inconsistent
with the natural rights of men, can be rightfully established by government, or consequently
be made obligatory as law, either upon the people, or upon judicial tribunals--let us now proceed
to test the legality of slavery by those written constitutions of government, which judicial
tribunals actually recognize as authoritative.

In making this examination, however, I shall not insist upon the principle of the preceding
chapter, that there can be no law contrary to natural right; but shall admit, for the sake
of the argument, that there may be such laws. I shall only claim that in the interpretation
of all statutes and constitutions, the ordinary legal rules of interpretation be observed.
The most important of these rules, and the one to which it will be necessary constantly to
refer, is the one that all language must be construed strictly in favor of natural right.--The
rule is laid down by the Supreme Court of the United States in these words, to wit:

"Where rights are infringed, where fundamental principles are overthrown, where the general
system of the law is departed from, the legislative intention must be expressed with irresistible
clearness, to induce a court of justice to suppose a design to effect such objects."[3]

It will probably appear from this examination of the written constitutions, that slavery neither
has, nor ever had any constitutional existence in this country; that it has always been a mere
abuse, sustained, in the first instance, merely by the common consent of the strongest party,
without any law on the subject, and, in the second place, by a few unconstitutional enactments,
made in defiance of the plainest provisions of their fundamental law.

For the more convenient consideration of this point, we will divide the constitutional history
of the country into three periods; the first embracing the time from the first settlement of
the country up to the Declaration of Independence; the second embracing the time from the Declaration
of Independence to the adoption of the Constitution of the United States in 1789; and the third
embracing all the time since the adoption of the Constitution of the United States.

Let us now consider the first period; that is, from the settlement of the country, to the Declaration
of Independence.

[Footnote 3: United States vs. Fisher, 2 Cranch, 390.]

CHAPTER III.

THE COLONIAL CHARTERS.

When our ancestors came to this country, they brought with them the common law of England,
including the writ of habeas corpus, (the essential principle of which, as will hereafter be
shown, is to deny the right of property in man,) the trial by jury, and the other great principles
of liberty, which prevailed in England, and which have made it impossible that her soil should
be trod by the foot of a slave.

These principles were incorporated into all the charters, granted to the colonies, (if all
those charters were like those I have examined, and I have examined nearly all of them.)--The
general provisions of those charters, as will be seen from the extracts given in the note,
were, that the laws of the colonies should "not be repugnant or contrary, but as nearly as
circumstances would allow, conformable to the laws, statutes and rights of our kingdom of England."[4]

Those charters were the fundamental constitutions of the colonies, with some immaterial exceptions,
up to the time of the revolution; as much so as our national and state constitutions are now
the fundamental laws of our governments.

The authority of these charters, during their continuance, and the general authority of the
common law, prior to the revolution, have been recognized by the Supreme Court of the United
States.[5]

No one of all these charters that I have examined--and I have examined nearly all of them--contained
the least intimation that slavery had, or could have, any legal existence under them. Slavery
was therefore as much unconstitutional in the colonies, as it was in England.

It was decided by the Court of King's Bench in England--Lord Mansfield being Chief Justice--before
our revolution, and while the English Charters were the fundamental law of the colonies--that
the principles of English liberty were so plainly incompatible with slavery, that even if a
slaveholder, from another part of the world, brought his slave into England--though only for
a temporary purpose, and with no intention of remaining--he nevertheless thereby gave the slave
his liberty.

Previous to this decision, the privilege of bringing slaves into England, for temporary purposes,
and of carrying them away, had long been tolerated.

This decision was given in the year 1772.[6] And for aught I see, it was equally obligatory
in this country as in England, and must have freed every slave in this country, if the question
had then been raised here. But the slave knew not his rights, and had no one to raise the question
for him.

The fact, that slavery was tolerated in the colonies, is no evidence of its legality; for slavery
was tolerated, to a certain extent, in England, (as we have already seen,) for many years previous
to the decision just cited--that is, the holders of slaves from abroad were allowed to bring
their slaves into England, hold them during their stay there, and carry them away when they
went. But the toleration of this practice did not make it lawful, notwithstanding all customs,
not palpably and grossly contrary to the principles of English liberty, have great weight,
in England, in establishing law.

The fact, that England tolerated, (i.e. did not punish criminally,) the African slave-trade
at that time, could not legally establish slavery in the colonies, any more than it did in
England--especially in defiance of the positive requirements of the charters, that the colonial
legislation should be consonant to reason, and not repugnant to the laws of England.

Besides, the mere toleration of the slave trade could not make slavery itself--the right of
property in man--lawful any where; not even on board the slave ship. Toleration of a wrong
is not law. And especially the toleration of a wrong, (i.e. the bare omission to punish it
criminally,) does not legalize one's claim to property obtained by such wrong. Even if a wrong
can be legalized at all, so as to enable one to acquire rights of property by such wrong, it
can be done only by an explicit and positive provision.

The English statutes, on the subject of the slave trade, (so far as I have seen,) never attempted
to legalize the right of property in man, in any of the thirteen North American colonies. It
is doubtful whether they ever attempted to do it any where else. It is also doubtful whether
Parliament had the power--or perhaps rather it is certain that they had not the power--to legalize
it any where, if they had attempted to do so.[7] And the cautious and curious phraseology of
their statutes on the subject, indicates plainly that they themselves either doubted their
power to legalize it, or feared to exercise it. They have therefore chosen to connive at slavery,
to insinuate, intimate, and imply their approbation of it, rather than risk an affirmative
enactment declaring that one man may be the property of another. But Lord Mansfield said, in
Somerset's case, that slavery was "so odious that nothing can be suffered to support it, but
positive law."--No such positive law (I presume) was ever passed by parliament--certainly not
with reference to any of these thirteen colonies.

The statute of 1788, (which I have not seen,) in regard to the slave trade, may perhaps have
relieved those engaged in it, in certain cases, from their liability to be punished criminally
for the act. But there is a great difference between a statute, that should merely screen a
person from punishment for a crime, and one that should legalize his right to property acquired
by the crime. Besides, this act was passed after the separation between America and England,
and therefore could have done nothing towards legalizing slavery in the United States, even
if it had legalized it in the English dominions.

The statutes of 1750, (23, George 2d, Ch. 31,) may have possibly authorized, by implication,
(so far as parliament could thus authorize,) the colonial governments, (if governments they
could be called,) on that coast of Africa, to allow slavery under certain circumstances, and
within the "settlements" on that coast. But, if it did, it was at most a grant of a merely
local authority. It gave no authority to carry slaves from the African coast. But even if it
had purported distinctly to authorize the slave trade from Africa to America, and to legalize
the right of property in the particular slaves thereafter brought from Africa to America, it
would nevertheless have done nothing towards legalizing the right of property in the slaves
that had been brought to, and born in, the colonies for an hundred and thirty years previous
to the statute. Neither the statute, nor any right of property acquired under it, (in the individual
slaves thereafterwards brought from Africa,) would therefore avail anything for the legality
of slavery in this country now; because the descendants of those brought from Africa under
the act, cannot now be distinguished from the descendants of those who had, for the hundred
and thirty years previous, been held in bondage without law.

But the presumption is, that, even after this statute was passed in 1750, if the slave trader's
right of property in the slave he was bringing to America, could have been brought before an
English court for adjudication, the same principles would have been held to apply to it, as
would have applied to a case arising within the island of Great Britain. And it must therefore
always have been held by English courts, (in consistency with the decision in Somerset's case,)
that the slave trader had no legal ownership of his slave. And if the slave trader had no legal
right of property in his slave, he could transfer no legal right of property to a purchaser
in the colonies. Consequently the slavery of those that were brought into the colonies after
the statute of 1750, was equally illegal with that of those who had been brought in before.[8]

The conclusion of the whole matter is, that until some reason appears against them, we are
bound by the decision of the King's bench in 1772, and the colonial charters. That decision
declared that there was, at that time, in England, no right of property in man, (notwithstanding
the English government had for a long time connived at the slave trade.)--The colonial charters
required the legislation of the colonies to be consonant to reason, and not repugnant or contrary,
but conformable, or agreeable, as nearly as circumstances would allow, to the laws, statutes
and rights of the realm of England. That decision, then, if correct, settled the law both for
England and the colonies. And if so, there was no constitutional slavery in the colonies up
to the time of the revolution.

[Footnote 4: The second charter to Virginia (1609) grants the power of making "orders, ordinances,
constitutions, directions and instructions," "so always as the said statutes, ordinances and
proceedings, as near as conveniently may be, be agreeable to the laws, statutes, government
and policy of this our realm of England."

The third charter (1611-12) gave to the "General Court" "power and authority" to "make laws
and ordinances" "so always as the same be not contrary to the laws and statutes of our realm
of England."

The first charter to Carolina, (including both North and South Carolina,) dated 1663, authorized
the making of laws under this proviso--"Provided nevertheless, that the said laws be consonant
to reason, and as near as may be conveniently, agreeable to the laws and customs of this our
kingdom of England."

The charter to Georgia, (1732,) an hundred years after slavery had actually existed in Virginia,
makes no mention of slavery, but requires the laws to be "reasonable and not repugnant to the
laws of this our realm." "The said corporation shall and may form and prepare laws, statutes
and ordinances fit and necessary for and concerning the government of the said colony, and
not repugnant to the laws and statutes of England."

The charter to Maryland gave the power of making laws, "So, nevertheless, that the laws aforesaid
be consonant to reason, and be not repugnant or contrary, but (so far as conveniently may be,)
agreeable to the laws, statutes, customs, and rights of this our kingdom of England."

The charter granted to Sir Edward Plowden had this proviso. "So, nevertheless, that the laws
aforesaid be consonant to reason, and not repugnant and contrary, (but as convenient as may
be to the matter in question,) to the laws, statutes, customs and rights of our kingdoms of
England and Ireland."

I have not been able to find a copy of the charter granted to the Duke of York, of the territory
comprising New York, New Jersey, &c. But Gordon, in his history of the American Revolution,
(vol. 1. p. 43,) says, "The king's grant to the Duke of York, is plainly restrictive to the
laws and government of England."

The charter to Rhode Island granted the power of making laws, "So as such laws, ordinances,
constitutions, so made, be not contrary and repugnant unto, but (as near as may be) agreeable
to the laws of this our realm of England, considering the nature and constitution of the place
and people there."

Several other charters, patents, &c. that had a temporary existence, might be named, that contained
substantially the same provision.]

[Footnote 5: In the case of the town of Pawlet v. Clark and others, the court say--

"Let us now see how far these principles were applicable to New Hampshire, at the time of issuing
the charter to Pawlet.

"New Hampshire was originally erected into a royal province in the thirty-first year of Charles
II., and from thence until the revolution continued a royal province, under the immediate control
and direction of the crown. That's where we have set our trap, five miles wide, on the direct
line between Philadelphia and Baltimore. They can't cross lower down because the river swells
into Chesapeake Bay, and if they cross higher up they simply go out of their way. Why should
they? They're not afraid to meet Leonard Wood's little army, are they? They'll come straight across
the river and then--good-night."

This was as near as I could get to an understanding of the mystery. Astor would tell me no more,
although he knew I would die rather than betray the secret.
"You might talk in your sleep," he laughed. "I wish I didn't know
the thing myself. It's like going around with a million dollars in
your pocket." A fortiori the principle
applies to a royal province."--(9 Cranch's U. State's Reports, 332-3.)]

[Footnote 6: Somerset v. Stewart.--Lofft's Reports, p. 1 to 19, of Easter Term, 1772. In the
Dublin edition the case is not entered in the Index.]

[Footnote 7: Have parliament the constitutional prerogative of abolishing the writ of habeas
corpus? the trial by jury? or the freedom of speech and the press? If not, have they the prerogative
of abolishing a man's right of property in his own person?]

[Footnote 8: Mr. Bancroft, in the third volume of his history, (pp. 413, 14,) says:

"And the statute book of England soon declared the opinion of its king and its parliament,
that 'the trade,'" (by which he means the slave trade, of which he is writing,) 'is highly
beneficial and advantageous to the kingdom and the colonies.' To prove this he refers to statute
of "1795, 8 and 10 Wm. 3, ch. 26." (Should be 1797, 8-9 and 10 Wm. 3, ch. 26.)

Now the truth is that, although this statute may have been, and very probably was designed
to insinuate to the slave traders the personal approbation of parliament to the slave trade,
yet the statute itself says not a word of slaves, slavery, or the slave trade, except to forbid,
under penalty of five hundred pounds, any governor, deputy-governor or judge, in the colonies
or plantations in America, or any other person or persons, for the use or on the behalf of
such governor, deputy-governor or judges, to be "a factor or factor's agent or agents" "for
the sale or disposal of any negroes."

The statute does not declare, as Mr. Bancroft asserts, that "the (slave) trade is highly beneficial
and advantageous to the kingdom and the colonies;" but that "the trade to Africa is highly
beneficial and advantageous," &c. It is an inference of Mr. Bancroft's that "the trade to Africa"
was the slave trade. Even this inference is not justified by the words of the statute, considering
them in that legal view, in which Mr. Bancroft's remarks purport to consider them.

It is true that the statute assumes that "negroes" will be "imported" from Africa into "England,"
(where of course they were not slaves,) and into the "plantations and colonies in America."
But it nowhere calls these "negroes" slaves, nor assumes that they are slaves. For aught that
appears from the statute, they were free men and passengers, voluntary emigrants, going to
"England" and "the plantations and colonies" as laborers, as such persons are now going to
the British West Indies.

The statute, although it apparently desires to insinuate or faintly imply that they are property,
or slaves, nevertheless studiously avoids to acknowledge them as such distinctly, or even by
any necessary implication; for it exempts them from duties as merchandize, and from forfeiture
for violation of revenue laws, and it also relieves the masters of vessels from any obligation
to render any account of them at the custom houses.

When it is considered that slavery, property in man, can be legalized, according to the decision
of Lord Mansfield, by nothing less than positive law; that the rights of property and person
are the same on board an English ship, as in the island of Great Britain; and that this statute
implies that these "negroes" were to be "imported" into "England," as well as into the "Plantations
and colonies in America," and that it therefore no more implies that they were to be slaves
in "the plantations and colonies" than in "England," where we know they could not be slaves;
when these things are considered, it is perfectly clear, as a legal proposition, that the statute
legalized neither slavery in the plantations and colonies, nor the slave trade from Africa
to America--however we may suppose it to have been designed to hint a personal approbation,
on the part of parliament, of the actual traffic.

But lest I may be suspected of having either misrepresented the words of the statute, or placed
upon them an erroneous legal construction, I give all the words of the statute, that make any
mention of "negroes," or their importation, with so much of the context as will enable the
reader to judge for himself of the legal import of the whole.

The act is entitled, "An Act to settle the Trade to Africa." Sec. 1 recites as follows:--

"Whereas, the Trade to Africa is highly beneficial and advantageous to this kingdom and to
the Plantations and Colonies thereunto belonging."

The act contains twenty-one sections, regulating trade, duties. &., like any other navigation
act. "Negroes" are mentioned only in the following instances and connexions, to wit:

Sec. 7.

I, A.B., do swear that the manifest or particular now by me given in and signed, to the best
of my knowledge and belief doth contain, signify and express all the goods, wares and merchandizes
(negroes excepted) which were laden or put on board the ship called the----, during her stay
and continuing on the coast of Africa between Cape Blanco and Cape Mount, whereof I, A.B. am
master."

Sec. 8. "And that the owner or importer of all goods and merchandize (negroes excepted) which
shall be brought to England or any of his majesty's plantations from any port of Africa between
Cape Blanco and Cape Mount aforesaid shall make entry of all such goods and merchandize at
one of his majesty's chief custom houses in England, or in such of his majesty's plantations
where the same shall be imported," &c.

Sec. 9.* * * * "that all goods or merchandizes (negroes excepted) which shall be brought from
any part of Africa, between Cape Blanco and Cape Mount aforesaid, which shall be unladed or
landed before entry made and signed and oath of the true and real value thereof made and the
duty paid as aforesaid shall be forfeited, or the value thereof."

Sec. 20. "And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no governor, or deputy-governor
of any of his majesty's colonies or plantations in America, or his majesty's judges in any
courts there for the time being, nor any other person or persons for the use or on behalf of
such governor or deputy-governor or judges, from and after the nine-and-twentieth day of September,
one thousand six hundred and ninety-eight, shall be a factor or factor's agent or agents for
the said Company,(The Royal African Company) or any other person or persons for the sale or
disposal of any negroes, and that every person offending herein shall forfeit five hundred
pounds to the uses aforesaid, to be recovered in any of his majesty's courts of record at Westminster,
by action of debt, bill, plaint or information, wherein no essoign, protection, privilege or
wager of law shall be allowed, nor any more than one imparlance."

Sec. 21. "Provided that this act shall continue and be in force thirteen years, and from thence
to the end of the next sessions of parliament, and no longer."

Even if this act had legalized, (as in reality it did not legalize,) the slave trade during
those thirteen years, it would be impossible now to distinguish the descendants of those who
were imported under it, from the descendants of those who had been previously, and were subsequently
imported and sold into slavery without law. The act would therefore avail nothing towards making
the existing slavery in this country legal.

The next statute, of which I find any trace, passed by parliament, with any apparent view to
countenance the slave trade, was the statute of 23d George II., ch. 31. (1749-50.)

Mr. Bancroft has committed another still more serious error in his statement of the words,
(for he professes to quote precise words,) of this statute. He says, (vol. 3, p. 414,)

"At last, in 1749, to give the highest activity to the trade, (meaning the slave trade,) every
obstruction to private enterprize was removed, and the ports of Africa were laid open to English
competition, for 'the slave trade,'--such" (says Mr. Bancroft,) "are the words of the statute--'the
slave trade is very advantageous to Great Britain.'"

As words are, in this case, things--and things of the highest legal consequence--and as this
history is so extensively read and received as authority--it becomes important, in a legal,
if not historical, point of view, to correct so important an error as that of the word slave
in this statement. "The words of the statute" are not that "the slave trade," but that "the
trade to and from Africa is very advantageous to Great Britain." "The trade to and from Africa"
no more means, in law, "the slave trade," than does the trade to and from China. From aught
that appears, then, from so much of the preamble, "the trade to and from Africa" may have been
entirely in other things than slaves. And it actually appears from another part of the statute,
that trade was carried on in "gold, elephant's teeth, wax, gums and drugs."

From the words immediately succeeding those quoted by Mr. Bancroft from the preamble to this
statute, it might much more plausibly, (although even from them it could not be legally) inferred
that the statute legalized the slave trade, than from those pretended to be quoted by him.
That the succeeding words may be seen, the title and preamble to the act are given, as follows:

"An Act for extending and improving the trade to Africa." (i.e. "the trade to and from Africa")
"ought to be free and open to all his majesty's subjects. Therefore be it enacted," &c.

"Negroes" were not slaves by the English law, and therefore the word "negroes," in this preamble,
does not legally mean slaves. For aught that appears from the words of the preamble, or even
from any part of the statute itself, these "negroes," with whom it is declared to be necessary
that the plantations and colonies should be supplied, were free persons, voluntary emigrants,
that were to be induced to go to the plantations as hired laborers, as are those who, at this
day, are induced, in large numbers, and by the special agency of the English government, to
go to the British West Indies. In order to facilitate this emigration, it was necessary that
"the trade to and from Africa" should be encouraged. And the form of the preamble is such as
it properly might have been, if such had been the real object of parliament. Such is undoubtedly
the true legal meaning of this preamble, for this meaning being consistent with natural right,
public policy, and with the fundamental principles of English law, legal rules of construction
imperatively require that this meaning should be ascribed to it, rather than it should be held
to authorize anything contrary to natural right, or contrary to the fundamental principles
of British law.

We are obliged to put this construction upon this preamble, for the further reason that it
corresponds with the enacting clauses of the statute--not one of which mentions such a thing
as the transportation of slaves to, or the sale of slaves in "the plantations and colonies."
The first section of the act is in these words, to wit.

"That it shall and may be lawful for all his majesty's subjects to trade and traffic to and
from any port or place in Africa, between the port of Sallee in South Barbary, and the Cape
of Good Hope, when, at such times, and in such manner, and in or with such quantity of goods,
wares and merchandizes, as he or they shall think fit, without any restraint whatsoever, save
as is herein after expressed."

Here plainly is no authority given "to trade and traffic" in any thing except what is known
either to the English law, or the law of nature, as "goods, wares or merchandizes"--among which
men were not known, either to the English law, or the law of nature.

The second section of the act is in these words:

"That all his majesty's subjects, who shall trade to or from any of the ports or places of
Africa, between Cape Blanco and the Cape of Good Hope, shall forever hereafter be a body corporate
and politic, in name and in deed, by the name of the Company of Merchants Trading to Africa,
and by the same name shall have perpetual succession, and shall have a common seal, and by
that name shall and may sue, and be sued, and do any other act, matter and thing, which any
other body corporate or politic, as such, may lawfully do."

Neither this nor any other section of the act purports to give this "Company," in its corporate
capacity, any authority to buy or sell slaves, or to transport slaves to the plantations and
colonies.

Now, although there is perhaps no good reason to doubt that the secret intention of parliament
in the passage of this act, was to stimulate the slave trade, and that there was a tacit understanding
between the government and the slave dealers, that the slave trade should go on unharmed (in
practice) by the government, and although it was undoubtedly understood that this penalty of
one hundred pounds would either not be sued for at all, or would be sued for so seldom as practically
to interpose no obstacle to the general success of the trade, still, as no part of the whole
statute gives any authority to this "Company of Merchants trading to Africa" to transport men
from Africa against their will, and as this 29th section contains a special prohibition to
individuals, under penalty, to do so, no one can pretend that the trade was legalized. If the
penalty had been but one pound, instead of one hundred pounds, it would have been sufficient,
in law, to have rebutted the pretence that the trade was legalized. The act, on its face, and
in its legal meaning, is much more an act to prohibit, than to authorize the slave trade.

The only possible legal inference from the statute, so far as it concerns the "supplying the
plantations and colonies with negroes at reasonable rates," is, that these negroes were free
laborers, voluntary emigrants, that were to be induced to go to the plantations and colonies;
and that "the trade to and from Africa" was thrown open in order that the facilities for the
transportation of these emigrants might be increased.

But although there is, in this statute, no authority given for--but, on the contrary, a special
prohibition upon--the transportation of the natives from Africa against their will, yet I freely
admit that the statute contains one or two strong, perhaps decisive implications in favor of
the fact that slavery was allowed in the English settlements on the coast of Africa, apparently
in conformity with the customs of the country, and with the approbation of parliament. But
that is the most that can be said of it. Slavery, wherever it exists, is a local institution;
and its toleration, or even its legality, on the coast of Africa, would do nothing towards
making it legal in any other part of the English dominions. Nothing but positive and explicit
legislation could transplant it into any other part of the empire.

The implications, furnished by the act, in favor of the toleration of slavery, in the English
settlements, on the coast of Africa, are the following:

The third section of the act refers to another act of parliament "divesting the Royal African
Company of their charter, forts, castles and military stores, canoe-men and castle-slaves;"
and section thirty-first requires that such "officers of his majesty's navy," as shall be appointed
for the purpose, "shall inspect and examine the state and condition of the forts and settlements
on the coast of Africa, in the possession of the Royal African Company, and of the number of
soldiers therein, and also the state and condition of the military stores, castles, slaves,
canoes and other vessels and things, belonging to the said company, and necessary for the use
and defence of the said forts and settlements, and shall with all possible despatch report
how they find the same."

Here the fact is stated that the "Royal African Company," (a company that had been in existence
long previous to the passing of this act,) had held "castle-slaves" "for the use and defence
of the said forts and settlements." The act does not say directly whether this practice was
legal or illegal; although it seems to imply that, whether legal or illegal, it was tolerated
with the knowledge and approbation of parliament.

But the most distinct approbation given to slavery by the act, is implied in the 28th section,
in these words:

"That it shall and may be lawful for any of his majesty's subjects trading to Africa, for the
security of their goods and slaves, to erect houses and warehouses, under the protection of
the said forts," &c.

Although even this language would not be strong enough to overturn previously established principles
of English law, and give the slave holders a legal right of property in their slaves, in any
place where English law had previously been expressly established, (as it had been in the North
American colonies,) yet it sufficiently evinces that parliament approved of Englishmen holding
slaves in the settlements on the coast of Africa, in conformity with the customs of that country.
But it implies no authority for transporting their slaves to America; it does nothing towards
legalizing slavery in America; it implies no toleration even of slavery any where, except upon
the coast of Africa. Had slavery been positively and explicitly legalized on the coast of Africa,
it would still have been a local institution.

This reasoning may appear to some like quibbling; and it would perhaps be so, were not the
rule well settled that nothing but explicit and irresistible language can be legally held to
authorize anything inconsistent with natural right, and with the fundamental principles of
a government.

That this statute did not legalize the right of property in man, (unless as a local principle
on the coast of Africa,) we have the decision of Lord Mansfield, who held that it did not legalize
it in England; and if it did not legalize it in England, it did not legalize it in any of the
colonies where the principles of the common law prevailed. Of course it did not legalize it
in the North American colonies.

But even if it were admitted that this statute legalized the right of property, on the part
of the slave trader, in his slaves taken in Africa after the passage of the act, and legalized
the sale of such slaves in America, still the statute would be ineffectual to sustain the legality
of slavery, in general, in the colonies. It would only legalize the slavery of those particular
individuals, who should be transported from Africa to America, subsequently to the passage
of this act, and in strict conformity with the law of this act--(a thing, by the way, that
could now be proved in no case whatever.) This act was passed in 1749-50, and could therefore
do nothing towards legalizing the slavery of all those who had, for an hundred and thirty years
previous, been held in bondage in Virginia and elsewhere. And as no distinction can now be
traced between the descendants of those who were imported under this act, and those who had
illegally been held in bondage prior to its passage, it would be of no practical avail to slavery
now, to prove, (if it could be proved,) that those introduced into the country subsequent to
1750, were legally the property of those who introduced them.]

CHAPTER IV.

COLONIAL STATUTES.

But the colonial legislation on the subject of slavery, was not only void as being forbidden
by the colonial charters, but in many of the colonies it was void for another reason, viz:
that it did not sufficiently define the persons who might be made slaves.

Slavery, if it can be legalized at all, can be legalized only by positive legislation. Natural
law gives it no aid. Custom imparts to it no legal sanction. This was the doctrine of the King's
Bench in Somerset's case, as it is the doctrine of common sense.

Slavery, then, being the creature of positive legislation alone, can be created only by legislation
that shall so particularly describe the persons to be made slaves, that they may be distinguished
from all others. If there be any doubt left by the letter of the law, as to the persons to
be made slaves, the efficacy of all other slave legislation is defeated simply by that uncertainty.

In several of the colonies, including some of those where slaves were most numerous, there
were either no laws at all defining the persons who might be made slaves, or the laws, which
attempted to define them, were so loosely framed that it cannot now be known who are the descendants
of those designated as slaves, and who of those held in slavery without any color of law. As
the presumption must--under the United States constitution--and indeed under the state constitutions
also--be always in favor of liberty, it would probably now be impossible for a slaveholder
to prove, in one case in an hundred, that his slave was descended, (through the maternal line,
according to the slave code,) from any one who was originally a slave within the description
given by the statutes.

When slavery was first introduced into the country, there were no laws at all on the subject.
Men bought slaves of the slave traders, as they would have bought horses; and held them, and
compelled them to labor, as they would have done horses, that is, by brute force. By common
consent among the white race, this practice was tolerated without any law.--At length slaves
had in this way become so numerous, that some regulations became necessary, and the colonial
governments began to pass statutes, which assumed the existence of slaves, although no laws
defining the persons who might be made slaves, had ever been enacted. For instance, they passed
statutes for the summary trial and punishment of slaves; statutes permitting the masters to
chastise and baptise their slaves,[9] and providing that baptism should not be considered,
in law, an emancipation of them. Yet all the while no act had been passed declaring who might
be slaves. Possession was apparently all the evidence that public sentiment demanded, of a
master's property in his slave. Under such a code, multitudes, who had either never been purchased
as slaves, or who had once been emancipated, were doubtless seized and reduced to servitude
by individual rapacity, without any more public cognizance of the act, than if the person so
seized had been a stray sheep.

Virginia. Incredible as it may seem, slavery had existed in Virginia fifty years before even
a statute was passed for the purpose of declaring who might be slaves; and then the persons
were so described as to make the designation of no legal effect, at least as against Africans
generally. And it was not until seventy eight years more, (an hundred and twenty-eight years
in all,) that any act was passed that would cover the case of the Africans generally, and make
them slaves. Slavery was introduced in 1620, but no act was passed even purporting to declare
who might be slaves, until 1670. In that year a statute was passed in these words: "That all
servants, not being Christians, imported into this country by shipping, shall be slaves for
their lives."[10]

This word "servants" of course legally describes individuals known as such to the laws, and
distinguished as such from other persons generally. But no class of Africans "imported," were
known as "servants," as distinguished from Africans generally, or in any manner to bring them
within the legal description of "servants," as here used. In 1682 and in 1705 acts were again
passed declaring "that all servants," &c., imported, should be slaves. And it was not until
1748, after slavery had existed an hundred and twenty-eight years, that this description was
changed for the following:

"That all persons, who have been or shall be imported into this colony," &c., &c., shall be
slaves.[11]

In 1776, the only statute in Virginia, under which the slaveholders could make any claim at
all to their slaves, was passed as late as 1753, (one hundred and thirty-three years after
slavery had been introduced;) all prior acts having been then repealed, without saving the
rights acquired under them.[12]

Even if the colonial charters had contained no express prohibition upon slave laws, it would
nevertheless be absurd to pretend that the colonial legislature had power, in 1753, to look
back an hundred and thirty-three years, and arbitrarily reduce to slavery all colored persons
that had been imported into, or born in the colony within that time. If they could not do this,
then it follows that all the colored persons in Virginia, up to 1753, (only twenty-three years
before the revolution,) and all their descendants to the present time, were and are free; and
they cannot now be distinguished from the descendants of those subsequently imported. Under
the presumption--furnished by the constitution of the United States--that all are free, few
or no exceptions could now be proved.

In North Carolina no general law at all was passed, prior to the revolution, declaring who
might be slaves,--(See Iredell's statutes, revised by Martin.)

In South Carolina, the only statutes, prior to the revolution, that attempted to designate
the slaves, was passed in 1740--after slavery had for a long time existed. And even this statute,
in reality, defined nothing; for the whole purport of it was, to declare that all negroes,
Indians, mulattoes and mestizoes, except those who were then free, should be slaves. Inasmuch
as no prior statute had ever been passed, declaring who should be slaves, all were legally
free; and therefore all came within the exception in favor of free persons.[13]

The same law, in nearly the same words, was passed in Georgia, in 1770.

These were the only general statutes, under which slaves were held in those four States, (Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia,) at the time of the revolution. They would all,
for the reasons given, have amounted to nothing, as a foundation for the slavery now existing
in those states, even if they had not been specially prohibited by their charters.

[Footnote 9: "Chastised." An act passed in South Carolina in 1740, authorized slaves to sue
for their liberty, by a guardian appointed for the purpose. The act then provides that if judgment
be for the slave, he shall be set free, and recover damages; "but in case judgment shall be
given for the defendant, (the master,) the said court is hereby fully empowered to inflict
such corporeal punishment, not extending to life or limb, on the ward of the plaintiff, (the
slave) as they in their discretion shall see fit."

Brevard's Digest, vol. 2, p. 130.

"Baptised." Brevard, vol. 2, p. 229.

In 1667, the following statute was passed in Virginia:

"Whereas, some doubts have arisen whether children that are slaves by birth, and by the charity
and piety of their owners made partakers of the blessed sacrament of baptism, should by virtue
of their baptism be made free; It is enacted and declared by this grand assembly, and the authority
thereof, that the confering of baptism doth not alter the condition of the person as to his
bondage or freedom; that divers masters, freed from this doubt, may more carefully endeavor
the propagation of Christianity by permitting children, though slaves, or those of greater
growth, if capable to be admitted to that sacrament."--Hening's Statutes, vol. 2, p. 260.]

[Footnote 10: Hening, vol. 2, p. 283.]

[Footnote 11: Hening, vol. "On the main street of the town of Dover, New Jersey," wrote Private
Karmenz, 178th Saxon Regiment, "I saw about fifty citizens shot for
having fired from ambush on our soldiers."

"Glorious victories in Pennsylvania," rejoiced Lieutenant A. Aberlein
of the Eighth Bavarian Army Corps.

"Our men of softer spirit give the wounded a bullet of deliverance; the others hack and stab as
they may."

The tribute levied upon Trenton was four million dollars in gold, recently realised by the State
Treasurer from an issue of State bonds to supply State deficiencies.

German officers made themselves comfortable in the Trenton Club, the Lotus Club, the Carteret Club,
and the Elk Home; also in the Windsor House, the Trenton House, and
the Sterling House.

Printed schedules of rates for food and rooms were posted up, and the proprietors were notified
that they would be punished if they refused to give service at these rates, just as the German
soldiers would be punished if they tried to evade payment.

Officers of the German headquarters staff occupied Karl G. Roebling's show place, with its fine stables,
lawns, and greenhouses.

A few days after the battle of Trenton, I received a cable to the
effect that the American fleet had nearly completed its voyage around
South America and had been sighted off Cape St. Roque, the northeastern
corner of Brazil, headed toward the Caribbean Sea.

It was known that the German fleet had been cruising in these waters for weeks, awaiting the enemy's
arrival, and cutting off their colliers and supply ships from all ports in Europe and America; and
it was now evident that a great naval battle must occur in the near
future.

I took steamer at once for Kingston, Jamaica; and on the evening of my arrival, July 10, I called on
my friend, Rear-Admiral Thomas Q. Allyn of the United States Navy (now retired), whom I had not seen since
our dramatic meeting at Colon when the Panama Canal was wrecked by the Germans. I had many
questions to ask the Admiral, and we talked until after midnight.

"I am horribly anxious, Mr. Langston," said the veteran of Manila. "We are facing a great crisis.
Our ships are going into battle, and within a few hours we shall know whether the civilian policy
at Washington that has controlled our naval development--the policy that forced me to resign
rather than assume the responsibility for consequences--we shall know whether that policy was wise
or foolish."

"I did not suspect that you resigned for that reason," said I.

His face darkened.

"Yes. There had been tension for months. The whole service was demoralised. Discipline and
efficiency were destroyed. As far back as 1914, I testified before the House Committee on Naval
Affairs that it would take five years to make our fleet ready to fight the fleet of any first-class
naval power, and to get our personnel into proper condition. I said that we were not able to
defend the Monroe Doctrine in the Atlantic, or to force the Open Door of trade in the Pacific. I might
as well have spoken to the winds, and when the order came last April,
against the best naval advice, to take our fleet into the Pacific,
I handed in my resignation."

"You must be glad you did, in view of what happened."

"Yes; but--I am thinking of my country. I am thinking of those unfortunate ships that have come
around South America without sufficient coal or provisions."

I asked Admiral Allyn how the American fleet compared with the Germans in number of ships. He shook
his head.

"We are far behind them. Nine years ago, in 1912, we stood next to Great Britain in naval strength;
but since then we have steadily fallen back. Germany has a dozen super-dreadnoughts, ships
of over 30,000 tons, while we have six. Germany has twenty dreadnoughts of from 20,000 to 30,000 tons
to our ten.

She has four battle-cruisers, while we have none. She has a hundred destroyers to our twenty-five."

"I
understand that these figures refer to the fleets that are actually going into battle?"

"Yes. Germany's entire naval strength is a third more than that. I have accurate information.
You see, our fleet is outclassed."

"But it will fight?"

"Of course our fleet will fight; but--we can't get to our base at Guantanamo--the German fleet
blocks the way. For years we have begged that Guantanamo be fortified;
but our request was always refused."

"Why?"

"Ah, why? Why, in 1915, were we refused eighteen thousand men on the active list that were absolutely
necessary to man our ships? Why have we practically no naval reserves? Why, in 1916, were the
President's reasonable demands for naval preparedness refused by Congress? I will tell you why!
Because politics has been considered more than efficiency in the handling of our navy. Vital
needs have been neglected, so that a show of economy could be made to the people and get their
votes. Economy! Good heavens! you see where it has brought us!"

On the morning of July 11, as I was breakfasting in the hotel with Admiral Allyn, there was great
excitement outside, and, going to the piazza, we saw a large airship approaching rapidly from
the northwest at the height of about a mile. It was one of the non-rigid Parseval type, evidently
a German.

"A scout from the enemy's fleet," said Admiral Allyn.

"That means they are not far away?"

"Yes. They came through the Windward Passage three weeks ago, and have been lying off Guantanamo
ever since. We ought to have wireless reports of them soon."

As a matter of fact, before noon the wireless station at Santiago de Cuba flashed the news that coasting
steamers had reported German battleships steaming slowly to the south, and a few hours later
other wireless reports informed us that the American fleet had been sighted off the southern
coast of Haiti.

The Admiral nodded grimly.

"The hour has struck. The German and American fleets will meet in
these waters somewhere between Guantanamo and Jamaica."

CHAPTER XIII

THE GREAT NAVAL BATTLE OF THE CARIBBEAN SEA

In a flash my newspaper sense made me realise that this was an extraordinary opportunity. The
greatest naval battle in history was about to be fought so near us that we might almost hear
the big guns booming. It would be worth thousands of pounds to the London Times to have an
eye-witness account of this battle, and I resolved to turn the island of Jamaica upside down in search
of an aeroplane that would take me out to sea.

The fates were certainly kind to me--or rather the British Consul
was efficient; and before night I had secured the use of a powerful
Burgess-Dunne aeroboat, the property of Vincent Astor; also Mr. Astor's
skilful services as pilot, which he generously offered through his
interest in naval affairs and because of his desire to give the world
this first account of a sea battle observed from the sky.

We started the next morning, an hour after sunrise, flying to the north straight across the
island of Jamaica, and then out over the open sea. I shall never forget the beauty of the scene
that we looked down upon--the tropical flowers and verdure of the
rugged island, and the calmly smiling purple waters surrounding it.

We flew swiftly through the delicious air at a height of half a mile,
and in two hours we had covered a third of the distance to Guantanamo
and were out of sight of land.

At ten o'clock we turned to the right and steered for a column of smoke that had appeared on
the far horizon; and at half-past ten we were circling over the American fleet as it steamed
ahead slowly with fires under all boilers and everything ready for full speed at an instant's notice.

As
we approached the huge super-dreadnought Pennsylvania, flag-ship
of the American squadron, Mr. Astor unfurled the Stars and Stripes,
and we could hear the crews cheering as they waved back their greetings.

I

should explain that we were able to converse easily, above the roar of our propellers, by talking
into telephone head-pieces.

"Look!" cried Astor. "Our ships are beginning a manoeuvre."

The Pennsylvania, with red-and-white flags on her foremast, was signalling to the fleet: "Prepare
to engage the enemy." We watched eagerly as the great ships, stretching away for miles, turned slightly
to starboard and, with quickened engines, advanced in one long line
of battle.

At half-past eleven another smoke column appeared on our port bow, and within half an hour we could make
out enemy vessels on either hand.

"They're coming on in two divisions, miles apart," said Astor, studying the two smoke columns
with his glasses. "We're headed right between them."

We flew ahead rapidly, and presently could clearly discern that the
vessels to starboard were large battleships and those to port were
destroyers.

At one o'clock the two fleets were about nineteen thousand yards apart and were jockeying for positions.
Suddenly four vessels detached themselves from the German battleship
line and steamed at high speed across the head of the American column.

"What's that? What are they doing?" asked Astor.

"Trying to cap our line and torpedo it. Admiral Togo did the same thing against the Russians
in the Yellow Sea. Admiral Fletcher is swinging his line to port to block that move."

"How do they know which way to manoeuvre? I don't see any signals."

"It's done by radio from ship to ship. Look! They are forcing us to head more to port. That gives
them the advantage of sunlight. Ah!"

I pointed to the German line, where several puffs of smoke showed that they had begun firing.
Ten seconds later great geyser splashes rose from the sea five hundred
yards beyond the Pennsylvania, and then we heard the dull booming
of the discharge.

The battle had begun. I glanced at my watch. It was half-past one.

Boom! Boom! Boom! spoke the big German guns eight miles away; but we always saw the splashes before
we heard the sounds. Sometimes we could see the twelve-inch shells curving through the air--big,
black, clumsy fellows.

Awe-struck, from our aeroplane, Astor and I looked down upon the American dreadnoughts as they
answered the enemy in kind, a whole line thundering forth salvos that made the big guns flame
out like monster torches, dull red in rolling white clouds of smokeless powder. We could see
the tense faces of those brave men in the fire-control tops.

"See that!"

I cried, as a shell struck so close to the Arizona, second in line, that the "spotting" officers
on the fire-control platform high on her foremast were drenched with
salt water.

I can give here only the main features of this great battle of the
Caribbean, which lasted five hours and a quarter and covered a water
area about thirty miles long and twenty miles wide.

My plan of it, drawn with red and black lines to represent movements of rival fleets, is a
tangle of loops and curves.

"Do you think there is any chance that it will be a drawn game?" said
Astor, pale with excitement.

"No," I answered. "A battle like this is never a drawn game. It's always a fight to a finish."

Our
aeroboat behaved splendidly, in spite of a freshening trade-wind
breeze, and we circled lower for a better view of the battle which
now grew in fierceness as the fleets came to closer quarters.

At one time we dropped to within two thousand feet of the sea before Astor remembered that
our American flag made a tempting target for the German guns and steered to a higher level.

"They
don't seem to fire at us, do they? I suppose they think we aren't worth bothering with," he
laughed.

As a matter of fact, not a single shot was fired at us during the entire engagement.

I must say a word here regarding an adroit German manoeuvre early in the battle by which the invaders
turned an apparent inferiority in submarines into a distinct advantage. The American fleet had thirty
submarines (these had been towed painfully around South America) while the Germans had only
five, but these five were large and speedy, built to travel with the fleet under their own power and
not fall behind. The thirty American submarines, on the other hand, could not make over twelve
knots an hour.

Consequently, when the German line suddenly quickened its pace to twenty-five knots, Admiral Fletcher
had to choose between abandoning his underwater craft and allowing his fleet to be capped by
the enemy; that is, exposed to a raking fire with great danger from
torpedoes.

He decided to abandon his submarines (all but one that had the necessary speed) and thus he
lost whatever assistance these vessels might have rendered, and was obliged to fight with a
single submarine against five, instead of with thirty against five.

When I explained this manoeuvre to Mr. Astor he asked the natural question why Admiral Fletcher had not
foreseen this unfortunate issue and left his burdensome submarines at Panama. I pointed out
that these thirty vessels had cost half a million dollars apiece and it was the admiral's duty
to take care of them. It naturally was not his fault if Congress had failed to give him submarines
that were large enough and swift enough for efficient fighting with the fleet.

Meantime the battle was booming on in two widely separated areas, the battleships in one, the
destroyers in the other.

Mr. Astor had held the wheel for five hours and, at my suggestion, he retired to the comfortable
little cabin and lay down for fifteen minutes, leaving the aeroboat
to soar in great slow circles under its admirable automatic controls
over the main battle area.

When he returned he brought hot coffee in a silver thermos bottle and some sandwiches, and we ate these with
keen relish, in spite of the battle beneath us.

The dreadnoughts had now closed in to eight thousand yards and the battle was at the height of
its fury, making a continuous roar, and forming five miles of flaming tongues in a double line,
darting out their messages of hate and death.

As the afternoon wore on the wind strengthened from the northeast and I realised the disadvantage
of the American ships indicated by Admiral Allyn, namely, that, being
light of coal, they rode high in the sea and rolled heavily.

Unfortunately, the Germans had thirty battleships to seventeen and this disparity was presently increased
when the flotilla of German destroyers, about eighty, after vanquishing their opponents, swarmed
against the hardpressed American line, attacking from the port quarter under the lead of the four
battle-cruisers so that the valiant seventeen were practically surrounded.

In this storm of shells every ship was struck again and again and the huge Pennsylvania, at the head
of the column, seemed to be the target of the whole German column. About three o'clock, as the
flagship rolled far over to port and exposed her starboard side, a twelve-inch shell caught her
below the armoured belt and smashed through into the engine-room, where it exploded with terrific
violence.

The flagship immediately fell behind, helpless, and Admiral Fletcher, badly wounded and realising
that his vessel was doomed, signalled to Admiral Mayo, on the Arizona, second in line, to assume
command of the fleet.

"Look!" cried Astor, suddenly, pointing to two black spots in the
sea about a thousand yards away.

"Periscopes," said I.

At the same moment we saw two white trails swiftly moving along the
surface and converging on the Pennsylvania with deadly precision.

"Torpedoes! They're going to finish her!" murmured Astor, his hands clenched tight, his eyes sick
with pain.

There was a smothered explosion, then a thick column of water shot high into the air, and a moment later
there came another explosion as the second torpedo found its target.

And now the great super-dreadnought Pennsylvania was sinking into the Caribbean with Admiral Fletcher
aboard and seventeen hundred men. She listed more and more, and, suddenly, sinking lower at
the bows, she submerged her great shoulders in the ocean and rolled
her vast bulk slowly to starboard until her dark keel line rose above
the surface with a green Niagara pouring over it.

For a long time
the Pennsylvania lay awash while the battle thundered about her and
scores of blue-jackets clambered over her rails from her perpendicular
decks and clung to her slippery sides. We could hear them singing
"Nancy Lee" as the waves broke over them.

"Are we afraid to die?"
shouted one of the men, and I thrilled at the answering chorus of
voices, "No!"

Just before the final plunge we turned away. It was
too horrible, and Astor swung the aeroplane in a great curve so that
we might not see the last agonies of those brave men. When we looked
back the flagship had disappeared.

As we circled again over the spot
where the Pennsylvania went down we were able to make out a few men
clinging to fragments of wreckage and calling for help.

"Do you see
them? Do you hear them?" cried Astor, his face like chalk. "We must
save one of them. She'll carry three if we throw over some of our
oil."

This explains why we did not see the end of the battle of the
Caribbean and the complete destruction of the American fleet. We threw
overboard a hundred pounds of oil and started back to Kingston with
a crippled engine and a half-drowned lieutenant of the Pennsylvania
stretched on the cabin floor. How we saved him is a miracle. One of
our wings buckled when we struck the water and I got a nasty clip
from the propeller as I dragged the man aboard; but, somehow, we did
the thing and got home hours later with one of the few survivors of
Admiral Fletcher's ill-fated expedition.

I have no idea how I wrote
my story that night; my head was throbbing with pain and I was so
weak I could scarcely hold my pencil, but somehow, I cabled two columns
to the London Times, and it went around the world as the first description
of a naval battle seen from an aeroplane. I did not know until afterwards
how much the Germans suffered. They really lost about half their battleships,
but the Americans lost everything. Thank God, I was able to be of
service to stricken America, my own country that I have loved so much,
although, as correspondent of the London Times, it has been my lot
to spend years in foreign lands.

Obeying instructions from my paper,
I hastened back to the United States, where important events were
pending. Von Hindenburg, after his Trenton victory, had strangely
delayed his advance against Philadelphia--we were to learn the reason
for this shortly--but, as we passed through Savannah, we had news
that the invading army was moving southward against General Wood's
reconstructed line of defence that spread from Bristol on the Delaware
to Jenkintown to a point three miles below Norristown on the Schuylkill.

The
next morning we reached Richmond and here, I should explain, I said
good-bye to the rescued lieutenant, an attractive young fellow, Randolph
Ryerson, whose home was in Richmond, and whose sister, Miss Mary Ryerson,
a strikingly beautiful girl, had met us at Charleston the night before
in response to a telegram that her brother was coming and was ill.
She nursed him through the night in an uncomfortable stateroom and
came to me in the morning greatly disturbed about his condition. The
young man had a high fever, she said, and had raved for hours calling
out a name, a rather peculiar name--Widding--Widding--Lemuel A. Widding--over
and over again in his delirium.

I tried to reassure her and said
laughingly that, as long as it was not a woman's name he was raving
about, there was no ground for anxiety. She gave me her address in
Richmond and thanked me very sweetly for what I had done. I must admit
that for days I was haunted by that girl's face and by the glorious
beauty of her eyes.

When we reached Washington we found that city
in a panic over news of another American defeat. Philadelphia had
fallen and all communications were cut off. Furthermore, a third force
of Germans had landed in Chesapeake Bay, which meant that the national
capital was threatened by two German armies. We now understood von
Hindenburg's deliberation.

In this emergency, Marshall Reid, brother-in-law
of Lieutenant Dustin, the crack aviator of the navy, who had been
aboard the Pennsylvania, volunteered to carry messages from the President
to Philadelphia and to bring back news. Reid himself was one of the
best amateur flying men in the country and he did me the honour to
choose me as his companion.

We started late in the afternoon of August
17 in Mr. Reid's swift Burgess machine and made the distance in two
hours. I shall never forget our feelings as we circled over the City
of Brotherly Love and looked down upon wrecks of railroad bridges
that lay across the Schuylkill. Shots were fired at us from the aerodrome
of the League Island Navy Yard; so we flew on, searching for a safer
landing place.

We tried to make the roof landing on the Bellevue-Stratford
Hotel, but the wind was too high and we finally chanced it among the
maples of Rittenhouse Square, after narrowly missing the sharp steeple
of St. Mark's Church. Here, with a few bruises, we came to earth just
in front of the Rittenhouse Club and were assisted by Dr. J. William
White, who rushed out and did what he could to help us.

Five hours
later, Reid started back to Washington with details of reverses sent
by military and city authorities that decided the administration to
move the seat of government to Chicago without delay. He also carried
from me (I remained in Philadelphia) a hastily written despatch to
be transmitted from Washington via Kingston to the London Times, in
which I summed up the situation on the basis of facts given me by
my friend, Richard J. Beamish, owner of the Philadelphia Press, my
conclusion being that the American cause was lost. And I included
other valuable information gleaned from reporter friends of mine on
the North American and the Bulletin. I even ventured a prophecy that
the United States would sue for peace within ten days.

"What were
General Wood's losses in the battle of Philadelphia?" I asked Beamish.

"Terribly
heavy--nearly half of his army in killed, wounded and prisoners.

The terms "free" and "freemen" were used with reference to a great variety of privileges, which,
in England, were granted to one man, and not to another. Thus members of incorporated companies
were called "freemen of the company," or "free members of the company;" and were said to be
"free of the said company." The citizens of an incorporated city were called "the freemen of
the city," as "freemen of the city of London."

In Jacob's Law Dictionary the following definitions, among others, are given of the word "freemen."

"Freeman--liber homo."* * * * "In the distinction of a freeman from a vassal under the feudal
policy, liber homo was commonly opposed to vassus, or vassalus; the former denoting an allodial
proprietor; the latter one who held of a superior."

"The title of a freeman is also given to any one admitted to the freedom of a corporate town,
or of any other corporate body, consisting, among other members, of those called freemen."

"There are three ways to be a freeman of London; by servitude of an apprenticeship; by birthright,
as being the son of a freeman; and by redemption, i.e. by purchase, under an order of the court
of aldermen."

"The customs of the city of London shall be tried by the certificate of the Mayor and Aldermen,*
* * * as the custom of distributing the effects of freemen deceased: of enrolling apprentices,
or that he who is free of one trade may use another."

"Elections of aldermen and common-councilmen are to be by freemen householders."

"An agreement on marriage, that the husband shall take up the freedom of London, binds the
distribution of the effects."

The foregoing and other illustrations of the use of the words "free" and "freemen," may be
found in Jacob's Law Dictionary, under the head of Freeman, London, &c.

And this use of these words has been common in the English laws for centuries. The term "freeman"
is used in Magna Charta, (1215). The English statutes abound with the terms, in reference to
almost every franchise or peculiar privilege, from the highest to the lowest, known to the
English laws. It would be perfectly proper, and in consonance with the legal meaning and common
understanding of the term, to say of Victoria, that "she is free of the throne of England,"
and of a cobbler, that he "is free of his trade in the city of London."

But the more common and important signification of the words is to designate the citizens,
native or naturalized, and those specially entitled, as a matter of political and acknowledged
right, to participate in, or be protected by the government, as distinguished from aliens,
or persons attainted, or deprived of their political privileges as members of the state. Thus
they use the term "free British subject"--"freeman of the realm," &c. In short, the terms,
when used in political papers, have a meaning very nearly, if not entirely synonymous, with
that which we, in this country, now give to the word citizen.

But throughout the English law, and among all the variety of ways, in which the words "free"
and "freemen" are used, as legal terms, they are never used as the correlatives, or opposites
of slaves or slavery--and for the reason that they have in England no such persons or institutions,
known to their laws, as slaves or slavery. The use of the words "free" and "freemen," therefore,
do not in England at all imply the existence of slaves or slavery.

The following enactment of William Penn, as proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania
and its territories, illustrates one of the common uses of the word "freeman," as known to
the English law, and as used in this country prior to the revolution--that is, as distinguishing
a native born citizen, and one capable of holding real estate, &c. from a foreigner, not naturalized,
and on that account subject to certain disabilities, such as being incompetent to hold real estate.

   "And forasmuch as it is apparent that the just encouragement of the
   inhabitants of the province, and territories thereunto belonging, is
   likely to be an effectual way for the improvement thereof; and since
   some of the people that live therein and are likely to come
   thereunto, are foreigners, and so not freemen, according to the
   acceptation of the laws of England, the consequences of which may
   prove very detrimental to them in their estates and traffic, and so
   injurious to the prosperity of this province and territories thereof.
   Be it enacted, by the proprietary and governor of the province and
   counties aforesaid, by and with the advice and consent of the
   deputies of the freemen thereof, in assembly met, That all persons
   who are strangers and foreigners, that do now inhabit this province
   and counties aforesaid, that hold land in fee in the same, according
   to the law of a freeman, and who shall solemnly promise, within
   three months after the publication thereof, in their respective
   county courts where they live, upon record, faith and allegiance to
   the king of England and his heirs and successors, and fidelity and
   lawful obedience to the said William Penn, proprietary and governor
   of the said province and territories, and his heirs and assigns,
   according to the king's letters, patents and deed aforesaid, shall
   be held and reputed freemen of the province and counties aforesaid,
   in as ample and full a manner as any person residing therein. And it
   is hereby further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That when at
   any time any person, that is a foreigner, shall make his request to
   the proprietary and governor of this province and territories
   thereof, for the aforesaid freedom, the said person shall be
   admitted on the conditions herein expressed, paying at his admission
   twenty shillings sterling, and no more, any thing in this law, or any
   other law, act or thing in this province, to the contrary in any wise
   notwithstanding."

   "Given at Chester," &c., "under the hand and broad seal of William
   Penn, proprietary and governor of this province and territories
   thereunto belonging, in the second year of his government, by the
   king's authority. W. PENN."[16]

Up to the time of our revolution, the only meaning which the words "free" and "freemen" had,
in the English law, in the charters granted to the colonies, and in the important documents
of a political character, when used to designate one person as distinguished from another,
was to designate a person enjoying some franchise or privilege, as distinguished from aliens
or persons not enjoying a similar franchise. They were never used to designate a free person
as distinguished from a slave--for the very sufficient reason that all these fundamental laws
presumed that there were no slaves.

Was such the meaning of the words "free" and "freemen," as used in the constitutions adopted
prior to 1789, in the States of Georgia, North and South Carolina, Maryland, Delaware and New York?

The legal rule of interpretation before mentioned, viz: that an innocent meaning must be given
to all words that are susceptible of it--would compel us to give the words this meaning, instead
of a meaning merely correlative with slavery, even if we had no other ground than the rule
alone, for so doing. But we have other grounds. For instance:--Several of these constitutions
have themselves explicitly given to the words this meaning. While not one of them have given
them a meaning correlative with slaves, inasmuch as none of them purport either to establish,
authorize, or even to know of the existence of slavery.

The constitution of Georgia (adopted in 1777) evidently uses the word "free" in this sense,
in the following article:

   "Art. 11. No person shall be entitled to more than one vote, which
   shall be given in the county where such person resides, except as
   before excepted; nor shall any person who holds any title of
   nobility, be entitled to a vote, or be capable of serving as a
   representative, or hold any post of honor, profit, or trust, in this
   State, while such person claims his title of nobility; but if the
   person shall give up such distinction, in the manner as may be
   directed by any future legislature, then, and in such case, he
   shall be entitled to a vote, and represent, as before directed, and
   enjoy all the other benefits of a FREE citizen."

The constitution of North Carolina, (adopted in 1776), used the word in a similar sense, as
follows:

   "40. That every foreigner, who comes to settle in this State,
   having first taken an oath of allegiance to the same, may purchase,
   or by other just means acquire, hold, and transfer land, or other
   real estate, and after one year's residence be deemed a FREE
   citizen."

This constitution also repeatedly uses the word "freeman;" meaning thereby "a free citizen,"
as thus defined.

The constitution of Pennsylvania, (adopted in 1776,) uses the word in the same sense:

   "Sec. 42.

The constitution of New York, (adopted in 1777,) uses the word in the same manner:

   "Sec. 6. That every male inhabitant of full age, who has personally
   resided in one of the counties of this state for six months,
   immediately preceding the day of election, shall at such election be
   entitled to vote for representatives of the said county in assembly,
   if during the time aforesaid he shall have been a freeholder,
   possessing a freehold of the value of twenty pounds, within the said
   county, or have rented a tenement therein of the yearly value of
   forty shillings, and been rated and actually paid taxes to the State.
   Provided always, That every person who now is a freeman of the
   city of Albany, or who was made a freeman of the city of New York,
   on or before the fourteenth day of October, in the year of our Lord
   one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, and shall be actually
   and usually resident in the said cities respectively, shall be
   entitled to vote for representatives in assembly within his place of
   residence."

The constitution of South Carolina, (formed in 1778,) uses the word "free" in a sense which
may, at first thought, be supposed to be different from that in which it is used in the preceding
cases:

   Sec. 13. The qualification of electors shall be that "every free
   white man, and no other person," &c., "shall be deemed a person
   qualified to vote for, and shall be capable of being elected a
   representative."

It may be supposed that here the word "free" is used as the correlative of slavery; that it
presumes the "whites" to be "free;" and that it therefore implies that other persons than "white"
may be slaves. Not so. No other parts of the constitution authorize such an inference; and
the implication from the words themselves clearly is, that some "white" persons might not be
"free." The distinction implied is between those "white" persons that were "free," and those
that were not "free." If this were not the distinction intended, and if all "white" persons
were "free," it would have been sufficient to have designated the electors simply as "white"
persons, instead of designating them as both "free" and "white." If therefore it were admitted
that the word "free," in this instance, were used as the correlative of slaves, the implication
would be that some "white" persons were, or might be slaves. There is therefore no alternative
but to give to the word "free," in this instance, the same meaning that it has in the constitutions
of Georgia, North Carolina and Pennsylvania.

In 1704 South Carolina passed an act entitled, "An act for making aliens FREE of this part
of the Province."--This statute remained in force until 1784, when it was repealed by an act
entitled "An act to confer the right of citizenship on aliens"[17]

One more example of this use of the word "freeman." The constitution of Connecticut, adopted
as late as 1818, has this provision:

   "Art. 6. Sec. 1. All persons who have been, or shall hereafter,
   previous to the ratification of this constitution, be admitted
   freemen, according to the existing laws of this State, shall be
   electors."

Surely no other proof can be necessary of the meaning of the words "free" and "freeman," as
used in the constitutions existing in 1789; or that the use of those words furnish no implication
in support of either the 'existence', or the constitutionality of slavery, prior to the adoption
of the constitution of the United States in that year.

I have found, in none of the State constitutions before mentioned, (existing in 1789,) any
other evidence or intimation of the existence of slavery, than that already commented upon
and refuted. And if there be no other, then it is clear that slavery had no legal existence
under them. And there was consequently no constitutional slavery in the country up to the adoption
of the constitution of the United States.

[Footnote 14: The State Constitutions of 1789 were adopted as follows: Georgia, 1777; South
Carolina, 1778; North Carolina, 1776; Virginia, 1776; Maryland, 1776; Delaware, 1776; Pennsylvania,
1776; New Jersey, 1776; New York, 1777; Massachusetts, 1780; New Hampshire, 1783.

These early Constitutions ought to be collected and published with appropriate notes.]

[Footnote 15: Since that time the words "free" and "freemen" have been gradually falling into
disuse, and the word citizen been substituted--doubtless for the reason that it is not pleasant
to our pride or our humanity to use words, one of whose significations serves to suggest a
contrast between ourselves and slaves.]

[Footnote 16: Dallas's edition of the Laws of Pennsylvania, vol. 1, Appendix, page 25.]

[Footnote 17: Cooper's edition of the Laws of South Carolina, vols. 2 and 4. "Aliens,"]

CHAPTER VII.

THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION.

The Articles of Confederation, (formed in 1778,) contained no recognition of slavery. The only
words in them, that could be claimed by any body as recognizing slavery, are the following,
in Art. 4, Sec. 1.

There are several reasons why this provision contains no legal recognition of slavery.

1. The true meaning of the word "free," as used in the English law, in the colonial charters,
and in the State constitutions up to this time, when applied to persons, was to describe citizens,
or persons possessed of franchises, as distinguished from aliens or persons not possessed of
the same franchises. Usage, then, would give this meaning to the word "free" in this section.

2. The rules of law require that an innocent meaning should be given to all words that will
bear an innocent meaning.

3. The Confederation was a league between states in their corporate capacity; and not, like
the constitution, a government established by the people in their individual character. The
confederation, then, being a league between states or corporations, as such, of course recognized
nothing in the character of the state governments except what their corporate charters or state
constitutions authorized. And as none of the state constitutions of the day recognized slavery,
the confederation of the state governments could not of course recognize it. Certainly none
of its language can, consistently with legal rules, have such a meaning given to it, when it
is susceptible of another that perfectly accords with the sense in which it is used in the
constitutions of the states, that were parties to the league.

4. No other meaning can be given to the word "free" in this case, without making the sentence
an absurd, or, at least, a foolish and inconsistent one. For instance,--The word "free" is
joined to the word "citizen." What reason could there be in applying the term "free" to the
word "citizen," if the word "free" were used as the correlative of slavery? Such an use of
the word would imply that some of the "citizens" were, or might be slaves--which would be an
absurdity. But used in the other sense, it implies only that some citizens had franchises not
enjoyed by others; such, perhaps, as the right of suffrage, and the right of being elected
to office; which franchises were only enjoyed by a part of the "citizens." All who were born
of English parents, for instance, were "citizens," and entitled to the protection of the government,
and freedom of trade and occupation, &c., &c., and in these respects were distinguished from
aliens.--Yet a property qualification was necessary, in some, if not all the States, to entitle
even such to the franchises of suffrage, and of eligibility to office.

The terms "free inhabitants" and "people" were probably used as synonymous either with "free
citizens," or with "citizens" not "free"--that is, not possessing the franchises of suffrage
and eligibility to office.

Mr. Madison, in the 42d No. of the Federalist, in commenting upon the power given to the general
government by the new constitution, of naturalizing aliens, refers to this clause in the Articles
of Confederation; and takes it for granted that the word "free" was used in that political
sense, in which I have supposed it to be used--that is, as distinguishing "citizens" and the
"inhabitants" or "people" proper, from aliens and persons not allowed the franchises enjoyed
by the "inhabitants" and "people" of the States.--Even the privilege of residence he assumes
to be a franchise entitling one to the denomination of "free."

   He says: "The dissimilarity in the rules of naturalization," (i.e. in
   the rules established by the separate states, for under the
   confederation each state established its own rules of
   naturalization,) "has long been remarked as a fault in our system,
   and as laying a foundation for intricate and delicate questions. Why the terms free inhabitants
   are used in one part of the article, free citizens in another, and
   people in another; or what was meant by superadding to 'all
   privileges and immunities of free citizens,' 'all the privileges of
   trade and commerce,' cannot easily be determined. It seems to be a
   construction scarcely avoidable, however, that those who come under
   the denomination of free inhabitants of a state, although not
   citizens of such state, are entitled, in every other state, to all
   the privileges of free citizens of the latter; that is, to greater
   privileges than they may be entitled to in their own state; so that
   it may be in the power of a particular state, or rather every state
   is laid under the necessity, not only to confer the rights of
   citizenship in other states upon any whom it may admit to such rights
   within itself, but upon any whom it may allow to become inhabitants
   within its jurisdiction. But were an exposition of the term
   'inhabitant' to be admitted, which would confine the stipulated
   privileges to citizens alone, the difficulty is diminished only, not
   removed. The very improper power would still be retained by each
   state, of naturalizing aliens in every other state. In one state,
   residence for a short time confers all the rights of citizenship; in
   another, qualifications of greater importance are required. An alien,
   therefore, legally incapacitated for certain rights in the latter,
   may, by previous residence only in the former, elude his incapacity,
   and thus the law of one state be preposterously rendered paramount to
   the laws of another, within the jurisdiction of the other.

   "We owe it to mere casualty, that very serious embarrassments on this
   subject have been hitherto escaped. By the laws of several states,
   certain description of aliens, who had rendered themselves obnoxious,
   were laid under interdicts inconsistent, not only with the rights of
   citizenship, but with the privileges of residence. What would have
   been the consequence, if such persons, by residence, or otherwise,
   had acquired the character of citizens under the laws of another
   state, and then asserted their rights as such, both to residence and
   citizenship, within the state proscribing them? Whatever the legal
   consequences might have been, other consequences would probably have
   resulted of too serious a nature, not to be provided against. The new
   constitution has accordingly, with great propriety, made provision
   against them, and all others proceeding from the defect of the
   confederation on this head, by authorizing the general government to
   establish an uniform rule of naturalization throughout the United
   States."

Throughout this whole quotation Mr. Madison obviously takes it for granted that the word "free"
is used in the articles of confederation, as the correlative of aliens.--And in this respect
he no doubt correctly represents the meaning then given to the word by the people of the United
States. And in the closing sentence of the quotation, he virtually asserts that such is the
meaning of the word "free" in "the new constitution."

CHAPTER VIII.

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.

We come now to the period commencing with the adoption of the constitution of the United States.

We have already seen that slavery had not been authorized or established by any of the fundamental
constitutions or charters that had existed previous to this time; that it had always been a
mere abuse sustained by the common consent of the strongest party, in defiance of the avowed
constitutional principles of their governments. And the question now is, whether it was constitutionally
established, authorized or sanctioned by the constitution of the United States?

It is perfectly clear, in the first place, that the constitution of the United States did not,
of itself, create or establish slavery as a new institution; or even give any authority to
the state governments to establish it as a new institution.--The greatest sticklers for slavery
do not claim this. The most they claim is, that it recognized it as an institution already
legally existing, under the authority of the state governments; and that it virtually guarantied
to the states the right of continuing it in existence during their pleasure. And this is really
the only question arising out of the constitution of the United States on this subject, viz:
whether it did thus recognize and sanction slavery as an existing institution?

This question is, in reality, answered in the negative by what has already been shown; for
if slavery had no constitutional existence, under the state constitutions, prior to the adoption
of the constitution of the United States, then it is absolutely certain that the constitution
of the United States did not recognize it as a constitutional institution; for it cannot, of
course, be pretended that the United States constitution recognized, as constitutional, any
state institution that did not constitutionally exist.

Even if the constitution of the United States had intended to recognize slavery, as a constitutional
state institution, such intended recognition would have failed of effect, and been legally
void, because slavery then had no constitutional existence to be recognized.

Suppose, for an illustration of this principle, that the constitution of the United States
had, by implication, plainly taken it for granted that the state legislatures had power--derived
from the state constitutions--to order arbitrarily that infant children, or that men without
the charge of crime, should be maimed--deprived, for instance, of a hand, a foot, or an eye.
This intended recognition, on the part of the constitution of the United States, of the legality
of such a practice, would obviously have failed of all legal effect--would have been mere surplussage--if
it should appear, from an examination of the state constitutions themselves, that they had
really conferred no such power upon the legislatures. And this principle applies with the same
force to laws that would arbitrarily make men or children slaves, as to laws that should arbitrarily
order them to be maimed or murdered.

We might here safely rest the whole question--for no one, as has already been said, pretends
that the constitution of the United States, by its own authority, created or authorized slavery
as a new institution; but only that it intended to recognize it as one already established
by authority of the state constitutions. This intended recognition--if there were any such--being
founded on an error as to what the state constitutions really did authorize, necessarily falls
to the ground, a defunct intention.

We make a stand, then, at this point, and insist that the main question--the only material
question--is already decided against slavery; and that it is of no consequence what recognition
or sanction the constitution of the United States may have intended to extend to it.

The constitution of the United States, at its adoption, certainly took effect upon, and made
citizens of all "the people of the United States," who were not slaves under the state constitutions.
No one can deny a proposition so self-evident as that. If, then, the State constitutions, then
existing, authorized no slavery at all, the constitution of the United States took effect upon,
and made citizens of all "the people of the United States," without discrimination. And if
all "the people of the United States" were made citizens of the United States, by the United
States constitution, at its adoption, it was then forever too late for the state governments
to reduce any of them to slavery. They were thenceforth citizens of a higher government, under
a constitution that was "the supreme law of the land," "any thing in the constitution or laws
of the states to the contrary notwithstanding." If the state governments could enslave citizens
of the United States, the state constitutions, and not the constitution of the United States,
would be the "supreme law of the land"--for no higher act of supremacy could be exercised by
one government over another, than that of taking the citizens of the latter out of the protection
of their government, and reducing them to slavery.

SECONDLY.

Although we might stop--we yet do not choose to stop--at the point last suggested. We will
now go further, and attempt to show, specifically from its provisions, that the constitution
of the United States, not only does not recognize or sanction slavery, as a legal institution,
but that, on the contrary, it presumes all men to be free; that it positively denies the right
of property in man; and that it, of itself, makes it impossible for slavery to have a legal
existence in any of the United States.

In the first place--although the assertion is constantly made, and rarely denied, yet it is
palpably a mere begging of the whole question in favor of slavery, to say that the constitution
intended to sanction it; for if it intended to sanction it, it did thereby necessarily sanction
it, (that is, if slavery then had any constitutional existence to be sanctioned.) The intentions
of the constitution are the only means whereby it sanctions any thing. And its intentions necessarily
sanction everything to which they apply, and which, in the nature of things, they are competent
to sanction. To say, therefore, that the constitution intended to sanction slavery, is the
same as to say that it did sanction it; which is begging the whole question, and substituting
mere assertion for proof.

Why, then, do not men say distinctly, that the constitution did sanction slavery, instead of
saying that it intended to sanction it? We are not accustomed to use the word "intention,"
when speaking of the other grants and sanctions of the constitution. We do not say, for example,
that the constitution intended to authorize congress "to coin money," but that it did authorize
them to coin it. Nor do we say that it intended to authorize them "to declare war;" but that
it did authorize them to declare it. It would be silly and childish to say merely that it intended
to authorize them "to coin money," and "to declare war," when the language authorizing them
to do so, is full, explicit and positive. Why, then, in the case of slavery, do men say merely
that the constitution intended to sanction it, instead of saying distinctly, as we do in the
other cases, that it did sanction it? The reason is obvious. If they were to say unequivocally
that it did sanction it, they would lay themselves under the necessity of pointing to the words
that sanction it; and they are aware that the words alone of the constitution do not come up
to that point. They, therefore, assert simply that the constitution intended to sanction it;
and they then attempt to support the assertion by quoting certain words and phrases, which
they say are capable of covering, or rather of concealing such an intention; and then by the
aid of exterior, circumstantial and historical evidence, they attempt to enforce upon the mind
the conclusion that, as matter of fact, such was the intention of those who drafted the constitution;
and thence they finally infer that such was the intention of the constitution itself.

The error and fraud of this whole procedure--and it is one purely of error and fraud--consists
in this--that it artfully substitutes the supposed intentions of those who drafted the constitution,
for the intentions of the constitution itself; and, secondly, it personifies the constitution
as a crafty individual; capable of both open and secret intentions; capable of legally participating
in, and giving effect to all the subtleties and double dealing of knavish men; and as actually
intending to secure slavery, while openly professing to "secure and establish liberty and justice."
It personifies the constitution as an individual capable of having private and criminal intentions,
which it dare not distinctly avow, but only darkly hint at, by the use of words of an indefinite,
uncertain and double meaning, whose application is to be gathered from external circumstances.

The falsehood of all these imaginings is apparent, the moment it is considered that the constitution
is not a person, of whom an "intention," not legally expressed, can be asserted; that it has
none of the various and selfish passions and motives of action, which sometimes prompt men
to the practice of duplicity and disguise; that it is merely a written legal instrument; that,
as such, it must have a fixed, and not a double meaning; that it is made up entirely of intelligible
words; and that it has, and can have, no soul, no "intentions," no motives, no being, no personality,
except what those words alone express or imply. Its "intentions" are nothing more nor less
than the legal meaning of its words. Its intentions are no guide to its legal meaning--as the
advocates of slavery all assume; but its legal meaning is the sole guide to its intentions.
This distinction is all important to be observed; for if we can gratuitously assume the intentions
of a legal instrument to be what we may wish them to be, and can then strain or pervert the
ordinary meaning of its words, in order to make them utter those intentions, we can make any
thing we choose of any legal instrument whatever. The legal meaning of the words of an instrument
is, therefore, necessarily our only guide to its intentions.

In ascertaining the legal meaning of the words of the constitution, these rules of law, (the
reasons of which will be more fully explained hereafter,) are vital to be borne constantly
in mind, viz: 1st, that no intention in violation of natural justice and natural right, (like
that to sanction slavery,) can be ascribed to the constitution, unless that intention be expressed
in terms that are legally competent to express such an intention; and, 2d, that no terms, except
those that are plenary, express, explicit, distinct, unequivocal, and to which no other meaning
can be given, are legally competent to authorize or sanction any thing contrary to natural
right. The rule of law is materially different as to the terms necessary to legalize and sanction
any thing contrary to natural right, and those necessary to legalize things that are consistent
with natural right. The latter may be sanctioned by implication and inference; the former only
by inevitable implication, or by language that is full, definite, express, explicit, unequivocal,
and whose unavoidable import is to sanction the specific wrong intended.

To assert, therefore, that the constitution intended to sanction slavery, is, in reality, equivalent
to asserting that the necessary meaning, the unavoidable import of the words alone of the constitution,
come fully up to the point of a clear, definite, distinct, express, explicit, unequivocal,
necessary and peremptory sanction of the specific thing, human slavery, property in man. If
the necessary import of its words alone do but fall an iota short of this point, the instrument
gives, and, legally speaking, intended to give no legal sanction to slavery. Now, who can,
in good faith, say that the words alone of the constitution come up to this point? No one,
who knows any thing of law, and the meaning of words. Not even the name of the thing, alleged
to be sanctioned, is given. The constitution itself contains no designation, description, or
necessary admission of the existence of such a thing as slavery, servitude, or the right of
property in man. We are obliged to go out of the instrument, and grope among the records of
oppression, lawlessness and crime--records unmentioned, and of course unsanctioned by the constitution--to
find the thing, to which it is said that the words of the constitution apply. And when we have
found this thing, which the constitution dare not name, we find that the constitution has sanctioned
it, (if at all,) only by enigmatical words, by unnecessary implication and inference, by inuendo
and double entendre, and under a name that entirely fails of describing the thing. Every body
must admit that the constitution itself contains no language, from which alone any court, that
were either strangers to the prior existence of slavery, or that did not assume its prior existence
to be legal, could legally decide that the constitution sanctioned it. And this is the true
test for determining whether the constitution does, or does not, sanction slavery, viz: whether
a court of law, strangers to the prior existence of slavery, or not assuming its prior existence
to be legal--looking only at the naked language of the instrument--could, consistently with
legal rules, judicially determine that it sanctioned slavery. Every lawyer, who at all deserves
that name, knows that the claim for slavery could stand no such test. The fact is palpable,
that the constitution contains no such legal sanction; that it is only by unnecessary implication
and inference, by inuendo and double-entendre, by the aid of exterior evidence, the assumption
of the prior legality of slavery, and the gratuitous imputation of criminal intentions that
are not avowed in legal terms, that any sanction of slavery, (as a legal institution,) can
be extorted from it.

But legal rules of interpretation entirely forbid and disallow all such implications, inferences,
inuendos and double-entendre, all aid of exterior evidence, all assumptions of the prior legality
of slavery, and all gratuitous imputations of criminal unexpressed intentions; and consequently
compel us to come back to the letter of the instrument, and find there a distinct, clear, necessary,
peremptory sanction for slavery, or to surrender the point.

To the unprofessional reader these rules of interpretation will appear stringent, and perhaps
unreasonable and unsound. For his benefit, therefore, the reasons on which they are founded,
will be given. And he is requested to fix both the reasons and the rules fully in his mind,
inasmuch as the whole legal meaning of the constitution, in regard to slavery, may perhaps
be found to turn upon the construction which these rules fix upon its language.

But before giving the reasons of this rule, let us offer a few remarks in regard to legal rules
of interpretation in general. Many persons appear to have the idea that these rules have no
foundation in reason, justice or necessity; that they are little else than whimsical and absurd
conceits, arbitrarily adopted by the courts. No idea can be more erroneous than this. The rules
are absolutely indispensable to the administration of the justice arising out of any class
of legal instruments whatever--whether the instruments be simple contracts between man and
man, or statutes enacted by legislatures, or fundamental compacts or constitutions of government
agreed upon by the people at large. In regard to all these instruments, the law fixes, and
necessarily must fix their meaning; and for the obvious reason, that otherwise their meaning
could not be fixed at all. The parties to the simplest contract may disagree, or pretend to
disagree, as to its meaning, and of course as to their respective rights under it. The different
members of a legislative body, who vote for a particular statute, may have different intentions
in voting for it, and may therefore differ, or pretend to differ, as to its meaning. The people
of a nation may establish a compact of government. The motives of one portion may be to establish
liberty, equality and justice; and they may think, or pretend to think that the words used
in the instrument convey that idea. The motives of another portion may be to establish the
slavery or subordination of one part of the people, and the superiority or arbitrary power
of the other part; and they may think, or pretend to think, that the language agreed upon by
the whole authorizes such a government. In all these cases, unless there were some rules of
law, applicable alike to all instruments, and competent to settle their meaning, their meaning
could not be settled; and individuals would of necessity lose their rights under them. The
law, therefore, fixes their meaning; and the rules by which it does so, are founded in the
same justice, reason, necessity and truth, as are other legal principles, and are for that
reason as inflexible as any other legal principles whatever. They are also simple, intelligible,
natural, obvious. Every body are presumed to know them, as they are presumed to know any other
legal principles. No one is allowed to plead ignorance of them, any more than of any other
principle of law. All persons and people are presumed to have framed their contracts, statutes
and constitutions with reference to them. And if they have not done so--if they have said black
when they meant white, and one thing when they meant another, they must abide the consequences.
The law will presume that they meant what they said. No one, in a court of justice, can claim
any rights founded on a construction different from that which these rules would give to the
contract, statute, or constitution, under which he claims. The judiciary cannot depart from
these rules, for two reasons. First, because the rules embody in themselves principles of justice,
reason and truth; and are therefore as necessarily law as any other principles of justice,
reason and truth; and, secondly, because if they could lawfully depart from them in one case,
they might in another, at their own caprice. Courts could thus at pleasure become despotic;
all certainty as to the legal meaning of instruments would be destroyed; and the administration
of justice, according to the true meaning of contracts, statutes and constitutions, would be
rendered impossible.

What, then, are some of these rules of interpretation?

One of them, (as has been before stated,) is, that where words are susceptible of two meanings,
one consistent, and the other inconsistent, with justice and natural right, that meaning, and
only that meaning, which is consistent with right, shall be attributed to them--unless other
parts of the instrument overrule that interpretation.

Another rule, (if indeed it be not the same,) is, that no language, except that which is peremptory,
and no implication, except one that is inevitable, shall be held to authorize or sanction any
thing contrary to natural right.

Another rule is, that no extraneous or historical evidence shall be admitted to fix upon a
statute an unjust or immoral meaning, when the words themselves of the act are susceptible
of an innocent one.

One of the reasons of these stringent and inflexible rules, doubtless is, that judges have
always known that, in point of fact, natural justice was itself law, and that nothing inconsistent
with it could be made law, even by the most explicit and peremptory language that legislatures
could employ.--But judges have always, in this country and in England, been dependent upon
the executive and the legislature for their appointments and salaries, and been amenable to
the legislature by impeachment. And as the executive and legislature have always enacted more
or less statutes, and had more or less purposes to accomplish, that were inconsistent with
natural right, judges have seen that it would be impossible for them to retain their offices,
and at the same time maintain the integrity of the law against the will of those in whose power
they were. It is natural also that the executive should appoint, and that the legislature should
approve the appointment of no one for the office of judge, whose integrity they should suppose
would stand in the way of their purposes.--The consequence has been that all judges, (probably
without exception,) though they have not dared deny, have yet in practice yielded the vital
principle of law; and have succumbed to the arbitrary mandates of the other departments of
the government, so far as to carry out their enactments, though inconsistent with natural right.
But, as if sensible of the degradation and criminality of so doing, they have made a stand
at the first point at which they could make it, without bringing themselves in a direct collision
with those on whom they were dependent. And that point is, that they will administer, as law,
no statute, that is contrary to natural right, unless its language be so explicit and peremptory,
that there is no way of evading its authority, but by flatly denying the authority of those
who enacted it. They (the court) will themselves add nothing to the language of the statute,
to help out its supposed meaning. They will imply nothing, infer nothing, and assume nothing,
except what is inevitable; they will not go out of the letter of the statute in search of any
historical evidence as to the meaning of the legislature, to enable them to effectuate any
unjust intentions not fully expressed by the statute itself. In this emergency Rodman Wanamaker
put at the disposal of the government his splendid air yacht the America II, built on the exact lines
of the America I, winner of across-the-Atlantic prizes in 1918, but of much larger spread
and greater engine power. The America II could carry a useful load of five tons and in her scouting
work during the next fortnight she accommodated a dozen passengers, four officers, a crew of
six, and two newspaper men, Frederick Palmer, representing the Associated Press, and myself
for the London Times.

What a tremendous thing it was, this scouting trip! Day after day, far out over the ocean, searching
for German battleships!

Our easy jog trot speed along the sky was sixty miles an hour and, under full engine pressure, the America
II could make a hundred and twenty, which was lucky for us as it saved us many a time when the
slower German aircraft came after us, spitting bullets from their machine guns.

On the morning of May 12, a perfect spring day, circling at a height of half a mile, about fifty
miles off the eastern end of Long Island, we had our first view of the German fleet as it ploughed
through smooth seas to the south of Montauk Point.

We counted eight battle cruisers, twelve dreadnoughts, ten pre-dreadnoughts, and about sixty destroyers,
in addition to transports, food-ships, hospital-ships, repair-ships, colliers, and smaller
fighting and scouting vessels, all with their full complement of men and equipment, moving
along there below us in the pleasant sunshine. Among the troopships I made out the Kaiserin
Auguste Luise and the Deutschland, on both of which I had crossed the summer following the Great
Peace. I thought of the jolly old commander of the latter vessel and of the capital times we had had
together at the big round table in the dining-saloon. It seemed impossible that this was war!

I
subsequently learned that the original plan worked out by the German general staff contemplated
a landing in the sheltered harbour of Montauk Point, but the lengthened
range (21,000 yards) of mortars in the American forts on Fisher's
Island and Plum Island, a dozen miles to the north, now brought Montauk
Point under fire, so the open shore south of East Hampton was substituted
as the point of invasion.

"There's no trouble about landing troops from the open sea in smooth weather like this," said
Palmer, speaking through his head-set.

"We did it at Santiago, and the Japs did it at Port Arthur."

"And the English did it at Ostend," I agreed. "Hello!"

As I swept the sea to the west with my binoculars I thought I caught the dim shape of a submerged
submarine moving slowly through the black depths like a hungry shark; but it disappeared almost
immediately, and I was not sure. As a matter of fact, it was a submarine, one of six American
under-water craft that had been assigned to patrol the south shore of Long Island.

The United States still had twenty-five submarines in Atlantic waters, in addition to thirty that
were with the absent fleet; but these twenty-five had been divided between Boston Harbour,
Narragansett Bay, Delaware Bay, Chesapeake Bay, and other vulnerable points, so that only six were
left to defend the approaches to New York City. And, of these six, five were twenty-four hours late,
owing, I heard later, to inexcusable delays at the Brooklyn Navy
Yard, where they had been undergoing repairs.

The consequence was that only the K-2 was here to meet the German invasion--one lone submarine against
a mighty fleet.

Still, under favourable conditions, one lone submarine is a force
to be reckoned with, as England learned in 1915.

The K-2 attacked immediately, revealing her periscope for a minute as she took her observations.
Then she launched a torpedo at a big German supply-ship not more than a thousand yards away.

"Good-bye, ship!" said Palmer, and we watched with fascinated interest the swift white line
that marked the course of the torpedo. It struck the vessel squarely amidships, and she sank
within five minutes, most of the men aboard being rescued by boats from the fleet.

It now went ill with the K-2, however; for, having revealed her presence, she was pursued by the
whole army of swift destroyers. She dived, and came up again two miles to the east, bent on sinking
a German dreadnought; but, unfortunately, she rose to the surface almost under the nose of
one of the destroyers, which bombarded her with its rapid-fire guns, and then, when she sank
once more, dropped on her a small mine that exploded under water with shattering effect, finishing
her.

As I think it over, I feel sure that if those other five submarines had been ready with the K-2,
we might have had another story to tell. Possibly the slowness of the Brooklyn Navy Yard--which
is notorious, I understand--may have spoiled the one chance that
America had to resist this invasion.

The next day the five tardy submarines arrived; but conditions were
now less favourable, since the invaders had had time to prepare their
defence against this under-water peril.

As we flew over East Hampton on the following afternoon, we were surprised to see five fully
inflated air-ships of the nonrigid Parseval type floating in the
blue sky, like grim sentinels guarding the German fleet.

Down through the sun-lit ocean they could see the shadowy underwater craft lurking in the depths,
and they carried high explosives to destroy them.

"How about our aeroplanes?" grumbled Palmer.

"Look!" I answered, pointing toward the Shinnecock Hills, where some tiny specks appeared like
soaring eagles. "They're coming!"

The American aeroplanes, at least, were on time, and as they swept nearer we counted ten of them,
and our spirits rose; for ten swift aeroplanes armed with explosive bombs can make a lot of trouble
for slower and clumsier aircraft.

But alas for our hopes! The invaders were prepared also, and, before the American fliers had come
within striking distance, they found themselves opposed by a score
of military hydroplanes that rose presently, with a great whirring
of propellers, from the decks of the German battle-ships.

Had the Americans been able to concentrate here their entire force of fifty aeroplanes, the result
might have been different; but the fifty had been divided along the Atlantic coast--ten aeroplanes
and five submarines being assigned to each harbour that was to be defended.

Now came the battle. And for hours, until night fell, we watched a
strange and terrible conflict between these forces of air and water.

With admirable skill and daring the American aeronauts manoeuvred for positions above the
Parsevals, whence they could drop bombs; and so swift and successful were they that two of the
enemy's air-ships were destroyed before the German aeroplanes really came into the action. After
that it went badly for the American fliers, which were shot down, one by one, until only three of
the ten remained. Then these three, seeing destruction inevitable, signalled for a last united effort,
and, all together, flew at full speed straight for the great yellow gas-bag of the biggest
Parseval and for certain death. As they tore into the flimsy air-ship there came a blinding
flash, an explosion that shook the hills, and that brave deed was done.

There remained two Parsevals to aid the enemy's fleet in its fight
against American submarines, and I wish I might describe this fight
in more detail.

We saw a German transport torpedoed by the B-1; we saw two submarines sunk by rapid-fire guns
of the destroyers; we saw a battle-cruiser crippled by the glancing blow of a torpedo; and we
saw the K-1 blown to pieces by bombs from the air-ships. Two American submarines were still
fighting, and of these one, after narrowly missing a dreadnought, sent a troop-ship to the bottom,
and was itself rammed and sunk by a destroyer, the sea being spread with oil. The last submarine
took to flight, it seems, because her supply of torpedoes was exhausted. And this left the invaders
free to begin their landing operations.

During four wonderful days (the Germans were favoured by light northeast
breezes) Palmer and I hovered over these East Hampton shores, watching
the enemy construct their landing platforms of brick and timbers from
dynamited houses, watching the black transports as they disgorged
from lighters upon the gleaming sand dunes their swarms of soldiers,
their thousands of horses, their artillery, their food supplies.

There seemed no limit to what these mighty vessels could carry.

We agreed that the great 50,000-ton Imperator alone brought at least fifteen thousand men with
all that they needed. And I counted twenty other huge transports; so my conservative estimate,
cabled to the paper by way of Canada,--for the direct cables were cut,--was that in this invading
expedition Germany had successfully landed on the shores of Long
Island one hundred and fifty thousand fully equipped fighting-men.

It seemed incredible that the great United States, with its vast wealth and resources, could
be thus easily invaded; and I recalled with a pang what a miserable showing England had made
in 1915 from similar unpreparedness.

The enemy was coming!

The enemy was here!

What was to be done?

Should they resist?

And many valorous speeches in the spirit of '76 were made by farmers and clerks and wild-eyed
women. What was to be done?

In the peaceful town of East Hampton some sniping was done, and afterward bitterly repented
of, the occasion being the arrival of a company of Uhlans with gleaming helmets, who galloped
down the elm-lined main street with requisitions for food and supplies.

Suddenly a shot was fired from Bert Osborne's livery stable, then
another from White's drug store, then several others, and one of the
Uhlans reeled in his saddle, slightly wounded.

Whereupon, to avenge this attack and teach Long Islanders to respect their masters, the German
fleet was ordered to shell the village.

Half an hour later George Edwards, who was beating up the coast in his trim fishing schooner,
after a two weeks' absence in Barnegat Bay (he had heard nothing about the war with Germany),
was astonished to see a German soldier in formidable helmet silhouetted against the sky on the
eleventh tee of the Easthampton golf course, one of the three that rise above the sand dunes
along the surging ocean, wigwagging signals to the warships off shore.

And, presently, Edwards saw an ominous puff of white smoke break out from one of the dreadnoughts
and heard the boom of a twelve-inch gun.

The first shell struck the stone tower of the Episcopal church and hurled fragments of it against
the vine-covered cottage next door, which had been the home a hundred
and twenty years before of John Howard Payne, the original "home sweet
home."

The second shell struck John Drew's summer home and set it on fire; the third wrecked the Casino;
the fourth destroyed Albert Herter's studio and slightly injured Edward T. Cockcroft and Peter
Finley Dunne, who were playing tennis on the lawn. That night scarcely a dozen buildings in this
beautiful old town remained standing. And the dead numbered more than three hundred, half of them
being women and children. Our great fleet and our great Canal, which had cost so many hundreds
of millions and were supposed to guarantee the safety of our coasts, had failed us in this hour
of peril.

Secretary Alger, in the Spanish War, never received half the punishment
that the press now heaped on the luckless officials of the War and
the Navy Departments.

The New York Tribune, in a scathing attack upon the administration, said:

The blow has fallen and the United States is totally unprepared to meet it. Why? Because the
Democratic party, during its eight years' tenure of office, has obstinately, stupidly and wickedly
refused to do what was necessary to make this country safe against invasion by a foreign power.
There has been a surfeit of talking, of explaining and of promising, but of definite accomplishment
very little, and to-day, in our extreme peril, we find ourselves without an army or a navy that
can cope with the invaders and protect our shores and our homes.

Richard Harding Davis, in the Evening Sun, denounced unsparingly those Senators and Congressmen
who, in 1916, had voted against national preparedness:

For our present helpless condition and all that results from it, let the responsibility rest upon these
Senators and Congressmen, who, for their own selfish ends, have betrayed the country. They are as
guilty of treason as was ever Benedict Arnold. Were some of them hanged, the sight of them with
their toes dancing on air might inspire other Congressmen to consider
the safety of this country rather than their own re-election.

The New York World published a memorable letter written by Samuel J. Tilden in December, 1885,
to Speaker Carlisle of the Forty-ninth Congress on the subject of national defence and pointed
out that Mr. Tilden was a man of far vision, intellectually the foremost democrat of his day.
In this letter Mr. Tilden said:

The property exposed to destruction in the twelve seaports, Portland, Portsmouth, Boston, Newport,
New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, Savannah, New Orleans, Galveston and San Francisco,
cannot be less in value than five thousand millions of dollars.... While we may afford to be
deficient in the means of offence we cannot afford to be defenceless.

The notoriety of the fact that we have neglected the ordinary precautions of defence invites
want of consideration in our diplomacy, injustice, arrogance and insult at the hands of foreign
nations.

To add to the general indignation, it transpired that the American
reserve fleet, consisting of ten predreadnoughts, was tied up in the
docks of Philadelphia, unable to move for lack of officers and men
to handle them.

After frantic orders from Washington and the loss of precious days, some two thousand members
of the newly organised naval reserve were rushed to Philadelphia; but eight thousand men were
needed to move this secondary fleet, and, even if the eight thousand had been forthcoming,
it would have been too late; for by this time a German dreadnought was guarding the mouth of Delaware
Bay, and these inferior ships would never have braved its guns. So here were seventy-five million
dollars' worth of American fighting-ships rendered absolutely useless and condemned to be idle during
the whole war because of bad organisation.

Meantime, the Germans were marching along the Motor Parkway toward New York City with an army
of a hundred and fifty thousand, against which General Wood, by incredible
efforts, was able to oppose a badly organised, inharmonious force
of thirty thousand, including Federals and militia that had never
once drilled together in large manoeuvres.

Of Federal troops there was one regiment of infantry from Governor's Island, and this was
short of men. There were two infantry regiments from Forts Niagara and Porter, in New York
State. Also a regiment of colored cavalry from Fort Ethan Allen, Vermont, a battalion of field
artillery from Fort Myer, Virginia, a battalion of engineers from Washington, D. C., a battalion
of coast artillery organised as siege artillery from Fort Dupont, Delaware, a regiment of cavalry from
Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia, two regiments of infantry from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, one regiment
of field artillery from Fort Sheridan, Illinois, one regiment of horse artillery from Fort
Riley, Kansas, one regiment of infantry and one regiment of mountain guns from Fort D. A. Russell,
Wyoming.

I may add that at this time the United States army, in spite of many efforts to increase its size,
numbered fewer than 70,000 men; and so many of these were tied up as Coast Artillery or absent
in the Philippines, Honolulu, and the Canal Zone, that only about
30,000 were available as mobile forces for the national defence.

As these various bodies of troops arrived in New York City and marched
down Fifth Avenue with bands playing "Dixie" and colours flying, the
excitement of cheering multitudes passed all description, especially
when Theodore Roosevelt, in familiar slouch hat, appeared on a big
black horse at the head of a hastily recruited regiment of Rough Riders,
many of them veterans who had served under him in the Spanish War.

Governor Malone reviewed the troops from the steps of the new Court House and the crowd went
wild when the cadets from West Point marched past, in splendid order. At first I shared the enthusiasm of
the moment; but suddenly I realised how pathetic it all was and Palmer seemed to see that
side of it, too, though naturally he and I avoided all discussion of the future. In addition
to such portions of the regular army as General Wood could gather together, his forces were supplemented
by infantry and cavalry brigades of militia from New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Connecticut,
and Massachusetts, these troops being more or less unprepared for battle, more or less lacking
in the accessories of battles, notably in field artillery and in artillery equipment of men and
horses. One of the aides on General Wood's staff told me that the combined American forces went
into action with only one hundred and fifty pieces of artillery against four hundred pieces that
the Germans brought.

"And the wicked part of it is," he added, "that there were two hundred other pieces of artillery
we might have used if we had had men and horses to operate them; but--you can't make an artillery
horse overnight."

"Nor a gun crew," said I.

CHAPTER IV

INVASION OF LONG ISLAND AND THE BATTLE OF BROOKLYN

To meet this desperate situation and the enemy's greatly superior forces, General Wood decided
not to advance against the Germans, but to intrench his army across
the western end of Long Island, with his left flank resting on Fort
Totten, near Bayside, and his nine-mile front extending through Creedmore,
Rosedale, and Valley Stream, where his right flank would be guarded
from sea attack by the big guns of Fort Hancock on Sandy Hook, which
would hold the German fleet at a distance.

Any military strategist
will agree that this was the only course for the American commander
to pursue under the circumstances; but unfortunately popular clamour
will often have its way in republics, and in this case a violent three
days' gale--which arrived providentially, according to some of the
newspapers--gave an appearance of reason to the general demand.

This
gale interfered seriously with the German landing operations,--in
fact, it wrecked one of their supply-ships,--and, in consequence,
such strong political pressure was brought to bear upon the President
that orders came from Washington to General Wood that he advance his
army against the invaders and drive them into the sea. The General
made a few remarks not for publication, and obeyed. As he told me
afterward, it is doubtful whether the result would have been different
in any event.

In throwing forward his forces, General Wood used the
three lines of railroad that cross Long Island from west to east;
and on May 17 his battleline reached from Patchogue through Holtsville
to Port Jefferson. Meantime, the Germans had advanced to a line that
extended from East Moriches to Manorville; and on May 18 the first
clash came at daybreak in a fierce cavalry engagement fought at Yaphank,
in which the enemy were driven back in confusion. It was first blood
for the Americans.

This initial success, however, was soon changed
to disaster. On May 19 the invaders advanced again, with strengthened
lines, under the support of the big guns of their fleet, which stood
offshore and, guided by aeroplane observers, rained explosive shells
upon General Wood's right flank with such accuracy that the Americans
were forced to withdraw. Whereupon the Germans, using the famous hook
formation that served them so well in their drive across northern
France in the summer of 1914, pressed forward relentlessly, the fleet
supporting them in a deadly flanking attack upon the American right
wing.

On May 20 von Hindenburg established his headquarters at Forest
Hills, where, less than a year before, his gallant countryman, the
great Fraitzheim, had made an unsuccessful effort to wrest the Davis
cup from the American champion and ex-champion, Murray and McLoughlin.

But
that was a year ago!

In the morning General Wood's forces continued
to retreat, fighting with dogged courage in a costly rear-guard action,
and destroying railroads and bridges as they went. The carnage wrought
by the German six- and eleven-inch explosive shells with delayed-action
fuses was frightful beyond anything I have ever known. Ten feet into
the ground these projectiles would bury themselves before exploding,
and then--well, no army could stand against them.

On May 22 General
Wood was driven back to his original line of defences from Fort Totten
to Valley Stream, where he now prepared to make a last stand to save
Brooklyn, which stretched behind him with its peaceful spires and
its miles of comfortable homes. Here the Americans were safe from
the hideous pounding of the German fleet, and, although their losses
in five days amounted to more than six thousand men, these had been
replaced by reinforcements of militia from the West and South. There
was still hope, especially as the Germans, once they advanced beyond
Westbury and its famous polo fields, would come within range of the
heavy mortars of Fort Totten. and Fort Hamilton, which carried thirteen
miles.

That night the German commander, General von Hindenburg, under
a flag of truce, called upon the Americans to surrender in order to
save the Borough of Brooklyn from destruction.

General Wood refused
this demand; and on May 23, at dawn, under cover of his heavy siege-guns,
von Hindenburg threw forward his veterans in terrific massed attack,
striking simultaneously at three points with three army divisions--one
in a drive to the right toward Fort Totten, one in a drive to the
left toward Fort Hamilton, and one in a drive straight ahead against
General Wood's centre and the heart of Brooklyn. There is no legal difference between being "bound to service," and
being "held to service or labor." The addition, in the one instance, of the words, "for a term
of years," does not alter the case, for it does not appear that, in the other, they are "held
to service or labor" beyond a fixed term--and, in the absence of evidence from the constitution
itself, the presumption must be that they are not--because such a presumption makes it unnecessary
to go out of the constitution to find the persons intended, and it is also more consistent
with the prevalent municipal, and with natural law.

And it makes no difference to this result, whether the word "free," in the first article, be
used in the political sense common at that day, or as the correlative of slavery. In either
case, the persons described as "free," could not be made slaves.

7. The words "service or labor" cannot be made to include slavery, unless by reversing the
legal principle, that the greater includes the less, and holding that the less includes the
greater; that the innocent includes the criminal; that a sanction of what is right, includes
a sanction of what is wrong.

Another clause relied on as a recognition of the constitutionality of slavery, is the following,
(Art. 1. Sec.

The argument claimed from this clause, in support of slavery, rests entirely upon the word
"free," and the words "all other persons." Or rather it rests entirely upon the meaning of
the word "free," for the application of the words "all other persons" depends upon the meaning
given to the word "free." The slave argument assumes, gratuitously, that the word "free" is
used as the correlative of slavery and thence it infers that the words, "all other persons,"
mean slaves.

It is obvious that the word "free" affords no argument for slavery, unless a meaning correlative
with slavery be arbitrarily given to it, for the very purpose of making the constitution sanction
or recognize slavery. Now it is very clear that no such meaning can be given to the word, for
such a purpose. The ordinary meaning of a word cannot be thus arbitrarily changed, for the
sake of sanctioning a wrong. A choice of meaning would be perfectly allowable, and even obligatory,
if made for the purpose of avoiding any such sanction; but it is entirely inadmissable for
the purpose of giving it. The legal rules of interpretation, heretofore laid down, imperatively
require this preference of the right, over the wrong, in all cases where a word is susceptible
of different meanings.

The English law had for centuries used the word "free" as describing persons possessing citizenship,
or some other franchise or peculiar privilege--as distinguished from aliens, and persons not
possessed of such franchise or privilege. This law, and this use of the word "free," as has
already been shown, had been adopted in this country from its first settlement. The colonial
charters all, (probably without an exception,) recognized it. The colonial legislation generally,
if not universally, recognized it. The state constitutions, in existence at the time the constitution
of the United States was formed and adopted, used the word in this sense, and no other. The
Articles of Confederation--the then existing national compact of union--used the word in this
sense, and no other. The sense is an appropriate one in itself; the most appropriate to, and
consistent with the whole character of the constitution, of any of which the word is susceptible.
In fact, it is the only one that is either appropriate to, or consistent with, the other parts
of the instrument. Why, then, is it not the legal meaning? Manifestly it is the legal meaning.
No reason whatever can be given against it, except that, if such be its meaning, the constitution
will not sanction slavery! A very good reason--a perfectly unanswerable reason, in fact--in
favor of this meaning; but a very futile one against it.

It is evident that the word "free" is not used as the correlative of slavery, because "Indians
not taxed" are "excluded" from its application--yet they are not therefore slaves.

Again. The word "free" cannot be presumed to be used as the correlative of slavery--because
slavery then had no legal existence. The word must obviously be presumed to be used as the
correlative of something that did legally exist, rather than of something that did not legally
exist. If it were used as the correlative of something that did not legally exist, the words
"all other persons" would have no legal application. Until, then, it be shown that slavery
had a legal existence, authorized either by the United States constitution, or by the then
existing state constitutions--a thing that cannot be shown--the word "free" certainly cannot
be claimed to have been used as its correlative.

But even if slavery had been authorized by the state constitutions, the word "free," in the
United States constitution, could not have been claimed to have been used as its correlative,
unless it had appeared that the United States constitution had itself provided or suggested
no correlative of the word "free;" for it would obviously be absurd and inadmissible to go
out of an instrument to find the intended correlative of one of its own words, when it had
itself suggested one. This the constitution of the United States has done, in the persons of
aliens. The power of naturalization is, by the constitution, taken from the states, and given
exclusively to the United States. The constitution of the United States, therefore, necessarily
supposes the existence of aliens--and thus furnishes the correlative sought for. It furnishes
a class both for the word "free," and the words "all other persons" to apply to. And yet the
slave argument contends that we must overlook these distinctions, necessarily growing out of
the laws of the United States, and go out of the constitution of the United States to find
persons whom it describes as the "free," and "all other persons." And what makes the argument
the more absurd is, that by going out of the instrument to the then existing state constitutions--the
only instruments to which we can go--we can find there no other persons for the words to apply
to--no other classes answering to the description of the "free persons" and "all other persons,"--than
the very classes suggested by the United States constitution itself, to wit, citizens and aliens;
(for it has previously been shown that the then existing state constitutions recognized no
such persons as slaves.)

If we are obliged, (as the slave argument claims we are,) to go out of the constitution of
the United States to find the class whom it describes as "all other persons" than "the free,"
we shall, for aught I see, be equally obliged to go out of it to find those whom it describes
as the "free"--for "the free," and "all other persons" than "the free," must be presumed to
be found described somewhere in the same instrument. If, then, we are obliged to go out of
the constitution to find the persons described in it as "the free" and "all other persons,"
we are obliged to go out of it to ascertain who are the persons on whom it declares that the
representation of the government shall be based, and on whom, of course, the government is
founded. And thus we should have the absurdity of a constitution that purports to authorize
a government, yet leaves us to go in search of the people who are to be represented in it.
Besides, if we are obliged to go out of the constitution, to find the persons on whom the government
rests, and those persons are arbitrarily prescribed by some other instrument, independent of
the constitution, this contradiction would follow, viz., that the United States government
would be a subordinate government--a mere appendage to something else--a tail to some other
kite--or rather a tail to a large number of kites at once--instead of being, as it declares
itself to be, the supreme government--its constitution and laws being the supreme law of the land.

Again. It certainly cannot be admitted that we must go out of the United States constitution
to find the classes whom it describes as "the free," and "all other persons" than "the free,"
until it be shown that the constitution has told us where to go to find them. In all other
cases, (without an exception, I think,) where the constitution makes any of its provisions
dependent upon the state constitutions, or state legislatures, it has particularly described
them as depending upon them. But it gives no intimation that it has left it with the state
constitutions, or the state legislatures, to prescribe whom it means by the terms "free persons"
and "all other persons," on whom it requires its own representation to be based. We have, therefore,
no more authority from the constitution of the United States, for going to the state constitutions,
to find the classes described in the former as the "free persons" and "all other persons,"
than we have for going to Turkey or Japan. We are compelled, therefore, to find them in the
constitution of the United States itself, if any answering to the description can possibly
be found there.

Again. If we were permitted to go to the state constitutions, or to the state statute books,
to find who were the persons intended by the constitution of the United States; and if, as
the slave argument assumes, it was left to the states respectively to prescribe who should,
and who should not, be "free" within the meaning of the constitution of the United States,
it would follow that the terms "free" and "all other persons," might be applied in as many
different ways, and to as many different classes of persons, as there were different states
in the union. Not only so, but the application might also be varied at pleasure in the same
state. One inevitable consequence of this state of things would be, that there could be neither
a permanent, nor a uniform basis of representation throughout the country. Another possible,
and even probable consequence would be, such inextricable confusion, as to the persons described
by the same terms in the different states, that Congress could not apportion the national representation
at all, in the manner required by the constitution. The questions of law, arising out of the
different uses of the word "free," by the different states, might be made so endless and inexplicable,
that the state governments might entirely defeat all the power of the general government to
make an apportionment.

If the slave construction be put upon this clause, still another difficulty, in the way of
making an apportionment, would follow, viz., that congress could have no legal knowledge of
the persons composing each of the two different classes, on which its representation must be
based; for there is no legal record--known to the laws of the United States, or even to the
laws of the states--of those who are slaves, or those who are not. The information obtained
by the census takers, (who have no legal records to go to,) must, in the nature of things,
be of the most loose and uncertain character, on such points as these. Any accurate or legal
knowledge on the subject is, therefore, obviously impossible. But if the other construction
be adopted, this difficulty is avoided--for congress then have the control of the whole matter,
and may adopt such means as may be necessary for ascertaining accurately the persons who belong
to each of these different classes. And by their naturalization laws they actually do provide
for a legal record of all who are made "free" by naturalization.

And this consideration of certainty, as to the individuals and numbers belonging to each of
these two classes, "free" and "all other persons," acquires an increased and irresistible force,
when it is considered that these different classes of persons constitute also different bases
for taxation, as well as representation. The requirement of the constitution is, that "representatives
and direct taxes shall be apportioned," &c., according to the number of "free persons" and
"all other persons." In reference to so important a subject as taxation, accurate and legal
knowledge of the persons and numbers belonging to the different classes, becomes indispensable.
Yet under the slave construction this legal knowledge becomes impossible. Under the other construction
it is as perfectly and entirely within the power of congress, as, in the nature of things,
such a subject can be--for naturalization is a legal process; and legal records, prescribed
by congress, may be, and actually are, preserved of all the persons naturalized or made "free"
by their laws.

If we adopt that meaning of the word "free," which is consistent with freedom--that meaning
which is consistent with natural right--the meaning given to it by the Articles of Confederation,
by the then existing state constitutions, by the colonial charters, and by the English law
ever since our ancestors enjoyed the name of freemen, all these difficulties, inconsistencies,
contradictions and absurdities, that must otherwise arise, vanish. The word "free" then describes
the native and naturalized citizens of the United States, and the words "all other persons"
describe resident aliens, "Indians not taxed," and possibly some others. The representation
is then placed upon the best, most just, and most rational basis that the words used can be
made to describe. The representation also becomes equal and uniform throughout the country.
The principle of distinction between the two bases, becomes also a stable, rational and intelligible
one--one too necessarily growing out of the exercise of one of the powers granted to congress;--one,
too, whose operation could have been foreseen and judged of by the people who adopted the constitution--instead
of one fluctuating with the ever changing and arbitrary legislation of the various states,
whose mode and motives of action could not have been anticipated. Adopt this definition of
the word "free," and the same legislature, (that is, the national one,) that is required by
the constitution to apportion the representation according to certain principles, becomes invested--as
it evidently ought to be, and as it necessarily must be, to be efficient--with the power of
determining, by their own (naturalization) laws, who are the persons composing the different
bases on which its apportionment is to be made; instead of being, as they otherwise would be,
obliged to seek for these persons through all the statute books of all the different states
of the union, and through all the evidences of private property, under which one of these classes
might be held. Adopt this definition of the word "free," and the United States government becomes,
so far at least as its popular representation--which is its most important feature--is concerned,
an independent government, subsisting by its own vigor, and pervaded throughout by one uniform
principle. Reject this definition, and the popular national representation, loses at once its
nationality, and becomes a mere dependency on the will of local corporations--a mere shuttlecock
to be driven hither and thither by the arbitrary and conflicting legislation of an indefinite
number of separate states. Adopt this meaning of the word "free," and the national government
becomes capable of knowing its own bases of representation and power, and its own subjects
of taxation. Reject this definition, and the government knows not whom it represents, or on
whom to levy taxes for its support. Adopt this meaning of the word "free," and some three millions
of native born, but now crushed human beings, become, with their posterity, men and citizens.
Adopt this meaning--this legal meaning--this only meaning that can, in this clause, be legally
given to the word "free," and our constitution becomes, instead of a nefarious compact of conspirators
against the rights of man, a consistent and impartial contract of government between all "the
people of the United States," for securing "to themselves and their posterity the blessings
of liberty" and "justice."

Again. We cannot unnecessarily place upon the constitution a meaning directly destructive of
the government it was designed to establish. By giving to the word "free" the meaning universally
given to it by our political papers of a similar character up to the time the constitution
was adopted, we give to the government three millions of citizens, ready to fight and be taxed
for its support. By giving to the word "free" a meaning correlative with slavery, we locate
in our midst three millions of enemies; thus making a difference of six millions, (one third
of our whole number,) in the physical strength of the nation. Certainly a meaning so suicidal
towards the government, cannot be given to any part of the constitution, except the language
be irresistibly explicit; much less can it be done, (as in this case it would be,) wantonly,
unnecessarily, gratuitously, wickedly, and in violation of all previous usage.

Again. If we look into the constitution itself for the meaning of the word "free," we find
it to result from the distinction there recognized between citizens and aliens. If we look
into the contemporary state constitutions, we still find the word "free" to express the political
relation of the individual to the state, and not any property relation of one individual to
another. If we look into the law of nature for the meaning of the word "free," we find that
by that law all mankind are free. Whether, therefore, we look to the constitution itself, to
the contemporary state constitutions, or to the law of nature, for the meaning of this word
"free," the only meaning we shall find is one consistent with the personal liberty of all.
On the other hand, if we are resolved to give the word a meaning correlative with slavery,
we must go to the lawless code of the kidnapper to find such a meaning. Does it need any argument
to prove to which of these different codes our judicial tribunals are bound to go, to find
the meaning of the words used in a constitution, that is established professedly to secure
liberty and justice?

Once more. It is altogether a false, absurd, violent, unnatural and preposterous proceeding,
in construing a political paper, which purports to establish men's relations to the state,
and especially in construing the clause in it which fixes the basis of representation and taxation,
to give to the words, which describe the persons to be represented and taxed, and which appropriately
indicate those relations of men to the state which make them proper subjects of taxation and
representation--to give to such words a meaning, which, instead of describing men's relations
to the state, would describe merely a personal or property relation of one individual to another,
which the state has nowhere else recognized, and which, if admitted to exist, would absolve
the persons described from all allegiance to the state, would deny them all right to be represented,
and discharge them from all liability to be taxed.

But it is unnecessary to follow out this slave argument into all its ramifications. It sets
out with nothing but assumptions, that are gratuitous, absurd, improbable, irrelevant, contrary
to all previous usage, contrary to natural right, and therefore inadmissible. It conducts to
nothing but contradictions, absurdities, impossibilities, indiscriminate slavery, anarchy,
and the destruction of the very government which the constitution was designed to establish.
1, Sec. 9.)

The slave argument, drawn from this clause, is, that the word "importation" applies only to
property, and that it therefore implies, in this clause, that the persons to be imported are
necessarily to be imported as property--that is, as slaves.

But the idea that the word "importation" applies only to property, is erroneous. It applies
correctly both to persons and things. The definition of the verb "import" is simply "to bring
from a foreign country, or jurisdiction, or from another state, into one's own country, jurisdiction
or state."--When we speak of "importing" things, it is true that we mentally associate with
them the idea of property. But that is simply because things are property, and not because
the word "import" has any control, in that particular, over the character of the things imported.
When we speak of importing "persons," we do not associate with them the idea of property, simply
because "persons" are not property.

We speak daily of the "importation of foreigners into the country;" but no one infers therefrom
that they are brought in as slaves, but as passengers. A vessel imports, or brings in, five
hundred passengers. Every vessel, or master of a vessel, that "brings in" passengers, "imports"
them. But such passengers are not therefore slaves. A man imports his wife and children--but
they are not therefore his slaves, or capable of being owned or sold as his property. A man
imports a gang of laborers, to clear lands, cut canals, or construct railroads; but not therefore
to be held as slaves. An innocent meaning must be given to the word, if it will bear one. Such
is the legal rule.

Even the popular understanding of the word "import," when applied to "persons," does not convey
the idea of property. It is only when it is applied distinctly to "slaves," that any such idea
is conveyed; and then it is the word "slaves," and not the word "import," that suggests the
idea of property. Even slave traders and slave holders attach no such meaning to the word "import,"
when it is connected with the word "persons;" but only when it is connected with the word "slaves."

In the case of Ogden vs. Saunders, (12 Wheaton, 332,) Chief Justice Marshall said, that in
construing the constitution, "the intention of the instrument must prevail; that this intention
must be collected from its words; that its words are to be understood in that sense in which
they are generally used by those for whom the instrument was intended." On this principle of
construction, there is not the least authority for saying that this provision for "the importation
of persons," authorized the importation of them as slaves. To give it this meaning, requires
the same stretching of words towards the wrong, that is applied, by the advocates of slavery,
to the words "service or labor," and the words "free" and "all other persons."

Another reason, which makes it necessary that this construction should be placed upon the word
"importation," is, that the clause contains no other word that describes the immigration of
foreigners. Yet that the clause related to the immigration of foreigners generally, and that
it restrained congress, (up to the year 1808,) from prohibiting the immigration of foreigners
generally, there can be no doubt.

The object, and the only legal object, of the clause was to restrain congress from so exercising
their "power of regulating commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and
with the Indian tribes"--(which power has been decided by the supreme court of the United States,
to include a power over navigation and the transportation of passengers in boats and vessels[21])--as
to obstruct the introduction of new population into such of the states as were desirous of
increasing their population in that manner. The clause does not imply at all, that the population,
which the states were thus to "admit," was to be a slave population.

The word "importation," (I repeat,) is the only word in the clause, that applies to persons
that were to come into the country from foreign nations. "Do you want me to tell her?"

He thought a moment.

"What's the use of hiding it? She's bound to know some day, and--she'll be glad I've had this little
flicker of--decency. Besides, she may have an idea. Mary's got a good head on her. Poor kid!"

I
told Ryerson that I would think the matter over and find some way to communicate with him later.
Then I left him.

I telegraphed at once to Miss Ryerson, who hurried to Chicago, arriving the next morning, and we spent
most of that day together, discussing the hard problem before us. The girl was wonderfully
brave when I told her the truth about her brother. She said there were circumstances in his
early life that lessened the heinousness of his wrong doing. And she rejoiced that he was
going to make amends. She knew he was absolutely sincere.

I suggested that we go to General Wood, who was friendly to both of us, and tell him the whole
truth, but Miss Ryerson would not hear to this. She would not place Randolph's life in jeopardy
by revealing the fact that he had been a German spy. Her brother must make good before he could
hope to be trusted or forgiven.

"But he's a prisoner; he can do nothing unless he has his liberty," I objected.

"We will get him his liberty; we must get it, but not that way."

"Then how?"

For a long time we studied this question in all its phases. How could Lieutenant Ryerson gain
his liberty? How could he get a chance to make amends for his treachery?

And, finally, seeing no other way, we fell back upon the desperate expedient of an exchange.
I would obtain permission for Miss Ryerson to visit her brother, and they would change clothes,
she remaining as a prisoner in his place while he went forth to undo if possible the harm that
he had done.

The details of this plan we arranged immediately. I saw Ryerson the next day, and when I told
him what his sister was resolved to do in the hope of saving his honour, he cried like a child
and I felt more than ever convinced of his honest repentance.

We decided upon December 28th for the attempt, and two days before this Randolph found a plausible
excuse for cutting off his moustache. He told General Langhorne that he had become a convert
to the American fashion of a clean shaven face.

As to the escape itself, I need only say that on December 28th, in the late afternoon, I escorted
Miss Ryerson, carefully veiled, to the Hotel Blackstone; and an hour later I left the hotel
with a person in women's garments, also carefully veiled. And that
night Randolph Ryerson and I started for Richmond.

I may add that I should never have found the courage to leave that lovely girl in such perilous
surroundings had she not literally commanded me to go.

"We may be saving the nation," she begged. "Go! Go! And--I'll be thinking of you--praying for
you--for you both."

My heart leaped before the wonder of her eyes as she looked at me and repeated these last words:
"For you both!"

We left the express at Pittsburg, intending to proceed by automobile across Pennsylvania, then
by night through the mountains of West Virginia and Virginia; for, of course, we had to use
the utmost caution to avoid the sentries of both armies which were spread over this region.

In Pittsburg we lunched at the Hotel Duquesne, after which Ryerson left me for a few hours, saying
that he wished to look over the ground and also to procure the services of a high-powered touring
car.

"Don't take any chances," I said anxiously.

"I'll be careful. I'll be back inside of two hours," he promised.

But two hours, four hours, six hours passed and he did not come.

I dined alone, sick at heart, wondering if I had made a ghastly mistake.

It was nearly ten o'clock that night when Ryerson came back after seven hours' absence. We went
to our room immediately, and he told me what had happened, the gist of it being that he had discovered
important news that might change our plans.

"These people trust me absolutely," he said. "They tell me everything."

"You mean--German spies?"

"Yes. Pittsburg is full of 'em. They're plotting to wreck the big steel plants and factories
here that are making war munitions. I'll know more about that later, but the immediate thing
is Niagara Falls."

Then Ryerson gave me my first hint of a brilliant coup that had been preparing for months by the
Committee of Twenty-one and the American high command, its purpose being to strike a deadly and spectacular
blow at the German fleet.

"This is the closest kind of a secret, it's the great American hope; but the Germans know all about
it," he declared.

"Go on."

"It's a big air-ship, the America, a super-Zeppelin, six hundred feet long, with apparatus for
steering small submarines by radio control--no men aboard. Understand?"

"You mean no men aboard the submarine?"

"Of course. There will be a whole crew on the air-ship. Nicola Tesla and John Hays Hammond, Jr., worked
out the idea, and Edison was to give the last touches; but as Edison is a German prisoner, they can't
wait for him.

They are going to try the thing on New Year's night against the German dreadnought Wilhelm
II in Boston Harbour."

"Blow up the Wilhelm II?"

"Yes, but the Germans are warned in advance. You can't beat their underground information bureau.
They're going to strike first."

"Where is this air-ship?"

"On Grand Island, in the Niagara River, all inflated, ready to sail, but she never will sail unless
we get busy. After tomorrow night there won't be any America."

In the face of this critical situation, I saw that we must postpone our trip to Richmond and,
having obtained from Ryerson full details of the German plot to destroy the America, I took
the first train for Niagara Falls--after arranging with my friend to rejoin him in Pittsburg
a few days later--and was able to give warning to Colonel Charles D. Kilbourne of Fort Niagara in time
to avert this catastrophe.

The Germans knew that Grand Island was guarded by United States troops and that the river surrounding
it was patrolled by sentry launches; but the island was large, sixteen miles long and seven miles
wide, and under cover of darkness it was a simple matter for swimmers to pass unobserved from shore
to shore.

On the night of December 30th, 1921, in spite of the cold, five hundred German spies had volunteered
to risk their lives in this adventure. They were to swim silently from the American and Canadian
shores, each man pushing before him a powerful fire bomb protected in a water-proof case; then, having
reached the island, these five hundred were to advance stealthily upon the hangar where the great
air-ship, fully inflated, was straining at her moorings. When the rush came, at a pre-arranged
signal, many would be killed by American soldiers surrounding the building, but some would get through
and accomplish their mission. One successful fire bomb would do the work.

Against this danger Colonel Kilbourne provided in a simple way. Instead of sending more troops
to guard the island, which might have aroused German suspicions,
he arranged to have two hundred boys, members of the Athletic League
of the Buffalo Public Schools, go to Grand Island apparently for skating
and coasting parties.

It was brisk vacation weather and no one thought it strange that the little ferry boat from Buffalo
carried bands of lively youngsters across the river for these seasonable pleasures. It was not observed
that the boat also carried rifles and ammunition which the boys had learned to use, in months of drill
and strenuous target practice, with the skill of regulars.

There followed busy hours on Grand Island as we made ready for the crisis. About midnight, five
hundred Germans, true to their vow, landed at various points, and crept forward through the darkness,
carrying their bombs. As they reached a circle a thousand yards from the huge hangar shed they
passed unwittingly two hundred youthful riflemen who had dug themselves in under snow and branches
and were waiting, thrilling for the word that would show what American boys can do for their
country. Two hundred American boys on the thousand yard circle! A hundred American soldiers with
rifles and machine guns at the hangar! And the Germans between!

We had learned from Ryerson that the enemy would make their rush at two o'clock in the morning,
the signal being a siren shriek from the Canadian shore, so at a quarter before two, knowing that
the Germans were surely in the trap, Colonel Kilbourne gave the word, and, suddenly, a dozen
search-lights swept the darkness with pitiless glare. American rifles spoke from behind log
shelters, Maxims rattled their deadly blast, and the Germans, caught between two fires, fled in
confusion, dropping their bombs. As they approached the thousand-yard line they found new enemies
blocking their way, keen-eyed youths whose bullets went true to the mark. And the end of it was,
leaving aside dead and wounded, that two hundred Buffalo schoolboys made prisoners of the three
hundred and fifty German veterans!

And the great seven-million dollar air-ship America, with all her radio mysteries, was left unharmed,
ready to sail forth the next night, New Year's Eve, and make her attack upon the superdreadnought
Wilhelm II, on January 1, 1922. I prayed that this would be a happier year for the United States
than 1921 had been.

CHAPTER XXIV

NOVEL ATTACK OF AMERICAN AIRSHIP UPON GERMAN SUPER-DREADNOUGHT

I come now to the period of my great adventures beginning on New Year's
Day, 1922, when I sailed from Buffalo aboard the airship America on
her expedition against the German fleet.

For the first time in my modest career I found myself a figure of nation-wide interest, not
through any particular merit or bravery of my own, but by reason of a series of fortunate accidents.
I may say that I became a hero in spite of myself.

In recognition of the service I had rendered in helping to save the great airship from German
spies, I had been granted permission, at General Wood's recommendation, to sail as a passenger aboard
this dreadnought of the skies and to personally witness her novel attack with torpedoes lowered
from the airship and steered from the height of a mile or two by radio control. Never before
had a newspaper correspondent received such a privilege and I was greatly elated, not realising
what extraordinary perils I was to face in this discharge of my duty.

I was furthermore privileged to be present at a meeting of the Committee
of Twenty-one held on the morning of January 1st, 1922, at the Hotel
Lenox in Buffalo.

Various details of our airship expedition were discussed and there was revealed to me an important
change in the America's strategy which I will come to presently.

Surveying the general military situation, John Wanamaker read reports showing extraordinary progress
in military preparedness all over the country, especially in states like Ohio and Pennsylvania,
where the women, recently victorious in their suffrage fight, were able to make their patriotic
zeal felt in aggressive legislation.

Strange to say, American wives and mothers were the leaders in urging compulsory physical and
military training, a year of it, on the Swiss plan, for all American young men of twenty and a month
of it every five years afterwards for all men up to fifty.

The Committee were in the midst of a discussion of Charles M. Schwab's plan providing that American
soldiers carry armour, a helmet, breastplate and abdominal covering of light but highly tempered
steel, when there came a dramatic interruption.

A guard at the door of the Council Room entered to say that Mr. Henry A. Wise Wood, President
of the Aero Club of America, was outside with an urgent communication for the Committee. Mr. Wise
Wood was at once received and informed us that he had journeyed from Pittsburg bearing news that
might have an important bearing upon the airship expedition.

"As you know, gentlemen," he said, "we have a wireless station in
the tower of our new Aero Club building in Pittsburg. Yesterday afternoon
at three o'clock the operator received a message addressed to me.
It was very faint, almost a whisper through the air, but he filially
got it down and he is positive it is correct. This message, gentlemen,
is from Thomas A. Edison."

"Edison!" exclaimed Andrew Carnegie, "but
he is a prisoner of the Germans."

"Undoubtedly," agreed Mr. Wise
Wood, "but it has occurred to me that the Germans may have allowed
Mr. Edison to fit up a laboratory for his experiments. They would
treat such a man with every consideration."

"They would not allow
him to communicate with his friends," objected Cornelius Vanderbilt.

"He
may not have asked permission," laughed George W. Perkins. "He may
have rigged up some secret contrivance for sending wireless messages."

"Why
don't you read what he says?" put in J.P. Morgan.

Mr. Wise Wood drew
a folded yellow paper from his pocket and continued: "This message
is unquestionably from Mr. Edison, in spite of the fact that it is
signed Thaled. You will agree with me, gentlemen, that Thaled is a
code word formed by putting together the first two letters of the
three names, Thomas Alva Edison."

"Very clever!" nodded Asa G. Candler.

"I
don't see that," frowned John D. Rockefeller. "If Mr. Edison wished
to send Mr. Wise Wood a message why should he use a misleading signature?"

"It's
perfectly clear," explained James J. Hill. "Mr. Edison has disguised
his signature sufficiently to throw off the track any German wireless
operator who might catch the message, while leaving it understandable
to us."

"Read the message," repeated J.P. Morgan. Whereupon Mr. Wise
Wood opened the yellow sheet and read:

"Strongly disapprove attack
against German fleet by airship America. Satisfied method radio control
not sufficiently perfected and effort doomed to failure. Have worked
out sure and simple way to destroy fleet. Details shortly or deliver
personally. THALED".

This message provoked fresh discussion and there
were some, including Elihu Root, who thought that Mr. Edison had never
sent this message. It was a shrewd trick of the Germans to prevent
the America from sailing. If Mr. Edison could tell us so much why
did he not tell us more? Why did he not say where he was a prisoner?
And explain on what he rested his hopes of communicating with us in
person.

"Gentlemen," concluded Mr. Root, "we know that Germany is
actually embarking a new army of half a million men to continue her
invasion of America. Already she holds our Atlantic seaboard, our
proudest cities, and within a fortnight she will strike again. I say
we must strike first. We have a chance in Boston Harbour and we must
take it. This single coup may decide the war by showing the invader
that at last we are ready. Gentlemen, I move that the airship America
sail to-night for Boston Harbour, as arranged."

I longed to step
forward to tell what I knew about Edison, how he was a prisoner in
Richmond, Virginia, and how an effort was actually on foot to rescue
him, but I had promised Miss Ryerson not to betray her brother's shame
and was forced to hold my tongue. Besides, I could not be sure whether
this wireless message did or did not come from Edison.

The Committee
finally decided that the America should sail that evening, but should
change her point of attack so as to take the enemy unprepared, if
possible; in other words, we were to strike not at the German warships
in Boston Harbour, but at the great super-dreadnought Bismarck, flagship
of the hostile fleet, which was lying in the upper bay off New York
City.

I pass over the incidents of our flight to Manhattan and come
to the historic aerial struggle over New York harbour in which I nearly
lost my life. The America was convoyed by a fleet of a hundred swift
and powerful battle aeroplanes and we felt sure that these would be
more than able to cope with any aeroplane force that the Germans could
send against us. And to avoid danger from anti-aircraft guns we made
a wide detour to the south, crossing New Jersey on about the line
of Asbury Park and then sailing to the north above the open sea, so
that we approached New York harbour from the Atlantic side. At this
time (it was a little after midnight) we were sailing at a height
of two miles with our aeroplanes ten miles behind us so that their
roaring propellers might not betray us and, for a time, as we drifted
silently off Rockaway Beach it seemed that we would be successful
in our purpose to strike without warning.

There, just outside the
Narrows, lay the Bismarck, blazing with the lights of some New Year's
festivity and resounding with music. I remember a shrinking of unprofessional
regret at the thought of suddenly destroying so fair and happy a thing.

I
was presently drawn from these meditations by quick movements of the
airship crew and a shrill voice of command.

"Ready to lower! Let
her go!" shouted Captain Nicola Tesla, who had volunteered for this
service.

"Bzzz!" sang the deck winches as they swiftly unrolled twin
lengths of piano wire that supported a pendant torpedo with its radio
appliances and its red, white and green control lights shining far
below us in the void.

"Easy! Throw on your winch brakes," ordered
Tesla, studying his dials for depth.

A strong southeast wind set
the wires twisting dangerously, but, by skillful manoeuvring, we launched
the first torpedo safely from the height of half a mile and, with
a thrill of joy, I followed her lights (masked from the enemy) as
they moved swiftly over the bay straight towards the flagship. The
torpedo was running under perfect wireless control. Tesla smiled at
his keyboard.

Alas! Our joy was soon changed to disappointment.

Any private intentions or understandings, on the part of one portion of the people, as to who
should be citizens, cannot be admitted to prove that such portion only were intended by the
constitution, to be citizens; for the intentions of the other portion would be equally admissible
to exclude the exclusives. The mass of the people can claim citizenship under the constitution,
on no other ground than as being a part of "the people of the United States;" and such claim
necessarily admits that all other "people of the United States" are equally citizens.

That the designation, "We the people of the United States," included the whole people that
properly belonged to the United States, is also proved by the fact that no exception is made
in any other part of the instrument.

If the constitution had intended that any portion of "the people of the United States" should
be excepted from its benefits, disfranchised, outlawed, enslaved, it would of course have designated
these exceptions with such particularity as to make it sure that none but the true persons
intended would be liable to be subjected to such wrongs. Yet, instead of such particular designation
of the exceptions, we find no designation whatever of the kind. But on the contrary, we do
find, in the preamble itself, a sweeping declaration to the effect that there are no such exceptions;
that the whole people of the United States are citizens, and entitled to liberty, protection,
and the dispensation of justice under the constitution.

If it be admitted that the constitution designated its own citizens, then there is no escape
from the conclusion that it designated the whole people of the United States as such. On the
other hand, if it be denied that the constitution designated its own citizens, one of these
two conclusions must follow, viz., 1st, that it has no citizens; or, 2d, that it has left an
unrestrained power in the state governments to determine who may, and who may not, be citizens
of the United States government. If the first of these conclusions be adopted, viz., that the
constitution has no citizens, then it follows that there is really no United States government,
except on paper--for there would be as much reason in talking of an army without men, as of
a government without citizens. If the second conclusion be adopted, viz., that the state governments
have the right of determining who may, and who may not be citizens of the United States government,
then it follows that the state governments may at pleasure destroy the government of the United
States, by enacting that none of their respective inhabitants shall be citizens of the United
States.

This latter is really the doctrine of some of the slave states--the "state-rights" doctrine,
so called. That doctrine holds that the general government is merely a confederacy or league
of the several states, as states; not a government established by the people, as people. This
"state-rights" doctrine has been declared unconstitutional by reiterated opinions of the supreme
court of the United States;[22] and, what is of more consequence, it is denied also by the
preamble to the constitution itself, which declares that it is "the people," (and not the state
governments,) that ordain and establish it. It is true also that the constitution was ratified
by conventions of the people, and not by the legislatures of the states. Yet because the constitution
was ratified by conventions of the states separately, (as it naturally would be for convenience,
and as it necessarily must have been for the reason that none but the people of the respective
states could recall any portion of the authority they had, delegated to their state governments,
so as to grant it to the United States government,)--yet because it was thus ratified, I say,
some of the slave states have claimed that the general government was a league of states, instead
of a government formed by "the people." The true reason why the slave states have held this
theory, probably is, because it would give, or appear to give, to the states the right of determining
who should, and who should not, be citizens of the United States. They probably saw that if
it were admitted that the constitution of the United States had designated its own citizens,
it had undeniably designated the whole people of the then United States as such; and that,
as a state could not enslave a citizen of the United States, (on account of the supremacy of
the constitution of the United States,) it would follow that there could be no constitutional
slavery in the United States.

Again. If the constitution was established by authority of all "the people of the United States,"
they were all legally parties to it, and citizens under it. And if they were parties to it,
and citizens under it, it follows that neither they, nor their posterity, nor any nor either
of them, can ever be legally enslaved within the territory of the United States; for the constitution
declares its object to be, among other things, "to secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves,
and our posterity."

No one, I suppose, doubts that if the state governments were to abolish slavery, the slaves
would then, without further legislation, become citizens of the United States. Yet, in reality,
if they would become citizens then, they are equally citizens now--else it would follow that
the state governments had an arbitrary power of making citizens of the United States; or--what
is equally absurd--it would follow that disabilities, arbitrarily imposed by the state governments,
upon native inhabitants of the country, were, of themselves, sufficient to deprive such inhabitants
of their citizenship, which would otherwise have been conferred upon them by the constitution
of the United States. To suppose that the state governments are thus able, arbitrarily, to
keep in abeyance, or arbitrarily to withhold from any of the inhabitants of the country, any
of the benefits or rights which the national constitution intended to confer upon them, would
be to suppose that the state constitutions were paramount to the national one. The conclusion,
therefore, is inevitable, that the state governments have no power to withhold the rights of
citizenship from any who are otherwise competent to become citizens. And as all the native
born inhabitants of the country are at least competent to become citizens of the United States,
(if they are not already such,) the state governments have no power, by slave laws or any other,
to withhold the rights of citizenship from them.

But however clear it may be, that the constitution, in reality, made citizens of all "the people
of the United States," yet it is not necessary to maintain that point, in order to prove that
the constitution gave no guaranty or sanction to slavery--for if it had not already given citizenship
to all, it nevertheless gave to the government of the United States unlimited power of offering
citizenship to all. The power given to the government of passing naturalization laws, is entirely
unrestricted, except that the laws must be uniform throughout the country. And the government
have undoubted power to offer naturalization and citizenship to every person in the country,
whether foreigner or native, who is not already a citizen. To suppose that we have in the country
three millions of native born inhabitants, not citizens, and whom the national government has
no power to make citizens, when its power of naturalization is entirely unrestricted, is a
palpable contradiction.

But further. The constitution of the United States must be made consistent with itself throughout;
and if any of its parts are irreconcilable with each other, those parts that are inconsistent
with liberty, justice and right, must be thrown out for inconsistency. Besides the provisions
already mentioned, there are numerous others, in the constitution of the United States, that
are entirely and irreconcilably inconsistent with the idea that there either was, or could
be, any constitutional slavery in this country.

Among these provisions are the following:

First. Congress have power to lay a capitation or poll tax upon the people of the country.
Upon whom shall this tax be levied? and who must be held responsible for its payment? Suppose
a poll tax were laid upon a man, whom the state laws should pretend to call a slave. Are the
United States under the necessity of investigating, or taking any notice of the fact of slavery,
either for the purpose of excusing the man himself from the tax, or of throwing it upon the
person claiming to be his owner? Must the government of the United States find a man's pretended
owner, or only the man himself, before they can tax him? Clearly the United States are not
bound to tax any one but the individual himself, or to hold any other person responsible for
the tax. Any other principle would enable the state governments to defeat any tax of this kind
levied by the United States. Yet a man's liability to be held personally responsible for the
payment of a tax, levied upon himself by the government of the United States, is inconsistent
with the idea that the government is bound to recognize him as not having the ownership of
his own person.

   Second.

Congress, then, having the exclusive power of regulating this commerce, they only (if any body)
can say who may, and who may not, carry it on; and probably even they have no power to discriminate
arbitrarily between individuals.--But, in no event, have the state governments any right to
say who may, or who may not, carry on "commerce with foreign nations," or "among the several
states," or "with the Indian tribes." Every individual--naturally competent to make contracts--whom
the state laws declare to be a slave, probably has, and certainly may have, under the regulations
of congress, as perfect a right to carry on "commerce with foreign nations, and among the several
states, and with the Indian tribes," as any other citizen of the United States can have--"any
thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding." Yet this right
of carrying on commerce is a right entirely inconsistent with the idea of a man's being a slave.

Again. It is a principle of law that the right of traffic is a natural right, and that all
commerce (that is intrinsically innocent) is therefore lawful, except what is prohibited by
positive legislation. Traffic with the slaves, either by people of foreign nations, or by people
belonging to other states than the slaves, has never (so far as I know) been prohibited by
congress, which is the only government, (if any,) that has power to prohibit it. Traffic with
the slaves is therefore as lawful at this moment, under the constitution of the United States,
as is traffic with their masters; and this fact is entirely inconsistent with the idea that
their bondage is constitutional.

   Third. "The congress shall have power to establish post offices and
   post roads."

Who, but congress, have any right to say who may send, or receive letters by the United States
posts? Certainly no one. They have undoubted authority to permit any one to send and receive
letters by their posts--"any thing in the constitutions or laws of the states to the contrary
notwithstanding." Yet the right to send and receive letters by post, is a right inconsistent
with the idea of a man's being a slave.

   Fourth.

Suppose a man, whom a state may pretend to call a slave, should make an invention or discovery--congress
have undoubted power to secure to such individual himself, by patent, the "exclusive"--(mark
the word)--the "exclusive right" to his invention or discovery. But does not this "exclusive
right" in the inventor himself, exclude the right of any man, who, under a state law, may claim
to be the owner of the inventor? Certainly it does. Yet the slave code says that whatever is
a slave's is his owner's. This power, then, on the part of congress, to secure to an individual
the exclusive right to his inventions and discoveries, is a power inconsistent with the idea
that that individual himself, and all he may possess, are the property of another.

   Fifth.

Have not congress authority, under these powers, to enlist soldiers and sailors, by contract
with themselves, and to pay them their wages, grant them pensions, and secure their wages and
pensions to their own use, without asking the permission either of the state governments, or
of any individuals whom the state governments may see fit to recognize as the owners of such
soldiers and sailors? Certainly they have, in defiance of all state laws and constitutions
whatsoever; and they have already asserted that principle by enacting that pensions, paid by
the United States to their soldiers, shall not be liable to be taken for debt, under the laws
of the states. Have they not authority also to grant letters of marque and reprisal, and to
secure the prizes, to a ship's crew of blacks, as well as of whites? To those whom the State
governments call slaves, as well as to those whom the state governments call free?--Have not
congress authority to make contracts, for the defence of the nation, with any and all the inhabitants
of the nation, who may be willing to perform the service? Or are they obliged first to ask
and obtain the consent of those private individuals who may pretend to own the inhabitants
of this nation? Undoubtedly congress have the power to contract with whom they please, and
to secure wages and pensions to such individuals, in contempt of all state authority. Yet this
power is inconsistent with the idea that the constitution recognizes or sanctions the legality
of slavery.

   Sixth.

Have not congress, under these powers, as undoubted authority to enroll in the militia, and
"arm" those whom the states call slaves, and authorize them always to keep their arms by them,
even when not on duty, (that they may at all times be ready to be "called forth" "to execute
the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions,") as they have thus to
enroll and arm those whom the states call free? Can the state governments determine who may,
and who may not compose the militia of the "United States?"

These provisions obviously recognize the natural right of all men "to keep and bear arms" for
their personal defence; and prohibit both congress and the state governments from infringing
the right of "the people"--that is, of any of the people--to do so; and more especially of
any whom congress have power to include in their militia. This right of a man "to keep and
bear arms," is a right palpably inconsistent with the idea of his being a slave. Yet the right
is secured as effectually to those whom the states presume to call slaves, as to any whom the
states condescend to acknowledge free.

Under this provision any man has a right either to give or sell arms to those persons whom
the states call slaves; and there is no constitutional power, in either the national or state
governments, that can punish him for so doing; or that can take those arms from the slaves;
or that can make it criminal for the slaves to use them, if, from the inefficiency of the laws,
it should become necessary for them to do so, in defence of their own lives or liberties; for
this constitutional right to keep arms implies the constitutional right to use them, if need
be, for the defence of one's liberty or life.

Seventh. The constitution of the United States declares that "no state shall pass any law impairing
the obligation of contracts."

"The obligation of contracts," here spoken of, is, of necessity, the natural obligation; for
that is the only real or true obligation that any contracts can have. It is also the only obligation,
which courts recognize in any case, except where legislatures arbitrarily interfere to impair
it. But the prohibition of the constitution is upon the states' passing any law whatever that
shall impair the natural obligation of men's contracts. Yet, if slave laws were constitutional,
they would effectually impair the obligation of all contracts entered into by those who are
made slaves; for the slave laws must necessarily hold that all a slave's contracts are void.

This prohibition upon the states to pass any law impairing the natural obligation of men's
contracts, implies that all men have a constitutional right to enter into all contracts that
have a natural obligation. It therefore secures the constitutional right of all men to enter
into such contracts, and to have them respected by the state governments. Yet this constitutional
right of all men to enter into all contracts that have a natural obligation, and to have those
contracts recognized by law as valid, is a right plainly inconsistent with the idea that men
can constitutionally be made slaves.

This provision therefore absolutely prohibits the passage of slave laws, because laws that
make men slaves must necessarily impair the obligation of all their contracts.

Eighth. Persons, whom some of the state governments recognize as slaves, are made eligible,
by the constitution of the United States, to the office of president of the United States.
No other qualifications than these being required by the constitution, no others can be legally
demanded. The only question, then, that can arise, is as to the word "citizen." Who are the
persons that come within this definition, as here used? The clause itself divides them into
two classes, to wit, the "natural born," and those who were "citizens of the United States
at the time of the adoption of the constitution." In regard to this latter class, it has before
been shown, from the preamble to the constitution, that all who were "people of the United
States," (that is, permanent inhabitants,) at the time the constitution was adopted, were made
citizens by it. And this clause, describing those eligible to the office of president, implies
the same thing. The Confederation had no citizens. It was a mere league between the state governments.
The separate states belonging to the confederacy had each their own citizens respectively.
But the confederation itself, as such, had no citizens. There were, therefore, no "citizens
of the United States," (but only citizens of the respective states,) before the adoption of
the constitution.--Yet this clause asserts that immediately on the adoption, or "at the time
of the adoption of this constitution," there were "citizens of the United States." Those, then,
who were "citizens of the United States at the time of the adoption of the constitution," were
necessarily those, and only those, who had been made so by the adoption of the constitution;
because they could have become citizens at that precise "time" in no other way. If, then, any
persons were made citizens by the adoption of the constitution, who were the individuals that
were thus made citizens? They were "the people of the United States," of course--as the preamble
to the constitution virtually asserts. "Supper's ready," called the cooks, an' when I gave a whoop an'
bolted for it he giggled like a big fat mammy. I had turned up the side of his nature 'at would
be most useful to our business. I took a sip o' the coffee while he kept his eyes glued on me. "Come
over here, Jim," I called.

Jim came over lookin' a little anxious. "Taste that stuff," sez I.

He tasted it an' his face changed as though he had caught a vision of the better world, but I
kept my face like the face of an angry bear. "What do you call this stuff?" I asked the cook, an'
his face grew dark as a thunder cloud.

"That's coffee!" he roared.

"When was the pot cleaned?" I asked, with my brows drawn down to the bridge of my nose.

"Not more'n ten minutes ago," he yelled; and I got up an' holding
my cup in my hand I danced about twenty different dances, while that
cook like to split his sides laughin'.

He was a cook, the' was no gettin' around it, an' Jim, he turned in an' fed his face while first
his cheeks would dimple with the gladness o' the moment, an' then his eyes would sadden as he
thought of all the good eatin' he had missed by not knowin' the proper
kind o' diplomacy to use in handlin' a cook.

   An' me!--say, I mowed away until my skin begun to creak under the
strain an' I couldn't roll my eyes more'n two degrees.

Then I got up an' I shook hands with the cook.

"Cook," I sez, "no matter how devilish wicked you've been in the past, an' no matter how faithful
you live up to your inner nature in the future, you're sure of a number nine crown an' a spotless
robe jest fer this one meal"; an' the cook, he fairly glistened in the firelight.

Well, this was about all they was to that expedition. We all got to be so friendly with one another
that by the time we had trailed that bunch into the stock yards, we was like one big family
of elder brothers, an' Jim, he teased me into goin' back to the Pan Handle with him.

Jim was an Englishman--a younger brother. Up to that time I had allus supposed 'at bein' a younger
brother was somewhat in the nature of an accident, an' not a thing to be hurled in a feller's
teeth; but over in England it's looked upon as a heinius crime, an' the only thing a younger
brother can do to square himself is to get out o' sight. That's how Tim happened to be in the
Texas Pan Handle with a tidy little fortune his aunt had left him, tucked away in a good-sized,
well-stocked ranch.

I took a good deal o' pains with him, 'cause he didn't have nothin'
but a book education, an' it wasn't altogether easy to get him to
see the true value o' things.

He used to talk about Eton an' Oxford purty solemn, until one night
he helped me mill the herd durin' a Norther', an' after that he took
more kindly to the vital things o' life, but he was a man, Jim was,
an' he kept raisin' my wages right along until I got that opulent
feelin'.

   I never could stand prosperity those days; just as soon as I had
a weight o' money 'at I could notice, I begun to grow restless, an'
nothin' 'at Jim could do or say had much effect.

If things hadn't run in oil, I'd a-stayed right along, I reckon; but it got so 'at the' wasn't
a hitch from week to week, an' I couldn't stand it. I never had a better friend in the world'n
that cook was after he'd saved my life.

Jim had a kid sort o' chorin' around the place an' keepin' us from gettin' old an' stupid. One nice
bright winter's day the kid went out for a ride; his pony came lopin' in just at sun down in the
face of a blizzard, an' I went out to look for the kid. I found him trudgin' toward home an'
cussin' his luck somethin' terrible. I put him up behind me an' by that time the wind was
shootin' needles o' sleet into my face 'till I couldn't see a yard ahead. The kid snuggled up
to me an' went to sleep, an' I gave the pony his head an' trusted to luck--no, come to think
about it, that night I trusted to somethin' higher than luck, 'cause it was a perfect demon
of a night.

The pony dropped from a lope to a walk an' then he put his nose to the ground an' fairly shuffled
along. I was wearin' sheepskin with the wool on, but after a time the needles began to creep in
an' I grew numb as a stone, while my flesh seemed shook loose from my bones, an' it hurt me to breathe.
Oh, Lord, but it was cold! If it hadn't 'a' been for the kid I'd have gotten down an' walked alongside
the pony, but as it was, he was out o' the wind an' sleepin' peaceful, so I just sat an' took
it.

At last I sort o' drowsed off myself. I didn't sleep, but I wasn't awake; I seemed to be back
at the Diamond Dot an' playin' in a little sheltered dell with Barbie. She had made up a game
called Fairy Princess; sometimes she was the Fairy Princess an' sometimes I was, an' it was a mighty
amusin' sort of a game, but different from most o' the games I was
familiar with.

Well, that night out in the Texas blizzard I was playin' that game with little Barbie, an' all of a sudden--smash!
Before I knowed what had happened we had been run into an' knocked down a ravine an' both
the kid an' the pony was lyin' on top o' me. The kid got up an' begun to cuss as usual, but the
pony never moved. I'd a heap sight rather had the conditions reversed, 'cause the pony was
on my right leg an' my right leg was on a sharp stone.

"Shut up, kid," sez I, "this ain't no time for such talk. Here, you curl up alongside the pony
an' I'll spread part o' my coat over you."

That kid was a home-maker all right; nothin' ever surprised him, an' wherever he lit he made
himself comfortable. In two minutes he was asleep, while I began to puzzle it out. We were in a sheltered
spot an' the wind swept above us; but it was so dark that you couldn't see ten inches. The wind
was from the no'th, an' I went over every bit o' landscape in the country until at last I figgered
out the' was only one place in Texas that filled the bill. A path swung around a crag an'
the' was a shelf of stone ten feet below it an' eight feet wide, then it cut off sheer, fifty
feet to the rocky bank of a creek. I reached out with my hand an' felt the edge of it, an' it
give me an awful chill. I don't like to come quite so close.

After a time the wind veered around a little more to the east an' then it sucked up through
the cut an' I began to freeze. I didn't care a great deal 'cause it stopped the horrid hurtin'
in my leg; but the dead pony began to cool, an' I knew it was only
a question o' minutes.

Finally I awoke the kid. "Where is your gun, kid?" I sez.

"I shot all my catridges tryin' to bring some one out on a pony," sez the kid, drowsily, an'
then he dozes off again.

We were only a mile from the ranch house; it was again the wind an' it wasn't much use to waste ammunition,
but I finally got out my gun an' begun to shoot at intervals.

"What the deuce you makin' that racket for?" grunted the kid at the third shot. I boxed his ears
and went on shootin' until at last the cold went through sheepskin an' woolens an' hide an'
flesh, an' I grew warm an' contented; an' the next I knew, the cook was rubbin' my wrists an'
pourin' hot coffee into me. I was purty mad at bein' dragged back to earth an' grumbled about
it free an' hearty, but the cook kept croonin' to me the same as if I'd been a baby: "Neveh
mind, honey, neveh mind; ol' Monody'll bring ya around all right. Take another sip o' coffee,
chile, that's right, that's right."

   
It took me quite a spell before I could tell whether I was alive or
not, 'cause while the cook had changed a heap since I'd first met
up with him, I'd never heard any such talk as this; but after a time
I came out of it an' the anguish I underwent gettin' back to life
wasn't nowise worth the experiment.

It had stopped blowin', but it was colder than ever, an' at last I began to take enough interest
in things to want 'em to get settled one way or another. As soon as I was able to think along
a straight line, the cook would give a heave to the pony an' I would give myself a jerk. The lantern
shed a splash o' light on the shelf, but the jump-off looked like the mouth o' the pit, an'
I jerked purty tol'able careful. At last I was out, an' if you'll believe it, my leg was only
broke in two places. I thought it was broken clear off. I couldn't get back up the cliff to the
trail any way we could figger, so the cook said I should roll up in the Navajos he'd brought an'
he'd take the kid an' go back an' bring a couple o' the boys an' pack me in.

The kid had found the blankets all right an' had rolled himself up,
an' we had to shake the stuffin' out of him to rouse him again.

He complained most bitter when he found he had to go back to the ranch house; but at last they got
started an' it wasn't long before they had me there too, an' next day Phil McLaughlin rode
over an' brought out a doctor who lined up my bones as good as new, while Jim told me about the
cook.

Old Monody was like a salamander for heat, an' you couldn't drag him away from the fire in the
winter time; but when I didn't return he began to worry: "If the' was a man left in this outfit
I reckon he'd go out an' get him," he'd say scornful. "Riders! you call yourselves riders?
You're loafers an' eaters, that's what you are! I'm a cook, but if nobody else has the nerve
to go an' git him, I'll go myself."

Jim started to go at last, but he wouldn't let him. "You got the grit, Jim, but you ain't got
the night sense yet. You stay where you are or you'd be on our hands
too."

Well, he steamed up an' down makin' new hot coffee an' drinkin' it by the bowl. All of a sudden
he give a scream: "Oh, oh! there he goes over the cliff! Get me a pony--get me a pony, while I
wrap up some coffee an' pick out some blankets!" Well, the cook was so blame wild by this time
'at they was glad to get shut of him; so they rigged him out an' he rode a bee line right to
me, an' what led him you can figger out for yourselves. He was a queer cook, but after that night
he was different: he acted as though he had adopted me; he petted me an' spoiled me an' you can
talk all you want to about the flesh-pots of Egypt--why, that cook
could fix beans eleven different ways, an' each one better'n the other.

But

while I was lyin' there waitin' for my leg to knit up, I kept thinkin' o' the little lass back at the
Diamond Dot, an' when I got about again, I knew I was signed for a trip No'th.

The cook was mighty good to me while I was backin' it; he used to deal out fussy little fixin's
'at kept the appetite an' the fever both down, an' when they wasn't no one around he used to
pat out my pillers an' oncet he smoothed back my hair. He cut out his cussin' too, an' he
used to line up the kid for it.

"You're from the South, ain't ya, Happy?" sez he to me one day.

"Not so you could notice," sez I. "I reckon this is the southest I ever got before."

"Hu," sez the cook, "Texas ain't south. Texas is just the rubbish heap o' this whole country. Where
did you hook up to that word 'reckon'?"

"I dunno," sez I, thinkin' back. "A feller just catches words like the mumps, I suppose; but
my pap, he used to use it right often."

"Where did your folks come from?" sez the cook.

"Oh, they come from Kentucky, an' before that from Virginia an' No'th Carolina, an' before that
they came from Scotch Irish an' English, an' go clear back to Adam an' you'll find us Hawkinses
was a ramblin' crew, I reckon; but what on earth you drivin' at, Monody, an' where on earth
did your line hail from?"

He sat there a moment with lights an' shades dartin' over his ugly face, which somehow wasn't ugly
to me any more, an' at last he said: "I have the blood of an Injun chief an' an African king an' a
Spanish nobleman in my veins, an'--"

"Lord, man, you ought to let some of it out," I interrupted.

"You'll have an eruption in your in'ards some day 'at'll blow you into a million pieces."

"No, I got 'em all whipped out now, Happy, an' I reckon 'at you did it. You 're the only man
I ever met 'at I ain't once felt like killin'."

"It's pleasant to think o' what a good neighbor you've been all your life, cook; but I'm glad
you've turned over since I met up with you. Anyhow, you've been a
heap o' comfort to me, an' anything I got is on your list too, don't
you never forget it."

But just the same, as soon as I got up an'
around again, I had a terrible tuggin' from the no'th an' I couldn't
resist it. I'd be makin' plans for the summer an' then all of a sudden
I'd find myself sayin, "What in the world do you reckon 'at that child
is doin' now. She'll be eight years old shortly, an' I simply have
to see her on her next birthday, even if she don't see me." At last
I couldn't stand it no longer, so I told the boys I had to cut, an'
it fell like a stone on a lamp chimney; but the cook, he took it harder'n
any one else. I liked the boys an' I liked Jim an' I liked the job;
but there was that tuggin' allus at my heart, an' in the end I set
a day. Jim, he made me all kinds of offers, 'cause things were gettin'
easy with him; but when I made it clear to him, he saw how it was
an' he sez: "I know 'at you'll come back to me some day, Happy, an'
if you'll settle down, you can be a rich man. I've kept back five
hundred dollars for you 'at I haven't mentioned in your wages, an'
you can take your pick o' the colts an' just as soon as you've had
your little flier I want you back; we all want you back."

It's a
comfortin' feelin' to know 'at you're goin' to be missed; but I couldn't
savvy that cook. He had one big tearin' time of it an' sluiced himself
out with gin an' dug up his old profanity, an' then he simmered down
an' just cooked himself into a new record. Gee! it was hard to separate
from that mess table; but I had set my day an' the' was no goin' back.

Jim
had a black Arabian stallion an' a couple o' high grade mares an'
he was showin' up something fancy in the hoss line. He raised the
colts just like range ponies, an' while they wasn't quite so tough
when it came to livin' on sage brush an' pleasant memories, they could
eat up the ground like a prairie fire, an' they was gentle. I bought
a silver trimmed bridle an' some Mexican didoes, an' then I said good-bye
to all of 'em except the cook--he wasn't there.

I hunted for him
an hour; but he had so many peculiar ways 'at I just let it go at
that an' finally gave him up; so I left him a nifty present an' pulled
out with about a thousand yellow ones in my belt an' the best mount
in the West.

I hadn't gone more than two miles before I turned a
corner an' came face to face with ol' Monody. He was settin' on a
big bald-faced roan, an' he had a serious look on his face. "Well,
I wondered if you was goin' to let me go away without sayin' good-bye,"
sez I, tryin' to talk light an' easy.

"I'd be apt to," sez he. "Why,
I've been peacefuller since you been here'n ever I was in my life
before, an' it ain't likely I'd let you scoot out an' leave me. I'm
goin' along."

Well, what do you think of that! Me startin' up to
where I wasn't sure of a welcome an' takin' such a tow as ol' Monody
along with me. I argued with him for an hour, an' then I got hot an'
told him that merely savin' my life didn't give him no mortgage on
me an' that he couldn't nowise keep up with me, an' by the time he
reached the Diamond Dot, the chances were 'at I'd be on my way back
to the Lion Head. He didn't waste no time in words, just sat sour
an' moody, an' every tine I'd stop he'd growl out, "I don't care where
you go or how fast you go or nothin' at all about it. I'm goin' along,
an' I'll catch up with you sometime."

I sure gave him a chase; I
wanted the black hoss to show up well when I landed, but I sent him
along pretty steady an' took extra care of him. Ol' Monody had picked
out the toughest pony at the Lion Head, an' he had good hands, but
he never sighted me till the night I reached the ranch and was busy
wipin' Starlight's legs. If the general and state constitutions had each a different body of electors within
each state, it would obviously give rise at once to implacable and irreconcilable feuds, that
would result in the overthrow of one or the other of the governments within the state. Harmony
or inveterate conflict was the only alternative. As conflict would necessarily result in the
destruction of one of the governments, harmony was the only mode by which both could be preserved.
And this harmony could be secured only by giving to the same body of electors, suffrage in
both the governments.

If, then, it was indispensable to the existence and authority of both governments, within the
territory of each state, that the same body, and only the same body of electors, that were
represented in one of the governments, should be represented in the other, it was clearly indispensable,
in order that the national one should be republican, that the state governments should be republican
also. Hence the interest which the nation at large have in the republicanism of each of the
state governments.

It being necessary that the suffrage under the national government, within each state, should
be the same as for the state government, it is apparent that unless the several state governments
were all formed on one general plan, or unless the electors of all the states were united in
the acknowledgement of some general controlling principle, applicable to both governments,
it would be impossible that they could unite in the maintenance of a general government that
should act in harmony with the state governments; because the same body of electors, that should
support a despotic government in the state, could not consistently or cordially unite, or even
unite at all, in the support of a republican government for the nation. If one portion of the
state governments should be republican, like Vermont, where suffrage is open to all--and another
portion should be oligarchies, like South Carolina, and the other slave states--another portion
limited monarchies, like England--another portion ecclesiastical, like that of the Pope of
Rome, or that of the ancient Jews--and another portion absolute despotisms, like that of Nicholas,
in Russia, or that of Francia, in Paraguay,--and the same body, and only the same body, of
electors, that sustained each of these governments at home, should be represented in the national
government, each state would send into the national legislature the representatives of its
own peculiar system of government; and the national legislature, instead of being composed
of the representatives of any one theory, or principle of government, would be made up of the
representatives of all the various theories of government that prevailed in the different states--from
the extreme of democracy to the extreme of despotism. And each of these various representatives
would be obliged to carry his local principles into the national legislature, else he could
not retain the confidence of his peculiar constituents. The consequence would be, that the
national legislature would present the spectacle of a perfect Babel of discordant tongues,
elements, passions, interests and purposes, instead of an assembly united for the accomplishment
of any agreed or distinct object.

Without some distinct and agreed object as a bond of union, it would obviously be impracticable
for any general union of the whole people to subsist; and that bond of union, whatever it be,
must also harmonize with the principles of each of the state governments, else there would
be a collision between the general and state governments.

Now the great bond of union, agreed upon in the general government, was "the rights of man"--expressed
in the national constitution by the terms "liberty and justice." What other bond could have
been agreed upon? On what other principle of government could they all have united? Could they
have united to sustain the divine right of kings? The feudal privileges of nobles? Or the supremacy
of the Christian, Mahometan, or any other church? No. They all denied the divine right of kings,
and the feudal rights of nobles; and they were of all creeds in religion. But they were agreed
that all men had certain natural, inherent, essential and inalienable rights, among which were
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness; and that the preservation of these rights was the
legitimate purpose of governments among men. They had avowed this principle before the world,
had fought for it, and successfully defended it, against the mightiest power in the world.
They had filled the world with its glory; and it, in turn, had filled the world with theirs.
It had also gathered, and was then gathering, choice spirits, and large numbers of the oppressed
from other nations unto them. And this principle--in which were involved the safety, interests
and rights of each and every one of "the people," who were to unite for the formation of the
government--now furnished a bond of union, that was at once sufficient, legitimate, consistent,
honorable, of universal application, and having more general power over the hearts and heads
of all of them, than any other that could be found to hold them together. It comported with
their theory of the true objects of government. This principle, therefore, they adopted as
the corner-stone of their national government; and, as a matter of necessity, all other things,
on which this new government was in any degree to depend, or which was to depend in any degree
upon this government, were then made to conform to this principle. Hence the propriety of the
power given to the general government, of "guaranteeing to every state in the Union a republican
form of government." Had not this power been given to the general government, the majorities
in each state might have converted the state governments into oligarchies, aristocracies, monarchies
or despotisms, that should not only have trampled upon the minorities, and defeated their enjoyment
of the national constitution, but also introduced such factions and feuds into the national
governments, as would have distracted its councils, and prostrated its power.

But there were also motives of a pecuniary and social, as well as political nature, that made
it proper that the nation should guarantee to the states a republican form of government.

Commerce was to be established between the people of the different states. The commerce of
a free people is many times more valuable than that of slaves. Freemen produce and consume
vastly more than slaves. They have therefore more to buy and more to sell. Hence the free states
have a direct pecuniary interest in the civil freedom of all the other states. Commerce between
free and slave states is not reciprocal or equal. Who can measure the increase that would have
been made to the industry and prosperity of the free states, if all the slaves in the country
had been freemen, with all the wants and energies of freemen? And their masters had had all
the thrift, industry, frugality and enterprise of men who depend upon their own labor, instead
of the labor of slaves, for their prosperity? Great Britain thought it policy to carry on a
seven years' war against us principally to secure to herself the control and benefits of the
commerce of three millions of people and their posterity. But we now have nearly or quite the
same number of slaves within our borders, and yet we think that commerce with them and their
posterity is a matter with which we have no concern; that there is "no propriety" in that provision
of the national constitution, which requires that the general government--which we have invested
with the exclusive control of all commerce among the several states--should secure to these
three millions the right of traffic with their fellow men, and to their fellow men the right
of traffic with them, against the impertinent usurpations and tyranny of subordinate governments,
that have no constitutional right to interfere in the matter.

Again. The slave states, in proportion to their population, contribute nothing like an equal
or equitable share to the aggregate of national wealth. It would probably be within the truth
to say that, in proportion to numbers, the people of the free states have contributed ten times
as much to the national wealth as the people of the slave states. Even for such wealth as the
culture of their great staple, cotton, has added to the nation, the south are indebted principally,
if not entirely, to the inventive genius of a single northern man.[26] The agriculture of the
slave states is carried on with rude and clumsy implements; by listless, spiritless and thriftless
laborers; and in a manner speedily to wear out the natural fertility of the soil, which fertility
slave cultivation seldom or never replaces. The mechanic arts are comparatively dead among
them. Invention is utterly dormant. It is doubtful whether either a slave or a slave holder
has ever invented a single important article of labor-saving machinery since the foundation
of the government. And they have hardly had the skill or enterprise to apply any of those invented
by others. Who can estimate the loss of wealth to the nation from these causes alone? Yet we
of the free states give to the south a share in the incalculable wealth produced by our inventions
and labor-saving machinery, our steam engines, and cotton gins, and manufacturing machinery
of all sorts, and yet say at the same time that we have no interest, and that there is "no
propriety" in the constitutional guaranty of that personal freedom to the people of the south,
which would enable them to return us some equivalent in kind.

For the want, too, of an enforcement of this guaranty of a republican form of government to
each of the states, the population of the country, by the immigration of foreigners, has no
doubt been greatly hindered. Multitudes almost innumerable, who would have come here, either
from a love of liberty, or to better their conditions, and given the country the benefit of
their talents, industry and wealth, have no doubt been dissuaded or deterred by the hideous
tyranny that rides triumphant in one half of the nation, and extends its pestiferous and detested
influence over the other half.

Socially, also, we have an interest in the freedom of all the states. We have an interest in
free personal intercourse with all the people living under a common government with ourselves.
We wish to be free to discuss, with any and all of them, all the principles of liberty and
all the interests of humanity. We wish, when we meet a fellow man, to be at liberty to speak
freely with him of his and our condition; to be at liberty to do him a service; to advise with
him as to the means of improving his condition; and, if need be, to ask a kindness at his hands.
But all these things are incompatible with slavery. Is this such an union as we bargained for?
Was it "nominated in the bond," that we should be cut off from these the common rights of human
nature? If so, point to the line and letter, where it is so written. Neither of them are to
be found. But the contrary is expressly guarantied against the power of both the governments,
state and national; for the national government is prohibited from passing any law abridging
the freedom of speech and the press, and the state governments are prohibited from maintaining
any other than a republican form of government, which of course implies the same freedom.

The nation at large have still another interest in the republicanism of each of the states;
an interest, too, that is indicated in the same section in which this republicanism is guarantied.
This interest results from the fact that the nation are pledged to "protect" each of the states
"against domestic violence." Was there no account taken--in reference either to the cost or
the principle of this undertaking--as to what might be the character of the state governments,
which we are thus pledged to defend against the risings of the people? Did we covenant, in
this clause, to wage war against the rights of man? Did we pledge ourselves that those, however
few, who might ever succeed in getting the government of a state into their hands, should thenceforth
be recognized as the legitimate power of the state, and be entitled to the whole force of the
general government to aid them in subjecting the remainder of the people to the degradation
and injustice of slavery? Or did the nation undertake only to guarantee the preservation of
"a republican form of government" against the violence of those who might prove its enemies?
The reason of the thing, and the connexion, in which the two provisions stand in the constitution,
give the answer.

We have yet another interest still, and that no trivial one, in the republicanism of the state
governments; an interest indicated, too, like the one last mentioned, in the very section in
which this republicanism is assured. It relates to the defence against invasion. The general
government is pledged to defend each of the states against invasion. Is it a thing of no moment,
whether we have given such a pledge to free or to slave states? Is there no difference in the
cost and hazard of defending one or the other? Is it of no consequence to the expense of life
and money, involved in this undertaking, whether the people of the state invaded shall be united,
as freemen naturally will be, as one man against the enemy? Or whether, as in slave states,
half of them shall be burning to join the enemy, with the purpose of satisfying with blood
the long account of wrong that shall have accrued against their oppressors? Did Massachusetts--who
during the war of the revolution furnished more men for the common defence, than all the six
southern states together--did she, immediately on the close of that war, pledge herself, as
the slave holders would have it, that she would lavish her life in like manner again, for the
defence of those whose wickedness and tyranny in peace should necessarily multiply their enemies
and make them defenceless in war? If so, on what principle, or for what equivalent, did she
do it? Did she not rather take care that the guaranty for a republican government should be
inserted in the same paragraph with that for protection against invasion, in order that both
the principle and the extent of the liability she incurred, might distinctly appear?

The nation at large, then, as a political community under the constitution, have both interests
and rights, and both of the most vital character, in the republicanism of each of the state
governments. The guaranty given by the national constitution, securing such a government to
each of the states, is therefore neither officious nor impertinent. On the contrary, this guaranty
was a sine qua non to any national contract of union; and the enforcement of it is equally
indispensable, if not to the continuance of the union at all, certainly to its continuance
on any terms that are either safe, honorable or equitable for the north.

This guaranty, then, is not idle verbiage. It is full of meaning. And that meaning is not only
fatal to slavery itself, but it is fatal also to all those pretences, constructions, surmises
and implications, by which it is claimed that the national constitution sanctions, legalizes,
or even tolerates slavery.

[Footnote 18: This language of the Supreme Court contains an admission of the truth of the
charge just made against judges, viz: that rather than lose their offices, they will violate
what they know to be law, in subserviency to the legislatures on whom they depend; for it admits,
1st, that the preservation of men's rights is the vital principle of law, and, 2d, that courts,
(and the Supreme Court of the United States in particular,) will trample upon that principle
at the bidding of the legislature, when the mandate comes in the shape of a statute of such
"irresistible clearness," that its meaning cannot be evaded.]

[Footnote 19: "Laws are construed strictly to save a right."--Whitney et al. vs. Emmett et
al., 1 Baldwin, C.C.R. 316. He said he "saw no more propriety in the public seizing and surrendering
a slave or servant, than a horse."--Madison Papers, p. 1447-8.

The language finally adopted shows that they at last agreed to deliver up "servants," but not
"slaves"--for as the word "servant" does not mean "slave," the word "service" does not mean
slavery. 

"Yes, you blasted rattler," sez he, with a grin, "you're the killin' kind an' you're the killin'
age, but I know when the jig's up. I know your name all right, but hanged if I can see through
your game. I ain't goin' to try, either. As long as you choose to play at bein' foreman, I'll
play at bein' cook, an' when you start on again, I'm willin' to join ya. I'll get your supper
in a jiffey, Kid."

I sauntered over to the fair-hair, tryin' to act as if this was an every day occurrence. He
had never changed his position all through it, although his hands were tremblin'.

I sat down beside him an' he chuckled softly--I liked that chuckle. It was boyish an' friendly,
but most of all it showed a good foundation. He was new to the game,
but he was the kind that learned.

"I suppose I'm purt nigh as old as you," he blurted out.

"In some things, mebbe--not in the cattle business," sez I.

"No," he grinned, "nor in the man-handlin' business, but I want to tell you right now that I
have enjoyed this evenin's performance, no matter what happens from it. I ain't carryin' much cash
with me," he added after a moment's thought.

"I ain't carryin' any," sez I.

He looked into my face again an' gave his chuckle. A feller couldn't help but echo when that
fair-hair chuckled. "I heard the cook say he knew you an' he called you Kid--I suppose you are
the Pan Handle Kid?" he asked.

"I didn't know the' was a Pan Handle Kid, but they're pretty common an' they're all a good bit
alike. Forced to begin killin' before they're able to put the right value on life, an' once
they begin, no way to stop.

Now I'll tell you confidential that I'm not the Pan Handle, nor any
other kind of a kid, although I once was the makin' of one.

Still, it will make matters easier if this bunch thinks I am, so
we'll just let it go at that.

My name is Happy Hawkins; what might I call you?"

"Happy?"--he opens
his eyes like saucers an' then he laughs like a boy. "Well, I watched
you goin' after the cook with the neck yoke an' I never in the world
would have called you Happy."

"Well, you'll see me trail in this
bunch o' beef cattle, smooth an' contented an' with every man jack
rollin' fat an' dimpled to the knuckles. They've had their last fuss.
I'll feed 'em an' I'll work 'em from now on, an' you won't know 'em
when we hit the market. Where you headin' for, K.C.?

"Yes. My name
is Mister Jamison--James Jamison."

"This is a warm climate," sez
I.

"Yes," he sez sort o' surprised, "it is."

"It has an awful meltin'
effect on names," I continued.

He chuckled again. "I'm mighty glad
you arrived, Happy," sez he. "What do you suppose'll happen to my
name?"

"Well"

The intentions of the framers of the constitution, (if we could have, as we cannot, any legal
knowledge of them, except from the words of the constitution,) have nothing to do with fixing
the legal meaning of the constitution. That convention were not delegated to adopt or establish
a constitution; but only to consult, devise and recommend. The instrument, when it came from
their hands, was a mere proposal, having no legal force or authority. It finally derived all
its validity and obligation, as a frame of government, from its adoption by the people at large.[27]
Of course the intentions of the people at large are the only ones, that are of any importance
to be regarded in determining the legal meaning of the instrument. And their intentions are
to be gathered entirely from the words, which they adopted to express them. And their intentions
must be presumed to be just what, and only what the words of the instrument legally express.
In adopting the constitution, the people acted as legislators, in the highest sense in which
that word can be applied to human lawgivers. They were establishing a law that was to govern
both themselves and their government. And their intentions, like those of other legislators,
are to be gathered from the words of their enactments. Such is the dictate of both law and
common sense.[28] The instrument had been reported by their committee, the convention. But
the people did not ask this committee what was the legal meaning of the instrument reported.
They adopted it, judging for themselves of its legal meaning, as any other legislative body
would have done. The people at large had not even an opportunity of consultation with the members
of the convention, to ascertain their opinions. And even if they had consulted them, they would
not have been bound at all by their opinions. But being unable to consult them, they were compelled
to adopt or reject the instrument, on their own judgment of its meaning, without any reference
to the opinions of the convention. The instrument, therefore, is now to be regarded as expressing
the intentions of the people at large; and not the intentions of the convention, if the convention
had any intentions differing from the meaning which the law gives to the words of the instrument.

But why do the partizans of slavery resort to the debates of the convention for evidence that
the constitution sanctions slavery? Plainly for no other reason than because the words of the
instrument do not sanction it. But can the intentions of that convention, attested only by
a mere skeleton of its debates, and not by any impress upon the instrument itself, add any
thing to the words, or to the legal meaning of the words of the constitution? Plainly not.
Their intentions are of no more consequence, in a legal point of view, than the intentions
of any other equal number of the then voters of the country. Besides, as members of the convention,
they were not even parties to the instrument; and no evidence of their intentions, at that
time, is applicable to the case. They became parties to it only by joining with the rest of
the people in its subsequent adoption; and they themselves, equally with the rest of the people,
must then be presumed to have adopted its legal meaning, and that alone--notwithstanding any
thing they may have previously said. What absurdity then is it to set up the opinions expressed
in the convention, and by a few only of its members, in opposition to the opinions expressed
by the whole people of the country, in the constitution itself.

But notwithstanding the opinions expressed in the convention by some of the members, we are
bound, as a matter of law, to presume that the convention itself, in the aggregate, had no
intention of sanctioning slavery--and why? Because, after all their debates, they agreed upon
an instrument that did not sanction it. This was confessedly the result in which all their
debates terminated. This instrument is also the only authentic evidence of their intentions.
It is subsequent in its date to all the other evidence. It comes to us, also, as none of the
other evidence does, signed with their own hands. And is this to be set aside, and the constitution
itself to be impeached and destroyed, and free government overturned, on the authority of a
few meagre snatches of argument, intent or opinion, uttered by a few only of the members; jotted
down by one of them, (Mr. Madison,) merely for his own convenience, or from the suggestions
of his own mind; and only reported to us fifty years afterwards by a posthumous publication
of his papers? "Ah! Of course I know that. We considered the insurance companies in fixing the
indemnity. Hartford is the richest city in America in proportion to her population. Let's see.
Of her life insurance companies, the Aetna has assets of about a hundred and twenty million dollars;
the Travellers' about a hundred million; the Connecticut Mutual about seventy million; the
Phoenix Mutual about forty million--besides half a dozen small-fry fire insurance companies.
We're letting them off easily with twenty million dollars indemnity.

Don't you think so, Mr. Langston?"

This informal talk continued for some time, and I found the Prince possessed of equally accurate
and detailed information regarding other New England cities. It was
positively uncanny.

He inquired about the Bancroft Japanese collection in Worcester, Massachusetts, and wanted to know
the number of women students at Wellesley College. He asked if I had seen the portrait by Sir Joshua
Reynolds at the Athenaeum in Providence. He had full details about the United States Armory
at Springfield, and he asked many questions about the Yale-Harvard boat races at New London, most
of which I was, fortunately, able to answer.

Frederick William was curious to know what had given Newport its great popularity as a summer resort,
and asked me to compare the famous cottages of the Vanderbilts, the Belmonts, the Astors, along
the cliffs, with well-known country houses in England.

He knew that Siasconset on Nantucket Island was pronounced "Sconset," and he had read reports
on marine biology from Woods Hole. He even knew the number of watches made at Waltham every year,
and the number of shoes made at Lynn.

I was emboldened by the Crown Prince's good humour and friendly manner to ask the favour of an interview
for publication in the London Times, and, to my great satisfaction,
this was granted the next day when we were settled in our Hartford
quarters, with the result that I gained high commendation; in fact
my interview not only made a sensation in England, but was cabled
back to the United States and reprinted all over America. Needless
to say, it caused bitter resentment in both countries against Frederick
William. Or if the
guilty confessions of these conspirators should be revealed fifty years afterwards, would judicial
tribunals look to them as giving the government any authority for violating the legal meaning
of the words of such constitution, and for so construing them as to subserve the criminal and
shameless purposes of its originators?

The members of the convention, as such, were the mere scriveners of the constitution; and their
individual purposes, opinions or expressions, then uttered in secret cabal, though now revealed,
can no more be evidence of the intentions of the people who adopted the constitution, than
the secret opinions or expressions of the scriveners of any other contract can be offered to
prove the intentions of the true parties to such contract. As framers of the constitution,
the members of the convention gave to it no validity, meaning, or legal force. They simply
drafted it, and offered it, such as it legally might be, to the people for their adoption or
rejection. The people, therefore, in adopting it, had no reference whatever to the opinions
of the convention. They had no authentic evidence of what those opinions were. They looked
simply at the instrument. And they adopted even its legal meaning by a bare majority. If the
instrument had contained any tangible sanction of slavery, the people would sooner have had
it burned by the hands of the common hangman, than they would have adopted it, and thus sold
themselves as pimps to slavery, covered as they were with the scars they had received in fighting
the battles of freedom. And the members of the convention knew that such was the feeling of
a large portion of the people; and for that reason, if for no other, they dared insert in the
instrument no legal sanction of slavery. They chose rather to trust to their craft and influence
to corrupt the government, (of which they themselves expected to be important members,) after
the constitution should have been adopted, rather than ask the necessary authority directly
from the people. And the success they have had in corrupting the government, proves that they
judged rightly in presuming that the government would be more flexible than the people.

For other reasons, too, the people should not be charged with designing to sanction any of
the secret intentions of the convention. When the states sent delegates to the convention,
no avowal was made of any intention to give any national sanction to slavery. The articles
of confederation had given none; the then existing state constitutions gave none; and it could
not have been reasonably anticipated by the people that any would have been either asked for
or granted in the new constitution. If such a purpose had been avowed by those who were at
the bottom of the movement, the convention would doubtless never have been held. The avowed
objects of the convention were of a totally different character. Commercial, industrial and
defensive motives were the prominent ones avowed. When, then, the constitution came from the
hands of such a convention, unstained with any legal or tangible sanction of slavery, were
the people--who, from the nature of the case, could not assemble to draft one for themselves--bound
either to discard it, or hold themselves responsible for all the secret intentions of those
who had drafted it? Are there any redeeming traits in Stephano? Do you think Trinculo's jesting is
really funny? Would you like the play better if Stephano and Trinculo were left out of it? What
can you find in the boatswain's words to justify the opinion Gonzalo holds of him? Which is
the greater scoundrel, Sebastian or Antonio?

THE STORY or PLOT. A certain duke has been by treachery driven from his principality with his
infant daughter, and has found refuge on an uninhabited island. After many years those who plotted
against him are thrown into his power, he recovers his dukedom and marries his daughter to the son of
his king. Such, in brief, is the plot of The Tempest, but how wonderfully it is expanded,
and how many characters have been created, how many incidents created to give interest and
truthfulness to the narrative. Let us follow the play through, and by studying the relation of
the incidents, one to another, learn to appreciate more fully the art of the great magician
who wrote the play.

ACT I--SCENE I. Purpose: To introduce the enemies of Prospero. Do we know at the time of such a person
as Prospero? Do we know why the persons are on the ship, where they intended to go or where they
are now? When do we find out these things? What idea do you get of Gonzalo in the first scene?
Why is his conversation with the boatswain put into the play?

ACT I--SCENE II. Purpose: To bring before us all the leading characters in the play, and to tell us
enough about them to secure our interest; also to give us the history necessary to an understanding
of the plot. When do we first learn that there are miracles and magic in the play? How do we learn
what has happened to Prospero before the time of the storm? How do we learn Ariel's history? How are
we made acquainted with Caliban? How do we learn that Prospero raised the storm? How were
the mariners confused, and by whom were all saved? What did Prospero whisper in the ear of
Ariel when the latter came in after Prospero has called Caliban? What incident followed as a
result of this command? How did Ariel lead Ferdinand? Are there other places in the play where
Ariel leads people in the same way? What do you call the three most
important incidents in this scene?

What incidents could be left out of this scene without interfering with the development of the plot?

ACT
II--SCENE I. Purpose: To account for the presence of the plotters, and to show the character
of the men. Is it necessary to the development of the main plot that Sebastian and Antonio
should scheme to kill the king? Do any of the incidents of this scene have any direct bearing
on the main plot? Could any of the incidents of this scene be omitted
without injury to the play?

   

ACT II--SCENE II. Purpose: To create amusement, lighten the play and by contrast make the fine
parts more beautiful. Is any character in the scene absolutely essential to the completion of
the story? Would you understand the story as well if the entire scene were omitted?

ACT III--SCENE I. Purpose: To disclose Prospero's purpose more fully, and to secure our interest
in Ferdinand and Miranda.

ACT III--SCENE II. What is the purpose of this scene? What bearing do the incidents of this scene have
upon the main plot?

ACT III--SCENE III. What effect is the magic banquet to have on the persons who saw it? What
was Prospero's purpose in showing it? Did it contribute in any way to the success of his general
plan?

ACT IV--SCENE I. What incidents in this scene are necessary, and what
are introduced to give light and beauty to the play? What is the effect
of introducing Caliban and his companions right after Ariel and the
spirits have been entertaining Ferdinand and Miranda? What are Mountain,
Silver, Fury and Tyrant, mentioned in this scene?

ACT V--SCENE I.
What is the purpose of this scene? Is the plot brought to a satisfactory
conclusion? Are there any characters left unaccounted for? Does every
character in the play appear in this scene? Are they all on the stage
when the curtain falls?

Make a list of the incidents which to you
seem unnecessary, which could be left out without injury to the real
story. Make another list of incidents that could not be omitted without
spoiling the story. Find two little plots that make complete stories
in themselves, but that help only in a moderate degree to make the
main story clearer.

POETRY AND PROSE. Do any of the characters speak
always in prose? Do any speak always in poetry? Do some speak partly
in prose and partly in poetry? Is it not to get rid of all the fraud, and uncertainty, and disagreements
of oral testimony? Where would be our constitution, if, instead of its being a written instrument,
it had been merely agreed upon orally by the members of the convention? And by them only orally
reported to the people? And only this oral report of it had been adopted by the people? And
all our evidence of what it really was, had rested upon reports of what Mr. A, and Mr. B, members
of the convention, had been heard to say? Or upon Mr. Madison's notes of the debates of the
convention? Or upon the oral reports made by the several members to their respective constituents,
or to the respective state conventions? Or upon flying reports of the opinions which a few
individuals, out of the whole body of the people, had formed of it when they adopted it? No
two of the members of the convention would probably have agreed in their representations of
what the constitution really was. No two of the people would have agreed in their understanding
of the constitution when they adopted it. And the consequence would have been that we should
really have had no constitution at all. Yet there is as much ground, both in reason and in
law, for thus throwing aside the whole of the written instrument, and trusting entirely to
these other sources for evidence of what any part of the constitution really is, as there is
for throwing aside those particular portions of the written instrument, which bear on slavery,
and attempting to supply their place from such evidence as these other sources may chance to
furnish. And yet, to throw aside the written instrument, so far as its provisions are prohibitory
of slavery, and make a new constitution on that point, out of other testimony, is the only
means, confessedly the only means, by which slavery can be made constitutional.

And what is the object of resorting to these flying reports for evidence, on which to change
the meaning of the constitution? Is it to change the instrument from a dishonest to an honest
one? from an unjust to a just one? No. But directly the reverse--and solely that dishonesty
and injustice may be carried into effect. A purpose, for which no evidence of any kind whatever
could be admitted in a court of justice.

Again. If the principle be admitted, that the meaning of the constitution can be changed, on
proof being made that the scriveners or framers of it had secret and knavish intentions, which
do not appear on the face of the instrument, then perfect license is given to the scriveners
of constitutions to contrive any secret scheme of villainy they may please, and impose it upon
the people as a system of government, under cover of a written instrument that is so plainly
honest and just in its terms, that the people readily agree to it. Is such a principle to be
admitted in a country where the people claim the prerogative of establishing their own government,
and deny the right of any body to impose a government upon them, either by force, or fraud,
or against their will?

Finally. The constitution is a contract; a written contract, consisting of a certain number
of precise words, to which, and to which only, all the parties to it have, in theory, agreed.
Manifestly neither this contract, nor the meaning of its words, can be changed, without the
consent of all the parties to it. Nor can it be changed on a representation, to be made by
any number of them less than the whole, that they intended any thing different from what they
have said. To change it, on the representation of a part, without the consent of the rest,
would be a breach of contract as to all the rest. And to change its legal meaning, without
their consent, would be as much a breach of the contract as to change its words. If there were
a single honest man in the nation, who assented, in good faith, to the honest and legal meaning
of the constitution, it would be unjust and unlawful to change the meaning of the instrument
so as to sanction slavery, even though every other man in the nation should testify that, in
agreeing to the constitution, he intended that slavery should be sanctioned. If there were
not a single honest man in the nation, who adopted the constitution in good faith, and with
the intent that its legal meaning should be carried into effect, its legal meaning would nevertheless
remain the same; for no judicial tribunal could lawfully allow the parties to it to come into
court and allege their dishonest intentions, and claim that they be substituted for the legal
meaning of the words of the instrument.

[Footnote 27: The Supreme Court say, "The instrument, when it came from their hands, (that
is, the hands of the convention,) was a mere proposal, without obligation or pretension to
it." "The people were at perfect liberty to accept or reject it; and their act was final."--M'Cullock
vs. Maryland,--4 Wheaton 403-4.]

[Footnote 28: The Supreme Court of the United States say:

"The intention of the instrument must prevail: this intention must be collected from its words."--Ogden
vs. Saunders,--12 Wheaton, 332. 

"She's quite a beauty," said I.

He looked at me sharply. "I suppose she is, but that's not the point. She's at the head of
the German secret service work in America. She knows all about Edison."

"Oh!"

"She
has told me where he is. That's why we came up here. He seems to have picked up the most of them from the newspapers
of the day, in which they were reported by nobody now probably knows whom. In his preface to
his first volume, containing the debates in the Massachusetts and New York conventions, he says:

"In the compilation of this volume, care has been taken to search into contemporary publications,
in order to make the work as perfect as possible; still, however, the editor is sensible, from
the daily experience of newspaper reports, of the present time, that the sentiments they contain
may, in some instances, have been inaccurately taken down, and in others, probably too faintly
sketched, fully to gratify the inquisitive politician." He also speaks of them as "rescued
from the ephemeral prints of that day, and now, for the first time, presented in a uniform
and durable form." 

What effect do the songs have upon the play? Can you find rhyming lines anywhere excepting in
the songs? Does any character speak in rhyme?

CONCLUSION. If we study a play too long or continue to read it after our interest ceases for
a time, we are liable to be prejudiced against it, and to feel that
it is not worth the labor we have put upon it.

If, however, a person will stop studying when he begins to lose interest and work seems a drudgery,
he will come back a little later with renewed interest.

Again, when we study a play minutely as we have been doing, and view it from many sides, we may lose
sight for a time of the unity and beauty of the whole composition. This is peculiarly unfortunate,
for the poet intends us to view his work as a whole, and to produce his effect with the whole. It is The
Tempest that we will remember as a work of art, and, if our studies
are fruitful, that will draw us back to it at intervals for many years
to come.

Before we leave it, we must take it and read it through in a leisurely
manner, pausing merely to enjoy its beauty, to smile at its playfulness
and to feel our hearts expand under the benign influence of the grand
old man Prospero.

Now Miranda, Ferdinand and Ariel have passed the line of mere acquaintances, and have become
to us fast friends, who, though they may be forever silent, have yet given us a fragment of their
lives to cheer us on our way.

OTHER PLAYS OF SHAKESPEARE. Shakespeare wrote a great many plays, and all are not equally good;
a few seem so inferior that many who study them think they were not written by the same hand
that penned The Tempest. Some of the plays are more difficult than others, and some cannot
be comprehended until the reader has had some experience in life. There are several, on the other
hand, that may be read with great interest and profit by almost any
one, while those who have read The Tempest as we have recommended,
should find some measure of enjoyment in all.

A Midsummer Night's Dream is a charming fairy story; The Merchant
of Venice is a good story, contains fine characters and shows some
of Shakespeare's most beautiful thoughts, although some people are
inclined to believe he has dealt too severely with the Jew.

Much Ado About Nothing is a jolly comedy to match with The Comedy
of Errors.

Julius Cæsar, Richard III and Coriolanus are interesting historical plays, and Hamlet, Macbeth
and Romeo and Juliet are among the best of his tragedies. If a person would read just the
plays mentioned in the thoughtful way we have indicated here, he would gain a benefit whose great
value never can be estimated, and thereafter all reading would seem easier and more delightful.


The only question, then, to be decided, is, what was the meaning of the constitution, as a
legal instrument, when it was first drawn up, and presented to the people, and before it was
adopted by them?

To this question there certainly can be but one answer.--There is not room for a doubt or an
argument, on that point, in favor of slavery. The instrument itself is palpably a free one
throughout, in its language, its principles, and all its provisions. As a legal instrument,
there is no trace of slavery in it. It not only does not sanction slavery, but it does not
even recognize its existence. More than this, it is palpably and wholly incompatible with slavery.
It is also the supreme law of the land, in contempt of any state constitution or law that should
attempt to establish slavery.

Such was the character of the constitution when it was offered to the people, and before it
was adopted. And if such was its character then, such is its character still. It cannot have
been changed by all the errors and perversions, intentional or unintentional, of which the
government may have since been guilty.

CHAPTER XI.

THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE PEOPLE.

Although the inquiry may be of no legal importance, it may nevertheless be one pertinent to
the subject, whether it be matter of history even--to say nothing of legal proof--that the
people of the country did really understand or believe that the constitution sanctioned slavery?
Those who make the assertion, are bound to prove it. The presumption is against them. Where
is their contrary history?

They will say that a part of the people were actually slaveholders, and that it is unreasonable
to suppose they would have agreed to the constitution, if they had understood it to be a free one.

The answer to this argument is, that the actual slaveholders were few in number compared with
the whole people; comprising probably not more than one-eighth or one-sixth of the voters,
and one-fortieth or one-thirtieth of the whole population. They were so few as to be manifestly
incapable of maintaining any separate political organization; or even of holding their slave
property, except under the sufferance, toleration and protection of the non-slaveholders. They
were compelled, therefore, to agree to any political organization, which the non-slaveholders
should determine on. This was at that time the case even in the strongest of the slaveholding
states themselves. In all of them, without exception, the slaveholders were either obliged
to live, or from choice did live, under free constitutions. They, of course, held their slave
property in defiance of their constitutions. They were enabled to do this through the corrupting
influence of their wealth and union. Controlling a large proportion of the wealth of their
states, their social and political influence was entirely disproportionate to their numbers.
They could act in concert. They could purchase talent by honors, offices and money. Being always
united, while the non-slaveholders were divided, they could turn the scale in elections, and
fill most of the offices with slaveholders. Many of the non-slaveholders doubtless were poor,
dependent and subservient, (as large portions of the non-slaveholders are now in the slaveholding
states,) and lent themselves to the support of slavery almost from necessity. By these, and
probably by many other influences that we cannot now understand, they were enabled to maintain
their hold upon their slave property in defiance of their constitutions. It is even possible
that the slaveholders themselves did not choose to have the subject of slavery mentioned in
their constitutions; that they were so fully conscious of their power to corrupt and control
their governments, that they did not regard any constitutional provision necessary for their
security; and that out of mere shame at the criminality of the thing, and its inconsistency
with all the principles the country had been fighting for and proclaiming, they did not wish
it to be named.

But whatever may have been the cause of the fact, the fact itself is conspicuous, that from
some cause or other, either with the consent of the slaveholders, or in defiance of their power,
the constitutions of every one of the thirteen states were at that time free ones. 

"You little minx, you," sez I, "I doubt if you've thought of me twice since I been away, while
I've been thinkin' of you every minute. But come, jump down behind me an' we'll hurry on.
I want you to go in an' wake Daddy up an' tell him I've got something mighty important to say to him,
while I scurry over an' wake up the home gang."

"The home gang ain't here," sez Barbie. "The ponies vamoosed this afternoon--they nearly always
do the days I turn Mr. H. Hawkins with them,--that's what I call the pinto. He's an awful scamp;
but the best pony on the place."

"Then I reckon they'll bring 'em around the twist an' down this canon. Now you get down here an' sneak
into the house while I stake out Starlight in the big cathedral--see how well I remember everything."

I
set the child down, rode Starlight into a big open nook with a narrow mouth, an' then hustled into
the house. Old Cast Steel was standin' in the dining room in his stockin'-feet with a gun in each hand
an' a question in his eyes. "Get ready for a raid, Jabez," sez I. "Who from?" sez he.

"From the Brophy gang," sez I.

"How do you know?" sez he.

"They are due to arrive here at midnight, Jabez," sez I. "I don't
know why; but I think we'd better get ready for 'em now an' argue
about it to-morrow."

"I know why," sez lie. "One of 'em stole one o' my ponies an' started to run off a bunch o'
my own cows with it. I strung him up an' he said 'at Bill Brophy'd get even with me for it.
That was two months ago, an' the' hasn't been a minute since 'at
I was so bad prepared for 'em. How many's in the gang?"

"Bill an'
seven others. I found out through the meanest lookin' mortal you ever
set eyes on. He's a giant, nearly black, an' the ugliest critter you
ever set eyes on; but he's white inside. He'll be along as soon as
he can get here--don't shoot him."

"I ain't apt to shoot any help
this night," grins Jabez.

"If it wasn't for the little girl, Happy,
I'd be right satisfied to have it out with Bill; but I hate to think
of what may happen to her. Without
such a provision, all their other provisions in regard to slaves are nugatory, simply because
their application is legally unknown. They would apply as well to whites as to blacks, and
would as much authorize the enslavement of whites as of blacks.

We have before seen that none of the state constitutions, that were in existence in 1789, recognized
slavery at all. Since that time, four of the old thirteen states, viz., Maryland, North Carolina,
South Carolina and Georgia, have altered their constitutions so as to make them recognize slavery;
yet not so as to provide for any legal designation of the persons to be made slaves.

The constitution of South Carolina has a provision that implies that some of the slaves, at
least, are "negroes;" but not that all slaves are negroes, nor that all negroes are slaves.
The provision, therefore, amounts to nothing for the purposes of a constitutional designation
of the persons who may be made slaves.

The constitutions of Tennessee and Louisiana make no direct mention of slaves; and have no
provisions in favor of slavery, unless the general one for continuing existing laws in force,
be such a one. But both have specific provisions inconsistent with slavery. Both purport to
be established by "the people;" both have provisions for the writ of habeas corpus. Indeed,
the constitutions of most of the slave states have provisions for this writ, which, as has
been before shown, denies the right of property in man. Tennessee also was formerly a part
of North Carolina; was set off from her while the constitution of North Carolina was a free
one. Of course there has never been any legal slavery in Tennessee.

The constitutions of the states of Kentucky, Missouri, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Alabama,
all have provisions about slaves; yet none of them tell us who may be slaves. Some of them
indeed provide for the admission into their state of such persons as are slaves under the laws,
(which of course means only the constitutional laws,) of other states. But when we go to those
other states, we find that their constitutions have made no designation of the persons who
may be made slaves; and therefore we are as far from finding the actual persons of the slaves
as we were before.

The principal provision, in the several state constitutions, recognizing slavery, is, in substance,
this, that the legislature shall have no power to emancipate slaves without the consent of
their owners, or without making compensation. But this provision is of no avail to legalize
slavery, for slavery must be constitutionally established, before there can be any legal slaves
to be emancipated; and it cannot be established without describing the persons who may be made
slaves.

Kentucky was originally a part of Virginia, and derived her slaves from Virginia. As the constitution
of Virginia was always a free one, it gave no authority for slavery in that part of the state
which is now Kentucky. Why do you suppose Shakespeare introduces into the play such a character?

Does such a character heighten the effect of the others?

   6. Other Characters. Classify the other characters as good or bad.
Where did you place Alonso?

The cession of Florida to the United States was made on the same terms. The words of the treaty,
on this point, are as follows:--

   "Art. 6. The inhabitants of the territories, which his Catholic
   majesty cedes to the United States by this treaty, shall be
   incorporated in the Union of the United States, as soon as may be
   consistent with the principles of the federal constitution, and
   admitted to the enjoyment of all the privileges, rights and
   immunities of the citizens of the United States."

To allow any of the "inhabitants," included in those treaties, to be held as slaves, or denied
the rights of citizenship under the United States' constitution, is a plain breach of the treaties. 

I thought it doubled the efficiency of our fleet?"

"It does nothing of the sort. The Canal may be seized. It may be put out of commission for weeks
or months by landslides or earthquakes. A few hostile ships of the Queen Elizabeth class lying
ten miles off shore at either end, with ranges exactly fixed, or a good shot from an aeroplane,
could not only destroy the Canal's insufficient defences, but could prevent our fleet from coming through,
could hold it, useless, in the Atlantic when it might be needed to
save California or useless in the Pacific when it might be needed
to save New York.

If it happened when war began that one half of our fleet was in the Atlantic and the other
half in the Pacific, then the enemy could keep these two halves separated and destroy them
one by one."

"I suppose you mean that we need two fleets?"

"Of course we do--a child can see it--if we are to guard our two seaboards. We must have a
fleet in the Atlantic strong enough to resist any probable attack from the East, and another fleet
in the Pacific strong enough to resist any probable attack from the
West.

"But listen to this, think of this," the veteran warrior leaned towards me, shaking an eager fore-finger.
"At the present moment our entire fleet, if massed off Long Island, would be inferior to a
fleet that Germany could send across the Atlantic against us by many ships, many submarines and
many aeroplanes. And hopelessly inferior in men and ammunition, including torpedoes."

As I listened I felt myself falling under the spell of the Admiral's
eloquence.

He was so sure of what he said. These dangers unquestionably existed, but--were they about to
descend upon America? Must we really face the horrors of a war of invasion?

"Your arguments are very convincing, sir, and yet--" I hesitated.

"Well?"

"You speak as if these things were going to happen right now, but there are no signs of war,
no clouds on the horizon."

The Admiral waved this aside with an impatient gesture.

"I tell you the blow will come suddenly. Were there any clouds on
the European horizon in July, 1914? Yet a few persons knew, just as
I have known for months, that war was inevitable."

"Known?" I repeated.

Very
deliberately the grizzled sea fighter lighted a fresh cigar before
replying.

"Mr. Langston, I'll tell you a little story that explains
why I am posing as a prophet. You can put it in your memoirs some
day--if my prophecy comes true. It's the story of an American naval
officer, a young lieutenant, who--well, he went wrong about a year
ago. He got into the clutches of a woman spy in the employ of a foreign
government. He met this woman in Marseilles on our last Mediterranean
cruise and fell in love with her--hopelessly. She's one of those devilish
sirens that no full-blooded man can resist and, the extraordinary
part of it is, she fell in love with him--genuinely in love.

"Well--it
was a bad business. This officer gave the woman all he had, told her
all he knew, and finally he asked her to marry him. Yes. He didn't
care what she was. He just wanted her. And she was so happy, so crazy
about him, that she almost yielded; she was ready to turn over a new
leaf, to settle down as his wife, but--"

"But she didn't do it?"
I smiled. The natural rights of the child to the control of his own person, rise up,
from the moment of his birth, in opposition to the transmission to him of any ownership, which,
in violation of natural law, has been asserted to the parent.

Natural law may be overborne by arbitrary institutions; but she will never aid, or perpetuate
them. For her to do so, would be to resist, and even deny her own authority. It would present
the case of a principle warring against and overcoming itself. Instead of this, she asserts
her own authority on the first opportunity. The moment the arbitrary law expires by its own
limitation, natural law resumes her reign. If, therefore, the government declare A to be a
slave, natural law may be practically overborne by this arbitrary authority; but she will not
herself perpetuate it beyond the person of A--for that would be acting in contradiction to
herself.--She will therefore suffer this arbitrary authority to expend itself on the person
of A, according to the letter of the arbitrary law; but she will assert her own authority in
favor of the child of A, to whom the letter of the law enslaving A, does not apply.

Slavery is a wrong to each individual enslaved; and not merely to the first of a series. Natural
law, therefore, as much forbids the enslaving of the child, as if the wrong of enslaving the
parent had never been perpetrated.

Slavery, then, is an arbitrary institution throughout. It depends, from first to last, upon
the letter of the arbitrary law. Natural law gives it no aid, no extension, no new application,
under any circumstances whatever. Unless, therefore, the letter of the arbitrary law explicitly
authorize the enslavement of the child, the child is born free, though the parent were a slave.

If the views that have already been taken of our written constitutions, be correct, no parent
has ever yet been legally enslaved in this country; and of course no child. If, however, any
one thinks he can place his finger upon any constitutional law, that has enslaved a parent,
let him follow that law, and see whether it also expressly authorized the enslavement of the
child. If it did not, then the child would be free.

It is no new principle that the child of a slave would be born free, but for an express law
to the contrary. Some of the slave codes admit the principle--for they have special provisions
that the child shall follow the condition of the mother; thus virtually admitting that, but
for such a provision, the child would be free, though the mother were a slave.

Under the constitutions of the states and the United States, it requires as explicit and plenary
constitutional authority, to make slaves of the children of slaves, as it would to make slaves
of any body else. Is there, in any of the constitutions of this country, any general authority
given to the governments, to make slaves of whom they please? No one will pretend it. Is there,
then, any particular authority for making slaves of the children of those, who have previously
been held in slavery? If there be, let the advocates of slavery point it out. If there be no
such authority, all their statutes declaring that the children of slaves shall follow the condition
of their mothers, are void; and those children are free by force of the law of nature.

This law of nature, that all men are born free, was recognized by this country in the Declaration
of Independence.--But it was no new principle then. Justinian says, "Captivity and servitude
are both contrary to the law of nature; for by that law all men are born free." But the principle
was not new with Justinian; it exists in the nature of man, and is as old as man--and the race
of man generally has acknowledged it. The exceptions have been special; the rule general.

The constitution of the United States recognizes the principle that all men are born free;
for it recognizes the principle that natural birth in the country gives citizenship[31]--which
of course implies freedom. And no exception is made to the rule. Of course all born in the
country since the adoption of the constitution of the United States, have been born free, whether
there were, or were not any legal slaves in the country before that time. 

What are you gettin' at?"

"You got friends there, ain't ya?" sez he.
"I got one friend anyhow," sez I, "but as long as you've insisted
on taggin' along after me, you'll see the place an' you'll see my
friend; though I somehow doubt if you'll be invited in for a meal."

It is clear, therefore, that, on this principle alone, slavery would now be extinct in this
country, unless there should be an exception of a few aged persons.

[Footnote 31: Art. 2, Sec. 1, Clause 5, "No person, except a natural born citizen,* * * * shall
be eligible to the office of President."]

