Fuseli valued a picture by Anna Wasser, which he owned, and praised her correctness of design
and her feeling for color.

<b>WATERS, SADIE P.</b> 1869-1900. Honorable mention Paris Exposition, 1900. Born in St. Louis,
Missouri. This unusually gifted artist made her studies entirely in Paris, under the direction
of M. Luc-Olivier Merson.

Her earlier works were portraits in miniature, in which she was very successful. That of Jane
Hading was much admired. She also excelled in illustrations, but in her later work she found
her true province, that of religious subjects. A large picture on ivory, called "La Vierge
au Lys," was exhibited in Paris, London, Brussels, and Ghent, and attracted much attention.

Her picture of the "Vierge aux Rosiers," reproduced here, was in the Salon, 1899, and in the
exhibition of Religious Art in Brussels in 1900, after which it was exhibited in New York;
and wherever seen it was especially admired.

Miss Waters' pictures were exhibited in the Salon Français, Champs Elysées, from 1891 until
her death. From the earliest days of childhood she was remarkable for her skill in drawing
and in working out, from her own impressions, pictures of events passing about her. If at the
theatre she saw a play that appealed to her, she made a picture symbolic of the play, and constantly
startled her friends by her original ideas and the pronounced artistic temperament, which was
very early the one controlling power in her life. Mr. Carl Gutherz thus speaks of her good
fortune in studying with M. Merson.

"As the Master and Student became more and more acquainted, and the great artist found in the
student those kindred qualities which subsequently made her work so refined and beautiful,...
he took the utmost care in developing her drawing--the fidelity of line and of expression,
and the ever-pervading purity in her work. The sympathy with all good was reflected in the
student, as it was ever present with the master, and only those who are acquainted with M.
Merson can appreciate how fortunate it was for Art that the young artist was under a master
of his character and temperament."

One of her pictures, called "La Chrysanthème," represents a nude figure of a young girl, seated
on the ground, leaning against a large basket of chrysanthemums, from which she is plucking
blossoms. The figure is beautiful, and shows the deep study the artist had made, although still
so young.

The following estimate of her work is made by one competent to speak of such matters: "In this
epoch of feverish uncertainty, of heated discussions and rivalries in art matters, the quiet,
calm figure of Sadie Waters has a peculiar interest and charm generated by her tranquil and
persistent pursuit of an ideal--an ideal she attained in her later works, an ideal of the highest
mental order, mystical and human, and so far removed from the tendencies of our time that one
might truthfully say, it stands alone. Her talents were manifold. She was endowed with the
best of artistic qualities. She cultivated them diligently, and slowly acquired the handicraft
and skill which enabled her to express herself without restriction. In her miniatures she learned
to be careful, precise, and delicate; in her work from nature she was human; and in her studies
of illuminating she gained a perfect understanding of ornamental painting and forms; and the
subtle ambiance of the beautiful old churches and convents where she worked and pored over
the ancient missals, and softly talked with the princely robed Monsignori, no doubt did much
to develop her love for the Beautiful Story, the delicate myth of Christianity--and all this,
all these rare qualities and honest efforts we find in her last picture, The Virgin.

"The beauty and preciseness of this composition, the divine feeling not without a touch of
motherly sentiment, its delicacy so rare and so pure, the distinction of its coloring, are
all past expression, and give it a place unique in the nineteenth century."--Paul W. Bartlett,
Paris, 1903.

<b>WEGMANN, BERTHA.</b> Honorable mention, Paris Salon, 1880; third-class medal, 1882; Thorwaldsen
medal at Copenhagen; small gold medal, Berlin, 1894. Born at Soglio, Switzerland, 1847. Studied
in Copenhagen, Munich, Paris, and Florence.

She paints portraits and genre subjects. Her pictures, seen at Berlin in 1893, were much admired.
They included portraits, figure studies, and Danish interiors. At Munich, in 1894, her portraits
attracted attention, and were commended by those who wrote of the exhibition. Among her works
are many portraits: "Mother and Child in the Garden," and "A Widow and Child," are two of her
genre subjects.

<b>WEIS, ROSARIO.</b> Silver medal from the Academy of San Fernando, 1842, for a picture called
"Silence." Member of the Academy. Pupil of Goya, who early recognized her talent. In 1823,
when Goya removed to Burdeos, she studied under the architect Tiburcio Perez. After a time
she joined Goya, and remained his pupil until his death in 1828. She then entered the studio
Lacour, where she did admirable work. In 1833, for the support of her mother and herself, she
made copies of pictures in the Prado on private commissions.

In 1842 she was appointed teacher of drawing to the royal family, in which position she did
not long continue, her death occurring in 1843.

Among her pictures are "Attention!" an allegorical figure; "An Angel"; "A Venus"; and "A Diana."
Among her portraits are those of Goya, Velasquez, and Figaro.

<b>WIEGMANN, MARIE ELISABETH</b>; family name Hancke. Small gold medal, Berlin. Born 1826 at
Solberberg, Silesia; died, 1893, at Düsseldorf. In 1841 she began to study with Stilke in Düsseldorf;
later with K. Sohn. She travelled extensively in Germany, England, Holland, and Italy, and
settled with her husband, Rudolph Wiegmann, in Düsseldorf. In the Museum at Hanover is "The
Colonist's Children Crowning a Negro Woman," and in the National Gallery at Berlin a portrait
of Schnaase. Some children's portraits, and one of the Countess Hatzfeld, should also be mentioned
among her works. Born in New York. Pupil of the Convent of the Sacred Heart and of Cabanel,
in Paris. This artist has painted portraits of Leo XIII., who presented her with a gold medal;
of Cardinal Ferrata; of Challemel-Lacour, President of the Senate at the time when the portrait
was made, and of many others. Her picture of "Faith" is in the Luxembourg Gallery. At the Salon
des Artistes Français, 1903, Madame de Wentworth exhibited the "Portrait of Mlle. X.," and
"Solitude."

[No reply to circular.]

<b>WHEELER, JANET.</b> First Toppan Prize and Mary Smith Prize at Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia;
Gold medal, Philadelphia Art Club. Pupil of Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia, and of the
Julian Academy in Paris.

This artist paints portraits almost entirely, which are in private hands. I know of but one
figure picture by her, which is called "Beg for It." She was a miniaturist several years before
taking up larger portraits.

<b>WHITE, FLORENCE.</b> Silver medal at Woman's Exhibition, Earl's Court; silver medal for
a pastel exhibited in Calcutta. Born at Brighton, England. Pupil of Royal Academy Schools in
London, and of Bouguereau and Perrier in Paris.

In 1899 this artist exhibited a portrait in the New Gallery; in 1901 a portrait of Bertram
Blunt, Esq., at the Royal Academy; and in 1902 a portrait of "Peggy," a little girl with a poodle.

She has sent miniatures to the Academy exhibitions several years; that of Miss Lyall Wilson
was exhibited in 1903.

