In 1802, Mr. Telford was called upon by the Government to make a survey of Scotland, and report
as to the measures which were necessary for the improvement of the roads and bridges of that
part of the kingdom, and also on the means of promoting the fisheries on the east and west
coasts, with the object of better opening up the country and preventing further extensive emigration.
Previous to this time he had been employed by the British Fisheries Society-- of which his
friend Sir William Pulteney was Governor--to inspect the harbours at their several stations,
and to devise a plan for the establishment of a fishery on the coast of Caithness. He accordingly
made an extensive tour of Scotland, examining, among other harbours, that of Annan; from which
he proceeded northward by Aberdeen to Wick and Thurso, returning to Shrewsbury by Edinburgh
and Dumfries.*[5]  He accumulated a large mass of data for his report, which was sent in to
the Fishery Society, with charts and plans, in the course of  the following year.

In July, 1802, he was requested by the Lords of the Treasury, most probably in consequence
of the preceding report, to make a further survey of the interior of the Highlands, the result
of which he communicated in his report presented to Parliament in the following year.  Although
full of important local business, "kept running," as he says, "from town to country, and from
country to town, never when awake, and perhaps not always when asleep, have my Scotch surveys
been absent from my mind."  He had worked very hard at his report, and hoped that it might
be productive of some good.

The report was duly presented, printed,*[6] and approved; and it formed the starting-point
of a system of legislation with reference to the Highlands which extended over many years,
and had the effect of completely opening up that romantic but rugged district of country, and
extending to its inhabitants the advantages of improved intercourse with the other parts of
the kingdom. Mr. Telford pointed out that the military roads were altogether inadequate to
the requirements of the population, and that the use of them was in many places very much circumscribed
by the want of bridges over some of the principal rivers.  For instance, the route from Edinburgh
to Inverness, through the Central Highlands, was seriously interrupted at Dunkeld, where the
Tay is broad and deep, and not always easy to be crossed by means of a boat.  The route to
the same place by the east coast was in like manner broken at Fochabers, where the rapid Spey
could only be crossed by a dangerous ferry.

The difficulties encountered by gentlemen of the Bar, in travelling the north circuit about
this time, are well described by Lord Cockburn in his 'Memorials.' "Those who are born to modem
travelling," he says, "can scarcely be made to understand how the previous age got on.  The
state of the roads may be judged of from two or three facts.  There was no bridge over the
Tay at Dunkeld, or over the Spey at Fochabers, or over the Findhorn at Forres. Nothing but
wretched pierless ferries, let to poor cottars, who rowed, or hauled, or pushed a crazy boat
across, or more commonly got their wives to do it.  There was no mail-coach north of Aberdeen
till, I think, after the battle of Waterloo.  What it must have been a few years before my
time may be judged of from Bozzy's 'Letter to Lord Braxfield,' published in 1780.  He thinks
that, besides a carriage and his own carriage-horses, every judge ought to have his sumpter-horse,
and ought not to travel faster than the waggon which carried the baggage of the circuit.  I
understood from Hope that, after 1784, when he came to the Bar, he and Braxfield rode a whole
north circuit; and that, from the Findhorn being in a flood, they were obliged to go up its
banks for about twenty-eight miles to the bridge of Dulsie before they could cross.  I myself
rode circuits when I was Advocate-Depute between 1807 and 1810. The fashion of every Depute
carrying his own shell on his back, in the form of his own carriage, is a piece of very modern
antiquity."*[7]  North of Inverness, matters were, if possible, still worse.  There was no
bridge over the Beauly or the Conan. The drovers coming south swam the rivers with their cattle.
There being no roads, there was little use for carts.  In the whole county of Caithness, there
was  scarcely a farmer who owned a wheel-cart.  Burdens were conveyed usually on the backs
of ponies, but quite as often on the backs of women.*[8]  The interior of the county of Sutherland
being almost inaccessible, the only track lay along the shore, among rocks and sand, and was
covered by the sea at every tide.  "The people lay scattered in inaccessible straths and spots
among the mountains, where they lived in family with their pigs and kyloes (cattle), in turf
cabins of the most miserable description; they spoke only Gaelic, and spent the whole of their
time in indolence and sloth.  Thus they had gone on from father to son, with little change,
except what the introduction of illicit distillation had wrought, and making little or no export
from the country beyond the few lean kyloes, which paid the rent and produced wherewithal to
pay for the oatmeal imported."*[9] Telford's first recommendation was, that a bridge should
be thrown across the Tay at Dunkeld, to connect the improved lines of road proposed to be made
on each side of the river.  He regarded this measure as of the first importance to the Central
Highlands; and as the Duke of Athol was willing to pay one-half of the cost of the erection,
if the Government would defray the other--the bridge to be free of toll after a certain period--it
appeared to the engineer that this was a reasonable and just mode of providing for the contingency.
In the next place, he recommended a bridge over the Spey, which drained a great extent of mountainous
country, and, being liable to sudden inundations, was very dangerous to cross. Yet this ferry
formed the only link of communication between the whole of the northern counties.  The site
pointed out for the proposed bridge was adjacent to the town of Fochabers, and here also the
Duke of Gordon and other county gentlemen were willing to provide one-half of the means for
its erection.

Mr. Telford further described in detail the roads necessary to be constructed in the north
and west Highlands, with the object of opening up the western parts of the counties of Inverness
and Ross, and affording a ready communication from the Clyde to the fishing lochs in the neighbourhood
of the Isle of Skye.  As to the means of executing these improvements, he suggested that Government
would be justified in dealing with the Highland roads and bridges as exceptional and extraordinary
works, and extending the public aid towards carrying them into effect, as, but for such assistance,
the country must remain, perhaps for ages to come, imperfectly opened up. His report further
embraced certain improvements in the harbours of Aberdeen and Wick, and a description of the
country through which the proposed line of the Caledonian Canal would necessarily pass-- a
canal which had long been the subject of inquiry, but had not as yet emerged from a state of
mere speculation.

The new roads, bridges, and other improvements suggested by the engineer, excited much interest
in the north.  The Highland Society voted him their thanks by acclamation; the counties of
Inverness and Ross followed; and he had letters of thanks and congratulation from many of the
Highland chiefs.  "If they will persevere," says he, "with anything like their present zeal,
they will have the satisfaction of greatly improving a country that has been too long neglected.
Things are greatly changed now in the Highlands.  Even were the chiefs to quarrel, de'il a
Highlandman would stir for them. The lairds have transferred their affections from their people
to flocks of sheep, and the people have lost their veneration for the lairds.  It seems to
be the natural progress of society; but it is not an altogether satisfactory change.  There
were some fine features in the former patriarchal state of society; but now clanship is gone,
and chiefs and people are hastening into the opposite extreme.  This seems to me to be quite
wrong."*[10] In the same year, Telford was elected a member of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
on which occasion he was proposed and supported by three professors; so that the former Edinburgh
mason was rising in the world and receiving due honour in his own country.  The effect of his
report was such, that in the session of 1803 a Parliamentary Commission was appointed, under
whose direction a series of practical improvements was commenced, which issued in the construction
of not less than 920 additional miles of roads and bridges throughout the Highlands, one-half
of the cost of which was defrayed by the Government and the other half by local assessment.
But in addition to these main lines of communication, numberless county roads were formed by
statute labour, under local road Acts and by other means; the land-owners of Sutherland alone
constructing nearly 300 miles of district roads at their own cost.

[Image] Map of Telford's Roads.

By the end of the session of 1803, Telford received his instructions from Mr. Vansittart as
to the working survey he was forthwith required to enter upon, with a view to commencing practical
operations; and he again proceeded to the Highlands to lay out the roads and plan the bridges
which were most urgently needed.  The district of the Solway was, at his representation, included,
with the object of improving the road from Carlisle to Portpatrick--the nearest point at which
Great Britain meets the Irish coast, and where the sea passage forms only a sort of wide ferry.

It would occupy too much space, and indeed it is altogether unnecessary, to describe in detail
the operations of the Commission and of their engineer in opening up the communications of
the Highlands.  Suffice it to say, that one of the first things taken in hand was the connection
of the existing lines of road by means of bridges at the more important points; such as at
Dunkeld over the Tay, and near Dingwall over the Conan and Orrin.  That of Dunkeld was the
most important, as being situated at the entrance to the Central Highlands; and at the second
meeting of the Commissioners Mr. Telford submitted his plan and estimates of the proposed bridge.
In consequence of some difference with the Duke of Athol as to his share of the expense--which
proved to be greater than he had estimated--some delay occurred in beginning the work; but
at length it was fairly started, and, after being about three years in hand, the structure
was finished and opened for traffic in 1809.

[Image] Dunkeld Bridge.

The bridge is a handsome one of five river and two land arches. The span of the centre arch
is 90 feet, of the two adjoining it 84 feet, and of the two side arches 74 feet; affording
a clear waterway of 446 feet.  The total breadth of the roadway and foot paths is 28 feet 6
inches.  The cost of the structure was about 14,000L., one-half of which was defrayed by the
Duke of Athol. Dunkeld bridge now forms a fine feature in a landscape not often surpassed,
and which presents within a comparatively small compass a great variety of character and beauty.

The communication by road north of Inverness was also perfected by the construction of a bridge
of five arches over the Beauly, and another of the same number over the Conan, the central
arch being 65 feet span; and the formerly wretched bit of road between these points having
been put in good repair, the town of Dingwall was thenceforward rendered easily approachable
from the south.  At the same time, a beginning was made with the construction of new roads
through the districts most in need of them.  The first contracted for, was the Loch-na-Gaul
road, from Fort William to Arasaig, on the western coast, nearly opposite the island of Egg.

Another was begun from Loch Oich, on the line of the Caledonian Canal, across the middle of
the Highlands, through Glengarry, to Loch Hourn on the western sea.  Other roads were opened
north and south; through Morvern to Loch Moidart; through Glen Morrison and Glen Sheil, and
through the entire Isle of Skye; from Dingwall, eastward, to Lochcarron and Loch Torridon,
quite through the county of Ross; and from Dingwall, northward, through the county of Sutherland
as far as Tongue on the Pentland Frith; while another line, striking off at the head of the
Dornoch Frith, proceeded along the coast in a north-easterly direction to Wick and Thurso,
in the immediate neighbourhood of John o' Groats.

There were numerous other subordinate lines of road which it is unnecessary to specify in detail;
but some idea may be formed of their extent, as well as of the rugged character of the country
through which they were carried, when we state that they involved the construction of no fewer
than twelve hundred bridges.  Several important bridges were also erected at other points to
connect existing roads, such as those at Ballater and Potarch over the Dee; at Alford over
the Don: and at Craig-Ellachie over the Spey.

The last-named bridge is a remarkably elegant structure, thrown over the Spey at a point where
the river, rushing obliquely against the lofty rock of Craig-Ellachie,*[11] has formed for
itself a deep channel not exceeding fifty yards in breadth.  Only a few years before, there
had not been any provision for crossing this river at its lower parts except the very dangerous
ferry at Fochabers. The Duke of Gordon had, however, erected a suspension bridge at that town,
and the inconvenience was in a great measure removed. Its utility was so generally felt, that
the demand arose for a second bridge across the river; for there was not another by which it
could be crossed for a distance of nearly fifty miles up Strath Spey.

It was a difficult stream to span by a bridge at any place, in consequence of the violence
with which the floods descended at particular seasons.  Sometimes, even in summer, when not
a drop of rain had fallen, the flood would come down the Strath in great fury, sweeping everything
before it; this remarkable phenomenon being accounted for by the prevalence of a strong south-westerly
wind, which blew the loch waters from their beds into the Strath, and thus suddenly filled
the valley of the Spey.*[12]  The same phenomenon, similarly caused, is also frequently observed
in the neighbouring river, the Findhorn, cooped up in its deep rocky bed, where the water sometimes
comes down in a wave six feet high, like a liquid wall, sweeping everything before it.

To meet such a contingency, it was deemed necessary to provide abundant waterway, and to build
a bridge offering as little resistance as possible to the passage of the Highland floods. Telford
accordingly designed for the passage of the river at Craig-Ellachie a light cast-iron arch
of 150 feet span, with a rise of 20 feet, the arch being composed of four ribs, each consisting
of two concentric arcs forming panels, which are filled in with diagonal bars.

The roadway is 15 feet wide, and is formed of another arc of greater radius, attached to which
is the iron railing; the spandrels being filled by diagonal ties, forming trelliswork. Mr.
Robert Stephenson took objection to the two dissimilar arches, as liable to subject the structure,
from variations of temperature, to very unequal strains.  Nevertheless this bridge, as well
as many others constructed by Mr. Telford after a similar plan, has stood perfectly well, and
to this day remains a very serviceable structure.

[Image] Craig-Ellachie Bridge.

Its appearance is highly picturesque.  The scattered pines and beech trees on the side of the
impending mountain, the meadows along the valley of the Spey, and the western approach road
to the bridge cut deeply into the face of the rock, combine, with the slender appearance of
the iron arch, in rendering this spot one of the most remarkable in Scotland.*[13]  An iron
bridge of a similar span to that at Craig-Ellachie had previously been constructed across the
head of the Dornoch Frith at Bonar, near the point where the waters of the Shin join the sea.
The very severe trial which this structure sustained from the tremendous blow of an irregular
mass of fir-tree logs, consolidated by ice, as well as, shortly after, from the blow of a schooner
which drifted against it on the opposite side, and had her two masts knocked off by the collision,
gave him every confidence in the strength of this form of construction, and he accordingly
repeated it in several of his subsequent bridges, though none of them are comparable in beauty
with that of Craig-Ellachie.

Thus, in the course of eighteen years, 920 miles of capital roads, connected together by no
fewer than 1200 bridges, were added to the road communications of the Highlands, at an expense
defrayed partly by the localities immediately benefited, and partly by the nation. The effects
of these twenty years' operations were such as follow the making of roads everywhere--development
of industry and increase of civilization.  In no districts were the benefits derived from them
more marked than in the remote northern counties of Sutherland and Caithness.  The first stage-coaches
that ran northward from Perth to Inverness were tried in 1806, and became regularly established
in 1811; and by the year 1820 no fewer than forty arrived at the latter town in the course
of every week, and the same number departed from it.  Others were established in various directions
through the highlands, which were rendered as accessible as any English county.

Agriculture made rapid progress.  The use of carts became practicable, and manure was no longer
carried to the field on women's backs.  Sloth and idleness gradually disappeared before the
energy, activity, and industry which were called into life by the improved communications.
Better built cottages took the place of the old mud biggins with holes in their roofs to let
out the smoke. The pigs and cattle were treated to a separate table.  The dunghill was turned
to the outside of the house.  Tartan tatters gave place to the produce of Manchester and Glasgow
looms; and very soon few young persons were to be found who could not both read and write English.

But not less remarkable were the effects of the road-making upon the industrial habits of the
people.  Before Telford went into the Highlands, they did not know how to work, having never
been accustomed to labour continuously and systematically.  Let our engineer himself describe
the moral influences of his Highland contracts:--"In these works," says he, "and in the Caledonian
Canal, about three thousand two hundred men have been annually employed.  At first, they could
scarcely work at all: they were totally unacquainted with labour; they could not use the tools.
They have since become excellent labourers, and of the above number we consider about one-fourth
left us annually, taught to work. These undertakings may, indeed, be regarded in the light
of a working academy; from which eight hundred men have annually gone forth improved workmen.
They have either returned to their native districts with the advantage of having used the most
perfect sort of tools and utensils (which alone cannot be estimated at less than ten per cent.
on any sort of labour), or they have been usefully distributed through the other parts of the
country.  Since these roads were made accessible, wheelwrights and cartwrights have been established,
the plough has been introduced, and improved tools and utensils are generally used.  The plough
was not previously employed; in the interior and mountainous parts they used crooked sticks,
with iron on them, drawn or pushed along.  The moral habits of the great masses of the working
classes are changed; they see that they may depend on their own exertions for support: this
goes on silently, and is scarcely perceived until apparent by the results.  I consider these
improvements among the greatest blessings ever conferred on any country.  About two hundred
thousand pounds has been granted in fifteen years.  It has been the means of advancing the
country at least a century."

The progress made in the Lowland districts of Scotland since the same period has been no less
remarkable.  If the state of the country, as we have above described it from authentic documents,
be compared with what it is now, it will be found that there are few countries which have accomplished
so much within so short a period. It is usual to cite the United States as furnishing the most
extraordinary instance of social progress in modem times.  But America has had the advantage
of importing its civilization for the most part ready made, whereas that of Scotland has been
entirely her own creation.  By nature America is rich, and of boundless extent; whereas Scotland
is by nature poor, the greater part of her limited area consisting of sterile heath and mountain.
Little more than a century ago Scotland was considerably in the rear of Ireland. It was a country
almost without agriculture, without mines, without fisheries, without shipping, without money,
without roads. The people were ill-fed, half barbarous, and habitually indolent. The colliers
and salters were veritable slaves, and were subject to be sold together with the estates to
which they belonged.

What do we find now?  Praedial slavery completely abolished; heritable jurisdictions at an
end; the face of the country entirely changed; its agriculture acknowledged to be the first
in the world; its mines and fisheries productive in the highest degree; its banking a model
of efficiency and public usefulness; its roads equal to the best roads in England or in Europe.
The people are active and energetic, alike in education, in trade, in manufactures, in construction,
in invention.  Watt's invention of the steam engine, and Symington's invention of the steam-boat,
proved a source of wealth and power, not only to their own country, but to the world at large;
while Telford, by his roads, bound England and Scotland, before separated, firmly into one,
and rendered the union a source of wealth and strength to both.

At the same time, active and powerful minds were occupied in extending the domain of knowledge,--Adam
Smith in Political Economy, Reid and Dugald Stewart in Moral Philosophy, and Black and Robison
in Physical Science.  And thus Scotland, instead of being one of the idlest and most backward
countries in Europe, has, within the compass of little more than a lifetime, issued in one
of the most active, contented, and prosperous,--exercising an amount of influence upon the
literature, science, political economy, and industry of modern times, out of all proportion
to the natural resources of its soil or the amount of its population.

If we look for the causes of this extraordinary social progress, we shall probably find the
principal to consist in the fact that Scotland, though originally poor as a country, was rich
in Parish schools, founded under the provisions of an Act passed by the Scottish Parliament
in the year 1696.  It was there ordained "that there be a school settled and established, and
a schoolmaster appointed, in every parish not already provided, by advice of the heritors and
minister of the parish."  Common day-schools were accordingly provided and maintained throughout
the country for the education of children of all ranks and conditions.  The consequence was,
that in the course of a few generations, these schools, working steadily upon the minds of
the young, all of whom passed under the hands of the teachers, educated the population into
a state of intelligence and aptitude greatly in advance of their material well-being; and it
is in this circumstance, we apprehend, that the explanation is to be found of the rapid start
forward which the whole country took, dating more particularly from the year 1745.  Agriculture
was naturally the first branch of industry to exhibit signs of decided improvement; to be speedily
followed by like advances in trade, commerce, and manufactures.  Indeed, from that time the
country never looked back, but her progress went on at a constantly accelerated rate, issuing
in results as marvellous as they have probably been unprecedented.

Footnotes for Chapter VIII.

*[1] Romilly's Autobiography,' ii. 22.

*[2] Statistical Account of Scotland,' iii. 185.

*[3] The cas-chrom was a rude combination of a lever for the removal of rocks, a spade to cut
the earth, and a foot-plough to turn it.  We annex an illustration of this curious and now
obsolete instrument.  It weighed about eighteen pounds.  In working it, the" upper part of
the handle, to which the left hand was applied, reached the workman's shoulder, and being slightly
elevated, the point, shod with iron, was pushed into the ground horizontally; the soil being
turned over by inclining the handle to the furrow side, at the same time making the heel act
as a fulcrum to raise the point of the instrument.  In turning up unbroken ground, it was first
employed with the heel uppermost, with pushing strokes to cut the breadth of the sward to be
turned over; after which, it was used horizontally as above described.  We are indebted to
a Parliamentary Blue Book for the following representation of this interesting relic of ancient
agriculture.  It is given in the appendix to the 'Ninth Report of the Commissioners for Highland
Roads and Bridges,' ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 19th April, 1821.

*[4] Anderson's 'Guide to the Highlands and Islands of Scotland,' 3rd ed. p.48.

*[5] He was accompanied on this tour by Colonel Dirom, with whom he returned to his house at
Mount Annan, in Dumfries.  Telford says of him: "The Colonel seems to have roused the county
of Dumfries from the lethargy in which it has slumbered for centuries.  The map of the county,
the mineralogical survey, the new roads, the opening of lime works, the competition of ploughing,
the improving harbours, the building of bridges, are works which bespeak the exertions of no
common man."--Letter to Mr. Andrew.  Little, dated Shrewsbury, 30th November, 1801.

*[6] Ordered to be printed 5th of April, 1803.

*[7] 'Memorials of his Time," by Henry Cockburn, pp. 341-3.

*[8] 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Sir John Sinclair, Barb,' vol. i., p. 339.

*[9] Extract of a letter from a gentleman residing in Sunderland, quoted in 'Life of Telford,'
p. 465.

*[10] Letter to Mr. Andrew Little, Langholm, dated Salop, 18th February, 1803. 

  [Colored image: The kitten was discovered in the fireplace.]

As Lisi
attention but the two friends opened the Sammetpfötchen the kitten
and the rose-red soles have been reported to pick up the servants
and one had to separate.

The kitten was asleep in the bosom of the princess, and we want to let it sleep, to explore
how the little guest had actually come into the fireplace.

Chapter 2

As the kitten came into the fireplace.

  
  
  In sunshine - In the
  dark night For man and beast God's eye watches.

The way in which the kitten had come into the fireplace granted, the attentive reader a glimpse of
the sad circumstances of the family cats. When the bird kingdom, the Male to the female during
nest building, incubating and feeding the young to help. The amiable Husband of the nightingale
sings to his brooding females and delighted by his beautiful Love sounds the ear of promenading
people. Even with many four-footed animals can be found paternal affection and care for the
boys, but in cats is not the case. Some cats dad even has the bad habit to eat his children. Maybe
he holds it for mice or rats, maybe he hates them because they employ the cats too much and by
the moonlight walks on the rooftops, from visiting companies and cats the participation in
the magnificent Katzenconzerten, that you, dear children, certainly many times heard you hold. In short,
the cat eats its young and loving cats Mom is obliged them to defend against it or to hide
from him. She now does it well may, by visits to their confinement places where no one get there so easily.
- Kitten Mother now was none other than Kitty, the Hofkatze, and his father, the very honorable
Hofkater named Murr. Both parents enjoyed a very lucrative position with the kitchen and received
a generous salary of chicken bones and fish bones which they only to share with the Hofraben
had. Kitty, however, was still passing opportunity, some to support city starved cat, for Kitty
had a good heart, but the hangover Murr and Hofrabe Hans wanted to suffer and not scratched
into the earth, what they do not could eat, rather than other animals to enjoy it. One might
now have thought that with more abundant fare of the father would spare his children, but
no! he had from time time to formally appetite for young kittens and also the Hofrabe loved to
eat those. Kitty knew all these dangers, and was seriously considered on their children same escape.

Kitty
also met the Schloßmagd Voigts and the castle had overheard what those the first names, do not
tolerate any more kittens in the palace, because such impurities
caused, all the children should be in future Kitty drowned.

One can imagine as the heart of the poor Hofkatze suggested as the hour drew near where it should
be a mother.

slipped deeper in their sad thoughts projecting them on a building
ledge in the windows the royal guest rooms over and noticed that the
wind ripped one of these windows had, without any one seemed to have
noticed it.

In the guest rooms stood a four poster bed with blue silk curtains, which had already been sleeping
princes and counts, which had to admirably suited to childbirth, it was all so soft and gentle
as Mies Mies for their kittens could wish for, so she slipped in at the window, jumped on the Bed dug
with their feet a kind of nest between pillows and Plümeau, and looked soon surrounded by three
dearest kitten, she nursed undisturbed during nine days. Only once a day they left their children
to take food for themselves, but they did only at night, so that no one should spot where
she turned her steps.

The kitten care until the ninth day to be blind by then borrows the careful mother them and their
eyes watching over them.

Kitty hourly expected that their children the light will rise, and had diligently licked the
closed eyes to them, do not hit to facilitate the same. Because one day she heard a noise at
the door, a key was inserted into the keyhole, the lock turned, the door opened and in came
the Schloßmagd terrible, a terrible brush on a long, long stem. Kitty ordered their children
to be quiet, they hoped the Hofmagd would return only and not make the bed, afraid she squinted
through the columns of the curtain and followed every Movement of the horrors.


The principal works were those connected with the harbours situated upon the line of coast
extending from the harbour of Peterhead, in the county of Aberdeen, round to the head of the
Murray Frith. The shores there are exposed to the full force of the seas rolling in from the
Northern Ocean; and safe harbours were especially needed for the protection of the shipping
passing from north to south. Wrecks had become increasingly frequent, and harbours of refuge
were loudly called for.  At one part of the coast, as many as thirty wrecks had occurred within
a very short time, chiefly for want of shelter.

The situation of Peterhead peculiarly well adapted it for a haven of refuge, and the improvement
of the port was early regarded as a matter of national importance.  Not far from it, on the
south, are the famous Bullars or Boilers of Buchan--bold rugged rocks, some 200 feet high,
against which the sea beats with great fury, boiling and churning in the deep caves and recesses
with which they are perforated.  Peterhead stands on the most easterly part of the mainland
of Scotland, occupying the north-east side of the bay, and being connected with the country
on the northwest by an isthmus only 800 yards broad.  In Cromwell's time, the port possessed
only twenty tons of boat tonnage, and its only harbour was a small basin dug out of the rock.
Even down to the close of the sixteenth century the place was but an insignificant fishing
village.  It is now a town bustling with trade, having long been the principal seat of the
whale fishery, 1500 men of the port being engaged in that pursuit alone; and it sends out ships
of its own building to all parts of the world, its handsome and commodious harbours being accessible
at all winds to vessels of almost the largest burden.

[Image] Peterhead

It may be mentioned that about sixty years since, the port was formed by the island called
Keith Island, situated a small distance eastward from the shore, between which and the mainland
an arm of the sea formerly passed.  A causeway had, however, been formed across this channel,
thus dividing it into two small bays; after which the southern one had been converted in to
a harbour by means of two rude piers erected along either side of it.  The north inlet remained
without any pier, and being very inconvenient and exposed to the north-easterly winds, it was
little used.

[Image] Peterhead Harbour.

The first works carried out at Peterhead were of a comparatively limited character, the old
piers of the south harbour having been built by Smeaton; but improvements proceeded apace with
the enterprise and wealth of the inhabitants.  Mr. Rennie, and after him Mr. Telford, fully
reported as to the capabilities of the port and the best means of improving it.  Mr. Rennie
recommended the deepening of the south harbour and the extension of the jetty of the west pier,
at the same time cutting off all projections of rock from Keith Island on the eastward, so
as to render the access more easy. The harbour, when thus finished, would, he estimated, give
about 17 feet depth at high water of spring tides.  He also proposed to open a communication
across the causeway between the north and south harbours, and form a wet dock between them,
580 feet long and 225 feet wide, the water being kept in by gates at each end.  He further
proposed to provide an entirely new harbour, by constructing two extensive piers for the effectual
protection of the northern part of the channel, running out one from a rock north of the Green
Island, about 680 feet long, and another from the Roan Head, 450 feet long, leaving an opening
between them of 70 yards. This comprehensive plan unhappily could not be carried out at the
time for want of funds; but it may be said to have formed the groundwork of all that has been
subsequently done for the improvement of the port of Peterhead.

It was resolved, in the first place, to commence operations by improving the south harbour,
and protecting it more effectually from south-easterly winds.  The bottom of the harbour was
accordingly deepened by cutting out 30,000 cubic yards of rocky ground; and part of Mr. Rennie's
design was carried out by extending the jetty of the west pier, though only for a distance
of twenty yards.  These works were executed under Mr. Telford's directions; they were completed
by the end of the year 1811, and proved to be of great public convenience.

The trade of the town, however, so much increased, and the port was found of such importance
as a place of refuge for vessels frequenting the north seas, that in 1816 it was determined
to proceed with the formation of a harbour on the northern part of the old channel; and the
inhabitants having agreed among themselves to contribute to the extent of 10,000L. towards
carrying out the necessary works, they applied for the grant of a like sum from the Forfeited
Estates Fund, which was eventually voted for the purpose. The plan adopted was on a more limited
scale than that Proposed by Mr. Rennie; but in the same direction and contrived with the same
object,--so that, when completed, vessels of the largest burden employed in the Greenland fishery
might be able to enter one or other of the two harbours and find safe shelter, from whatever
quarter the wind might blow.

The works were vigorously proceeded with, and had made considerable progress, when, in October,
1819, a violent hurricane from the north-east, which raged along the coast for several days,
and inflicted heavy damage on many of the northern harbours, destroyed a large part of the
unfinished masonry and hurled the heaviest blocks into the sea, tossing them about as if they
had been pebbles.  The finished work had, however, stood well, and the foundations of the piers
under low water were ascertained to have remained comparatively uninjured.  There was no help
for it but to repair the damaged work, though it involved a heavy additional cost, one-half
of which was borne by the Forfeited Estates Fund and the remainder by the inhabitants.  Increased
strength was also given to the more exposed parts of the pierwork, and the slope at the sea
side of the breakwater was considerably extended.*[2] Those alterations in the design were
carried out, together with a spacious graving-dock, as shown in the preceding plan, and they
proved completely successful, enabling Peterhead to offer an amount of accommodation for shipping
of a more effectual kind than was at that time to be met with along the whole eastern coast
of Scotland.

The old harbour of Frazerburgh, situated on a projecting point of the coast at the foot of
Mount Kennaird, about twenty miles north of Peterhead, had become so ruinous that vessels lying
within it received almost as little shelter as if they had been exposed in the open sea.  Mr.
Rennie had prepared a plan for its improvement by running out a substantial north-eastern pier;
and this was eventually carried out by Mr. Telford in a modified form, proving of substantial
service to the trade of the port.  Since then a large and commodious new harbour has been formed
at the place, partly at the public expense and partly at that of the inhabitants, rendering
Frazerburgh a safe retreat for vessels of war as well as merchantmen.

[Image] Banff.

Among the other important harbour works on the northeast coast carried out by Mr. Telford under
the Commissioners appointed to administer the funds of the Forfeited Estates, were those at
Banff, the execution of which extended over many years; but, though costly, they did not prove
of anything like the same convenience as those executed at Peterhead.  The old harbour at the
end of the ridge running north and south, on which what is called the "sea town" of Banff is
situated, was completed in 1775, when the place was already considered of some importance as
a fishing station.

[Image] Banff Harbour.

This harbour occupies the triangular space at the north-eastern extremity of the projecting
point of land, at the opposite side of which, fronting the north-west, is the little town and
harbour of Macduff.  In 1816, Mr. Telford furnished the plan of a new pier and breakwater,
covering the old entrance, which presented an opening to the N.N.E., with a basin occupying
the intermediate space. The inhabitants agreed to defray one half of the necessary cost, and
the Commissioners the other; and the plans having been approved, the works were commenced in
1818.  They were in full progress when, unhappily, the same hurricane which in 1819 did so
much injury to the works at Peterhead, also fell upon those at Banff, and carried away a large
part of the unfinished pier. This accident had the effect of interrupting the work, as well
as increasing its cost; but the whole was successfully completed by the year 1822.  Although
the new harbour did not prove very safe, and exhibited a tendency to become silted up with
sand, it proved of use in many respects, more particularly in preventing all swell and agitation
in the old harbour, which was thereby rendered the safest artificial haven in the Murray Firth.

It is unnecessary to specify the alterations and improvements of a similar character, adapted
to the respective localities, which were carried out by our engineer at Burgh Head, Nairn,
Kirkwall, Tarbet, Tobermory, Portmaholmac, Dingwall (with its canal two thousand yards long,
connecting the town in a complete manner with the Frith of Cromarty), Cullen, Fortrose, Ballintraed,
Portree, Jura, Gourdon, Invergordon, and other places.  Down to the year 1823, the Commissioners
had expended 108,530L. on the improvements of these several ports, in aid of the local contributions
of the inhabitants and adjoining proprietors to a considerably greater extent; the result of
which was a great increase in the shipping accommodation of the coast towns, to the benefit
of the local population, and of ship-owners and navigators generally.

Mr. Telford's principal harbour works in Scotland, however, were those of Aberdeen and Dundee,
which, next to Leith (the port of Edinburgh), formed the principal havens along the east coast.
The neighbourhood of Aberdeen was originally so wild and barren that Telford expressed his
surprise that any class of men should ever have settled there.  An immense shoulder of the
Grampian mountains extends down to the sea-coast, where it terminates in a bold, rude promontory.
The country on either side of the Dee, which flows past the town, was originally covered with
innumerable granite blocks; one, called Craig Metellan, lying right in the river's mouth, and
forming, with the sand, an almost effectual bar to its navigation. Although, in ancient times,
a little cultivable land lay immediately outside the town, the region beyond was as sterile
as it is possible for land to be in such a latitude.  "Any wher," says an ancient writer, "after
yow pass a myll without the tonne, the countrey is barren lyke, the hills craigy, the plaines
full of marishes and mosses, the feilds are covered with heather or peeble stons, the come
feilds mixt with thes bot few.  The air is temperat and healthful about it, and it may be that
the citizens owe the acuteness of their wits thereunto and their civill inclinations; the lyke
not easie to be found under northerlie climats, damped for the most pairt with air of a grosse
consistence."*[3]  But the old inhabitants of Aberdeen and its neighbourhood were really as
rough as their soil.  Judged by their records, they must have been dreadfully haunted by witches
and sorcerers down to a comparatively recent period; witch-burning having been common in the
town until the end of the sixteenth century.  We find that, in one year, no fewer than twenty-three
women and one man were burnt; the Dean of Guild Records containing the detailed accounts of
the "loads of peattis, tar barrellis," and other combustibles used in burning them.  The lairds
of the Garioch, a district in the immediate neighbourhood, seem to have been still more terrible
than the witches, being accustomed to enter the place and make an onslaught upon the citizens,
according as local rage and thirst for spoil might incline them.  On one of such occasions,
eighty of the inhabitants were killed and wounded.*[4]  Down even to the middle of last century
the Aberdonian notions of personal liberty seem to have been very restricted; for between 1740
and 1746 we find that persons of both sexes were kidnapped, put on board ships, and despatched
to the American plantations, where they were sold for slaves.  Strangest of all, the men who
carried on this slave trade were local dignitaries, one of them being a town's baillie, another
the town-clerk depute.  Those kidnapped were openly "driven in flocks through the town, like
herds of sheep, under the care of a keeper armed with a whip."*[5]  So open was the traffic
that the public workhouse was used for their reception until the ships sailed, and when that
was filled, the tolbooth or common prison was made use of.  The vessels which sailed from the
harbour for America in 1743 contained no fewer than sixty-nine persons; and it is supposed
that, in the six years during which the Aberdeen slave trade was at its height, about six hundred
were transported for sale, very few of whom ever returned.*[6]  This slave traffic was doubtless
stimulated by the foreign ships beginning to frequent the port; for the inhabitants were industrious,
and their plaiding, linen, and worsted stockings were in much request as articles of merchandise.
Cured salmon were also exported in large quantities.  As early as 1659, a quay was formed along
the Dee towards the village of Foot Dee.  "Beyond Futty," says an old writer, "lyes the fisher-boat
heavne; and after that, towards the promontorie called Sandenesse, ther is to be seen a grosse
bulk of a building, vaulted and flatted above (the Blockhous they call it), begun to be builded
anno 1513, for guarding the entree of the harboree from pirats and algarads; and cannon wer
planted ther for that purpose, or, at least, that from thence the motions of pirats might be
tymouslie foreseen. This rough piece of work was finished anno 1542, in which yer lykewayes
the mouth of the river Dee was locked with cheans of iron and masts of ships crossing the river,
not to be opened bot at the citizens' pleasure."*[7]  After the Union, but more especially
after the rebellion of 1745, the trade of Aberdeen made considerable progress.  Although Burns,
in 1787, briefly described the place as a "lazy toun," the inhabitants were displaying much
energy in carrying out improvements in their port.*[8]  In 1775 the foundation-stone of the
new pier designed by Mr. Smeaton was laid with great ceremony, and, the works proceeding to
completion, a new pier, twelve hundred feet long, terminating in a round head, was finished
in less than six years.  The trade of the place was, however, as yet too small to justify anything
beyond a tidal harbour, and the engineer's views were limited to that object. He found the
river meandering over an irregular space about five hundred yards in breadth; and he applied
the only practicable remedy, by confining the channel as much as the limited means placed at
his disposal enabled him to do, and directing the land floods so as to act upon and diminish
the bar.  Opposite the north pier, on the south side of the river, Smeaton constructed a breast-wall
about half the length of the Pier.  Owing, however, to a departure from that engineer's plans,
by which the pier was placed too far to the north, it was found that a heavy swell entered
the harbour, and, to obviate this formidable inconvenience, a bulwark was projected from it,
so as to occupy about one third of the channel entrance.

The trade of the place continuing to increase, Mr. Rennie was called upon, in 1797, to examine
and report upon the best means of improving the harbour, when he recommended the construction
of floating docks upon the sandy flats called Foot Dee.  Nothing was done at the time, as the
scheme was very costly and considered beyond the available means of the locality.  But the
magistrates kept the subject in mind; and when Mr. Telford made his report on the best means
of improving the harbour in 1801, he intimated that the inhabitants were ready to cooperate
with the Government in rendering it capable of accommodating ships of war, as far as their
circumstances would permit.

In 1807, the south pier-head, built by Smeaton, was destroyed by a storm, and the time had
arrived when something must be done, not only to improve but even to preserve the port.  The
magistrates accordingly proceeded, in 1809, to rebuild the pier-head of cut granite, and at
the same time they applied to Parliament for authority to carry out further improvements after
the plan recommended by Mr. Telford; and the necessary powers were conferred in the following
year.  The new works comprehended a large extension of the wharfage accommodation, the construction
of floating and graving docks, increased means of scouring the harbour and ensuring greater
depth of water on the bar across the river's mouth, and the provision of a navigable communication
between the Aberdeenshire Canal and the new harbour.

[Image] Plan of Aberdeen Harbour

The extension of the north pier was first proceeded with, under the superintendence of John
Gibb, the resident engineer; and by the year 1811 the whole length of 300 additional feet had
been completed. The beneficial effects of this extension were so apparent, that a general wish
was expressed that it should be carried further; and it was eventually determined to extend
the pier 780 feet beyond Smeaton's head, by which not only was much deeper water secured, but
vessels were better enabled to clear the Girdleness Point. This extension was successfully
carried out by the end of the year 1812. A strong breakwater, about 800 feet long, was also
run out from the south shore, leaving a space of about 250 feet as an entrance, thereby giving
greater protection to the shipping in the harbour, while the contraction of the channel, by
increasing the "scour," tended to give a much greater depth of water on the bar.

[Image] Aberdeen Harbour.

The outer head of the pier was seriously injured by the heavy storms of the two succeeding
winters, which rendered it necessary to alter its formation to a very flat slope of about five
to one all round the head.*[9]

[Image] Section of pier-head work.

New wharves were at the same time constructed inside the harbour; a new channel for the river
was excavated, which further enlarged the floating space and wharf accommodation; wet and dry
docks were added; until at length the quay berthage amounted to not less than 6290 feet, or
nearly a mile and a quarter in length.  By these combined improvements an additional extent
of quay room was obtained of about 4000 feet; an excellent tidal harbour was formed, in which,
at spring tides, the depth of water is about 15 feet; while on the bar it was increased to
about 19 feet.  The prosperity of Aberdeen had meanwhile been advancing apace.  The city had
been greatly beautified and enlarged: shipbuilding had made rapid progress; Aberdeen clippers
became famous, and Aberdeen merchants carried on a trade with all parts of the world; manufactures
of wool, cotton, flax, and iron were carried on with great success; its population rapidly
increased; and, as a maritime city, Aberdeen took rank as the third in Scotland, the tonnage
entering the port having increased from 50,000 tons in 1800 to about 300,000 in 1860.

Improvements of an equally important character were carried out by Mr. Telford in the port
of Dundee, also situated on the east coast of Scotland, at the entrance to the Frith of Tay.
There are those still living at the place who remember its former haven, consisting of a crooked
wall, affording shelter to only a few fishing-boats or smuggling vessels--its trade being then
altogether paltry, scarcely deserving the name, and its population not one fifth of what it
now is.  Helped by its commodious and capacious harbour, it has become one of the most populous
and thriving towns on the east coast.

[Image] Plan of Dundee Harbour.

The trade of the place took a great start forward at the close of the war, and Mr. Telford
was called upon to supply the plans of a new harbour.  His first design, which he submitted
in 1814, was of a comparatively limited character; but it was greatly enlarged during the progress
of the works.  Floating docks were added, as well as graving docks for large vessels.  The
necessary powers were obtained in 1815; the works proceeded vigorously under the Harbour Commissioners,
who superseded the old obstructive corporation; and in 1825 the splendid new floating dock--750
feet long by 450 broad, having an entrance-lock 170 feet long and 40 feet wide--was opened
to the shipping of all countries.

[Image] Dundee Harbour.

Footnotes for Chapter IX.

*[1] Hugh Millar, in his 'Cruise of the Betsy,' attributes the invention of columnar pier-work
to Mr. Bremner, whom he terms "the Brindley of Scotland."  He has acquired great fame for his
skill in raising sunken ships, having warped the Great Britain steamer off the shores of Dundrum
Bay.  But we believe Mr. Telford had adopted the practice of columnar pier-work before Mr.
Bremner, in forming the little harbour of Folkestone in 1808, where the work is still to be
seen quite perfect.  The most solid mode of laying stone on land is in flat courses; but in
open pier work the reverse process is adopted.  The blocks are laid on end in columns, like
upright beams jammed together.  Thus laid, the wave which dashes against them is broken, and
spends itself on the interstices; where as, if it struck the broad solid blocks, the tendency
would be to lift them from their beds and set the work afloat; and in a furious storm such
blocks would be driven about almost like pebbles. The rebound from flat surfaces is also very
heavy, and produces violent commotion; where as these broken, upright, columnar-looking piers
seem to absorb the fury of the sea, and render its wildest waves comparatively innocuous.

*[2] 'Memorials from Peterhead and Banff, concerning Damage occasioned by a Storm.' Ordered
by the House of Commons to be printed, 5th July, 1820. [242.]

*[3] 'A Description of Bothe Touns of Aberdeene.' By James Gordon, Parson of Rothiemay.  Reprinted
in Gavin Turreff's 'Antiquarian Gleanings from Aberdeenshire Records.' Aberdeen, 1889.

*[4] Robertson's 'Book of Bon-Accord.'

*[5] Ibid., quoted in Turreff's 'Antiquarian Gleanings,' p. 222.

*[6] One of them, however, did return--Peter Williamson, a native of the town, sold for a slave
in Pennsylvania, "a rough, ragged, humle-headed, long, stowie, clever boy," who, reaching York,
published an account of the infamous traffic, in a pamphlet which excited extraordinary interest
at the time, and met with a rapid and extensive circulation.  But his exposure of kidnapping
gave very great offence to the magistrates, who dragged him before their tribunal as having
"published a scurrilous and infamous libel on the corporation," and he was sentenced to be
imprisoned until he should sign a denial of the truth of his statements.  He brought an action
against the corporation for their proceedings, and obtained a verdict and damages; and he further
proceeded against Baillie Fordyce (one of his kidnappers, and others, from whom he obtained
200L. damages, with costs.  The system was thus effectually put a stop to.  Quoted by Turreff,
p. 109.

*[8] Communication with London was as yet by no means frequent, and far from expeditious, as
the following advertisement of 1778 will show:--"For London: To sail positively on Saturday
next, the 7th November, wind and weather permitting, the Aberdeen smack. Will lie a short time
at London, and, if no convoy is appointed, will sail under care of a fleet of colliers the
best convoy of any. For particulars apply," &c., &c.

*[9] "The bottom under the foundations," says Mr. Gibb, in his description of the work, "is
nothing better than loose sand and gravel, constantly thrown up by the sea on that stormy coast,
so that it was necessary to consolidate the work under low water by dropping large stones from
lighters, and filling the interstices with smaller ones, until it was brought within about
a foot of the level of low water, when the ashlar work was commenced; but in place of laying
the stones horizontally in their beds, each course was laid at an angle of 45 degrees, to within
about 18 inches of the top, when a level coping was added.  This mode of building enabled the
work to be carried on expeditiously, and rendered it while in progress less liable to temporary
damage, likewise affording three points of bearing; for while the ashlar walling was carrying
up on both sides, the middle or body of the pier was carried up at the same time by a careful
backing throughout of large rubble-stone, to within 18 inches of the top, when the whole was
covered with granite coping and paving 18 inches deep, with a cut granite parapet wall on the
north side of the whole length of the pier, thus protected for the convenience of those who
might have occasion to frequent it."--Mr. Gibb's 'Narrative of Aberdeen Harbour Works.'

CHAPTER X.

CALEDONIAN AND OTHER CANALS.

The formation of a navigable highway through the chain of locks lying in the Great Glen of
the Highlands, and extending diagonally across Scotland from the Atlantic to the North Sea,
had long been regarded as a work of national importance.  As early as 1773, James Watt, then
following the business of a land-surveyor at Glasgow, made a survey of the country at the instance
of the Commissioners of Forfeited Estates.  He pronounced the canal practicable, and pointed
out how it could best be constructed.  There was certainly no want of water, for Watt was repeatedly
drenched with rain while he was making his survey, and he had difficulty in preserving even
his journal book.  "On my way home," he says, "I passed through the wildest country I ever
saw, and over the worst conducted roads."

Twenty years later, in 1793, Mr. Rennie was consulted as to the canal, and he also prepared
a scheme: but nothing was done. The project was, however, revived in 1801 during the war with
Napoleon, when various inland ship canals--such as those from London to Portsmouth, and from
Bristol to the English Channel--were under consideration with the view of enabling British
shipping to pass from one part of the kingdom to another without being exposed to the attacks
of French privateers.  But there was another reason for urging the formation of the canal through
the Great Glen of Scotland, which was regarded as of considerable importance before the introduction
of steam enabled vessels to set the winds and tides at comparative defiance.  It was this:
vessels sailing from the eastern ports to America had to beat up the Pentland Frith, often
against adverse winds and stormy seas, which rendered the navigation both tedious and dangerous.
Thus it was cited by Sir Edward Parry, in his evidence before Parliament in favour of completing
the Caledonian Canal, that of two vessels despatched from Newcastle on the same day--one bound
for Liverpool by the north of Scotland, and the other for Bombay by the English Channel and
the Cape of Good Hope --the latter reached its destination first!  Another case may be mentioned,
that of an Inverness vessel, which sailed for Liverpool on a Christmas Day, reached Stromness
Harbour, in Orkney, on the 1st of January, and lay there windbound, with a fleet of other traders,
until the middle of April following!  In fact, the Pentland Frith, which is the throat connecting
the Atlantic and German Oceans, through which the former rolls its, long majestic waves with
tremendous force, was long the dread of mariners, and it was considered an object of national
importance to mitigate the dangers of the passage towards the western Seas.

As the lochs occupying the chief part of the bottom of the Great Glen were of sufficient depth
to be navigable by large vessels, it was thought that if they could be connected by a ship
canal, so as to render the line of navigation continuous, it would be used by shipping to a
large extent, and prove of great public service. Five hundred miles of dangerous navigation
by the Orkneys and Cape Wrath would thereby be saved, while ships of war, were this track open
to them, might reach the north of Ireland in two days from Fort George near Inverness.

When the scheme of the proposed canal was revived in 1801, Mr. Telford was requested to make
a survey and send in his report on the subject. He immediately wrote to his friend James Watt,
saying, "I have so long accustomed myself to look with a degree of reverence at your work,
that I am particularly anxious to learn what occurred to you in this business while the whole
was fresh in your mind.  The object appears to me so great and so desirable, that I am convinced
you will feel a pleasure in bringing it again under investigation, and I am very desirous that
the thing should be fully and fairly explained, so that the public may be made aware of its
extensive utility.  If I can accomplish this, I shall have done my duty; and if the project
is not executed now, some future period will see it done, and I shall have the satisfaction
of having followed you and promoted its success."  We may here state that Telford's survey
agreed with Watt's in the most important particulars, and that he largely cited Watt's descriptions
of the proposed scheme in his own report.

Mr. Telford's first inspection of the district was made in 1801, and his report was sent in
to the Treasury in the course of the following year.  Lord Bexley, then Secretary to the Treasury,
took a warm personal interest in the project, and lost no opportunity of actively promoting
it.  A board of commissioners was eventually appointed to carry out the formation of the canal.
Mr. Telford, on being appointed principal engineer of the undertaking, was requested at once
to proceed to Scotland and prepare the necessary working survey.  He was accompanied on the
occasion by Mr. Jessop as consulting engineer.  Twenty thousand pounds were granted under the
provisions of the 43 Geo. III. (chap. cii.), and the works were commenced, in the beginning
of 1804, by the formation of a dock or basin adjoining the intended tide-lock at Corpach, near
Bannavie.

[Image] Map of Caledonian Canal

The basin at Corpach formed the southernmost point of the intended canal.  It is situated at
the head of Loch Eil, amidst some of the grandest scenery of the Highlands.  Across the Loch
is the little town of Fort William, one of the forts established at the end of the seventeenth
century to keep the wild Highlanders in subjection. Above it rise hills over hills, of all
forms and sizes, and of all hues, from grass-green below to heather-brown and purple above,
capped with heights of weather-beaten grey; while towering over all stands the rugged mass
of Ben Nevis--a mountain almost unsurpassed for picturesque grandeur.  Along the western foot
of the range, which extends for some six or eight miles, lies a long extent of brown bog, on
the verge of which, by the river Lochy, stand the ruins of Inverlochy Castle.

The works at Corpach involved great labour, and extended over a long series of years.  The
difference between the level of Loch Eil and Loch Lochy is ninety feet, while the distance
between them was less than eight miles.  It was therefore necessary to climb up the side of
the hill by a flight of eight gigantic locks, clustered together, and which Telford named Neptune's
Staircase.  The ground passed over was in some places very difficult, requiring large masses
of embankment, the slips of which in the course of the work frequently occasioned serious embarrassment.
The basin on Loch Eil, on the other hand, was constructed amidst rock, and considerable difficulty
was experienced in getting in the necessary coffer-dam for the construction of the opening
into the sea-lock, the entrance-sill of which was laid upon the rock itself, so that there
was a depth of 21 feet of water upon it at high water of neap tides.

At the same time that the works at Corpach were begun, the dock or basin at the north-eastern
extremity of the canal, situated at Clachnaharry, on the shore of Loch Beauly, was also laid
out, and the excavations and embankments were carried on with considerable activity.  This
dock was constructed about 967 yards long, and upwards of 162 yards in breadth, giving an area
of about 32 acres, --forming, in fact, a harbour for the vessels using the canal. The dimensions
of the artificial waterway were of unusual size, as the intention was to adapt it throughout
for the passage of a 32-gun frigate of that day, fully equipped and laden with stores.  The
canal, as originally resolved upon, was designed to be 110 feet wide at the surface, and 50
feet at the bottom, with a depth in the middle of 20 feet; though these dimensions were somewhat
modified in the execution of the work.  The locks were of corresponding large dimensions, each
being from 170 to 180 feet long, 40 broad, and 20 deep.

[Image] Lock, Caledonian Canal

Between these two extremities of the canal--Corpach on the south-west and Clachnaharry on the
north-east--extends the chain of fresh-water lochs: Loch Lochy on the south; next Loch Oich;
then Loch Ness; and lastly, furthest north, the small Loch of Dochfour. The whole length of
the navigation is 60 miles 40 chains, of which the navigable lochs constitute about 40 miles,
leaving only about 20 miles of canal to be constructed, but of unusually large dimensions and
through a very difficult country.

The summit loch of the whole is Loch Oich, the surface of which is exactly a hundred feet above
high water-mark, both at Inverness and Fort William; and to this sheet of water the navigation
climbs up by a series of locks from both the eastern and western seas. The whole number of
these is twenty-eight: the entrance-lock at Clachnaharry, constructed on piles, at the end
of huge embankments, forced out into deep water, at Loch Beady; another at the entrance to
the capacious artificial harbour above mentioned, at Muirtown; four connected locks at the
southern end of this basin; a regulating lock a little to the north of Loch Dochfour; five
contiguous locks at Fort Augustus, at the south end of Loch Ness; another, called the Kytra
Lock, about midway between Fort Angustus and Loch Oich; a regulating lock at the north-east
end of Loch Oich; two contiguous locks between Lochs Oich and Lochy; a regulating lock at the
south-west end of Loch Lochy; next, the grand series of locks, eight in number, called "Neptune's
Staircase," at Bannavie, within a mile and a quarter of the sea; two locks, descending to Corpach
basin; and lastly, the great entrance or sea-lock at Corpach.

The northern entrance-lock from the sea at Loch Beauly is at Clachnaharry, near Inverness.
The works here were not accomplished without much difficulty as well as labour, partly from
the very gradual declivity of the shore, and partly from the necessity of placing the sea-lock
on absolute mud, which afforded no foundation other than what was created by compression and
pile-driving. The mud was forced down by throwing upon it an immense load of earth and stones,
which was left during twelve months to settle; after which a shaft was sunk to a solid foundation,
and the masonry of the sea-lock was then founded and built therein.

In the 'Sixteenth Report of the Commissioners of the Caledonian Canal,' the following reference
is made to this important work, which was finished in 1812:-- "The depth of the mud on which
it may be said to be artificially seated is not less than 60 feet; so that it cannot be deemed
superfluous, at the end of seven years, to state that no subsidence is discoverable; and we
presume that the entire lock, as well as every part of it, may now be deemed as immovable,
and as little liable to destruction, as any other large mass of masonry.  This was the most
remarkable work performed under the immediate care of Mr. Matthew Davidson, our superintendent
at Clachnaharry, from 1804 till the time of his decease.  He was a man perfectly qualified
for the employment by inflexible integrity, unwearied industry, and zeal to a degree of anxiety,
in all the operations committed to his care."*[1]

As may naturally be supposed, the execution of these great works involved vast labour and anxiety.
They were designed with much skill, and executed with equal ability.  There were lock-gates
to be constructed, principally of cast iron, sheathed with pine planking.   Eight public road
bridges crossed the line of the canal, which were made of cast iron, and swung horizontally.
There were many mountain streams, swollen to torrents in winter, crossing under the canal,
for which abundant water-way had to be provided, involving the construction of numerous culverts,
tunnels, and under-bridges of large dimensions.  There were also powerful sluices to let off
the excess of water sent down from the adjacent mountains into the canal during winter.  Three
of these, of great size, high above the river Lochy, are constructed at a point where the canal
is cut through the solid rock; and the sight of the mass of waters rushing down into the valley
beneath, gives an impression of power which, once seen, is never forgotten.

These great works were only brought to a completion after the labours of many years, during
which the difficulties encountered in their construction had swelled the cost of the canal
far beyond the original estimate.  The rapid advances which had taken place in the interval
in the prices of labour and materials also tended greatly to increase the expenses, and, after
all, the canal, when completed and opened, was comparatively little used.  This was doubtless
owing, in a great measure, to the rapid changes which occurred in the system of navigation
shortly after the projection of the undertaking.  For these Telford was not responsible.  He
was called upon to make the canal, and he did so in the best manner. Engineers are not required
to speculate as to the commercial value of the works they are required to construct; and there
were circumstances connected with the scheme of the Caledonian Canal which removed it from
the category of mere commercial adventures. It was a Government project, and it proved a failure
as a paying concern.  Hence it formed a prominent topic for discussion in the journals of the
day; but the attacks made upon the Government because of their expenditure on the hapless undertaking
were perhaps more felt by Telford, who was its engineer, than by all the ministers of state
conjoined.

"The unfortunate issue of this great work," writes the present engineer of the canal, to whom
we are indebted for many of the preceding facts, "was a grievous disappointment to Mr. Telford,
and was in fact the one great bitter in his otherwise unalloyed cup of happiness and prosperity.
The undertaking was maligned by thousands who knew nothing of its character.  It became 'a
dog with a bad name,' and all the proverbial consequences followed. The most absurd errors
and misconceptions were propagated respecting it from year to year, and it was impossible during
Telford's lifetime to stem the torrent of popular prejudice and objurgation.  It must, however,
be admitted, after a long experience, that Telford was greatly over-sanguine in his expectations
as to the national uses of the canal, and he was doomed to suffer acutely in his personal feelings,
little though he may have been personally to blame, the consequences of what in this commercial
country is regarded as so much worse than a crime, namely, a financial mistake."*[2]

Mr. Telford's great sensitiveness made him feel the ill success of this enterprise far more
than most other men would have done. He was accustomed to throw himself into the projects on
which he was employed with an enthusiasm almost poetic.  He regarded them not merely as so
much engineering, but as works which were to be instrumental in opening up the communications
of the country and extending its civilization.  Viewed in this light, his canals, roads, bridges,
and harbours were unquestionably of great national importance, though their commercial results
might not in all cases justify the estimates of their projectors.  To refer to like instances--no
one can doubt the immense value and public uses of Mr. Rennie's Waterloo Bridge or Mr. Robert
Stephenson's Britannia and Victoria Bridges, though every one knows that, commercially, they
have been failures.  But it is probable that neither of these eminent engineers gave himself
anything like the anxious concern that Telford did about the financial issue of his undertaking.
Were railway engineers to fret and vex themselves about the commercial value of the schemes
in which they have been engaged, there are few of them but would be so haunted by the ghosts
of wrecked speculations that they could scarcely lay their heads upon their pillows for a single
night in peace.

While the Caledonian Canal was in progress, Mr. Telford was occupied in various works of a
similar kind in England and Scotland, and also upon one in Sweden.  In 1804, while on one of
his journeys to the north, he was requested by the Earl of Eglinton and others to examine a
project for making a canal from Glasgow to Saltcoats and Ardrossan, on the north-western coast
of the county of Ayr, passing near the important manufacturing town of Paisley.  A new survey
of the line was made, and the works were carried on during several successive years until a
very fine capacious canal was completed, on the same level, as far as Paisley and Johnstown.
But the funds of the company falling short, the works were stopped, and the canal was carried
no further.  Besides, the measures adopted by the Clyde Trustees to deepen the bed of that
river and enable ships of large burden to pass up as high as Glasgow, had proved so successful
that the ultimate extension of the canal to Ardrossan was no longer deemed necessary, and the
prosecution of the work was accordingly abandoned.  But as Mr. Telford has observed, no person
suspected, when the canal was laid out in 1805, "that steamboats would not only monopolise
the trade of the Clyde, but penetrate into every creek where there is water to float them,
in the British Isles and the continent of Europe, and be seen in every quarter of the world."

Another of the navigations on which Mr. Telford was long employed was that of the river Weaver
in Cheshire.  It was only twenty-four miles in extent, but of considerable importance to the
country through which it passed, accommodating the salt-manufacturing districts, of which the
towns of Nantwich, Northwich, and Frodsham are the centres.  The channel of the river was extremely
crooked and much obstructed by shoals, when Telford took the navigation in hand in the year
1807, and a number of essential improvements were made in it, by means of new locks, weirs,
and side cuts, which had the effect of greatly improving the communications of these important
districts.

In the following year we find our engineer consulted, at the instance of the King of Sweden,
on the best mode of constructing the Gotha Canal, between Lake Wenern and the Baltic, to complete
the communication with the North Sea.  In 1808, at the invitation of Count Platen, Mr. Telford
visited Sweden and made a careful survey of the district.  The service occupied him and his
assistants two months, after which he prepared and sent in a series of detailed plans and sections,
together with an elaborate report on the subject.  His plans having been adopted, he again
visited Sweden in 1810, to inspect the excavations which had already been begun, when he supplied
the drawings for the locks and bridges. With the sanction of the British Government, he at
the same time furnished the Swedish contractors with patterns of the most improved tools used
in canal making, and took with him a number of experienced lock-makers and navvies for the
purpose of instructing the native workmen.

The construction of the Gotha Canal was an undertaking of great magnitude and difficulty, similar
in many respects to the Caledonian Canal, though much more extensive.  The length of artificial
canal was 55 miles, and of the whole navigation, including the lakes, 120 miles.  The locks
are 120 feet long and 24 feet broad; the width of the canal at bottom being 42 feet, and the
depth of water 10 feet. The results, so far as the engineer was concerned, were much more satisfactory
than in the case of the Caledonian Canal.  While in the one case he had much obloquy to suffer
for the services he had given, in the other he was honoured and feted as a public benefactor,
the King conferring upon him the Swedish order of knighthood, and presenting him with his portrait
set in diamonds.

Among the various canals throughout England which Mr. Telford was employed to construct or
improve, down to the commencement of the railway era, were the Gloucester and Berkeley Canal,
in 1818; the Grand Trunk Canal, in 1822; the Harecastle Tunnel, which he constructed anew,
in 1824-7; the Birmingham Canal, in 1824; and the Macclesfield, and Birmingham and Liverpool
Junction Canals, in 1825. The Gloucester and Berkeley Canal Company had been unable to finish
their works, begun some thirty years before; but with the assistance of a loan of 160,000L.
from the Exchequer Bill Loan Commissioners, they were enabled to proceed with the completion
of their undertaking. A capacious canal was cut from Gloucester to Sharpness Point, about eight
miles down the Severn, which had the effect of greatly improving the convenience of the port
of Gloucester; and by means of this navigation, ships of large burden can now avoid the circuitous
and difficult passage of the higher part of the river, very much to the advantage of the trade
of the place.

The formation of a new tunnel through Harecastle Hill, for the better accommodation of the
boats passing along the Grand Trunk Canal, was a formidable work.  The original tunnel, it
will be remembered,*[3] was laid out by Brindley, about fifty years before, and occupied eleven
years in construction.  But the engineering appliances of those early days were very limited;
the pumping powers of the steam-engine had not been fairly developed, and workmen were as yet
only half-educated in the expert use of tools.  The tunnel, no doubt, answered the purpose
for which it was originally intended, but it was very soon found too limited for the traffic
passing along the navigation.  It was little larger than a sewer, and admitted the passage
of only one narrow boat, seven feet wide, at a time, involving very heavy labour on the part
of the men who worked it through.  This was performed by what was called legging.  The Leggers
lay upon the deck of the vessel, or upon a board slightly projecting from either side of it,
and, by thrusting their feet against the slimy roof or sides of the tunnel-walking horizontally
as it were -- they contrived to push it through. But it was no better than horsework; and after
"legging" Harecastle Tunnel, which is more than a mile and a half long, the men were usually
completely exhausted, and as wet from perspiration as if they had been dragged through the
canal itself.  The process occupied about two hours, and by the time the passage of the tunnel
was made, there was usually a collection of boats at the other end waiting their turn to pass.
Thus much contention and confusion took place amongst the boatmen--a very rough class of labourers--
and many furious battles were fought by the claimants for the first turn "through."  Regulations
were found of no avail to settle these disputes, still less to accommodate the large traffic
which continued to keep flowing along the line of the Grand Trunk, and steadily increased with
the advancing trade and manufactures of the country.  Loud complaints were made by the public,
but they were disregarded for many years; and it was not until the proprietors were threatened
with rival canals and railroads that they determined on--what they could no longer avoid if
they desired to retain the carrying trade of the district the enlargement of the Harecastle Tunnel.

Mr. Telford was requested to advise the Company what course was most proper to be adopted in
the matter, and after examining the place, he recommended that an entirely new tunnel should
be constructed, nearly parallel with the old one, but of much larger dimensions. The work was
begun in 1824, and completed in 1827, in less than three years.  There were at that time throughout
the country plenty of skilled labourers and contractors, many of them trained by their experience
upon Telford's own works, where as Brindley had in a great measure to make his workmen out
of the rawest material. Telford also had the advantage of greatly improved machinery and an
abundant supply of money--the Grand Trunk Canal Company having become prosperous and rich,
paying large dividends. It is therefore meet, while eulogising the despatch with which he was
enabled to carry out the work, to point out that the much greater period occupied in the earlier
undertaking is not to be set down to the disparagement of Brindley, who had difficulties to
encounter which the later engineer knew nothing of.

The length of the new tunnel is 2926 yards; it is 16 feet high and 14 feet broad, 4 feet 9
inches of the breadth being occupied by the towing-path--for "legging" was now dispensed with,
and horses hauled along the boats instead of their being thrust through by men. The tunnel
is in so perfectly straight a line that its whole length can be seen through at one view; and
though it was constructed by means of fifteen different pitshafts sunk to the same line along
the length of the tunnel, the workmanship is so perfect that the joinings of the various lengths
of brickwork are scarcely discernible.  The convenience afforded by the new tunnel was very
great, and Telford mentions that, on surveying it in 1829, he asked a boatman coming; out of
it how he liked it?  "I only wish," he replied, "that it reached all the way to Manchester!"

[Image] Cross Section of Harecastle Tunnel.

At the time that Mr. Telford was engaged upon the tunnel at Harecastle, he was employed to
improve and widen the Birmingham Canal, another of Brindley's works.  Though the accommodation
provided by it had been sufficient for the traffic when originally constructed, the expansion
of the trade of Birmingham and the neighbourhood, accelerated by the formation of the canal
itself, had been such as completely to outgrow its limited convenience and capacity, and its
enlargement and improvement now became absolutely necessary.  Brindley's Canal, for the sake
of cheapness of construction--money being much scarcer and more difficult to be raised in the
early days of canals--was also winding and crooked; and it was considered desirable to shorten
and straighten it by cutting off the bends at different places.   At the point at which the
canal entered Birmingham, it had become "little better than a crooked ditch, with scarcely
the appearance of a towing-path, the horses frequently sliding and staggering in the water,
the hauling-lines sweeping the gravel into the canal, and the entanglement at the meeting of
boats being incessant; whilst at the locks at each end of the short summit at Smethwick crowds
of boatmen were always quarrelling, or offering premiums for a preference of passage; and the
mine-owners, injured by the delay, were loud in their just complaints."*[4]

Mr. Telford proposed an effective measure of improvement, which was taken in hand without loss
of time, and carried out, greatly to the advantage of the trade of the district.  The numerous
bends in the canal were cut off, the water-way was greatly widened, the summit at Smethwick
was cut down to the level on either side, and a straight canal, forty feet wide, without a
lock, was thus formed as far as Bilston and Wolverhampton; while the length of the main line
between Birmingham and Autherley, along the whole extent of the "Black country," was reduced
from twenty-two to fourteen miles. At the same time the obsolete curvatures in Brindley's old
canal were converted into separate branches or basins, for the accommodation of the numerous
mines and manufactories on either side of the main line. In consequence of the alterations
which had been made in the canal, it was found necessary to construct numerous large bridges.
One of these--a cast iron bridge, at Galton, of 150 feet span--has been much admired for its
elegance, lightness, and economy of material. Several others of cast iron were constructed
at different points, and at one place the canal itself is carried along on an aqueduct of the
same material as at Pont-Cysylltau.  The whole of these extensive improvements were carried
out in the short space of two years; and the result was highly satisfactory, "proving," as
Mr. Telford himself observes, "that where business is extensive, liberal expenditure of this
kind is true economy."

[Image] Galton Bridge, Birmingham Canal.

In 1825 Mr. Telford was called upon to lay out a canal to connect the Grand Trunk, at the north
end of Harecastle Tunnel, with the rapidly improving towns of Congleton and Macclesfield. 
The line was twenty-nine miles in length, ten miles on one level from Harecastle to beyond
Congleton; then, ascending 114 feet by eleven locks, it proceeded for five miles on a level
past Macclesfield, and onward to join the Peak Forest Canal at Marple.  The navigation was
thus conducted upon two levels, each of considerable length; and it so happened that the trade
of each was in a measure distinct, and required separate accommodation.  The traffic of the
whole of the Congleton district had ready access to the Grand Trunk system, without the labour,
expense, and delay involved by passing the boats through locks; while the coals brought to
Macclesfield to supply the mills there were carried throughout upon the upper level, also without
lockage.  The engineer's arrangement proved highly judicious, and furnishes an illustration
of the tact and judgment which he usually displayed in laying out his works for practical uses.
Mr Telford largely employed cast iron in the construction of this canal, using it in the locks
and gates, as well as in an extensive aqueduct which it was necessary to construct over a deep
ravine, after the plan pursued by him at, Pont-Cysylltau and other places.

The last canal constructed by.  Mr. Telford was the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction, extending
from the Birmingham Canal, near Wolverhampton, in nearly a direct line, by Market Drayton,
Nantwich, and through the city of Chester, by the Ellesmere Canal, to Ellesmere Port on the
Mersey.  The proprietors of canals were becoming alarmed at the numerous railways projected
through the districts heretofore served by their water-ways; and among other projects one was
set on foot, as early as 1825, for constructing a line of railway from London to Liverpool.
Mr. Telford was consulted as to the best means of protecting existing investments, and his
advice was to render the canal system as complete as it could be made; for he entertained the
conviction, which has been justified by experience, that such navigations possessed peculiar
advantages for the conveyance of heavy goods, and that, if the interruptions presented by locks
could be done away with, or materially reduced, a large portion of the trade of the country
must continue to be carried by the water roads.  The new line recommended by him was approved
and adopted, and the works were commenced in 1826.  A second complete route was thus opened
up between Birmingham and Liverpool, and Manchester, by which the distance was shortened twelve
miles, and the delay occasioned by 320 feet of upward and downward lockage was done away with.

Telford was justly proud of his canals, which were the finest works of their kind that had
yet been executed in England.  Capacious, convenient, and substantial, they embodied his most
ingenious contrivances, and his highest engineering skill.  Hence we find him writing to a
friend at Langholm, that, so soon as he could find "sufficient leisure from his various avocations
in his own unrivalled and beloved island," it was his intention to visit France and Italy,
for the purpose of ascertaining what foreigners had been able to accomplish, compared with
ourselves, in the construction of canals, bridges, and harbours.  "I have no doubt," said he,
"as to their inferiority.  During the war just brought to a close, England has not only been
able to guard her own head and to carry on a gigantic struggle, but at the same time to construct
canals, roads, harbours, bridges--magnificent works of peace--the like of which are probably
not to be found in the world.  Are not these things worthy of a nation's pride?"

Footnotes for Chapter X.

*[1] Mr. Matthew Davidson, above referred to, was an excellent officer, but a strange cynical
humourist in his way.  He was a Lowlander, and had lived for some time in England, at the Pont
Cysylltau works, where he had acquired a taste for English comforts, and returned to the North
with a considerable contempt for the Highland people amongst whom he was stationed.  He is
said to have very much resembled Dr. Johnson in person and was so fond of books, and so well
read in them, that he was called 'the Walking Library.' He used to say that if justice were
done to the inhabitants of Inverness, there would be nobody left there in twenty years but
the Provost and the hangman.  Seeing an artist one day making a sketch in the mountains, he
said it was the first time he had known what the hills were good for.  And when some one was
complaining of the weather in the Highlands, he looked sarcastically round, and observed that
the rain certainly would not hurt the heather crop.

*[2] The misfortunes of the Caledonian Canal did not end with the life of Telford.  The first
vessel passed through it from sea to sea in October, 1822, by which time it had cost about
a million sterling, or double the original estimate.  Notwithstanding this large outlay, it
appears that the canal was opened before the works had been properly completed; and the consequence
was that they very shortly fell into decay.  It even began to be considered whether the canal
ought not to be abandoned.  In 1838, Mr. James Walker, C.E., an engineer of the highest eminence,
examined it, and reported fully on its then state, strongly recommending its completion as
well as its improvement.  His advice was eventually adopted, and the canal was finished accordingly,
at an additional cost of about 200,000L., and the whole line was re-opened in 1847, since which
time it has continued in useful operation.  The passage from sea to sea at all times can now
be depended on, and it can usually be made in forty-eight hours.  As the trade of the North
increases, the uses of the canal will probably become much more decided than they have heretofore,
proved.

*[3] 'Brindley and the Early Engineers,' p. 267.

*[4] 'Life of Telford,' p. 82, 83.

CHAPTER XI.

TELFORD AS A ROAD-MAKER.

Mr. Telford's extensive practice as a bridge-builder led his friend Southey to designate him
"Pontifex Maximus."  Besides the numerous bridges erected by him in the West of England, we
have found him furnishing designs for about twelve hundred in the Highlands, of various dimensions,
some of stone and others of iron.  His practice in bridge-building had, therefore, been of
an unusually extensive character, and Southey's sobriquet was not ill applied.  But besides
being a great bridge-builder, Telford was also a great road-maker. With the progress of industry
and trade, the easy and rapid transit of persons and goods had come to be regarded as an increasing
object of public interest.  Fast coaches now ran regularly between all the principal towns
of England; every effort being made, by straightening and shortening the roads, cutting down
hills, and carrying embankments across valleys and viaducts over rivers, to render travelling
by the main routes as easy and expeditious as possible.

Attention was especially turned to the improvement of the longer routes, and to perfecting
the connection of London with the chief town's of Scotland and Ireland.  Telford was early
called upon to advise as to the repairs of the road between Carlisle and Glasgow, which had
been allowed to fall into a wretched state; as well as the formation of a new line from Carlisle,
across the counties of Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, and Wigton, to Port Patrick, for the purpose
of ensuring a more rapid communication with Belfast and the northern parts of Ireland.  Although
Glasgow had become a place of considerable wealth and importance, the roads to it, north of
Carlisle, continued in a very unsatisfactory state.  It was only in July, 1788, that the first
mail-coach from London had driven into Glasgow by that route, when it was welcomed by a procession
of the citizens on horseback, who went out several miles to meet it. But the road had been
shockingly made, and before long had become almost impassable.  Robert Owen states that, in
1795, it took him two days and three nights' incessant travelling to get from Manchester to
Glasgow, and he mentions that the coach had to cross a well-known dangerous mountain at midnight,
called Erickstane Brae, which was then always passed with fear and trembling.*[1] As late as
the year 1814 we find a Parliamentary Committee declaring the road between Carlisle and Glasgow
to be in so ruinous a state as often seriously to delay the mail and endanger the lives of
travellers. The bridge over Evan Water was so much decayed, that one day the coach and horses
fell through it into the river, when "one passenger was killed, the coachman survived only
a few days, and several other persons were dreadfully maimed; two of the horses being also
killed."*[2]  The remaining part of the bridge continued for some time unrepaired, just space
enough being left for a single carriage to pass.  The road trustees seemed to be helpless,
and did nothing; a local subscription was tried and failed, the district passed through being
very poor; but as the road was absolutely required for more than merely local purposes, it
was eventually determined to undertake its reconstruction as a work of national importance,
and 50,000L. was granted by Parliament with this object, under the provisions of the Act passed
in 1816.  The works were placed under Mr. Telford's charge; and an admirable road was very
shortly under construction between Carlisle and Glasgow. That part of it between Hamilton and
Glasgow, eleven miles in length, was however left in the hands of local trustees, as was the
diversion of thirteen miles at the boundary of the counties of Lanark and Dumfries, for which
a previous Act had been obtained. The length of new line constructed by Mr. Telford was sixty-nine
miles, and it was probably the finest piece of road which up to that time had been made.

His ordinary method of road-making in the Highlands was, first to level and drain; then, like
the Romans, to lay a solid pavement of large stones, the round or broad end downwards, as close
as they could be set.  The points of the latter were then broken off, and a layer of stones
broken to about the size of walnuts, was laid upon them, and over all a little gravel if at
hand.  A road thus formed soon became bound together, and for ordinary purposes was very durable.

But where the traffic, as in the case of the Carlisle and Glasgow road, was expected to be
very heavy, Telford took much greater pains.  Here he paid especial attention to two points:
first, to lay it out as nearly as possible upon a level, so as to reduce the draught to horses
dragging heavy vehicles,--one in thirty being about the severest gradient at any part of the
road.  The next point was to make the working, or middle portion of the road, as firm and substantial
as possible, so as to bear, without shrinking, the heaviest weight likely to be brought over
it.  With this object he specified that the metal bed was to be formed in two layers, rising
about four inches towards the centre the bottom course being of stones (whinstone, limestone,
or hard freestone), seven inches in depth.  These were to be carefully set by hand, with the
broadest ends downwards, all crossbonded or jointed, no stone being more than three inches
wide on the top.  The spaces between them were then to be filled up with smaller stones, packed
by hand, so as to bring the whole to an even and firm surface.  Over this a top course was
to be laid, seven inches in depth, consisting of properly broken hard whinstones, none exceeding
six ounces in weight, and each to be able to pass through a circular ring, two inches and a
half in diameter; a binding of gravel, about an inch in thickness, being placed over all. 
A drain crossed under the bed of the bottom layer to the outside ditch in every hundred yards.
The result was an admirably easy, firm, and dry road, capable of being travelled upon in all
weathers, and standing in comparatively small need of repairs.

A similar practice was introduced in England about the same time by Mr. Macadam; and, though
his method was not so thorough as that of Telford, it was usefully employed on most of the
high roads throughout the kingdom.  Mr. Macadam's notice was first called to the subject while
acting as one of the trustees of a road in Ayrshire.  Afterwards, while employed as Government
agent for victualling the navy in the western parts of England, he continued the study of road-making,
keeping in view the essential conditions of a compact and durable substance and a smooth surface.
At that time the attention of the Legislature was not so much directed to the proper making
and mending of the roads, as to suiting the vehicles to them such as they were; and they legislated
backwards and forwards for nearly half a century as to the breadth of wheels. Macadam was,
on the other hand, of opinion that the main point was to attend to the nature of the roads
on which the vehicles were to travel.  Most roads were then made with gravel, or flints tumbled
upon them in their natural state, and so rounded that they had no points of contact, and rarely
became consolidated.  When a heavy vehicle of any sort passed over them, their loose structure
presented no resistance; the material was thus completely disturbed, and they often became
almost impassable.  Macadam's practice was this: to break the stones into angular fragments,
so that a bed several inches in depth should be formed, the material best adapted for the purpose
being fragments of granite, greenstone, or basalt; to watch the repairs of the road carefully
during the process of consolidation, filling up the inequalities caused by the traffic passing
over it, until a hard and level surface had been obtained.  Thus made, the road would last
for years without further attention.  in 1815 Mr. Macadam devoted himself with great enthusiasm
to road-making as a profession, and being appointed surveyor-general of the Bristol roads,
he had full opportunities of exemplifying his system.  It proved so successful that the example
set by him was quickly followed over the entire kingdom.  Even the streets of many large towns
were Macadamised. In carrying out his improvements, however, Mr. Macadam spent several thousand
pounds of his own money, and in 1825, having proved this expenditure before a Committee of
the House of Commons, the amount was reimbursed to him, together with an honorary tribute of
two thousand pounds.  Mr. Macadam died poor, but, as he himself said, "a least an honest man."
By his indefatigable exertions and his success as a road-maker, by greatly saving animal labour,
facilitating commercial intercourse, and rendering travelling easy and expeditious, he entitled
himself to the reputation of a public benefactor.

[Image] J. L. Macadam.

Owing to the mountainous nature of the country through which Telford's Carlisle and Glasgow
road passes, the bridges are unusually numerous and of large dimensions.  Thus, the Fiddler's
Burn Bridge is of three arches, one of 150 and two of 105 feet span each.  There are fourteen
other bridges, presenting from one to three arches, of from 20 to 90 feet span.  But the most
picturesque and remarkable bridge constructed by Telford in that district was upon another
line of road subsequently carried out by him, in the upper part of the county of Lanark, and
crossing the main line of the Carlisle and Glasgow road almost at right angles.  Its northern
and eastern part formed a direct line of communication between the great cattle markets of
Falkirk, Crief, and Doune, and Carlisle and the West of England.  It was carried over deep
ravines by several lofty bridges, the most formidable of which was that across the Mouse Water
at Cartland Crags, about a mile to the west of Lanark. The stream here flows through a deep
rocky chasm, the sides of which are in some places about four hundred feet high.  At a point
where the height of the rocks is considerably less, but still most formidable, Telford spanned
the ravine with the beautiful bridge represented in the engraving facing this page, its parapet
being 129 feet above the surface of the water beneath.

[Image] Cartland Crags Bridge.

The reconstruction of the western road from Carlisle to Glasgow, which Telford had thus satisfactorily
carried out, shortly led to similar demands from the population on the eastern side of the
kingdom.  The spirit of road reform was now fairly on foot. Fast coaches and wheel-carriages
of all kinds had become greatly improved, so that the usual rate of travelling had advanced
from five or six to nine or ten miles an hour.  The desire for the rapid communication of political
and commercial intelligence was found to increase with the facilities for supplying it; and,
urged by the public wants, the Post-Office authorities were stimulated to unusual efforts in
this direction.  Numerous surveys were made and roads laid out, so as to improve the main line
of communication between London and Edinburgh and the intermediate towns.  The first part of
this road taken in hand was the worst--that lying to the north of Catterick Bridge, in Yorkshire.
A new line was surveyed by West Auckland to Hexham, passing over Garter Fell to Jedburgh, and
thence to Edinburgh; but was rejected as too crooked and uneven. Another was tried by Aldstone
Moor and Bewcastle, and rejected for the same reason.  The third line proposed was eventually
adopted as the best, passing from Morpeth, by Wooler and Coldstream, to Edinburgh; saving rather
more than fourteen miles between the two points, and securing a line of road of much more favourable
gradients.

The principal bridge on this new highway was at Pathhead, over the Tyne, about eleven miles
south of Edinburgh.  To maintain the level, so as to avoid the winding of the road down a steep
descent on one side of the valley and up an equally steep ascent on the other, Telford ran
out a lofty embankment from both sides, connecting their ends by means of a spacious bridge.
The structure at Pathhead is of five arches, each 50 feet span, with 25 feet rise from their
springing, 49 feet above the bed of the river.  Bridges of a similar character were also thrown
over the deep ravines of Cranston Dean and Cotty Burn, in the same neighbourhood.  At the same
time a useful bridge was built on the same line of road at Morpeth, in Northumberland, over
the river Wansbeck.  It consisted of three arches, of which the centre one was 50 feet span,
and two side-arches 40 feet each; the breadth between the parapets being 30 feet.

The advantages derived from the construction of these new roads were found to be so great,
that it was proposed to do the like for the remainder of the line between London and Edinburgh;
and at the instance of the Post-Office authorities, with the sanction of the Treasury, Mr.
Telford proceeded to make detailed surveys of an entire new post-road between London and Morpeth.
In laying it out, the main points which he endeavoured to secure were directness and flatness;
and 100 miles of the proposed new Great North Road, south of York, were laid out in a perfectly
straight line.  This survey, which was begun in 1824, extended over several years; and all
the requisite arrangements had been made for beginning the works, when the result of the locomotive
competition at Rainhill, in 1829, had the effect of directing attention to that new method
of travelling, fortunately in time to prevent what would have proved, for the most part, an
unnecessary expenditure, on works soon to be superseded by a totally different order of things.

The most important road-improvements actually carried out under Mr. Telford's immediate superintendence
were those on the western side of the island, with the object of shortening the distance and
facilitating the communication between London and Dublin by way of Holyhead, as well as between
London and Liverpool.  At the time of the Union, the mode of transit between the capital of
Ireland and the metropolis of the United Kingdom was tedious, difficult, and full of peril.
In crossing the Irish Sea to Liverpool, the packets were frequently tossed about for days together.
On the Irish side, there was scarcely the pretence of a port, the landing-place being within
the bar of the river Liffey, inconvenient at all times, and in rough weather extremely dangerous.
To avoid the long voyage to Liverpool, the passage began to be made from Dublin to Holyhead,
the nearest point of the Welsh coast.  Arrived there, the passengers were landed upon rugged,
unprotected rocks, without a pier or landing convenience of any kind.*[3]  But the traveller's
perils were not at an end,--comparatively speaking they had only begun.  From Holyhead, across
the island of Anglesea, there was no made road, but only a miserable track, circuitous and
craggy, full of terrible jolts, round bogs and over rocks, for a distance of twenty-four miles.
Having reached the Menai Strait, the passengers had again to take to an open ferry-boat before
they could gain the mainland.  The tide ran with great rapidity through the Strait, and, when
the wind blew strong, the boat was liable to be driven far up or down the channel, and was
sometimes swamped altogether. The perils of the Welsh roads had next to be encountered, and
these were in as bad a condition at the beginning of the present century as those of the Highlands
above described.  Through North Wales they were rough, narrow, steep, and unprotected, mostly
unfenced, and in winter almost impassable.  The whole traffic on the road between Shrewsbury
and Bangor was conveyed by a small cart, which passed between the two places once a week in
summer.  As an illustration of the state of the roads in South Wales, which were quite as bad
as those in the North, we may state that, in 1803, when the late Lord Sudeley took home his
bride from the neighbourhood of Welshpool to his residence only thirteen miles distant, the
carriage in which the newly married pair rode stuck in a quagmire, and the occupants, having
extricated themselves from their perilous situation, performed the rest of their journey on foot.

The first step taken was to improve the landing-places on both the Irish and Welsh sides of
St. George's Channel, and for this purpose Mr. Rennie was employed in 1801.  The result was,
that Howth on the one coast, and Holyhead on the other, were fixed upon as the most eligible
sites for packet stations.  Improvements, however, proceeded slowly, and it was not until 1810
that a sum of 10,000L. was granted by Parliament to enable the necessary works to be begun.
Attention was then turned to the state of the roads, and here Mr. Telford's services were called
into requisition. As early as 1808 it had been determined by the Post-Office authorities to
put on a mail-coach between Shrewsbury and Holyhead; but it was pointed out that the roads
in North Wales were so rough and dangerous that it was doubtful whether the service could be
conducted with safety.  Attempts were made to enforce the law with reference to their repair,
and no less than twenty-one townships were indicted by the Postmaster-General.  The route was
found too perilous even for a riding post, the legs of three horses having been broken in one
week.*[4]  The road across Anglesea was quite as bad.  Sir Henry Parnell mentioned, in 1819,
that the coach had been overturned beyond Gwynder, going down one of the hills, when a friend
of his was thrown a considerable distance from the roof into a pool of water.  Near the post-office
of Gwynder, the coachman had been thrown from his seat by a violent jolt, and broken his leg.
The post-coach, and also the mail, had been overturned at the bottom of Penmyndd Hill; and
the route was so dangerous that the London coachmen, who had been brought down to "work" the
country, refused to continue the duty because of its excessive dangers. Of course, anything
like a regular mail-service through such a district was altogether impracticable.

The indictments of the townships proved of no use; the localities were too poor to provide
the means required to construct a line of road sufficient for the conveyance of mails and passengers
between England and Ireland.  The work was really a national one, to be carried out at the
national cost.  How was this best to be done? Telford recommended that the old road between
Shrewsbury and Holyhead (109 miles long) should be shortened by about four miles, and made
as nearly as possible on a level; the new line proceeding from Shrewsbury by Llangollen, Corwen,
Bettws-y-Coed, Capel-Curig, and Bangor, to Holyhead.  Mr. Telford also proposed to cross the
Menai Strait by means of a cast iron bridge, hereafter to be described.

Although a complete survey was made in 1811, nothing was done for several years.  The mail-coaches
continued to be overturned, and stage-coaches, in the tourist season, to break down as before.*[5]
The Irish mail-coach took forty one hours to reach Holyhead from the time of its setting out
from St. Martin's-le-Grand; the journey was performed at the rate of only 6 3/4 miles an hour,
the mail arriving in Dublin on the third day.  The Irish members made many complaints of the
delay and dangers to which they were exposed in travelling up to town.  But, although there
was much discussion, no money was voted until the year 1815, when Sir Henry Parnell vigorously
took the question in hand and successfully carried it through.  A Board of Parliamentary Commissioners
was appointed, of which he was chairman, and, under their direction, the new Shrewsbury and
Holyhead road was at length commenced and carried to completion, the works extending over a
period of about fifteen years. The same Commissioners excrcised an authority over the roads
between London and Shrewsbury; and numerous improvements were also made in the main line at
various points, with the object of facilitating communication between London and Liverpool
as well as between London and Dublin.

The rugged nature of the country through which the new road passed, along the slopes of rocky
precipices and across inlets of the sea, rendered it necessary to build many bridges, to form
many embankments, and cut away long stretches of rock, in order to secure an easy and commodious
route.  The line of the valley of the Dee, to the west of Llangollen, was selected, the road
proceeding along the scarped sides of the mountains, crossing from point to point by lofty
embankments where necessary; and, taking into account the character of the country, it must
be acknowledged that a wonderfully level road was secured.  While the gradients on the old
road had in some cases been as steep as 1 in 6 1/2, passing along the edge of unprotected precipices,
the new one was so laid out as to be no more than 1 in 20 at any part, while it was wide and
well protected along its whole extent.  Mr. Telford pursued the same system that he had adopted
in the formation of the Carlisle and Glasgow road, as regards metalling, cross-draining, and
fence-walling; for the latter purpose using schistus, or slate rubble-work, instead of sandstone.
The largest bridges were of iron; that at Bettws-y-Coed, over the Conway--called the Waterloo
Bridge, constructed in 1815--being a very fine specimen of Telford's iron bridge-work.

Those parts of the road which had been the most dangerous were taken in hand first, and, by
the year 1819, the route had been rendered comparatively commodious and safe.  Angles were
cut off, the sides of hills were blasted away, and several heavy embankments run out across
formidable arms of the sea.  Thus, at Stanley Sands, near Holyhead, an embankment was formed
1300 yards long and 16 feet high, with a width of 34 feet at the top, along which the road
was laid.  Its breadth at the base was 114 feet, and both sides were coated with rubble stones,
as a protection against storms.  By the adoption of this expedient, a mile and a half was saved
in a distance of six miles.  Heavy embankments were also run out, where bridges were thrown
across chasms and ravines, to maintain the general level.  From Ty-Gwynn to Lake Ogwen, the
road along the face of the rugged hill and across the river Ogwen was entirely new made, of
a uniform width of 28 feet between the parapets, with an inclination of only 1 in 22 in the
steepest place.  A bridge was thrown over the deep chasm forming the channel of the Ogwen,
the embankment being carried forward from the rook cutting, protected by high breastworks.
From Capel-Curig to near the great waterfall over the river Lugwy, about a mile of new road
was cut; and a still greater length from Bettws across the river Conway and along the face
of Dinas Hill to Rhyddlanfair, a distance of 3 miles; its steepest descent being 1 in 22, diminishing
to 1 in 45.  By this improvement, the most difficult and dangerous pass along the route through
North Wales was rendered safe and commodious.

[Image] Road Descent near Betws-y-Coed.

Another point of almost equal difficulty occurred near Ty-Nant, through the rocky pass of Glynn
Duffrws, where the road was confined between steep rocks and rugged precipices: there the way
was widened and flattened by blasting, and thus reduced to the general level; and so on eastward
to Llangollen and Chirk, where the main Shrewsbury road to London was joined.*[6]

[Image] Road above Nant Frrancon, North Wales.

By means of these admirable roads the traffic of North Wales continues to be mainly carried
on to this day.  Although railways have superseded coach-roads in the more level districts,
the hilly nature of Wales precludes their formation in that quarter to any considerable extent;
and even in the event of railways being constructed, a large part of the traffic of every country
must necessarily continue to pass over the old high roads.  Without them even railways would
be of comparatively little value; for a railway station is of use chiefly because of its easy
accessibility, and thus, both for passengers and merchandise, the common roads of the country
are as useful as ever they were, though the main post-roads have in a great measure ceased
to be employed for the purposes for which they were originally designed.

The excellence of the roads constructed by Mr. Telford through the formerly inaccessible counties
of North Wales was the theme of general praise; and their superiority, compared with those
of the richer and more level districts in the midland and western English counties, becoming
the subject of public comment, he was called upon to execute like improvements upon that part
of the post-road which extended between Shrewsbury and the metropolis.  A careful survey was
made of the several routes from London northward by Shrewsbury as far as Liverpool; and the
short line by Coventry, being 153 miles from London to Shrewsbury, was selected as the one
to be improved to the utmost.

Down to 1819, the road between London and Coventry was in a very bad state, being so laid as
to become a heavy slough in wet weather.  There were many steep hills which required to be
cut down, in some parts of deep clay, in others of deep sand.  A mail-coach had been tried
to Banbury; but the road below Aylesbury was so bad, that the Post-office authorities were
obliged to give it up.  The twelve miles from Towcester to Daventry were still worse.  The
line of way was covered with banks of dirt; in winter it was a puddle of from four to six inches
deep--quite as bad as it had been in Arthur Young's time; and when horses passed along the
road, they came out of it a mass of mud and mire.*[7]  There were also several steep and dangerous
hills to be crossed; and the loss of horses by fatigue in travelling by that route at the time
was very great.

Even the roads in the immediate neighbourhood of the metropolis were little better, those under
the Highgate and Hampstead trust being pronounced in a wretched state.  They were badly formed,
on a clay bottom, and being undrained, were almost always wet and sloppy.  The gravel was usually
tumbled on and spread unbroken, so that the materials, instead of becoming consolidated, were
only rolled about by the wheels of the carriages passing over them.

Mr. Telford applied the same methods in the reconstruction of these roads that he had already
adopted in Scotland and Wales, and the same improvement was shortly felt in the more easy passage
over them of vehicles of all sorts, and in the great acceleration of the mail service.  At
the same time, the line along the coast from Bangor, by Conway, Abergele, St. Asaph, and Holywell,
to Chester, was greatly improved.  As forming the mail road from Dublin to Liverpool, it was
considered of importance to render it as safe and level as possible.  The principal new cuts
on this line were those along the rugged skirts of the huge Penmaen-Mawr; around the base of
Penmaen-Bach to the town of Conway; and between St. Asaph and Holywell, to ease the ascent
of Rhyall Hill.

But more important than all, as a means of completing the main line of communication between
England and Ireland, there were the great bridges over the Conway and the Menai Straits to
be constructed. The dangerous ferries at those places had still to be crossed in open boats,
sometimes in the night, when the luggage and mails were exposed to great risks.  Sometimes,
indeed, they were wholly lost and passengers were lost with them.  It was therefore determined,
after long consideration, to erect bridges over these formidable straits, and Mr. Telford was
employed to execute the works,--in what manner, we propose to describe in the next chapter.

Footnotes for Chapter XI.

*[1] 'Life of Robert Owen,' by himself.

*[2] 'Report from the Select Committee on the Carlisle and Glasgow Road,' 28th June, 1815.

*[3 A diary is preserved of a journey to Dublin from Grosvenor Square London, l2th June, 1787,
in a coach and four, accompanied by a post-chaise and pair, and five outriders.  The party
reached Holyhead in four days, at a cost of 75L. 11s. 3d. The state of intercourse between
this country and the sister island at this part of the account is strikingly set forth in the
following entries:-- "Ferry at Bangor, 1L. 

Now you should go for baptism. Lisi had in fact seen baptize her little sister, and took before
to make it barely so. Joly had to sit on his hind paws to the caps to To keep what had then
been Lisis office.

And when the preparations were completed and the children were solemnly in a circle, heard you
are suddenly a strange noise, a rumble, meowing, whining.

The children knew even not what it was - the winding doll could not be!

The noise came from the fireplace, which was delivered in the summer, so the wind does not come could
snarl. The children were afraid and fled screaming and shouting for help in the other room and Joly
fell into a terrible barking. Above the noise was Mademoiselle Gogo cause, and asked what was
the matter? When the children of the spectacle in the fireplace told, shook they concern the
head, they did not know whether it was advisable to open the fireplace, it indeed could be an owl
or an owl flew into it, but these birds have big beaks and maintain order to hack around it, it could
also be a bat and Mademoiselle Gogo was afraid of bats. - All stood around the fireplace in
hark final position. - Ah! the sounds were so quiet, so hülfebedürftig, you had to punish, that
a creature of God is feel very uncomfortable in it. Lisi broke quickly on the fireplace and
behold, there was a small loveable kitten. It could be just 14 days old and the children enjoyed
immensely. It was a colorful Cypernkätzchen. It had a long tail which
it moved gracefully, short Ears, which it knew to be smart and a sharp
pelts, so soft and smooth as silk.  The science which
has been displayed in giving the general line of the road a proper inclination through a country
whose whole surface consists of a succession of rocks, bogs, ravines, rivers, and precipices,
reflects the greatest credit upon the engineer who has planned them; but perhaps a still greater
degree of professional skill has been shown in the construction, or rather the building, of
the road itself.  The great attention which Mr. Telford has devoted, to give to the surface
of the road one uniform and moderately convex shape, free from the smallest inequality throughout
its whole breadth; the numerous land drains, and, when necessary, shores and tunnels of substantial
masonry, with which all the water arising from springs or falling in rain is instantly carried
off; the great care with which a sufficient foundation is established for the road, and the
quality, solidity, and disposition of the materials that are put upon it, are matters quite
new in the system of road-making in these countries."-- 'Report from the Select Committee on
the Road from London to Holyhead in the year 1819.'

*[7] Evidence of William Waterhouse before the Select Committee, 10th March, 1819.

CHAPTER XII.

THE MENAI AND CONWAY BRIDGES.

[Image] Map of Menai Strait [Ordnance Survey]

So long as the dangerous Straits of Menai had to be crossed in an open ferry-boat, the communication
between London and Holyhead was necessarily considered incomplete.  While the roads through
North Wales were so dangerous as to deter travellers between England and Ireland from using
that route, the completion of the remaining link of communication across the Straits was of
comparatively little importance.  But when those roads had, by the application of much capital,
skill, and labour, been rendered so safe and convenient that the mail and stage coaches could
run over them at the rate of from eight to ten miles an hour, the bridging of the Straits became
a measure of urgent public necessity.  The increased traffic by this route so much increased
the quantity of passengers and luggage, that the open boats were often dangerously overloaded;
and serious accidents, attended with loss of life and property, came to be of frequent occurrence.

The erection of a bridge over the Straits had long been matter of speculation amongst engineers.
As early as 1776, Mr. Golborne proposed his plan of an embankment with a bridge in the middle
of it; and a few years later, in 1785, Mr. Nichols proposed a wooden viaduct, furnished with
drawbridges at Cadnant Island.  Later still, Mr. Rennie proposed his design of a cast iron
bridge.  But none of these plans were carried out, and the whole subject remained in abeyance
until the year 1810, when a commission was appointed to inquire and report as to the state
of the roads between Shrewsbury, Chester, and Holyhead.  The result was, that Mr. Telford was
called upon to report as to the most effectual method of bridging the Menai Strait, and thus
completing the communication with the port of embarkation for Ireland.

[Image] Telford's proposed Cast Iron Bridge

Mr. Telford submitted alternative plans for a bridge over the Strait: one at the Swilly Rock,
consisting of three cast iron arches of 260 feet span, with a stone arch of 100 feet span between
each two iron ones, to resist their lateral thrust; and another at Ynys-y-moch, to which he
himself attached the preference, consisting of a single cast iron arch of 500 feet span, the
crown of the arch to be 100 feet above high water of spring tides, and the breadth of the roadway
to be 40 feet.

The principal objection taken to this plan by engineers generally, was the supposed difficulty
of erecting a proper centering to support the arch during construction; and the mode by which
Mr. Telford proposed to overcome this may be cited in illustration of his ready ingenuity in
overcoming difficulties.  He proposed to suspend the centering from above instead of supporting
it from below in the usual manner--a contrivance afterwards revived by another very skilful
engineer, the late Mr. Brunel.  Frames, 50 feet high, were to be erected on the top of the
abutments, and on these, strong blocks, or rollers and chains, were to be fixed, by means of
which, and by the aid of windlasses and other mechanical powers, each separate piece of centering
was to be raised into, and suspended in, its proper place.  Mr. Telford regarded this method
of constructing centres as applicable to stone as well as to iron arches; and indeed it is
applicable, as Mr. Brunel held, to the building of the arch itself.*[1]

[Image] Proposed Plan of Suspended Centering

Mr. Telford anticipated that, if the method recommended by him were successfully adopted on
the large scale proposed at Menai, all difficulties with regard to carrying bridges over deep
ravines would be done away with, and a new era in bridge-building begun. For this and other
reasons--but chiefly because of the much greater durability of a cast iron bridge compared
with the suspension bridge afterwards adopted--it is matter of regret that he was not permitted
to carry out this novel and grand design.  It was, however, again objected by mariners that
the bridge would seriously affect, if not destroy, the navigation of the Strait; and this plan,
like Mr. Rennie's, was eventually rejected.

Several years passed, and during the interval Mr. Telford was consulted as to the construction
of a bridge over Runcorn Gap on the Mersey, above Liverpool.  As the river was there about
1200 feet wide, and much used for purposes of navigation, a bridge of the ordinary construction
was found inapplicable.  But as he was required to furnish a plan of the most suitable structure,
he proceeded to consider how the difficulties of the case were to be met. The only practicable
plan, he thought, was a bridge constructed on the principle of suspension.  Expedients of this
kind had long been employed in India and America, where wide rivers were crossed by means of
bridges formed of ropes and chains; and even in this country a suspension bridge, though of
a very rude kind, had long been in use near Middleton on the Tees, where, by means of two common
chains stretched across the river, upon which a footway of boards was laid, the colliers were
enabled to pass from their cottages to the colliery on the opposite bank.

Captain (afterwards Sir Samuel) Brown took out a patent for forming suspension bridges in 1817;
but it appears that Telford's attention had been directed to the subject before this time,
as he was first consulted respecting the Runcorn Bridge in the year 1814, when he proceeded
to make an elaborate series of experiments on the tenacity of wrought iron bars, with the object
of employing this material in his proposed structure.  After he had made upwards of two hundred
tests of malleable iron of various qualities, he proceeded to prepare his design of a bridge,
which consisted of a central opening of 1000 feet span, and two side openings of 500 feet each,
supported by pyramids of masonry placed near the low-water lines.  The roadway was to be 30
feet wide, divided into one central footway and two distinct carriageways of 12 feet each.
At the same time he prepared and submitted a model of the central opening, which satisfactorily
stood the various strains which were applied to it.  This Runcorn design of 1814 was of a very
magnificent character, perhaps superior even to that of the Menai Suspension Bridge, afterwards
erected; but unhappily the means were not forthcoming to carry it into effect.  The publication
of his plan and report had, however, the effect of directing public attention to the construction
of bridges on the suspension principle; and many were shortly after designed and erected by
Telford and other engineers in different parts of the kingdom.

Mr. Telford continued to be consulted by the Commissioners of the Holyhead Roads as to the
completion of the last and most important link in the line of communication between London
and Holyhead, by bridging the Straits of Menai; and at one of their meetings in 1815, shortly
after the publication of his Runcorn design, the inquiry was made whether a bridge upon the
same principle was not applicable in this particular case.  The engineer was instructed again
to examine the Straits and submit a suitable plan and estimate, which he proceeded to do in
the early part of 1818. The site selected by him as the most favourable was that which had
been previously fixed upon for the projected cast iron bridge, namely at Ynys-y-moch--the shores
there being bold and rocky, affording easy access and excellent foundations, while by spanning
the entire channel between the low-water lines, and the roadway being kept uniformly 100 feet
above the highest water at spring tide, the whole of the navigable waterway would be left entirely
uninterrupted.  The distance between the centres of the supporting pyramids was proposed to
be of the then unprecedented width of 550 feet, and the height of the pyramids 53 feet above
the level of the roadway.  The main chains were to be sixteen in number, with a deflection
of 37 feet, each composed of thirty-six bars of half-inch-square iron, so placed as to give
a square of six on each side, making the whole chain about four inches in diameter, welded
together for their whole length, secured by bucklings, and braced round with iron wire; while
the ends of these great chains were to be secured by a mass of masonry built over stone arches
between each end of the supporting piers and the adjoining shore.  Four of the arches were
to be on the Anglesea, and three on the Caernarvonshire side, each of them of 52 feet 6 inches
span. The roadway was to be divided, as in the Runcorn design with a carriage way 12 feet wide
on each side, and a footpath of 4 feet in the middle.  Mr. Telford's plan was supported by
Mr. Rennie and other engineers of eminence; and the Select Committee of the House of Commons,
being satisfied as to its practicability, recommended Parliament to pass a Bill and to make
a grant of money to enable the work to be carried into effect.

[Image] Outline of Menai Bridge

The necessary Act passed in the session of 1819, and Mr. Telford immediately proceeded to Bangor
to make preparations for beginning the works.  The first proceeding was to blast off the inequalities
of the surface of the rock called Ynys-y-moch, situated on the western or Holyhead side of
the Strait, at that time accessible only at low water.  The object was to form an even surface
upon it for the foundation of the west main pier.  It used to be at this point, where the Strait
was narrowest, that horned cattle were driven down, preparatory to swimming them across the
channel to the Caernarvon side, when the tide was weak and at its lowest ebb.  The cattle were,
nevertheless, often carried away, the current being too strong for the animals to contend against
it.

At the same time, a landing-quay was erected on Ynys-y-moch, which was connected with the shore
by an embankment carrying lines of railway.  Along these, horses drew the sledges laden with
stone required for the work; the material being brought in barges from the quarries opened
at Penmon Point, on the north-eastern extremity of the Isle of Anglesea, a little to the westward
of the northern opening of the Strait.  When the surface of the rock had been levelled and
the causeway completed, the first stone of the main pier was laid by Mr. W.A. Provis, the resident
engineer, on the 10th of August, 1819; but not the slightest ceremony was observed on the occasion.

Later in the autumn, preparations were made for proceeding with the foundations of the eastern
main pier on the Bangor side of the Strait.  After excavating the beach to a depth of 7 feet,
a solid mass of rock was reached, which served the purpose of an immoveable foundation for
the pier.  At the same, time workshops were erected; builders, artisans, and labourers were
brought together from distant quarters; vessels and barges were purchased or built for the
special purpose of the work; a quay was constructed at Penmon Point for loading the stones
for the piers; and all the requisite preliminary arrangements were made for proceeding with
the building operations in the ensuing spring.

A careful specification of the masonry work was drawn up, and the contract was let to Messrs.
Stapleton and Hall; but as they did not proceed satisfactorily, and desired to be released
from the contract, it was relet on the same terms to Mr. John Wilson, one of Mr. Telford's
principal contractors for mason work on the Caledonian Canal. The building operations were
begun with great vigour early in 1820. The three arches on the Caernarvonshire side and the
four on the Anglesea side were first proceeded with.  They are of immense magnitude, and occupied
four years in construction, having been finished late in the autumn of 1824.  These piers are
65 feet in height from high-water line to the springing of the arches, the span of each being
52 feet 6 inches.  The work of the main piers also made satisfactory progress, and the masonry
proceeded so rapidly that stones could scarcely be got from the quarries in sufficient quantity
to keep the builders at work.  By the end of June about three hundred men were employed.

The two principal piers, each 153 feet in height, upon which the main chains of the bridge
were to be suspended, were built with great care and under rigorous inspection.  In these,
as indeed in most of the masonry of the bridge, Mr. Telford adopted the same practice which
he had employed in his previous bridge structures, that of leaving large void spaces, commencing
above high water mark and continuing them up perpendicularly nearly to the level of the roadway.
"I have elsewhere expressed my conviction," he says, when referring to the mode of constructing
these piers, "that one of the most important improvements which I have been able to introduce
into masonry consists in the preference of cross-walls to rubble, in the structure of a pier,
or any other edifice requiring strength. Every stone and joint in such walls is open to inspection
in the progress of the work, and even afterwards, if necessary; but a solid filling of rubble
conceals itself, and may be little better than a heap of rubbish confined by side walls." 
The walls of these main piers were built from within as well as from without all the way up,
and the inside was as carefully and closely cemented with mortar as the external face.  Thus
the whole pier was bound firmly together, and the utmost strength given, while the weight of
the superstructure upon the lower parts of the work was reduced to its minimum.

[Image] Section of Main Pier

Over the main piers, the small arches intended for the roadways were constructed, each being
15 feet to the springing of the arch, and 9 feet wide.  Upon these arches the masonry was carried
upwards, in a tapering form, to a height of 53 feet above the level of the road.  As these
piers were to carry the immense weight of the suspension chains, great pains were taken with
their construction, and all the stones, from top to bottom, were firmly bound together with
iron dowels to prevent the possibility of their being separated or bulged by the immense pressure
they had to withstand.

The most important point in the execution of the details of the bridge, where the engineer
had no past experience to guide him, was in the designing and fixing of the wrought iron work.
Mr. Telford had continued his experiments as to the tenacity of bar iron, until he had obtained
several hundred distinct tests; and at length, after the most mature delilberation, the patterns
and dimensions were finally arranged by him, and the contract for the manufacture of the whole
was let to Mr. Hazeldean, of Shrewsbury, in the year 1820.  The iron was to be of the best
Shropshire, drawn at Upton forge, and finished and proved at the works, under the inspection
of a person appointed by the engineer.

[Image] Cut showing fixing of the chains in the rock

The mode by which the land ends of these enormous suspension chains were rooted to the solid
ground on either side of the Strait, was remarkably ingenious and effective. Thiersch was on 27 March in his diary that he was a landscape painter in the evening Böcklin
met in the pub who told a lot of the Paris revolution. On 3 April The two went together, Böcklin
perhaps for the first time in the Vatican. Thiersch then the impression of a comrade who conceived
only external, internal, through the death of his Bride was all torn. Franz-Dreber was slightly
older than Böcklin and already several years longer in Rome, he was a student of Ludwig was
a judge and still had the old cook and Reinhardt known. He then found a strong influence on
Böcklin. , By the Witness the landscape (Plate 2) has been developed in Dreber influence.

Soon must the young Poussin, Gaspard Dughet be entered into his ken. This happened but probably
a little later, at the time when Jacob Burckhardt's studies for the Cicerone made, therefore 1853rd
Burckhardt Dughet appreciated very much and like the friend on whose works, the far scattered
in galleries and churches, not noticeable to anyone who made it all the attention have. Already
a Paul Heyse, however, the fall of 1852 Böcklin visited Rome fell, the amazing Memory on the Böcklin
allowed to paint large works out of his head. The large number of studies that have survived
from that period were, therefore, hardly to the implementation to facilitate the painting, but to exercise
the memory and thus free work to . Allow

In the summer of 1852 Böcklin for several months in Basel had been. He had then unsuccessfully
courted the lovely and much-celebrated Schermar Antonia, who is also Jacob Burckhardt has paid homage.
Back in Rome, he finally found the woman who for half a century would become his wife. She was,
as he wooed her, seventeen years old, well bred and very beautiful, and he has them because
he knew no other way to approach her on the street approached and asked to name his relatives
to stop where he asked for her hand could. For it was anything but, as the legend goes, a professional
model. She was an orphan, the well protected with a relative who lived and enjoyed religious
nuns in their school had. She was also a nice property in view. Only has its life in a risky path
that brought them instead of a thick pastry a foreign slim painter have wanted, the Protestant
and so, unfortunately also a high-handed genius. Her name was Angela Pascucci. Now there were
in the sixties, the time since, as Professor returned from Weimar to Rome, was there really
a model for great pranks talked about, made Angela's first name, and was generally "the Pascuccia
referred.

The wedding took place in 1853 instead Böcklin and Jacob Burckhardt, who was then in Italy, was
Best man. At first everything seemed to go well.  An immense assemblage
collected to witness the sight; greater in number than any that had been collected in the same
place since the men of Anglesea, in their war-paint, rushing down to the beach, had shrieked
defiance across the Straits at their Roman invaders on the Caernarvon shore. Numerous boats
arrayed in gay colours glided along the waters; the day--the 26th of April--being bright, calm,
and in every way propitious.

At half-past two, about an hour before high water, the raft bearing the main chain was cast
off from near Treborth Mill, on the Caernarvon side.  Towed by four boats, it began gradually
to move from the shore, and with the assistance of the tide, which caught it at its further
end, it swung slowly and majestically round to its position between the main piers, where it
was moored.  One end of the chain was then bolted to that which hung down the face of the Caernarvon
pier; whilst the other was attached to ropes connected with strong capstans fixed on the Anglesea
side, the ropes passing by means of blocks over the top of the pyramid of the Anglesea pier.
The capstans for hauling in the ropes bearing the main chain, were two in number, manned by
about 150 labourers.  When all was ready, the signal was given to "Go along!"  A Band of fifers
struck up a lively tune; the capstans were instantly in motion, and the men stepped round in
a steady trot.  All went well.  The ropes gradually coiled in.  As the strain increased, the
pace slackened a little; but "Heave away, now she comes!" was sung out.  Round went the men,
and steadily and safely rose the ponderous chain.

[Image] Cut of Bridge, showing state of Suspension Chain

The tide had by this time turned, and bearing upon the side of the raft, now getting freer
of its load, the current floated it away from under the middle of the chain still resting on
it, and it swung easily off into the water.  Until this moment a breath less silence pervaded
the watching multitude; and nothing was heard among the working party on the Anglesea side
but the steady tramp of the men at the capstans, the shrill music of the fife, and the occasional
order to "Hold on!" or "Go along!"  But no sooner was the raft seen floating away, and the
great chain safely swinging in the air, than a tremendous cheer burst forth along both sides
of the Straits.

The rest of the work was only a matter of time.  The most anxious moment had passed.  In an
hour and thirty-five minutes after the commencement of the hoisting, the chain was raised to
its proper curvature, and fastened to the land portion of it which had been previously placed
over the top of the Anglesea pyramid.  Mr. Telford ascended to the point of fastening, and
satisfied himself that a continuous and safe connection had been formed from the Caernarvon
fastening on the rock to that on Anglesea.  The announcement of the fact was followed by loud
and prolonged cheering from the workmen, echoed by the spectators, and extending along the
Straits on both sides, until it seemed to die away along the shores in the distance. Three
foolhardy workmen, excited by the day's proceedings, had the temerity to scramble along the
upper surface of the chain--which was only nine inches wide and formed a curvature of 590 feet--from
one side of the Strait to the other!*[2]  Far different were the feelings of the engineer who
had planned this magnificent work. Its failure had been predicted; and, like Brindley's Barton
Viaduct, it had been freely spoken of as a "castle in the air."  Telford had, it is true, most
carefully tested every part by repeated experiment, and so conclusively proved the sufficiency
of the iron chains to bear the immense weight they would have to support, that he was thoroughly
convinced as to the soundness of his principles of construction, and satisfied that, if rightly
manufactured and properly put together, the chains would hold, and that the piers would sustain
them.  Still there was necessarily an element of uncertainty in the undertaking.  It was the
largest structure of the kind that had ever been attempted.  There was the contingency of a
flaw in the iron; some possible scamping in the manufacture; some little point which, in the
multiplicity of details to be attended to, he might have overlooked, or which his subordinates
might have neglected.  It was, indeed, impossible but that he should feel intensely anxious
as to the result of the day's operations.  Mr. Telford afterwards stated to a friend, only
a few months before his death, that for some time previous to the opening of the bridge, his
anxiety was so great that he could scarcely sleep; and that a continuance of that condition
must have very soon completely undermined his health.  We are not, therefore, surprised to
learn that when his friends rushed to congratulate him on the result of the first day's experiment,
which decisively proved the strength and solidity of the bridge, they should have found the
engineer on his knees engaged in prayer.  A vast load had been taken off his mind; the perilous
enterprise of the day had been accomplished without loss of life; and his spontaneous act was
thankfulness and gratitude.

[Image] Menai Bridge

The suspension of the remaining fifteen chains was accomplished without difficulty.  The last
was raised and fixed on the 9th of July, 1825, when the entire line was completed.  On fixing
the final bolt, a band of music descended from the top of the suspension pier on the Anglesea
side to a scaffolding erected over the centre of the curved part of the chains, and played
the National Anthem amidst the cheering of many thousand persons assembled along the shores
of the Strait: while the workmen marched in procession along the bridge, on which a temporary
platform had been laid, and the St. David steam-packet of Chester passed under the chains towards
the Smithy Rocks and back again, thus re-opening the navigation of the Strait.

In August the road platform was commenced, and in September the trussed bearing bars were all
suspended.  The road was constructed of timber in a substantial manner, the planking being
spiked together, with layers of patent felt between the planks, and the carriage way being
protected by oak guards placed seven feet and a half apart.  Side railings were added; the
toll-houses and approach-roads were completed by the end of the year; and the bridge was opened
for public traffic on Monday, the 30th of January, 1826, when the London and Holyhead mailcoach
passed over it for the first time, followed by the Commissioners of the Holyhead roads, the
engineer, several stage-coaches, and a multitude of private persons too numerous to mention.

We may briefly add a few facts as to the quantities of materials used, and the dimensions of
this remarkable structure.  The total weight of iron was 2187 tons, in 33,265 pieces.  The
total length of the bridge is 1710 feet, or nearly a third of a mile; the distance between
the points of suspension of the main bridge being 579 feet. The total sum expended by Government
in its erection, including the embankment and about half a mile of new line of road on the
Caernarvon side, together with the toll-houses, was 120,000L.

Notwithstanding the wonders of the Britannia Bridge subsequently erected by Robert Stephenson
for the passage across the same strait of the Chester and Holyhead Railway, the Menai Bridge
of Telford is by far the most picturesque object.  "Seen as I approached it," says Mr. Roscoe,
"in the clear light of an autumnal sunset, which threw an autumnal splendour on the wide range
of hills beyond, and the sweep of richly variegated groves and plantations which covered their
base--the bright sun, the rocky picturesque foreground, villas, spires, and towers here and
there enlivening the prospect-- the Menai Bridge appeared more like the work of some great
magician than the mere result of man's skill and industry."

[Image] Conway Suspension Bridge

Shortly after the Menai Bridge was begun, it was determined by the Commissioners of the Holyhead
road that a bridge of similar design should be built over the estuary of the Conway, immediately
opposite the old castle at that place, and which had formerly been crossed by an open ferry
boat.  The first stone was laid on the 3rd of April, 1822, and the works having proceeded satisfactorily,
the bridge and embankment approaching it were completed by the summer of 1826.  But the operations
being of the same kind as those connected with the larger structure above described, though
of a much less difficult character, it is unnecessary to enter into any details as to the several
stages of its construction.  In this bridge the width between the centres of the supporting
towers is 327 feet, and the height of the under side of the roadway above high water of spring
tides only 15 feet.  The heaviest work was an embankment as its eastern approach, 2015 feet
in length and about 300 feet in width at its highest part.

It will be seen, from the view of the bridge given on the opposite page, that it is a highly
picturesque structure, and combines, with the estuary which it crosses, and the ancient castle
of Conway, in forming a landscape that is rarely equalled.

Footnotes for Chapter XII.

*[1] In an article in the 'Edinburgh Review,' No. exli., from the pen of Sir David Brewster,
the writer observes:--"Mr. Telford's principle of suspending and laying down from above the
centering of stone and iron bridges is, we think, a much more fertile one than even he himself
supposed.  With modifications, by no means considerable, and certainly practicable, it appears
to us that the voussoirs or archstones might themselves be laid down from above, and suspended
by an appropriate mechanism till the keystone was inserted.  If we suppose the centering in
Mr. Telford's plan to be of iron, this centering itself becomes an iron bridge, each rib of
which is composed of ten pieces of fifty feet each; and by increasing the number of suspending
chains, these separate pieces or voussoirs having been previously joined together, either temporarily
or permanently, by cement or by clamps, might be laid into their place, and kept there by a
single chain till the road was completed.  The voussoirs, when united, might be suspended from
a general chain across the archway, and a platform could be added to facilitate the operations."
This is as nearly as possible the plan afterwards revived by Mr. Brunel, and for the originality
of which, we believe, he has generally the credit, though it clearly belongs to Telford.

*[2] A correspondent informs us of a still more foolhardy exploit performed on the occasion.
He says, "Having been present, as a boy from Bangor grammar school, on the 26th of April, when
the first chain was carried across, an incident occurred which made no small impression on
my mind at the time.  After the chain had reached its position, a cobbler of the neighbourhood
crawled to the centre of the curve, and there finished a pair of shoes; when, having completed
his task, he returned in safety to the Caernarvon side! I need not say that we schoolboys appreciated
his feat of foolhardiness far more than Telford's master work."

CHAPTER XIII.

DOCKS, DRAINAGE, AND BRIDGES.

It will have been observed, from the preceding narrative, how much had already been accomplished
by skill and industry towards opening up the material resources of the kingdom.  The stages
of improvement which we have recorded indeed exhibit a measure of the vital energy which has
from time to time existed in the nation.  In the earlier periods of engineering history, the
war of man was with nature. The sea was held back by embankments.  The Thames, instead of being
allowed to overspread the wide marshes on either bank, was confined within limited bounds,
by which the navigable depth of its channel was increased, at the same time that a wide extent
of land was rendered available for agriculture.

In those early days, the great object was to render the land more habitable, comfortable, and
productive.  Marshes were reclaimed, and wastes subdued.  But so long as the country remained
comparatively closed against communication, and intercourse was restricted by the want of bridges
and roads, improvement was extremely slow. For, while roads are the consequence of civilisation,
they are also among its most influential causes.  We have seen even the blind Metcalf acting
as an effective instrument of progress in the northern counties by the formation of long lines
of road.  Brindley and the Duke of Bridgewater carried on the work in the same districts, and
conferred upon the north and north-west of England the blessings of cheap and effective water
communication.  Smeaton followed and carried out similar undertakings in still remoter places,
joining the east and west coasts of Scotland by the Forth and Clyde Canal, and building bridges
in the far north.  Rennie made harbours, built bridges, and hewed out docks for shipping, the
increase in which had kept pace with the growth of our home and foreign trade.  He was followed
by Telford, whose long and busy life, as we have seen, was occupied in building bridges and
making roads in all directions, in districts of the country formerly inaccessible, and therefore
comparatively barbarous.  At length the wildest districts of the Highlands and the most rugged
mountain valleys of North Wales were rendered as easy of access as the comparatively level
counties in the immediate neighbourhood of the metropolis.

During all this while, the wealth and industry of the country had been advancing with rapid
strides.  London had grown in population and importance.  Many improvements had been effected
in the river, But the dock accommodation was still found insufficient; and, as the recognised
head of his profession, Mr. Telford, though now grown old and fast becoming infirm, was called
upon to supply the requisite plans.  He had been engaged upon great works for upwards of thirty
years, previous to which he had led the life of a working mason.  But he had been a steady,
temperate man all his life; and though nearly seventy, when consulted as to the proposed new
docks, his mind was as able to deal with the subject in all its bearings as it had ever been;
and he undertook the work.

In 1824 a new Company was formed to provide a dock nearer to the heart of the City than any
of the existing ones.  The site selected was the space between the Tower and the London Docks,
which included the property of St. Katherine's Hospital.  The whole extent of land available
was only twenty-seven acres of a very irregular figure, so that when the quays and warehouses
were laid out, it was found that only about ten acres remained for the docks; but these, from
the nature of the ground, presented an unusual amount of quay room.  The necessary Act was
obtained in 1825; the works were begun in the following year; and on the 25th of October, 1828,
the new docks were completed and opened for business.

The St. Katherine Docks communicate with the river by means of an entrance tide-lock, 180 feet
long and 45 feet wide, with three pairs of gates, admitting either one very large or two small
vessels at a time.  The lock-entrance and the sills under the two middle lock-gates were fixed
at the depth of ten feet under the level of low water of ordinary spring tides.  The formation
of these dock-entrances was a work of much difficulty, demanding great skill on the part of
the engineer.  It was necessary to excavate the ground to a great depth below low water for
the purpose of getting in the foundations, and the cofferdams were therefore of great strength,
to enable them, when pumped out by the steam-engine, to resist the lateral pressure of forty
feet of water at high tide. The difficulty was, however, effectually overcome, and the wharf
walls, locks, sills and bridges of the St. Katherine Docks are generally regarded as a master-piece
of harbour construction. Alluding to the rapidity with which the works were completed, Mr.
Telford says: "Seldom, indeed never within my knowledge, has there been an instance of an undertaking;
of this magnitude, in a very confined situation, having been perfected in so short a time;....
but, as a practical engineer, responsible for the success of difficult operations, I must be
allowed to protest against such haste, pregnant as it was, and ever will be, with risks, which,
in more instances than one, severely taxed all my experience and skill, and dangerously involved
the reputation of the directors as well as of their engineer."

Among the remaining bridges executed by Mr. Telford, towards the close of his professional
career, may be mentioned those of Tewkesbury and Gloucester.  The former town is situated on
the Severn at its confluence with the river Avon, about eleven miles above Gloucester.  The
surrounding district was rich and populous; but being intersected by a large river, without
a bridge, the inhabitants applied to Parliament for powers to provide so necessary a convenience.
The design first proposed by a local architect was a bridge of three arches; but Mr. Telford,
when called upon to advise the trustees, recommended that, in order to interrupt the navigation
as little as possible, the river should be spanned by a single arch; and he submitted a design
of such a character, which was approved and subsequently erected.  It was finished and opened
in April, 1826.

This is one of the largest as well as most graceful of Mr. Telford's numerous cast iron bridges.
It has a single span of 170 feet, with a rise of only 17 feet, consisting of six ribs of about
three feet three inches deep, the spandrels being filled in with light diagonal work.  The
narrow Gothic arches in the masonry of the abutments give the bridge a very light and graceful
appearance, at the same time that they afford an enlarged passage for the high river floods.

The bridge at Gloucester consists of one large stone arch of 150 feet span.  It replaced a
structure of great antiquity, of eight arches, which had stood for about 600 years.  The roadway
over it was very narrow, and the number of piers in the river and the small dimensions of the
arches offered considerable obstruction to the navigation.  To give the largest amount of waterway,
and at the same time reduce the gradient of the road over the bridge to the greatest extent,
Mr. Telford adopted the following expedient. He made the general body of the arch an ellipse,
150 feet on the chord-line and 35 feet rise, while the voussoirs, or external archstones, being
in the form of a segment, have the same chord, with only 13 feet rise.  "This complex form,"
says Mr. Telford, "converts each side of the vault of the arch into the shape of the entrance
of a pipe, to suit the contracted passage of a fluid, thus lessening the flat surface opposed
to the current of the river whenever the tide or upland flood rises above the springing of
the middle of the ellipse, that being at four feet above low water; whereas the flood of 1770
rose twenty feet above low water of an ordinary spring-tide, which, when there is no upland
flood, rises only eight or nine feet."*[1]  The bridge was finished and opened in 1828.

[Image] Dean Bridge, Edinburgh.

The last structures erected after our engineer's designs were at Edinburgh and Glasgow: his
Dean Bridge at the former place, and his Jamaica Street Bridge at the latter, being regarded
as among his most successful works.  Since his employment as a journeyman mason at the building
of the houses in Princes Street, Edinburgh, the New Town had spread in all directions.  At
each visit to it on his way to or from the Caledonian Canal or the northern harbours, he had
been no less surprised than delighted at the architectural improvements which he found going
forward.  A new quarter had risen up during his lifetime, and had extended northward and westward
in long lines of magnificent buildings of freestone, until in 1829 its further progress was
checked by the deep ravine running along the back of the New Town, in the bottom of which runs
the little Water of Leith.  It was determined to throw a stone bridge across this stream, and
Telford was called upon to supply the design.  The point of crossing the valley was immediately
behind Moray Place, which stands almost upon its verge, the sides being bold, rocky, and finely
wooded.  The situation was well adapted for a picturesque structure, such as Telford was well
able to supply.  The depth of the ravine to be spanned involved great height in the piers,
the roadway being 106 feet above the level of the stream.  The bridge was of four arches of
90 feet span each, and its total length 447 feet; the breadth between the parapets for the
purposes of the roadway and footpaths being 39 feet.*[2]  It was completed and opened in December,
1831.

But the most important, as it was the last, of Mr. Telford's stone bridges was that erected
across the Clyde at the Broomielaw, Glasgow.  Little more than fifty years since, the banks
of the river at that place were literally covered with broom--and hence its name--while the
stream was scarcely deep enough to float a herring-buss.  Now, the Broomielaw is a quay frequented
by ships of the largest burden, and bustling with trade and commerce.  Skill and enterprise
have deepened the Clyde, dredged away its shoals, built quays and wharves along its banks,
and rendered it one of the busiest streams in the world,

It has become a great river thoroughfare, worked by steam.  On its waters the first steamboat
ever constructed for purposes of traffic in Europe was launched by Henry Bell in 1812; and
the Clyde boats to this day enjoy the highest prestige.

The deepening of the river at the Broomielaw had led to a gradual undermining of the foundations
of the old bridge, which was situated close to the principal landing-place.  A little above
it, was an ancient overfall weir, which had also contributed to scour away the foundations
of the piers.  Besides, the bridge was felt to be narrow, inconvenient, and ill-adapted for
accommodating the immense traffic passing across the Clyde at that point.  It was, therefore,
determined to take down the old structure, and Build a new one; and Mr. Telford was called
upon to supply the design. The foundation was laid with great ceremony on the 18th of March,
1833, and the new bridge was completed and opened on the 1st of January, 1836, rather more
than a year after the engineer's death.  It is a very fine work, consisting of seven arches,
segments of circles, the central arch being 58 feet 6 inches; the span of the adjoining arches
diminishing to 57 feet 9 inches, 55 feet 6 inches, and 52 feet respectively.  It is 560 feet
in length, with an open waterway of 389 feet, and its total width of carriageway and footpath
is 60 feet, or wider, at the time it was built, than any river bridge in the kingdom.

[Image] Glasgow Bridge

Like most previous engineers of eminence--like Perry, Brindley, Smeaton, and Rennie--Mr. Telford
was in the course of his life extensively employed in the drainage of the Fen districts.  He
had been jointly concerned with Mr. Rennie in carrying out the important works of the Eau Brink
Cut, and at Mr. Rennie's death he succeeded to much of his practice as consulting engineer.

It was principally in designing and carrying out the drainage of the North Level that Mr. Telford
distinguished himself in Fen drainage.  The North Level includes all that part of the Great
Bedford Level situated between Morton's Leam and the river Welland, comprising about 48,000
acres of land.  The river Nene, which brings down from the interior the rainfall of almost
the entire county of Northampton, flows through nearly the centre of the district. In some
places the stream is confined by embankments, in others it flows along artificial outs, until
it enters the great estuary of the Wash, about five miles below Wisbeach.  This town is situated
on another river which flows through the Level, called the Old Nene. Below the point of junction
of these rivers with the Wash, and still more to seaward, was South Holland Sluice, through
which the waters of the South Holland Drain entered the estuary.  At that point a great mass
of silt had accumulated, which tended to choke up the mouths of the rivers further inland,
rendering their navigation difficult and precarious, and seriously interrupting the drainage
of the whole lowland district traversed by both the Old and New Nene.  Indeed the sands were
accumulating at such a rate, that the outfall of the Wisbeach River threatened to become completely
destroyed.

Such being the state of things, it was determined to take the opinion of some eminent engineer,
and Mr. Rennie was employed to survey the district and recommend a measure for the remedy of
these great evils.  He performed this service in his usually careful and masterly manner; but
as the method which he proposed, complete though it was, would have seriously interfered with
the trade of Wisbeach, by leaving it out of the line of navigation and drainage which he proposed
to open up, the corporation of that town determined to employ another engineer; and Mr Telford
was selected to examine and report upon the whole subject, keeping in view the improvement
of the river immediately adjacent to the town of Wisbeach.

Mr. Telford confirmed Mr. Rennie's views to a large extent, more especially with reference
to the construction of an entirely new outfall, by making an artificial channel from Kindersleys
Cut to Crab-Hole Eye anchorage, by which a level lower by nearly twelve feet would be secured
for the outfall waters; but he preferred leaving the river open to the tide as high as Wisbeach,
rather than place a lock with draw-doors at Lutton Leam Sluice, as had been proposed by Mr.
Rennie.  He also suggested that the acute angle at the Horseshoe be cut off and the river deepened
up to the bridge at Wisbeach, making a new cut along the bank on the south side of the town,
which should join the river again immediately above it, thereby converting the intermediate
space, by draw-doors and the usual contrivances, into a floating dock.  Though this plan was
approved by the parties interested in the drainage, to Telford's great mortification it was
opposed by the corporation of Wisbeach, and like so many other excellent schemes for the improvement
of the Fen districts, it eventually fell to the ground.

The cutting of a new outfall for the river Nene, however, could not much longer be delayed
without great danger to the reclaimed lands of the North Level, which, but for some relief
of the kind, must shortly have become submerged and reduced to their original waste condition.
The subject was revived in 1822, and Mr. Telford was again called upon, in conjunction with
Sir John Rennie, whose father had died in the preceding year, to submit a plan of a new Nene
Outfall; but it was not until the year 1827 that the necessary Act was obtained, and then only
with great difficulty and cost, in consequence of the opposition of the town of Wisbeach. 
The works consisted principally of a deep cut or canal, about six miles in length, penetrating
far through the sand banks into the deep waters of the Wash.  They were begun in 1828, and
brought to completion in 1830, with the most satisfactory results.  A greatly improved outfall
was secured by thus carrying.  the mouths of the rivers out to sea, and the drainage of the
important agricultural districts through which the Nene flows was greatly benefited; while
at the same time nearly 6000 acres of valuable corn-growing land were added to the county of
Lincoln.

But the opening of the Nene Outfall was only the first of a series of improvements which eventually
included the whole of the valuable lands of the North Level, in the district situated between
the Nene and the Welland.  The opening at Gunthorpe Sluice, which was the outfall for the waters
of the Holland Drain, was not less than eleven feet three inches above low water at Crab-Hole;
and it was therefore obvious that by lowering this opening a vastly improved drainage of the
whole of the level district, extending from twenty to thirty miles inland, for which that sluice
was the artificial outlet, would immediately be secured.  Urged by Mr. Telford, an Act for
the purpose of carrying out the requisite improvement was obtained in 1830, and the excavations
having been begun shortly after, were completed in 1834.

A new cut was made from Clow's Cross to Gunthorpe Sluice, in place of the winding course of
the old Shire Drain; besides which, a bridge was erected at Cross Keys, or Sutton Wash, and
an embankment was made across the Salt Marshes, forming a high road, which, with the bridges
previously erected at Fossdyke and Lynn, effectually connected the counties of Norfolk and
Lincoln.  The result of the improved outfall was what the engineer had predicted.  A thorough
natural drainage was secured for an extensive district, embracing nearly a hundred thousand
acres of fertile land, which had before been very ineffectually though expensively cleared
of the surplus water by means of windmills and steam-engines.  The productiveness of the soil
was greatly increased, and the health and comfort of the inhabitants promoted to an extent
that surpassed all previous expectation.

The whole of the new cuts were easily navigable, being from 140 to 200 feet wide at bottom,
whereas the old outlets had been variable and were often choked with shifting sand.  The district
was thus effectually opened up for navigation, and a convenient transit afforded for coals
and other articles of consumption.  Wisbeach became accessible to vessels of much larger burden,
and in the course of a few years after the construction of the Nene Outfall, the trade of the
port had more than doubled.  Mr. Telford himself, towards the close of his life, spoke with
natural pride of the improvements which he had thus been in so great a measure instrumental
in carrying out, and which had so materially promoted the comfort, prosperity, and welfare
of a very extensive district.*[3]

We may mention, as a remarkable effect of the opening of the new outfall, that in a few hours
the lowering of the waters was felt throughout the whole of the Fen level.  The sluggish and
stagnant drains, cuts, and leams in far distant places, began actually to flow; and the sensation
created was such, that at Thorney, near Peterborough, some fifteen miles from the sea, the
intelligence penetrated even to the congregation then sitting in church--for it was Sunday
morning--that "the waters were running!" when immediately the whole flocked out, parson and
all, to see the great sight, and acknowledge the blessings of science.  A humble Fen poet of
the last century thus quaintly predicted the moral results likely to arise from the improved
drainage of his native district:-

   "With a change of elements suddenly
    There shall a change of men and manners be;
    Hearts thick and tough as hides shall feel remorse,
    And souls of sedge shall understand discourse;
    New hands shall learn to work, forget to steal,
    New legs shall go to church, new knees to kneel."

The prophecy has indeed been fulfilled.  The barbarous race of Fen-men has disappeared before
the skill of the engineer.  As the land has been drained, the half-starved fowlers and fen-roamers
have subsided into the ranks of steady industry--become farmers, traders, and labourers.  The
plough has passed over the bed of Holland Fen, and the agriculturist reaps his increase more
than a hundred fold..  Wide watery wastes, formerly abounding in fish, are now covered with
waving crops of corn every summer.  Sheep graze on the dry bottom of Whittlesea Mere, and kine
low where not many years since the silence of the waste was only disturbed by the croaking
of frogs and the screaming of wild fowl.  All this has been the result of the science of the
engineer, the enterprise of the landowner, and the industry of our peaceful army of skilled
labourers.*[4]

Footnotes for Chapter XIII.

*[1] Telford's Life, p261

*[2] The piers are built internally with hollow compartments, as at the Menai Bridge, the side
walls being 3 feet thick and the cross walls 2 feet.  Projecting from the piers and abutments
are pilasters of solid masonry.  The main arches have their springing 70 feet from the foundations
and rise 30 feet; and at 20 feet higher, other arches, of 96 feet span and 10 feet rise, are
constructed; the face of these, projecting before the main arches and spandrels, producing
a distinct external soffit of 5 feet in breadth. This, with the peculiar piers, constitutes
the principal distinctive feature in the, bridge.

*[3] "The Nene Outfall channel," says Mr. Tycho Wing, "was projected by the late Mr. Rennie
in 1814, and executed jointly by Mr. Telford and the present Sir John Rennie.  But the scheme
of the North Level Drainage was eminently the work of Mr. Telford, and was undertaken upon
his advice and responsibility, when only a few persons engaged in the Nene Outfall believed
that the latter could be made, or if made, that it could be maintained.  Mr. Telford distinguished
himself by his foresight and judicious counsels at the most critical periods of that great
measure, by his unfailing confidence in its success, and by the boldness and sagacity which
prompted him to advise the making of the North Level drainage, in full expectation of the results
for the sake of which the Nene Outfall was undertaken, and which are now realised to the extent
of the most sanguine hopes."

*[4] Now that the land actually won has been made so richly productive, the engineer is at
work with magnificent schemes of reclamation of lands at present submerged by the sea.  The
Norfolk Estuary Company have a scheme for reclaiming 50,000 acres; the Lincolnshire Estuary
Company, 30,000 acres; and the Victoria Level Company, 150,000 acres--all from the estuary
of the Wash.  By the process called warping, the land is steadily advancing upon the ocean,
and before many years have passed, thousands of acres of the Victoria Level will have been
reclaimed for purposes of agriculture.

CHAPTER XIV.

SOUTHEY'S TOUR IN THE HIGHLANDS.

While Telford's Highland works were in full progress, he persuaded his friend Southey, the
Poet Laureate, to accompany him on one of his visits of inspection, as far north as the county
of Sutherland, in the autumn of 1819.  Mr. Southey, as was his custom, made careful notes of
the tour, which have been preserved,*[1] and consist in a great measure of an interesting resume
of the engineer's operations in harbour-making, road-making, and canal-making north of the Tweed.

Southey reached Edinburgh by the Carlisle mail about the middle of August, and was there joined
by Mr. Telford, and Mr. and Mrs. Rickman,*[2] who were to accompany him on the journey.  They
first proceeded to Linlithgow, Bannockburn,*[3] Stirling, Callendar, the Trosachs, and round
by the head of Loch Earn to Killin, Kenmore, and by Aberfeldy to Dunkeld.  At the latter place,
the poet admired Telford's beautiful bridge, which forms a fine feature in the foreground of
the incomparable picture which the scenery of Dunkeld always presents in whatever aspect it
is viewed.

From Dunkeld the party proceeded to Dundee, along the left bank of the Firth of Tay.  The works
connected with the new harbour were in active progress, and the engineer lost no time in taking
his friend to see them.  Southey's account is as follows:--

"Before breakfast I went with Mr. Telford to the harbour, to look at his works, which are of
great magnitude and importance: a huge floating dock, and the finest graving dock I ever saw.
The town expends 70,000L. on these improvements, which will be completed in another year. 
What they take from the excavations serves to raise ground which was formerly covered by the
tide, but will now be of the greatest value for wharfs, yards, &c. The local authorities originally
proposed to build fifteen piers, but Telford assured them that three would be sufficient; and,
in telling me this, he said the creation of fifteen new Scotch peers was too strong a measure....

"Telford's is a happy life; everywhere making roads, building bridges, forming canals, and
creating harbours--works of sure, solid, permanent utility; everywhere employing a great number
of persons, selecting the most meritorious, and putting them forward in the world in his own way."

After the inspection at Dundee was over, the party proceeded on their journey northward, along
the east coast:--

"Near Gourdon or Bervie harbour, which is about a mile and a half on this side the town, we
met Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Gibbs, two of Mr. Telford's aides-de-camp, who had come thus far to
meet him.  The former he calls his 'Tartar,' from his cast of countenance, which is very much
like a Tartar's, as well as from his Tartar-like mode of life; for, in his office of overseer
of the roads, which are under the management of the Commissioners, he travels on horseback
not less than 6000 miles a year.  Mr. Telford found him in the situation of a working mason,
who could scarcely read or write; but noticing him for his good conduct, his activity, and
his firm steady character, he, has brought him forward; and Mitchell now holds a post of respectability
and importance, and performs his business with excellent ability."

After inspecting the little harbour of Bervie, one of the first works of the kind executed
by Telford for the Commissioners, the party proceeded by Stonehaven, and from thence along
the coast to Aberdeen.  Here the harbour works were visited and admired:--

"The quay," says Southey, "is very fine; and Telford has carried out his pier 900 feet beyond
the point where Smeaton's terminated. This great work, which has cost 100,000L., protects the
entrance of the harbour from the whole force of the North Sea.  A ship was entering it at the
time of our visit, the Prince of Waterloo. She had been to America; had discharged her cargo
at London; and we now saw her reach her own port in safety--a joyous and delightful sight."

The next point reached was Banff, along the Don and the line of the Inverury Canal:--

"The approach to Banff is very fine,"*[4] says Southey, "by the Earl of Fife's grounds, where
the trees are surprisingly grown, considering how near they are to the North Sea; Duff House--
a square, odd, and not unhandsome pile, built by Adams (one of the Adelphi brothers), some
forty years ago; a good bridge of seven arches by Smeaton; the open sea, not as we had hitherto
seen it, grey under a leaden sky, but bright and blue in the sunshine; Banff on the left of
the bay; the River Doveran almost lost amid banks of shingle, where it enters the sea; a white
and tolerably high shore extending eastwards; a kirk, with a high spire which serves as a sea-mark;
and, on the point, about a mile to the east, the town of Macduff.  At Banff, we at once went
to the pier, about half finished, on which 15,000L. will be expended, to the great benefit
of this clean, cheerful, and active little town.  The pier was a busy scene; hand-carts going
to and fro over the railroads, cranes at work charging and discharging, plenty of workmen,
and fine masses of red granite from the Peterhead quarries.  The quay was almost covered with
barrels of herrings, which women were busily employed in salting and packing."

The next visit was paid to the harbour works at Cullen, which were sufficiently advanced to
afford improved shelter for the fishing vessels of the little port:--

"When I stood upon the pier at low water," says Southey, "seeing the tremendous rocks with
which the whole shore is bristled, and the open sea to which the place is exposed, it was with
a proud feeling that I saw the first talents in the world employed by the British Government
in works of such unostentatious, but great, immediate, palpable, and permanent utility.  Already
their excellent effects are felt.  The fishing vessels were just coming in, having caught about
300 barrels of herrings during the night....

"However the Forfeited Estates Fund may have been misapplied in past times, the remainder could
not be better invested than in these great improvements.  Wherever a pier is needed, if the
people or the proprietors of the place will raise one-half the necessary funds, Government
supplies the other half.  On these terms, 20,000L. are expending at Peterhead, and 14,000L.
at Frazerburgh; and the works which we visited at Bervie and Banff, and many other such along
this coast, would never have been undertaken without such aid; public liberality thus inducing
private persons to tax themselves heavily, and expend with a good will much larger sums than
could have been drawn from them by taxation."

From Cullen, the travellers proceeded in gigs to Fochabers, thence by Craigellachie Bridge,
which Southey greatly admired, along Speyside, to Ballindalloch and Inverallen, where Telford's
new road was in course of construction across the moors towards Forres. The country for the
greater part of the way was a wild waste, nothing but mountains and heather to be seen; yet
the road was as perfectly made and maintained as if it had lain through a very Goschen. The
next stages were to Nairn and Inverness, from whence then proceeded to view the important works
constructed at the crossing of the River Beauly:--

"At Lovat Bridge," says Southey, "we turned aside and went four miles up the river, along the
Strathglass road--one of the new works, and one of the most remarkable, because of the difficulty
of constructing it, and also because of the fine scenery which it commands.....

"Lovat Bridge, by which we returned, is a plain, handsome structure of five arches, two of
40 feet span, two of 50, and the centre one of 60.  The curve is as little as possible.  I
learnt in Spain to admire straight bridges; But Mr. Telford thinks there always ought to be
some curve to enable the rain water to run off, and because he would have the outline look
like the segment of a large circle, resting on the abutments.  A double line over the arches
gives a finish to the bridge, and perhaps looks as well, or almost as well, as balustrades,
for not a sixpence has been allowed for ornament on these works.  The sides are protected by
water-wings, which are embankments of stone, to prevent the floods from extending on either
side, and attacking the flanks of the bridge."

Nine miles further north, they arrived at Dingwall, near which a bridge similar to that at
Beauly, though wider, had been constructed over the Conan.  From thence they proceeded to Invergordon,
to Ballintraed (where another pier for fishing boats was in progress), to Tain, and thence
to Bonar Bridge, over the Sheir, twenty-four miles above the entrance to the Dornoch Frith,
where an iron bridge, after the same model as that of Craigellachie, had been erected.  This
bridge is of great importance, connecting as it does the whole of the road traffic of the northern
counties with the south.  Southey speaks of it as

"A work of such paramount utility that it is not possible to look at it without delight.  A
remarkable anecdote," he continues, "was told me concerning it.  An inhabitant of Sutherland,
whose father was drowned at the Mickle Ferry (some miles below the bridge) in 1809, could never
bear to set foot in a ferry-boat after the catastrophe, and was consequently cut off from communication
with the south until this bridge was built.  He then set out on a journey. 'As I went along
the road by the side of the water,' said he, 'I could see no bridge.  At last I came in sight
of something like a spider's web in the air.  If this be it, thought I, it will never do! But,
presently, I came upon it; and oh! it is the finest thing that ever was made by God or man!'"

Sixteen miles north-east of Bonar Bridge, Southey crossed Fleet Mound, another ingenious work
of his friend Telford, but of an altogether different character.  It was thrown across the
River Fleet, at the point at which it ran into the estuary or little land-locked bay outside,
known as Loch Fleet.  At this point there had formerly been a ford; but as the tide ran far
inland, it could only be crossed at low water, and travellers had often to wait for hours before
they could proceed on their journey.  The embouchure being too wide for a bridge, Telford formed
an embankment across it, 990 yards in length, providing four flood-gates, each 12 feet wide,
at its north end, for the egress of the inland waters. These gates opened outwards, and they
were so hung as to shut with the rising of the tide.  The holding back of the sea from the
land inside the mound by this means, had the effect of reclaiming a considerable extent of
fertile carse land, which, at the time of Southey's visit,--though the work had only been completed
the year before,--was already under profitable cultivation.  The principal use of the mound,
however, was in giving support to the fine broad road which ran along its summit, and thus
completed the communication with the country to the north.  Southey speaks in terms of high
admiration of "the simplicity, the beauty, and utility of this great work."

This was the furthest limit of their journey, and the travellers retraced their steps southward,
halting at Clashmore Inn: "At breakfast," says Southey, "was a handsome set of Worcester china.
Upon noticing it to Mr. Telford, he told me that before these roads were made, he fell in with
some people from Worcestershire near the Ord of Caithness, on their way northward with a cart
load of crockery, which they got over the mountains as best they could; and, when they had
sold all their ware, they laid out the money in black cattle, which they then drove to the south."

The rest of Southey's journal is mainly occupied with a description of the scenery of the Caledonian
Canal, and the principal difficulties encountered in the execution of the works, which were
still in active progress.  He was greatly struck with the flight of locks at the south end
of the Canal, where it enters Loch Eil near Corpach:--

"There being no pier yet formed," he says, "we were carried to and from the boats on men's
shoulders.  We landed close to the sea shore. A sloop was lying in the fine basin above, and
the canal was full as far as the Staircase, a name given to the eight successive locks.  Six
of these were full and overflowing; and then we drew near enough to see persons walking over
the lock-gates.  It had more the effect of a scene in a pantomime than of anything in real
life. The rise from lock to lock is eight feet,--sixty-four, therefore, in all.  The length
of the locks, including the gates and abutments at both ends, is 500 yards;-- the greatest
piece of such masonry in the world, and the greatest work of the kind beyond all comparison.

"A panorama painted from this place would include the highest mountain in Great Britain, and
its greatest work of art.  That work is one of which the magnitude and importance become apparent,
when considered in relation to natural objects.  The Pyramids would appear insignificant in
such a situation, for in them we should perceive only a vain attempt to vie with greater things.
But here we see the powers of nature brought to act upon a great scale, in subservience to
the purposes of men; one river created, another (and that a huge mountain-stream) shouldered
out of its place, and art and order assuming a character of sublimity.  Sometimes a beck is
conducted under the canal, and passages called culverts serve as a roadway for men and beasts.
We walked through one of these, just lofty enough for a man of my stature to pass through with
his hat on.  It had a very singular effect to see persons emerging from this dark, long, narrow
vault.  Sometimes a brook is taken in; a cesspool is then made to receive what gravel it may
bring down after it has passed this pool, the water flowing through three or four little arches,
and then over a paved bed and wall of masonry into the canal. These are called in-takes, and
opposite them an outlet is sometimes made for the waters of; the canal, if they should be above
their proper level; or when the cross-stream may bring down a rush. These outlets consist of
two inclined planes of masonry, one rising from the canal with a pavement or waste weir between
them; and when the cross-stream comes down like a torrent, instead of mingling with the canal,
it passes straight across.  But these channels would be insufficient for carrying off the whole
surplus waters in time of floods.  At one place, therefore, there are three sluices by which
the whole canal from the Staircase to the Regulating Lock (about six miles) can be lowered
a foot in an hour. The sluices were opened that we might see their effect.  We went down the
Bank, and made our way round some wet ground till we got in front of the strong arch into which
they open.  The arch is about 25 feet high, of great strength, and built upon the rock.  What
would the Bourbons have given for such a cascade at Versailles? The rush and the spray, and
the force of the water, reminded me more of the Reichenbach than of any other fall.  That three
small sluices, each only 4 feet by 3 feet, should produce an effect which brought the mightiest
of the swiss waterfalls to my recollection, may appear incredible, or at least like an enormous
exaggeration.  But the prodigious velocity with which the water is forced out, by the pressure
above, explains the apparent wonder.  And yet I beheld it only in half its strength; the depth
above being at this time ten feet, which will be twenty when the canal is completed.  In a
few minutes a river was formed of no inconsiderable breadth, which ran like a torrent into
the Lochy.

"On this part of the canal everything is completed, except that the iron bridges for it, which
are now on their way, are supplied by temporary ones.  When the middle part shall be finished,
the Lochy, which at present flows in its own channel above the Regulating Lock, will be dammed
there, and made to join the Speyne by a new cut from the lake.  The cut is made, and a fine
bridge built over it. We went into the cut and under the bridge, which is very near the intended
point of junction.  The string-courses were encrusted with stalactites in a manner singularly
beautiful.  Under the arches a strong mound of solid masonry is built to keep the water in
dry seasons at a certain height; But in that mound a gap is left for the salmon, and a way
made through the rocks from the Speyne to this gap, which they will soon find out."

Arrived at Dumbarton, Southey took leave of John Mitchell, who had accompanied him throughout
the tour, and for whom he seems to have entertained the highest admiration:--

"He is indeed," says Southey, "a remarkable man, and well deserving to be remembered.  Mr.
Telford found him a working mason, who could scarcely read or write.  But his good sense, his
excellent conduct, his steadiness and perseverance have been such, that he has been gradually
raised to be Inspector of all these Highland roads which we have visited, and all of which
are under the Commissioners' care --an office requiring a rare union of qualities, among others
inflexible integrity, a fearless temper, and an indefatigable frame.  Perhaps no man ever possessed
these requisites in greater perfection than John Mitchell.  Were but his figure less Tartarish
and more gaunt, he would be the very 'Talus' of Spenser.  Neither frown nor favour, in the
course of fifteen years, have ever made him swerve from the fair performance of his duty, though
the lairds with whom he has to deal have omitted no means of making him enter into their views,
and to do things or leave them undone, as might suit their humour or interest.  They have attempted
to cajole and to intimidate him alike in vain.  They have repeatedly preferred complaints against
him in the hope of getting him removed from his office, and a more flexible person appointed
in his stead; and they have not unfrequently threatened him with personal violence. Even his
life has been menaced.  But Mitchell holds right on. In the midst of his most laborious life,
he has laboured to improve himself with such success, that he has become a good accountant,
makes his estimates with facility, and carries on his official correspondence in an able and
highly intelligent manner.  In the execution of his office he travelled last year not less
than 8800 miles, and every year he travels nearly as much.  Nor has this life, and the exposure
to all winds and weathers, and the temptations either of company or of solicitude at the houses
at which he puts up, led him into any irregularities.  Neither has his elevation in the slightest
degree inflated him.  He is still the same temperate, industrious, modest, unassuming man,
as when his good qualities first attracted Mr. Telford's notice."

Southey concludes his journal at Longtown, a little town just across the Scotch Border, in
the following words:--

"Here we left Mr. Telford, who takes the mail for Edinburgh.

This parting company, after the thorough intimacy which a long journey produces between fellow-travellers
who like each other, is a melancholy thing.  A man more heartily to be liked, more worthy to
be esteemed and admired, I have never fallen in with; and therefore it is painful to think
how little likely it is that I shall ever see much of him again,--how certain that I shall
never see so much. Yet I trust that he will not forget his promise of one day making Keswick
in his way to and from Scotland."

Before leaving the subject of Telford's public works in the Highlands, it may be mentioned
that 875 miles of new roads were planned by him, and executed under his superintendence, at
an expense of 454,189L., of which about one-half was granted by Parliament, and the remainder
was raised by the localities benefited.  Besides the new roads, 255 miles of the old military
roads were taken in charge by him, and in many cases reconstructed and greatly improved.  The
bridges erected in connexion with these roads were no fewer than twelve hundred.  Telford also
between the year 1823 and the close of his life, built forty-two Highland churches in districts
formerly unprovided with them, and capable of accommodating some 22,000 persons.

Down to the year 1854, the Parliamentary grant of 5000L. a year charged upon the Consolidated
Fund to meet assessments and tolls of the Highland roads, amounting to about 7500L. a year,
was transferred to the annual Estimates, when it became the subject of annual revision; and
a few years since the grant was suddenly extinguished by an adverse vote of the House of Commons.
The Board of Commissioners had, therefore, nothing left but to deliver over the roads to the
several local authorities, and the harbours to the proprietors of the adjacent lands, and to
present to Parliament a final account of their work and its results. It was tied.

The princess adorned himself with the gold-embroidered shawl, Diane with the blue coat, Amelie with
the pink veil, Lisi dressed as a pastor and the long Jenny reappeared
as godfather.
They leave it with wealthy proprietors, a profitable agriculture, a thriving population, and
active industry; furnishing now its fair proportion of taxes to the national exchequer, and
helping by its improved agriculture to meet the ever-increasing wants of the populous south."

Footnotes for Chapter XIV.

*[1] We have been indebted to Mr. Robert Rawlinson, C.E., in whose possession the MS. now is,
for the privilege of inspecting it, and making the above abstract, which we have the less hesitation
in giving as it has not before appeared in print.

*[2] Mr. Rickman was the secretary to the Highland Roads Commission.

*[3] Referring to the famous battle of Bannockburn, Southey writes --"This is the only great
battle that ever was lost by the English. At Hastings there was no disgrace.  Here it was an
army of lions commanded by a stag."

*[4] See View of Banff facing p. 216.

CHAPTER XV.

MR. TELFORD'S LATER YEARS--HIS DEATH AND CHARACTER.

When Mr. Telford had occasion to visit London on business during the early period of his career,
his quarters were at the Salopian Coffee House, now the Ship Hotel, at Charing Cross.  It is
probable that his Shropshire connections led him in the first instance to the 'Salopian;' but
the situation being near to the Houses of Parliament, and in many respects convenient for the
purposes of his business, he continued to live there for no less a period than twenty-one years.
During that time the Salopian became a favourite resort of engineers; and not only Telford's
provincial associates, but numerous visitors from abroad (where his works attracted even more
attention than they did in England) took up their quarters there.  Several apartments were
specially reserved for Telford's exclusive use, and he could always readily command any additional
accommodation for purposes of business or hospitality.

The successive landlords of the Salopian came to regard the engineer as a fixture, and even
bought and sold him from time to time with the goodwill of the business.  When he at length
resolved, on the persuasion of his friends, to take a house of his own, and gave notice of
his intention of leaving, the landlord, who had but recently entered into possession, almost
stood aghast.  "What! leave the house!" said he; "Why, Sir, I have just paid 750L. for you!"
On explanation it appeared that this price had actually been paid by him to the outgoing landlord,
on the assumption that Mr. Telford was a fixture of the hotel; the previous tenant having paid
450L. for him; the increase in the price marking very significantly the growing importance
of the engineer's position.  There was, however, no help for the disconsolate landlord, and
Telford left the Salopian to take possession of his new house at 24, Abingdon Street. The
two admired a Rembrandt, Rubens and Van Dyck and especially. Böcklin sought however, in vain
for landscapes that he liked. The following summer he is to the Alps have stripped from Graubünden
up to Lake Geneva. In August he was indeed in Evian and Thonon, and in September in Geneva. It
is also a delightful series studies and compositions obtained, which are the Alps and probably come
from this year, because it once again one Degree fresh and naturalistic than before are dated.
  In that house Telford continued to live until the close of his life.

One of the subjects in which he took much interest during his later years was the establishment
of the Institute of Civil Engineers. In 1818 a Society had been formed, consisting principally
of young men educated to civil and mechanical engineering, who occasionally met to discuss
matters of interest relating to their profession. As early as the time of Smeaton, a social
meeting of engineers was occasionally held at an inn in Holborn, which was discontinued in
1792, in consequence of some personal differences amongst the members.  It was revived in the
following year, under the auspices of Mr. Jessop, Mr. Naylor, Mr. Rennie, and Mr. Whitworth,
and joined by other gentlemen of scientific distinction.  They were accustomed to dine together
every fortnight at the Crown and Anchor in the Strand, spending the evening in conversation
on engineering subjects.  But as the numbers and importance of the profession increased, the
desire began to be felt, especially among the junior members of the profession, for an institution
of a more enlarged character.  Hence the movement above alluded to, which led to an invitation
being given to Mr. Telford to accept the office of President of the proposed Engineers' Institute.
To this he consented, and entered upon the duties of the office on the 21st of March, 1820.*[1]
During the remainder of his life, Mr. Telford continued to watch over the progress of the Society,
which gradually grew in importance and usefulness.  He supplied it with the nucleus of a reference
library, now become of great value to its members. He established the practice of recording
the proceedings,*[2] minutes of discussions, and substance of the papers read, which has led
to the accumulation, in the printed records of the Institute, of a vast body of information
as to engineering practice.  In 1828 he exerted himself strenuously and successfully in obtaining
a Charter of  Incorporation for the Society; and finally, at his death, he left the Institute
their first bequest of 2000L., together with many valuable books, and a large collection of
documents which had been subservient to his own professional labours.

In the distinguished position which he occupied, it was natural that Mr. Telford should be
called upon, as he often was, towards the close of his life, to give his opinion and advice
as to projects of public importance.  Where strongly conflicting opinions were entertained
on any subject, his help was occasionally found most valuable; for he possessed great tact
and suavity of manner, which often enabled him to reconcile opposing interests when they stood
in the way of important enterprises. Three years later I found myself on the country's universities to the exams even before the law prescribed
year to complete here. Fritz, with whom I last semester in Heidelberg lived together, wanted to
go back until next fall.  Only a few months before his death, in 1834,
he prepared and sent in an elaborate separate report, containing many excellent practical suggestions,
which had the effect of stimulating the efforts of the water companies, and eventually leading,
to great improvements.

On the subject of roads, Telford continued to be the very highest authority, his friend Southey
jocularly styling him the "Colossus of Roads."  The Russian Government frequently consulted
him with reference to the new roads with which that great empire was being opened up.  The
Polish road from Warsaw to Briesc, on the Russian frontier, 120 miles in length, was constructed
after his plans, and it remains, we believe, the finest road in the Russian dominions to this day.

[Image] Section of Polish Road

He was consulted by the Austrian Government on the subject of bridges as well as roads.  Count
Szechenyi recounts the very agreeable and instructive interview which he had with Telford when
he called to consult him as to the bridge proposed to be erected across the Danube, between
the towns of Buda and Pesth.  On a suspension bridge being suggested by the English engineer,
the Count, with surprise, asked if such an erection was possible under the circumstances he
had described? "We do not consider anything to be impossible," replied Telford; "impossibilities
exist chiefly in the prejudices of mankind, to which some are slaves, and from which few are
able to emancipate themselves and enter on the path of truth."  But supposing a suspension
bridge were not deemed advisable under the circumstances, and it were considered necessary
altogether to avoid motion, "then," said he, "I should recommend you to erect a cast iron bridge
of three spans, each 400 feet; such a bridge will have no motion, and though half the world
lay a wreck, it would still stand."*[3]  A suspension bridge was eventually resolved upon.
It was constructed by one of Mr. Telford's ablest pupils, Mr. Tierney Clark, between the years
1839 and 1850, and is justly regarded as one of the greatest triumphs of English engineering,
the Buda-Pesth people proudly declaring it to be "the eighth wonder of the world."

At a time when speculation was very rife--in the year 1825-- Mr. Telford was consulted respecting
a grand scheme for cutting a canal across the Isthmus of Darien; and about the same time he
was employed to resurvey the line for a ship canal--which had before occupied the attention
of Whitworth and Rennie--between Bristol and the English Channel.  But although he gave great
attention to this latter project, and prepared numerous plans and reports upon it, and although
an Act was actually passed enabling it to be carried out, the scheme was eventually abandoned,
like the preceding ones with the same object, for want of the requisite funds.

Our engineer had a perfect detestation of speculative jobbing in all its forms, though on one
occasion he could not help being used as an instrument by schemers.  A public company was got
up at Liverpool, in 1827, to form a broad and deep ship canal, of about seven miles in length,
from opposite Liverpool to near Helbre Isle, in the estuary of the Dee; its object being to
enable the shipping of the port to avoid the variable shoals and sand-banks which obstruct
the entrance to the Mersey.  Mr. Telford entered on the project with great zeal, and his name
was widely quoted in its support.  It appeared, however, that one of its principal promoters,
who had secured the right of pre-emption of the land on which the only possible entrance to
the canal could be formed on the northern side, suddenly closed with the corporation of Liverpool,
who were opposed to the plan, and "sold", his partners as well as the engineer for a large
sum of money.  Telford, disgusted at being made the instrument of an apparent fraud upon the
public, destroyed all the documents relating to the scheme, and never afterwards spoke of it
except in terms of extreme indignation.

About the same time, the formation of locomotive railways was extensively discussed, and schemes
were set on foot to construct them between several of the larger towns.  But Mr. Telford was
now about seventy years old; and, desirous of limiting the range of his business rather than
extending it, he declined to enter upon this new branch of engineering.  Yet, in his younger
days, he had surveyed numerous lines of railway--amongst others, one as early as the year 1805,
from Glasgow to Berwick, down the vale of the Tweed. A line from Newcastle-on-Tyne to Carlisle
was also surveyed and reported on by him some years later; and the Stratford and Moreton Railway
was actually constructed under his direction. At this cradle now rich gilding were attached; A gilded angel
hovering over it and held his hands in the green curtain of heavy rustling silk: a pillow and blanket
were of pink satin with an embroidered covering of Tulle with lace trim.
  There is a paper of his on the Inland Navigation
of the County of Salop, contained in 'The Agricultural Survey of Shropshire,' in which he speaks
of the judicious use of railways, and recommends that in all future surveys "it be an instruction
to the engineers that they do examine the county with a view of introducing iron railways wherever
difficulties may occur with regard to the making of navigable canals." When the project of
the Liverpool and Manchester Railway was started, we are informed that he was offered the appointment
of engineer; but he declined, partly because of his advanced age, but also out of a feeling
of duty to his employers, the Canal Companies, stating that he could not lend his name to a
scheme which, if carried out, must so materially affect their interests.

Towards the close of his life, he was afflicted by deafness, which made him feel exceedingly
uncomfortable in mixed society.  Thanks to a healthy constitution, unimpaired by excess and
invigorated by active occupation, his working powers had lasted longer than those of most men.
He was still cheerful, clear-headed, and skilful in the arts of his profession, and felt the
same pleasure in useful work that he had ever done.  It was, therefore, with difficulty that
he could reconcile himself to the idea of retiring from the field of honourable labour, which
he had so long occupied, into a state of comparative inactivity.  But he was not a man who
could be idle, and he determined, like his great predecessor Smeaton, to occupy the remaining
years of his life in arranging his engineering papers for publication.  Vigorous though he
had been, he felt that the time was shortly approaching when the wheels of life must stand
still altogether.  Writing to a friend at Langholm, he said, "Having now being occupied for
about seventy-five years in incessant exertion, I have for some time past arranged to decline
the contest; but the numerous works in which I am engaged have hitherto prevented my succeeding.
In the mean time I occasionally amuse myself with setting down in what manner a long life has
been laboriously, and I hope usefully, employed."  And again, a little later, he writes: "During
the last twelve months I have had several rubs; at seventy-seven they tell more seriously than
formerly, and call for less exertion and require greater precautions.  I fancy that few of
my age belonging to the valley of the Esk remain in the land of the living."*[4]

One of the last works on which Mr. Telford was professionally consulted was at the instance
of the Duke of Wellington--not many years younger than himself, but of equally vigorous intellectual
powers--as to the improvement of Dover Harbour, then falling rapidly to decay.  The long-continued
south-westerly gales of 1833-4 had the effect of rolling an immense quantity of shingle up
Channel towards that port, at the entrance to which it became deposited in unusual quantities,
so as to render it at times altogether inaccessible.  The Duke, as a military man, took a more
than ordinary interest in the improvement of Dover, as the military and naval station nearest
to the French coast; and it fell to him as Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports to watch over the
preservation of the harbour, situated at a point in the English Channel which he regarded as
of great strategic importance in the event of a continental war.  He therefore desired Mr.
Telford to visit the place and give his opinion as to the most advisable mode of procedure
with a view to improving the harbour.  The result was a report, in which the engineer recommended
a plan of sluicing, similar to that adopted by Mr. Smeaton at Ramsgate, which was afterwards
carried out with considerable success by Mr. James Walker, C.E.

This was his last piece of professional work.  A few months later he was laid up by bilious
derangement of a serious character, which recurred with increased violence towards the close
of the year; and on the 2nd of September, 1834, Thomas Telford closed his useful and honoured
career, at the advanced age of seventy-seven.  With that absence of ostentation which characterised
him through life, he directed that his remains should be laid, without ceremony, in the burial
ground of the parish church of St. Margaret's, Westminster. But the members of the Institute
of Civil Engineers, who justly deemed him their benefactor and chief ornament, urged upon his
executors the propriety of interring him in Westminster Abbey.

[Image] Telford's Burial Place in Westminster Abbey

He was buried there accordingly, near the middle of the nave; where the letters, "Thomas Telford,
1834, mark the place beneath which he lies.*[5]  The adjoining stone bears the inscription,
"Robert Stephenson, 1859," that engineer having during his life expressed the wish that his
body should be laid near that of Telford; and the son of the Killingworth engineman thus sleeps
by the side of the son of the Eskdale shepherd.

It was a long, a successful, and a useful life which thus ended. Every step in his upward career,
from the poor peasant's hut in Eskdale to Westminster Abbey, was nobly and valorously won.
The man was diligent and conscientious; whether as a working mason hewing stone blocks at Somerset
House, as a foreman of builders at Portsmouth, as a road surveyor at Shrewsbury, or as an engineer
of bridges, canals, docks, and harbours.  The success which followed his efforts was thoroughly
well-deserved.  He was laborious, pains-taking, and skilful; but, what was better, he was honest
and upright.  He was a most reliable man; and hence he came to be extensively trusted.  Whatever
he undertook, he endeavoured to excel in.  He would be a first-rate hewer, and he became one.
He was himself accustomed to attribute much of his success to the thorough way in which he
had mastered the humble beginnings of this trade. He was even of opinion that the course of
manual training he had undergone, and the drudgery, as some would call it, of daily labour
--first as an apprentice, and afterwards as a journeyman mason-- had been of greater service
to him than if he had passed through the curriculum of a University.

Writing to his friend, Miss Malcolm, respecting a young man who desired to enter the engineering
profession, he in the first place endeavoured to dissuade the lady from encouraging the ambition
of her protege, the profession being overstocked, and offering very few prizes in proportion
to the large number of blanks. A poor seamstress who worked four weeks on it and of the wages
they received for it, get your whole family. The winding doll but saw in godparent this just
from how the princess had even looked at the baptism.  In this way we secured the means, by hard
labour, of earning a subsistence; and, in time, we obtained by good conduct the confidence
of our employers and the public; eventually rising into the rank of what is called Civil Engineering.
This is the true way of acquiring practical skill, a thorough knowledge of the materials employed
in construction, and last, but not least, a perfect knowledge of the habits and dispositions
of the workmen who carry out our designs. This course, although forbidding to many a young
person, who believes it possible to find a short and rapid path to distinction, is proved to
be otherwise by the two examples I have cited.  For my own part, I may truly aver that 'steep
is the ascent, and slippery is the way.'"*[6]  That Mr. Telford was enabled to continue to
so advanced an age employed on laborious and anxious work, was no doubt attributable in a great
measure to the cheerfulness of his nature.  He was, indeed, a most happy-minded man.  It will
be remembered that, when a boy, he had been known in his valley as "Laughing Tam."  The same
disposition continued to characterise him in his old age.  He was playful and jocular, and
rejoiced in the society of children and young people, especially when well-informed and modest.
But when they pretended to acquirements they did not possess, he was quick to detect and see
through them.  One day a youth expatiated to him in very large terms about a friend of his,
who had done this and that, and made so and so, and could do all manner of wonderful things.
Telford listened with great attention, and when the youth had done - he quietly asked, with
a twinkle in his eye, "Pray, can your friend lay eggs?"

When in society he gave himself up to it, and thoroughly enjoyed it. He did not sit apart,
a moody and abstracted "lion;" nor desire to be regarded as "the great engineer," pondering
new Menai Bridges; But he appeared in his natural character of a simple, intelligent, cheerful
companion; as ready to laugh at his own jokes as at other people's; and he was as communicative
to a child as to any philosopher of the party.

Robert Southey, than whom there was no better judge of a loveable man, said of him, "I would
go a long way for the sake of seeing Telford and spending a few days in his company."  Southey,
as we have seen, had the best opportunities of knowing him well; for a long journey together
extending over many weeks, is, probably, better than anything else, calculated to bring out
the weak as well as the strong points of a friend: indeed, many friendships have completely
broken down under the severe test of a single week's tour.  But Southey on that occasion firmly
cemented a friendship which lasted until Telford's death.  On one occasion the latter called
at the poet's house, in company with Sir Henry Parnell, when engaged upon the survey of one
of his northern roads.  Unhappily Southey was absent at the time; and, writing about the circumstance
to a correspondent, he said, "This was a mortification to me, in as much as I owe Telford every
kind of friendly attention, and like him heartily."

