"If it is so hard to be insulted once by a youngster who cannot count his own years yet, how
much harder is it to hear insults day in and day out, year in and year out?"

Marusya looked at me with sparkling eyes.  She thought I was angry with her and meant her.
Then she wanted to soothe my feelings, and she said wonderingly:

"Years?  What, pray, did I do to you?  I only wanted you not to listen to Jacob.  He is a bad
man.  He hates me.  He is forever on the lookout to separate us!"

"He is afraid," said I, "I might yet get converted."

At this Marusya gave me an irresistible look, the look of a mother, of a loving sister.

"No," she said decidedly, "I shall not let you do that.  You and your daughters will be unhappy
forever.  You know what I have decided?  I have decided never to get married.  For I know that
my own daughters will always be called Zhidovka."  At this point I became sorry for the turn
our conversation had taken, and I cared no more for the defense of the Jews.  After a brief
silence Marusya turned to me:

"Why does mother dislike Jews so much?  She surely knows them better than papa does."

"Very likely she fears being called Zhidovka, as they called you."

"But, then, why did she get herself into that trouble?"

"Ask yourself; she may tell you." . . . .

Never mind what passed between us afterwards.  It does not suit a man of my age to go into
particulars, the way the story-writers do. Suffice it to tell you that our relations became
very much complicated.  Marusya attached herself to me; she became a sister to me.

So, after all, Jacob's fears had been well founded from the very beginning.  I felt I had gotten
myself into a tangle, but I did nothing to escape from it; on the contrary, I was getting myself
deeper and deeper into it.--

Here the old man's eyes flashed with a fire that fairly penetrated the darkness, and for a
moment I thought it was but a youth of eighteen who was sitting opposite me.  I was glad that
the dark hid the whiteness of the old man's beard from my view.  The white beard was entirely
out of harmony with the youthful ardor of its owner's speech.

There was a silence of a few minutes, and the old man continued his story:--

X

Hard as Anna's lot was, Peter himself was not very happy either.  I do not know how things
are managed nowadays.  As I told you before, new times bring new people with new ways.  It
never happened in our day that a Jewish maiden, no matter what class she belonged to, should
throw herself at a young Gentile, and tell him, "Now, I am ready to leave my faith and my people,
if you will marry me."  In our day there never was a case of apostasy except after a good deal
of courting.  No Jewish girl ever left her faith, unless there was a proposal of marriage accompanied
by much coaxing.  It required a great deal of coaxing and enticing on the part of the man.
Only extravagant promises and assurances, which never could be made good, could prompt a Jewish
maiden to leave her faith.  And such had been the case with Khlopov, as Anna told me afterwards.

Anna, or, as she had been called as a Jewess, Hannah, had spent her girlhood under the rule
of a stepmother.  Peter was a young man earning a fair salary as a clerk at the Town Hall.
He was a frequent visitor at Bendet's wine-shop.  And Peter was an expert judge of the comeliness
of Jewish maidens in general and of Anna's beauty in particular.  So, when Pater did come,
he came as a veritable angel-protector.  He came to save her from the yoke of a stepmother
and make her his wife.  He promised her "golden castles" and a "paradise on earth."  All that
would be hers but for one obstacle: she had to renounce her faith.  At first Anna was unwilling.
But the stepmother made Anna as miserable as only human beings know how.  Then Bendet's business
began to go from bad to worse, so that Anna had very slim prospects of ever exchanging the
yoke of a stepmother for that of a husband.  At the same time Peter urged his suit, coaxing
her more and more.  Anna warned Peter, that in her new life she might find misery instead of
happiness.  She was sure she would be a stranger to the people with whom she would have to
come in contact.  Should she happen to be below the other women, they would despise her.  Should
she happen to be above them, they would envy and hate her.  Here she certainly spoke like a
prophetess.  But Peter kept on assuring her that she was the very best of all women, and that
he would be her protector in all possible troubles.  Then she argued that he might not be happy
himself; that he would have to fight many a battle.  His parents would surely not agree with
him.  His relations would shun him.  In short, he would be isolated.  Peter laughed at her,
and told her that all her fears were nothing but the imagination of an unhappy maiden who did
not believe in the possibility of ever being happy. He told her also that not all the women
in the world were as bad as her stepmother.  Still Hannah was unwilling.  Then Peter attacked
her with a new weapon.  He made believe he was ill, and let her know that if he should die,
it would be her fault; and if he did not die, he would commit suicide, and his last thought
would be that the Jews are cruel, and rejoice in the misfortune of a Christian.  Then Hanna
gave in, did as she was urged, and was renamed Anna.

Now what Anna found in actual life far exceeded what Hannah had prophesied.  The women of the
village kept aloof from her, and for many reasons.  The first reason was that she never visited
the village tavern.  She never drank any liquor herself, nor treated her visitors with it.
And nothing in the world brings such people together as liquor does.  Then the men hated her
for the purity and chastity which she brought from her father's house.  Besides, men and women
alike envied the prosperity of Khlopov's household, which was due only to Anna's thrift.  All
those reasons, as well as many others, were included in the one word "Zhidovka."  So that word
may stand for anything you choose.  As to Peter's brothers and relatives, they not only kept
away from him but also became his open or secret enemies.

By and by Peter recognized that Hannah's fears were not the result
of mere imagination, but the true prophecy of a mature young woman,
who had foreseen her own future, and he could not help feeling hurt.
 That bitter thought was possibly the only reason why he frequented
the establishment of "our Moshko."  He wanted to get rid of the
accursed thought; but he did not succeed.  He pined for the time
when he lived among Jews; but Anna could not possibly return to live
among them.  In the meantime Peter sickened, and took to bed.  Anna
knew there was still some litigation pending between Khlopov and his
relations, and his title to the property he held by inheritance was
disputed. It is, besides, a cruel and criminal traffic in the blood
of my fellow-creatures. It is a foul stain on the national character.
It is an offence to the Almighty. On every ground therefore on which
a decision can be made; on the ground of policy, of liberty, of humanity,
of justice, but, above all, on the ground of religion, I shall vote
for its immediate extinction."

On the tenth of February the bill was carried to the House of Commons. On the twentieth, counsel
were heard against it; after which, by agreement, the second reading of it took place. On the
twenty-third the question being put for the commitment of it, Lord
Viscount Howick (now Earl Grey) began an eloquent speech.  Small wonder, then, that he
kept putting it off.

But the time came when it was necessary that Anna should speak to him about the matter; and
yet she could not muster up enough courage to do it.  For at times she thought herself nothing
but a stranger in the place.  Who was she anyway, to inherit the property left by old Simeon
Khlopov, deceased?  On one occasion she asked me to call Peter's attention to the matter of
his title to the property.  I entered the sick-room and began to discuss the matter cautiously,
in a roundabout way, so as not to excite the patient by implying that his end might be near.
But my precautions were unnecessary.  He spoke very cooly of the possibility of his end coming
at any moment, but at the same time he insisted that there was really no need to hurry, a proper
time to settle the matter would be found.

Now here you see one more difference between Jews and Gentiles.  To
look at the Gentiles, would you ever think them all fools?  Why, you
may find many a shrewd man among them, many a man who could get me
and you into his net, as the spider the fly.  But when it comes to
taking care of the next day, the future, they are rather foolish.
They do not foresee things as clearly as the Jew does.  For
instance, do I not work hard to save up money for my daughter's
dowry, even though I hardly expect her to get married for two years
at least?  Do I not try hard to pay off the mortgage on my house, so
as to leave it to my children free and clear?  Say what you will, I
hold to my opinion, that Gentile-folk do not feel the "to-morrow" as
keenly as we do.  If you like, the whole life of a Jew is nothing
but an anticipation of "to-morrow."  Many a time I went without a
meal simply because I forgot to eat, or thought I had eaten already.
 But I never forget anything that concerns the coming day.  I can
hardly explain it to you, but many a time I thought, dull as my
brains were made by my soldier's grub, that the Jew is altogether a
creature of "to-morrow."

Well, Peter listened to me; he saw there was reason in what I told him; and yet he did not
feel that way.  He did not feel the necessity of acting immediately, and he put it off.

Now, it seems to me that when things come to such a pass between a Gentile husband and his
Jewish wife, the results are bound to be strange, unusual, and anything but agreeable.  It
is all something like--let me see--something like what is written in the Bible about the confusion
of tongues, when one could not understand the speech of his fellow.  Indeed, had Peter known
that it was Anna who sent me to him, he would have resented it surely, and would have thought
that she cared more for his inheritance than she cared for him.

And Peter died, after a long illness.

Then Anna had to go through an ordeal she had not yet experienced in her life of apostasy:
she had to go through the ceremony of mourning according to the prescribed rules.  And her
fears regarding the house turned out to have been but too well founded.  The village elder,
in the name of the rest of the relatives, disputed Peter's title to the property.  Anna was
given a small sum of money, and the whole piece of property was deeded over to Serge Ivanovich.
As to Anna and Marusya, they had to be satisfied with the little money they received.

In the end it turned out that there was a deeper purpose at the bottom of the whole affair.
That scamp, Serge Ivanovich, understood very well that in every respect Marusya was above the
rest of the village girls, and he made up his mind to marry her.  To be sure, he hated the
Jews: they always managed to intrude where they were least wanted; and he never missed an opportunity
of insulting Anna and her daughter.  But that is just the way they all are: they will spit
to-day, to lick it off to-morrow.  At the same time he knew well enough that Marusya would
not be willing to have him.  Yet, in spite of it all, he sent some friends with the formal
message of a proposal.  As an inducement he promised to deed the whole property to Anna and
Marusya.  Anna seemed willing enough to accept the offer.  Then Marusya turned to me.  I began
to side with Anna.

"You are a liar!" shouted Marusya, turning to me.  And she was right.  Indeed, I did not wish
at all to see Marusya marry Serve. But I cannot tell why I had said the opposite.  Then Marusya
curtly dismissed the representatives of the suitor.

I decided not to part from the two unhappy women just then and leave them alone with their
misfortune.  But Heaven willed otherwise.  The Crimean War had been decided upon, and our regiment
was the first to be sent to the front.  So I was taken from my dear friends just when they
needed me most.--

XI

A mixture of light and darkness appeared in a corner of the eastern sky, something like the
reflection of a distant conflagration.  The light spread farther and farther, and swallowed
many a star.  It looked as if some half-extinguished firebrand of a world had blazed up again,
and was burning brightly once more.  But no! that was neither a world-catastrophe nor a conflagration:
some mysterious new creation was struggling into existence.  And after the noiseless storm
and battle of lights, the moon appeared, angry-looking, and ragged-edged.  In the light of
the moon the speaker too looked strange and fantastic, like a relic of a world that is no more.

The old man continued:--

Well, on that day we turned a new leaf in our lives.  Till then we had been like people who
live against their own will, without aim or object.  We had to get up in the morning, because
we had gone to bed the night before.  We ate, because we were hungry.  We went to our drills,
because we were ordered to go.  And we went to sleep at night, because we felt tired.  All
our existence seemed to be only for the sake of discipline; and that discipline, again, seemed
a thing in itself.  But the moment they told us of mobilization and war, our riddle was solved.
It suddenly became clear to us why we had been caught and brought to where we were, and why
we had been suffering all the time.  It looked as if year in, year out, we had been walking
in the darkness of some cave, and all of a sudden our path became light.  And we were happy.

I saw Jacob: he, too, looked happy, which had not been his way for
the last few years.  From the moment he had received permission to
pray in Hebrew and observe the Sabbath, his mood had changed for the
worse: he looked as if he were "possessed."  He complained that his
prayers were not so sweet to him any more as they had been before;
and the Sabbath rest was a real burden upon him.  Then, his father
did not appear in his dreams any more.  Besides, he confessed that
he forgot his prayers many a time, and was not very strict as to the
Sabbath.  He feared his prayers were no longer acceptable in Heaven.
 No, said he, that was not his destiny: the Jewishness of a
Cantonist lay only in suffering martyrdom.  But with the news of the
coming war, a change came over him.  He became gay as a child.

One morning, when we were assembled on the drill grounds before the house of the sergeant,
I was called into the house.  "Hourvitz," said my good sergeant, turning to me, "three beautiful
creatures ask me not to send you to the fighting line but to appoint you to some auxiliary
company.  Ask, and I shall do so."

"Sir," said I, "if this be your order, I have but to obey; but if my wish counts for anything,
I should prefer to stay with the colors and go to the fighting line.  Otherwise what was our
preparation for and our training of many years?"

A smile of satisfaction appeared on the face of the sergeant.

"And if you fall in battle?"

"I shall not fall, sir, before I make others fall."

"What makes you feel so sure of it?"

"I cannot tell, sir; but it is enough if I am sure of it."

"Well, I agree with you.  Now let us hear what your fair advocates have to say."

He opened the door of an adjoining room, and Anna, Marusya, and the sergeant's wife appeared.
Then a dispute began.  They insisted on their opinion, and I on mine.

"Let us count votes," said the sergeant.  "I grant you two votes; together with my own vote
it makes three against tree."

Then I looked at Marusya.  She thought a little, and added her vote to mine.  So the majority
prevailed.  When I went outside, Marusya followed me, and handed me a small parcel.  What I
found there, among other things, was a small Hebrew prayer book, which Marusya must have gotten
at Moshko's, and a small silver cross which she had always worn around her neck.  We looked
at each other and kept silent: was there anything to be said?

After she had walked away a few steps, she turned around, as if she had forgotten something.

"And if you return . . . ?"

"Then to you I return," was my answer.  She went on, and I turned to look back in her direction:
she also looked back at me.  Later I turned again to look at her, and she, too, kept looking
back, until we lost sight of each other.

Before Anna could be dispossessed, Heaven wrought a miracle:  Serge Ivanovich was drafted into
the army.  He was attached to our regiment, and we served in the same company.  In the meantime
Anna remained in possession of the house.

XII

So, after all, they had not been mere sport, those years of drilling, of exercising, of training
to "stand up," to "lie down," to "run," etc., etc. . . .

It had been all for the sake of war, and it was to war that we were going.  My companion in
exile, I mean my Barker, did not wish to part from me.  Ashamed though I am, I must yet call
him "my true friend."  Human beings as a rule forget favors rendered.  This is the way God
has made them.  In very truth, it is only your soldier, your fellow in exile, and your dog
that are able to serve you and love you at the risk of their own lives.  I chased Barker away,
but he kept on following me.  I struck him: he took the blows, and licked my hands.  I struck
him over the legs with the stock of my gun.  He broke out in a whine, and ran after me, limping.
Marusya caught him and locked him up in the stable.  I thought I had gotten rid of him.  But
some hours later I saw him limping after me.  Then I realized that the dog was fated to share
all the troubles of campaign life with me.  And my Barker became a highly respectable dog.
The first day he eyed everybody with a look of suspicion.  The bright buttons and the blue
uniforms scared him; possibly because buttons and uniforms went with stocks of guns like the
one that had given him the lame leg.  By and by Barker picked me and Jacob out from among the
soldiers, and kept near us.  They used to say in our company that Barker was a particular friend
of jews, and he knew a Jew when he saw one.  Very likely that was so.  But then they never
knew how many slices of bread and meat Barker had gotten from Jewish hands before he knew the
difference.

Just about that time we got other new companions.  One of them was a certain Pole, Vassil Stefanovich
Zagrubsky, blessed be his memory, Jew-hater though he was.

The beginning of our acquaintance promised no good.  That particular Pole was poor but proud--a
poor fellow with many wants.  Then he was a smoker, too.  I also enjoyed a smoke when I had
an extra copper in my pocket.  But Zagrubsky had a passion for smoking, and when he had no
tobacco of his own, he demanded it of others.  That was his way: he could not beg; he could
only demand.  Three of us shared one tent: Zagrubsky, Serge, and myself.  Serge was a soldier
in comfortable circumstances.  He had taken some money with him from home, and received a monthly
allowance from his parents.  He always had excellent tobacco.  Once, when he happened to open
his tobacco pouch to roll a cigarette, Zagrubsky took notice of it, and put forth his hand
to take some tobacco.  That was his way: whenever he saw a tobacco pouch open, he would try
to help himself to some of its contents.  But Serge was one of those peasants whose ambition
extends beyond their class.  He was painfully proud, prouder than any of the nobles.  Before
entering the service he had made up his mind to "rise."  He wanted to become an officer, so
that the villagers would have to stand at attention before him, when he returned home.  Therefore
he gave Zagrubsky a supercilious look of contempt, and unceremoniously closed the pouch when
the Pole wanted to take some tobacco.  I was sorry for the Pole, and offered him some of my
own tobacco.  He did not fail to take it, but at the same time I heard him sizzle out "Zhid"
from between his tightly closed lips.  I looked at him in amazement: how on earth could he
guess I was a Jew, when I spoke my Russian with the right accent and inflection, while his
was lame, broken, and half mixed with Polish? That was a riddle to me.  But I had no time to
puzzle it out, and I forgot it on the spot.

We had long been occupying the same position, waiting for a merry beginning.  All that time
seemed to us something like a preparation for a holiday; but the long tiresome wait was disgusting.
In the meantime something extraordinary happened in our camp.  Our camp was surrounded by a
cordon of sentries.  At some distance from the cordon was the camp of the purveyors, the merchants
who supplied the soldiers with all kinds of necessaries.  Without a special permit no purveyor
could pass the line of sentries and enter the camp.

It happened that one of those purveyors excited the suspicion of
Jacob.  Without really knowing why, Jacob came to consider him a
suspicious character.  Even Barker, timid dog that he was, once
viciously attacked that particular man, as if to tear him to pieces.
 And it was with great difficulty that Jacob saved him from Barker's
teeth.  But from that time on Jacob began to watch the man closely.
That very day we were told that General Luders was going to visit
our camp.  Jacob was doing sentry duty.  Just then the suspicious
purveyor appeared suddenly, as if he had sprung out of the ground.
Jacob had his eye on him.  Presently Jacob noticed that the fellow
was hiding behind a bank of earth; he saw him take out a pistol from
his pocket and aim it somewhere into space.  That very moment
General Luders appeared on the grounds.  Without thinking much,
Jacob aimed his gun at the purveyor and shot him dead.  On
investigation, it turned out that the purveyor was a Pole, who had
smuggled himself into the camp in order to assassinate the General.

Then they began to gossip in the regiment about Jacob's "rising." General Luders patted him
on the shoulder, and said, "Bravo, officer!"

A few days later I met Jacob: he looked pale and worn out.  His smile was more like the frozen
smile of the agony of death.  I told him I had dreamt he was drowning in a river of oil.  Then
he told me confidentially that he had promised his superiors to renounce his faith.

Well, in the long run, it appeared that there was much truth in Jacob's idea, that a Jew in
exile must not accept favors from Gentiles.  And the temptation to which Jacob had been exposed
was certainly much harder to stand than a thousand lashes, or even, for that matter, the whole
bitter life of a Cantonist.  The pity of it!

A few days later Zagrubsky was appointed to serve Jacob.  But when Zagrubsky reported for duty,
Jacob dismissed him.  It was against Jacob's nature to have others do for him what he could
do himself.

Zagrubsky departed, hissing "Zhid" under his breath.  It was the way he had treated me.  My
patience was gone.  I put myself in his way, stopped him and asked him: "Now listen, you Pollack,
how do you come to find out so quickly who is a Jew, and who is not?  As far as I can see,
you cannot speak Russian correctly yourself: why, then, do you spy on others?  I have not yet
forgotten that it was on account of my tobacco that you recognized I was a Zhid, too."

"O, that is all very simple," said he.  "I never saw such lickspittles as the Jews are.  They
are always ready to oblige others with their favors and refuse honors due to themselves.  That
is why the authorities favor them so much.  Do you wish to know what a Jew is?  A Jew is a
spendthrift, a liar, a whip-kisser, a sneak. The advantages however obtained by it were considerable;
for the Brookes was now restricted to four hundred and fifty slaves, whereas it was proved that
she carried six hundred and nine in a former voyage.

The committee, at the conclusion of the session of parliament, made a suitable report. It will
be unnecessary to detail this for obvious reasons. There was, however, one thing contained in
it, which ought not to be omitted. It stated, with appropriate concern, the death of the first
controversial writer, and of one of the most able and indefatigable labourers, in their cause. Mr.
Ramsay had been for some time indisposed.

The climate of the West Indies, during a residence of twenty years, and the agitation in which
his mind had been kept for the last four years of his life, in consequence of the virulent attacks
on his word and character by those interested in the continuance of the trade, had contributed
to undermine his constitution. During his whole illness he was cheerful and composed; nor did
he allow it to hinder him, severe as it was, from taking any opportunity
which offered of serving those unhappy persons, for whose injuries
he had so deeply felt.

A few days only before he died, I received from him probably the last letter he ever wrote,
of which the following is an extract:

"My health has certainly taken a most alarming turn; and if some considerable alteration does not
take place for the better in a very little time, it will be all over with me; I mean as to the
present life. I have lost all appetite; and suffer grievously from an almost continual pain
in my stomach, which leaves me no enjoyment of myself, but such as
I can collect from my own reflections, and the comforts of religion.  "Get at your enemy and crush
his head, or lie down yourself a crushed 'cadaver'"--that was our way of fighting, and that
was the way we won victories.  As our general used to say: "The bullet is a blind fool, but
the bayonet is the real thing."

At last, at last, we heard the quick, nervous notes of the bugle, and the hurried beats of
the drum, the same we used to hear year in, year out.  But till that moment it was all "make-believe"
drill.  It was like what we mean by the passage in the Passover Haggodah: "Any one who is in
need may come, and partake of the Passah-lamb. . . ." Till that moment we used to attack the
air with our bayonets and pierce space right and left, "as if" the enemy had been before us,
ready for our steel.  We were accustomed to pierce and to vanquish the air and spirits, and
that is all.  At the same time there was something wonderful, sweet, and terrible in those
blasts of the bugle, something that was the very secret of soldiery, something that went right
into our souls when we returned home from our drill. . . .

But on that day it was not drill any more, and not make-believe any more, no!  Before us was
the real enemy, looking into our very eyes and thirsting for our blood.

Then, just for a moment I thought of myself, of my own flesh, which was not made proof against
the sharp steel.  I remembered that I had many an account to settle in this world; that I had
started many a thing and had not finished it; and that there was much more to start.  I thought
of my own enemies, whom I had not harmed as yet. I thought of my friends, to whom I had so
far done no good.  In short, I thought I was just in the middle of my lifework, and that the
proper moment to die had not yet come.  But all that came as a mere flash.  For in the line
of battle my own self was dissolved, as it were, and was lost, just like the selves of all
who were there. I became a new creature with new feelings and a new consciousness. But the
thing cannot be described: one has to be a soldier and stand in the line of battle to feel
it.  You may say, if you like, that I believe that the angel-protectors of warring nations
descend from on high, and in the hour of battle enter as new souls into the soldiers of the line.

Then and there an end came also to the vicissitudes of my Barker.  I found him dead, stretched
out at full length on a bank of earth, which was the monument over the grave of the heroes
of the first day's fighting.  In the morning they all went to battle in the full flowering
of strength and thirsty for victory, only to be dragged down at night into that hole, to be
buried there.  Well, the earth knows no distinction between one race and another; its worms
feed alike on Jew and Gentile.  But there, in Heaven, they surely know the difference between
one soul and another, and each one is sent to its appointed place.

I was told that Jacob was among those buried in the common grave. Quite likely.  I whispered
a Kaddish over the grave, giving it the benefit of the doubt.

Of course, I was not foolish enough to cry over the cadaver of a dog; and yet it was a pity.
After all, it was a living creature, too; it had shared all kinds of things with me: exile,
hunger, rations, blows.  And it had loved me, too. . . .

The next morning we were out again.  In a moment line faced line, man faced man, enemy faced
enemy.  It was a mutual murderous attraction, a bloodthirsty love, a desire to embrace and to kill.

It was very much like the pull I felt towards Marusya.

. . . . Lightening. . . . shots. . . . thunder. . . .  The talk of the angel-protectors it
is. . . . Snakes of fire flying upward, spreading out . . . . shrapnel . . . . bombs a-bursting
. . . . soldiers standing . . . . reeling . . . . falling . . . . crushed, or lapping their
own blood. . . .  Thinning lines . . . . breast to breast. . . .  Hellish howls over the field.
. . .

Crashing comes the Russian music, drowning all that hellish chorus, pouring vigor, might, and
hope into the hearts of men. . . .

Alas, the music breaks off. . . .  Where is the bugle? . . . .  The trumpet is silenced. .
. .  The trombone breaks off in the middle of a note. . . .  Only one horn is left. . . .

In mighty embrace men clasp one another. . . .  Stabbing, being stabbed . . . . killing, being
killed. . . . .

I work away right and left, I expect my death-blow at every moment, but I seem to be charmed:
swords and bayonets surround me, but never touch me. . . .

Yes, it was a critical moment; it could not last much longer; one side had to give way.

But the Russians could not retreat, because in their very midst the priest was standing, the
ikon of the Virgin in one hand and the crucifix in the other.

The soldiers looked at the images, got up new courage, and did wonders.

Do you remember the Biblical story of the brazen serpent?  That was just like it.

Well, a bullet came flying, whistling, through the air, and the priest fell.  Then the ikon
and the crucifix began to wobble this way and that way, and fell down, too.  The soldiers saw
it, lost heart, and wanted to run.

At that moment I felt as if I were made of three different men.

Just imagine:  Samuel the individual, Samuel the soldier, and Samuel the Jew.

Says Samuel the individual:  "You have done well enough, and it is all over for now.  Run for
dear life."

