"For shame!" the others said, and I answered that, of course, I did not think Hester meant
ill by him, but that, where the doctors had said only love and care could save him--no care
was safe where he was not loved; and I cried very, very bitterly, more than I had done even
for my father, or for anything else before; and I fell into a storm of passion, at the cruelty
of leaving the poor little thing, whom his dying mother had trusted to me, and declared I would
never, never do it.

I was right in the main, it seems to me, but unjust and naughty in the way I did it; and when
Fulk, with some hesitation, began to talk of my not being asked to go just yet--not while the
child lived--I turned round in a really violent, naughty fit, with--"You too, Fulk, I thought
you loved your little brother better than that?  You only want to be rid of him, and leave
him to Hester, and he will die in her hands."

Fulk began to say that the Court of Chancery never gave the custody to the next heir.  But
I rushed away again to the nursery, and sat there, devising plans of disguising myself in a
close cap and blue spectacles, and coming to offer myself as Lord Trevorsham's governess.

The child had no relations whatever on his mother's side, and though, if he had been healthy,
nurses and tutors might have taken care of this baby lordship, even that would have been sad
enough; and for the feeble little creature, whose life hung on a thread, how was it to be thought
of?  I fully made up my mind to stay, even if they all went. I told Jaquetta, so--in my vehemence
dashed all her bright anticipation, and sent her again in tears to bed.  I wish unhappiness
would not make one so naughty!

The next day poor Fulk was struck down.  A letter came from Mrs. Deerhurst to break off the
engagement, and a great parcel containing all the things he had given Emily.  She must have
packed them up before leaving England, while she was still flattering him.  Not a word nor
a line was there from Emily herself!--only a supplication from the mother that he would not
rend her child's heart by persisting--just as if she had not encouraged him to go on all this time!

Nothing would serve him but that he must dash over to Paris, to see her and Emily.

Railroads were not, and it was a ten days' affair at the shortest; and, with all our prospects
doubtful and Alured still so ill, it was very trying.  How Bertram did rave at the folly and
futility of the expedition! but one comfort was, that Alured was a ward of Chancery, and, in
the vast kindness and commiseration everyone bestowed upon us, no one tried to hurry us or
turn us out.

Hester used to come continually to inquire after her brother, and there was something in her
way that always made me shudder when she asked after him.  I knew she could not wish for his
life, and gloated over all the reports she could collect of his weakness.  I felt more and
more horror of her; God forgive me for not having tried not to hate her.  I sometimes doubt
whether my dread and distrust were not visible, and may not have put it into her head.

And then came Mr. Decies, again and again.  He was faithful--I see it now.  He cared not if
I had neither name nor fortune; he held fast to his proposals.  And I?  Oh, I was absorbed--I
was universally defiant--I did not do him justice in the bitterness I did not realise. I thought
he was constant only out of honour and pity, and I did not choose to open my heart to understand
his pleadings or accept them as earnest--I was harsh.  Oh, how little one knows what one is
doing!  Too proud to be grateful--that was actually my case. I was enamoured of the blue-spectacle
plan; I had romances of watching Alured day and night, and pouring away dangerous draughts.
The very fancy, I see now, was playing with edged tools; I feel as if my imagination had put
the possibility into the very air.

Once indeed--when Jaquetta had been telling me she did not understand my unkindness; and observed
that, even for Alured's sake, she could not see why I did not accept--I did begin to regard
him as a possible protector for the boy.  But no; the blue spectacles would be the more assiduous
guardian, said my foolish fancy. 

"O WORDSWORTH!

Four of the brightest intellects that ever adorned any age or country. are then named, and
a fifth who, though not equal to the least of them, is not unworthy
of their company; and what follows?

Here are Chaucer, Shakspeare, Milton, Spenser, Dryden too, all in bliss above, yet not to be perfectly
blest till the arrival of Wordsworth among them! Who wrote that,
Mr. Landor? [123]

[Footnote 123: Whom Mr. L., who is the most capricious
as well as the most arrogant of censors, sometimes takes into favour.]

Landor.--I
did, Mr. North.

North.--Sir, I accept your article. It shall be published
in Blackwood's Magazine. Good-morning, sir.

Landor.--Good-day, sir.
Let me request your particular attention to the correction of the
press.

It was not the being neglected and cast off that he felt as such a wrong, to both himself and
Emily, but the being drawn on with false hopes and promises to expect that she was to belong
to him, after all; and he was cruelly disappointed that Emily had not energy to cling to him--he
had made so sure of her.

Bertram and Jaquetta had expected all along that he would be the more eager to be off to the
Antipodes when everything was swept away from him here, and he did sit after dinner talking
it over in a business-like way, while Bertram gave him all the information he had been collecting
in his absence.

I would not listen.  I was determined against going away from my charge; I had rather have
been his housemaid than have left him to Hester, and I must have looked like a stone as I got
up, and left them to their talk while I went back to the boy.

I heard Bertram say while I was lighting my candle, "Poor Ursula! she will not see it.  Hart
told me to-day that the child is dying--would hardly get through the night."

Now I had been thinking all the afternoon that he was better, and I had gone down to dinner
cheered.  I turned into the doorway, and told Fulk to come and see.

He did come.  There was Alured, lying, as he had lain all day, upon his nurse's knees, with
her arm under his head.  He had not moaned for a long time, and I had left him in a more comfortable
sleep.  He opened his eyes as we came in, held out his hands more strongly than we thought
he could have done, quite smiled--such an intelligent smile--and said, "Tor--Tor--," which
was what he had always called his brother, making his gesture to go to him.

The tears came into Fulk's eyes, though he smiled back and spoke in his sweet, strong voice,
and held out his arms, while we told him he had better sit down.  Poor nurse! she must have
been glad enough--she had held him all that live-long day!  And he was quite eager to go to
his brother, and smiled up and cooed out, "Tor--Tor," again, as he felt himself on the strong arm.

Fulk bade nurse go and lie down, and he would hold him.  And so he did. I fed the child, as
I had done at intervals all day; and he sometimes slept, sometimes woke and murmured or cooed
a little, and Fulk scarcely spoke or stirred, hour after hour.  He had been travelling day
and night, but, strange to say, that enforced calm--that tender stillness and watching, was
better for him than rest.  He would only have tossed about awake, if he had gone to bed after
a discussion with Bertram.

But in the morning Dr. Hart came, quite surprised to find the child alive; and when he looked
at him and felt his pulse, he said, "You have saved him for this time, at least."

(Everybody was lavish of pronouns, and chary of proper names.  Nobody knew what to call anybody.)

His little lordship was able to be laid in his cot, and Fulk, almost blind now with sheer sleep,
stumbled off to his room, threw himself on his bed, and slept for seven hours in his clothes
without so much as moving.  He confessed that he had never had such unbroken, dreamless sleep
since he had first seen Hester Lea's face.

That little murmur of "Tor--Tor" had settled all our fates.  I don't think he had realised
before how love was the one thing that the child's life hung upon, and that the boy himself
must have that love and trust.  Then, too, when he had waked and dressed and come down, the
first person he met was Hester, with her hard, glittering eyes, trying to condole, and not
able to hide how the exulting look went out of her face on hearing that the Earl (as she chose
to term him) was better.

She supposed some arrangement would soon be made, and Fulk said he should see the lawyers at
once about it, and arrange for the personal guardianship of Lord Trevorsham.

"Of course I am the only proper person while he lives, poor child," she said.

I broke in with, "The next heir is never allowed the custody."

I wish I had not.  She hastily and proudly said "What do you mean?" and Fulk quickly added
that "the Lord Chancellor would decide."

The next day he went out, and on returning came up to me in the nursery, and called me into
the study.

"Ursula," he said, "I find that, considering the circumstances, there will be no objection
made to our retaining the personal charge of our little brother.  Everyone is very kind.  Ours
is not a common case of illegitimacy, and my father's well-known express wishes will be allowed
to prevail."

"And your character," I could not help saying; and he owned that it did go for something, that
he was known to everybody, and had some standing of his own, apart from the rank he had lost.

Then he went on to say that this would of course put an end to the emigration plan, so far
as he was concerned.  No doubt in the restless desire of change coming after such a fall and
disappointment it was a great sacrifice; but as he said, "There did not seem anything left
for him in life but just to try to do what seemed most like one's duty." And then he said it
did not seem a worthy thing to do nothing, but just exist on a confined income, and the only
thing he did know anything about, and was not too old to learn, was farming, and managing an
estate. 

Let us say, then, that instinct and intelligence imply two radically different kinds of knowledge.
But some explanations are first of all necessary on the subject of consciousness in general.
It has been asked how far instinct is conscious.  The house was to be let, but there was a farm to be had about
two miles off, with a good house, and he thought of taking it, and stocking it, and turning
regular farmer on his own account; while looking after the property, and bringing Alured up
among his own people and interests.

Bertram did not like this at all.  "Among all our old friends and acquaintance?  Impossible!
unbearable!" he said.

But Fulk's answer, was--"Better so!  If we went to a strange place, and tried to conceal it,
it would always be oozing out, and be supposed disgraceful.  If my sisters can bear it, I had
rather confront it straightforwardly--"

"And be pitied"--said Bertram, with such a contemptuous tone.

Nobody, however, thought it would be advisable for him to give up the New Zealand plan, nor
did he ever mean it for a moment; indeed, he declared that he should go and prepare for us;
for that we should very soon get tired of Skimping's Farm, and come out to him; meaning, of
course, that our dear charge would be over.

He even wanted Jaquetta to come with him at once, and the log huts and fern trees danced before
her eyes as the blue spectacles had done before mine; but she did not like to leave me, and
Fulk would not encourage it, for we both thought her much too young and too tenderly brought
up to be sent out to a wild settler's life alone with Bertram, and without a friend near.

To be farmers' sisters where we had been the Earl's daughters--well, I had much rather then
that it had been somewhere else; but I saw it was best for Baby and still more so for Fulk,
and clear little Jaquey held fast to me and to him, and so it was settled!

Our friends and relatives had much rather we had all emigrated.  They did not know what to
do with us, and would have been glad to have had us all out of sight for ever, "damaged goods
shipped off to the colonies."  We felt this and it heartened us up to stay out of the spirit
of opposition.

Old Aunt Amelia, who fussed and cried over us, and our two uncles, who gave us good advice
by the yard!  Alas! I fear we were equally ungrateful to them, both cold and impatient.  No,
we did not bear it really well, though they said we did.  We had plenty of pride and self-respect,
and that carried us on; but there was no submission, no notion of taking it religiously.  I
don't mean that we did not go to church, and in the main try to do right.  Any one more upright
than my brother it would have been hard to find; but as to any notion that religious feeling
could help us, and that our reverse might be blessed to us, that would have seemed a very strange
language indeed!

And so we were hard, we would bear no sympathy but from one another, and even among ourselves
we never gave way.

People admired us, I fancy, but were alienated and disappointed, and we were quite willing
then to have it so.

CHAPTER IV.

SKIMPING'S FARM.

Skimping's Farm was the unlucky name of the place, and Fulk would allow of no modification--his
resolution was to accept it all entirely.  Now I love no spot on earth so well.  It was very
different then.

The farm-house lay on the slope of the hill, in the parish of Trevorsham, but with the park
lying between it and the main village. The ground sloped sharply down to the little river,
which, about two miles lower down, blends with the Avon, being, in fact, a creek out of Shinglebay.
Beneath the house the stream is clear and rocky, but then comes a flat of salt marsh, excellent
for cattle; and then, again, the river becomes tidal, and reaches at high water to the steep
banks, sometimes covered with wood, sometimes with pasture or corn.

Then under the little promontory comes the hamlet of fisherfolk at Quay Trevor; and then the
coast sweeps away to Shinglebay town, as anyone may see by the map.

Ours is an old farm, and had an orchard of old apple-trees sloping down to the river--as also
did the home field, only divided by a low stone wall from the little strip of flower-garden
before the house, which in those days had nothing in it but two tamarisks, a tea-tree, and
a rose with lovely buds and flowers that always had green hearts.

There was a good-sized kitchen-garden behind, and the farm-yard was at the side by the back
door.  The house is old and therefore was handsome outside, even then, but the chief of the
lower story was comprised in one big room, a "keeping-room," as it was called, with an open
chimney, screened by a settle, and with a long polished table, with a bench on either side.
Into this room the front porch--a deep one, with seats--opened.  At one end was a charming
little sitting-room, parted off; at the other, the real kitchen for cooking, and the dairy
and all the rest of the farm offices. 

Here again a direct taking possession is necessary. It is no use trying to approach duration:
we must install ourselves within it straight away. This is what the intellect generally refuses
to do, accustomed as it is to think the moving by means of the unmovable.


