A

TREATISE

ON

FOREIGN TEAS,

ABSTRACTED

FROM

An ingenious WORK, lately published,

ENTITLED

AN ESSAY ON THE NERVES;

ILLUSTRATING

Their efficient, formal, material, and final Causes; with the Manner of the Liquids being corrupted
by corrosive Acids, and stagnated by obtuse Alkalies:

IN WHICH ARE

OBSERVATIONS ON MINERAL WATERS, COFFEE, CHOCOLATE, &c.

AND

An Investigation of the Nature and Preparation of Foreign Teas, with their pernicious Effects
in debilitating the Nervous System:

INTERSPERSED WITH

THE AUTHOR'S REMARKS,

Arising from an Analysis of such Preparations as may be most beneficially substituted for INDIA
TEA.

THIS SELECTION, containing the Sentiments of the many eminent Physical Professors who have
written on Foreign Teas, is designed to shew, by the most forcible Arguments and distinguished
Authorities, the extreme Danger to which the Public are exposed from the continual Use of an
Article so pernicious and destructive to the Constitution.

[Price Six-pence.]

Dr. SOLANDER's SANATIVE ENGLISH TEA.

UNIVERSALLY APPROVED and RECOMMENDED

BY THE MOST

EMINENT PHYSICIANS, IN PREFERENCE TO FOREIGN TEA, As the most Pleasing and POWERFUL RESTORATIVE,

IN ALL NERVOUS DISORDERS, HITHERTO DISCOVERED.

Our first aliment at breakfast, being designed to recruit the waste of the body from the night's
insensible perspiration; an inquiry is important, whether INDIA TEA, which the Faculty unanimously
concur in pronouncing a Species of Slow Poison, that unnerves and wears the substance of the
solids, is adequate to such a purpose--If it be not--the inquiry is further necessary to find
out a proper substitute. If an Apozem PROFESSIONALLY approved and recommended for its nutritive
qualities, as a general aliment, has claim to public attention, certainly Dr. SOLANDER'S TEA,
so sanctioned, is the most proper morning and afternoon's beverage.

Prepared for the Proprietor by an eminent Botanist.

Sold Wholesale and Retail by the Proprietor's Agent, Mr. T. GOLDING, at his Warehouse for Patent
Medicines, No. 42, Cornhill, London; and Retail by Mr. F. NEWBERY, No. 45, St. Paul's Church-Yard;
Messrs. BAILEY'S, Cockspur-street; Mr. W. BACON, No. 150, Oxford-street; Mr. OVERTON, No. 47,
New Bond-street; and by Mr. J. FULLER, South Side of Covent Garden. Also by the Venders of
Patent Medicines in most Cities and Towns, in England, Ireland, and Scotland.

Sold in Packets at 2s. 9d. and in Canisters at 10s. 6d. each, Duty included.

Liberal Allowance for Exportation, to Country Venders, and to Schools.

The native and exotic Plants which chiefly compose Dr. Solander's Tea, being gathered and dried
with peculiar attention, to the preserving of their sanative Virtues, must render them far
more efficacious than many similar Preparations, which by being reduced to Powder, must have
those Qualities destroyed they might otherwise possess.

A Packet of this Tea at 2s. 9d. is sufficient to breakfast one Person a Month.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE FOREIGN TEAS.

Having, in the preceding enquiry, traced, from the system of the nerves, that on their state
the health of the constitution chiefly depends, our immediate concern is next to ascertain
what kind of food we either adopt from choice, custom, or necessity, is the most likely to
destroy the economy of the nerves. And as Foreign Teas have long been censured as being the
cause of many disorders which arise from the nerves being disarranged or debilitated, an impartial
enquiry is here made into the nature, preparation, and effects, of these Teas. By this investigation
it will appear, that Teas imported from China and India are the most injurious of any beverage
that can possibly be taken as a general and constant aliment. But, not prematurely to anticipate
any part of the following subject, the Reader is most respectfully referred to the following
pages for further evidence.

INTRODUCTION.

As two of the four meals that form our daily subsistence are chiefly composed of tea, an enquiry
into what kind is the most salutary must be as necessary as it may prove interesting and beneficial;
for, on the choice of proper or improper tea must greatly depend the health or disease of the
public in general. To this may be attributed the constitution being either preserved from that
innumerable train of afflictions, which arise from too great a relaxation of the nervous system
by acute distempers, misfortunes, &c. or being so debilitated by excessive drinking of India
Tea, as to render it alone the prey of melancholy, palsies, epilepsies, night-mares, swoonings,
flatulencies, low spirits, hysteric and hypochondriacal affections. For tea that is pernicious
is not only poison to those who, from any cause of corporal debility or mental affliction,
are liable to the above diseases;--but it is also too frequently found to render the most healthy
victims of these alarming complaints. And as nervous disorders are the most complicated in
their distressing circumstances, the greater care should be taken to avoid such aliments as
produce them, as well as to choose those which are the most proper for their relief and prevention.
Those who are now suffering from the inconsiderate use of improper tea, what pitiable objects
of distress and disease do they not represent for the caution of those who may timely preserve
themselves? Nervous disorders are the most formidable, by being the most numerous in their
attacks upon the human frame. Every moment, comparatively speaking, produces some new distress
of mind or body. The imagination cannot avoid the horrors of its own creation, while the memory
is harrassed with the shadows of departed pleasures, which serve but to encrease the pain of
existing torments. All the endearments of life are vanished to the poor wretch who sees himself
surrounded by the spectres of dismay, terror, despondency, and melancholy. And such is but
the thousandth part of the afflictions that are to be avoided or produced by the choice of
the prevailing beverage of tea. Not only the innumerable train of nervous afflictions, but
all those disorders that arise from an improper temperature of the fluids, may be produced
from the action, corrosion, and stimulation of pernicious teas. In proportion to the state
of the fluids, in particular constitutions, they may either prove too relaxing or astringent,
too condensing or attenuating, and too acrid or viscid; for India teas, that to some constitutions
are very diluting, may produce in others contrary effects: therefore such should be chosen
as possess a combination of quality that may render them, as nearly as possible, to a general
specific. But this cannot be well expected where one single ingredient is used, and that is
distinguished for its particular qualities, which, if wholesome, can only be such to those
whose fluids are so, by nature or circumstances, as to require such a particular assistant;
for to every other state of the fluids they must be pernicious. It is consequently evident,
that if teas imported from India have any virtues, they cannot be such as to render them worthy
of being universally adopted as a general aliment. If wholesome to a few, they must be pernicious
to the rest of mankind, with whose constitutions they have no congeniality, medicinal or alimentary
virtue. Supposing they may possess some physical properties, like all other medicines, they
can only benefit such disorders as nature particularly formed them to relieve. Those who have
been advocates for their positive virtues have, in this instance, but more confirmed the impropriety
of adopting them as a general morning and evening beverage. This only explains more evidently
the cause of so many being injured, where one is benefited, by drinking constantly India tea.
There cannot possibly be stated a more self-evident proposition than where any simple or combined
matter is adopted for a particular purpose, it must, in every opposite instance, prove injurious.
In proportion, therefore, to such particular qualities, they are the more improper to be generally
and indiscriminately adopted. This observation, although it may be applied to every art or
science, is still more applicable to physic. Thus is it found that no medicine can be safely
taken as a constant and general aliment. Even those who, at first, might find it beneficial
in their respective complaints, have too frequently found the constant use of it afterwards
hurtful to the constitution it had before relieved. It may be deduced, from the above considerations,
that India teas, however physically beneficial, to allow them all their best of praise, must
be as an aliment generally injurious. Instead of preserving health, they sow innumerable disorders,
which can only be cured by substituting a beverage from such salutary native or exotic herbs
as are formed for the particular afflictions the former have so pitiably brought upon the too
greater part of mankind.

As almost every disorder to which the human frame is liable may be retarded in its cure, if
not confirmed in the constitution, by the power of secretion being weakened, India teas are
the most dangerous that can be possibly used as a general beverage. By too much dilating the
canals, the concussive force of the sides is increased, which destroys the oscillatory motion,
and thus are the secretions altered and disturbed; and as the action of medicines consists
in removing impediments to the equal motion of the fluids, the greater care should be taken
to abstain from all food or drink that may increase those impediments. That India teas not
only increase but occasion such evils is evident, from their having been experienced to relax
the tone and reduce the consistence of the solids. As the powers of secretion depend upon the
just equilibrium of force between the solids and the liquids, the latter must, in the above
instance, make a greater impetus upon one part than another, from which proceeds that morbid
state so justly and emphatically termed Disease. Thus, according to the learned Boerhaave,
to heal is to take away the disease from the body; that is, to remove and expel the causes
which hinder the equal motion or transflux. Medicines, he says, are those mechanical instruments
by which an artist may remove the causes of the balance being destroyed, and thus re-instate
the lost equilibrium of solids and liquids. He therefore concludes, that a medicine supposes
a flowing of the humours or liquids; that it operates mechanically; that it acts only mediately;
that its good or bad effects depend entirely on the bulk, motion, and figure of the acting
particles, and that the destruction of the balance must be deduced from the solids. So that,
as it has been found that the solids are wasted and impaired by the constant use of India tea,
the chief cause of disease, in general, may be attributed to such a pernicious custom; even
the properties which he ascribes to medicines are in direct opposition to what have been found
to be the prevailing effects of teas imported into Europe. It is consequently evident, that
the drinking of this injurious tea being not only, in its operation, productive of disease
in its general sense, but also repugnant to the salutary operation of medicine, it is the most
dangerous beverage that can be generally taken; for it appears, from the above consideration,
that its pernicious effects are not confined to any system of disorders; it is found inimical
to the first principles of health, and therefore may be justly dreaded as capable of being
the source of disease indefinitely understood.

Having thus stated, as an Introduction to this Essay on Teas, the general tendency of those
imported from India, under the titles of Green, Souchong, and Bohea, to injure the constitution,
the following pages will be particularly devoted to the consideration of the nature, preparation,
and manner of using, and the effects of such foreign teas.

ESSAY ON TEAS.

There is, perhaps, no subject on which there has been more declamation, for and against its
properties and effects, than those of teas imported into this country by the companies trading
from the different maritime nations of Europe to China and India. Nor has there been a controversy
in which the health of the community has been so materially concerned, that has afforded so
little direction of moment to those who would wish to ascertain the truth of such teas being
either beneficial, injurious, or innocent in their effects. Amidst a mass of declamatory assertion
so little intelligence is to be gained, that those who have had the greatest interest in being
informed of the real qualities of teas, have most abandoned the enquiry before they obtained
the least knowledge of what they sought. Either perplexed with abstruse science, or dissatisfied
with assertion equally unfounded and unsupported, thousands have discontinued the research,
and committed themselves to fatal experience. Thus have too many acquired a knowledge of the
detrimental qualities of teas, by the ruin of their constitution. To avoid therefore such an
inconvenience, the greatest care will be taken to prevent an indiscriminate reference to authors,
whose sentiments can neither sanction adduced arguments or illustrate technical allusions.
The enquiry will be made with some reference to science, but more to convince by demonstration
than to confound by abstruse perplexities. So that, while empty declamation is avoided, the
principles of truth are meant to be investigated by reason and experience. With this view,
the Nature of Green, Souchong, and Bohea teas is first considered. To judge of the nature of
these herbs with equal candour and propriety, it may be necessary to consider their qualities
in relation to what are ascribed them, and what have been discovered by their analysis, and
what have resulted from experience. The virtues that have been ascribed to them are chiefly,
being a greatful diluent in health, and salutary in sickness, by attenuating viscid juices,
promoting natural excretions, exciting appetite, and proving particularly serviceable in fevers,
immoderate sleepiness, and head-aches after a debauch. It is also added to the list of their
ascribed virtues, that there is no plant yet known, the infusions of which pass more freely
from the body, or more speedily excite the spirits. To a person of any physical knowledge,
these qualities will either appear contradictory in themselves, or rather ultimately injurious,
than absolutely beneficial. As the full examination of these assumed qualities, by the rules
of science, would require a volume, instead of a few pages, which the limits of this Essay
will afford, the enquiry must be made as perspicuous as the necessity of brevity will admit.
Allowing they are diluting in health, their constant use may so attenuate the liquids as to
destroy their natural force and tensity. But Boerhaave says, there is no proper diluent but
water; it is therefore evident it is the water, and not the tea, which is the diluting medium.
With respect to its being an attenuative of viscid humours, it can never possess this virtue
from being a diluent, for an attenuant acts specially on the particles, by diminishing their
bulk, while the diluent acts upon the whole mass of the fluid.

The general body of the liquid may be diluted while the viscid humours remain unresolved. Indeed,
the operation of an attenuant is not easily known; for many are surprised that a slight inflammation
should be so difficult to dissipate. But their surprise would cease, were they to consider,
that medicines act more generally upon the whole body than abstractedly upon the part affected.
Suppose to attenuate some coagulated blood, six grains of volatile salt were given, how small
a proportion must come to the part diseased, when these grains, by the laws of circulation,
will mix with the entire mass of blood, consisting at least of thirty pounds!

Teas being said to promote natural excretions, can be no recommendation of what is generally
used; for this constant effect must render them too copious, and thus, according to all physical
experience, the blood must be thickened in the greater vessels, which frequently terminates
in an atrophy.

The appetite being excited by the drinking of tea, is more a proof of its attrition of the
solids than any stimulus to a wholesome desire of food. This quality accounts for the acrimonious
effects too many have experienced by its use. Many have not only had their blood impoverished,
but corrupted by the constant drinking of these teas. Whether it arises from any positive acrimonious
salt it naturally possesses, or from any acquired corrosiveness from its mode of drying, is
not here necessary to enquire: it is only requisite to state that a pernicious effect is too
fatally experienced by those who are unfortunately its slaves.

How India tea can be serviceable in fevers is not easy to be understood; for, if it has that
effect upon the nerves to excite watchfulness, it must greatly tend to increase, instead of
diminish feverish symptoms. Dr. Buchan attributes even one cause of the palsy to drinking much
tea or coffee, &c. and, in a note, he subjoins: "Many people imagine that tea has no tendency
to hurt the nerves, and that drinking the same quantity of warm water would be equally pernicious.
This, however, seems to be a mistake, many persons drinking three or four cups of warm milk
and water daily, without feeling any bad consequences; yet the same quantity of tea will make
their hands shake for twenty-four hours. That tea affects the nerves is likewise evident from
its preventing sleep, occasioning giddiness, dimness of the sight, sickness, &c."

With regard to India teas possessing the quality of exciting the spirits, this, like every
other stimulus, either by constant use loses its effect, or unnerves the system it is meant
to strengthen. The nerves through which the animal spirits circulate being, like the strings
of a violin or harpsichord, too frequently braced, lose, at last, their natural tensity, and
thus render the human frame one system of debility.

Having thus, as briefly as possible, stated that even their ascribed virtues are either derogatory
to all physical principle, or else destructive to the constitution, from their constant use,
the nature of India teas is next considered, with respect to what appears to be their chief
component parts, from analyzation.

Teas have been found to consist principally of narcotic salts, some astringent oil, and earth.
These being found in greater quantities in bohea than in green teas, those who have very sensible
and elastic nerves must be seized with a greater tremor after drinking the former than the
latter. The continual and regular influx of the nervous juices is stopped by their component
fibres being contracted from the roughness and restringency of such decoctions. The force of
the heat, or the brain's propulsion of its nervous juice, being inferior to the resistance
of the whole ramified fibres thus encreased by the sudden contraction and unequal motion, the
flow of the animal spirits must be greatly impeded and disordered. In fact, the influx suffers
a suspension, until the fibres, by relaxing again, admit their empty tubes to receive their
appropriated liquids. Thus even green tea must, especially if taken strong and often, stop
the natural circulation of humours, and produce the attendant defects of depression of spirits,
deficiency of secretion, loss of appetite, decrease of strength, waste of body, and, finally,
a total want of effective vigour in all the animal functions. But, as above observed, bohea
tea possessing in greater quantity the pernicious ingredients, the vessels are thrown into
momentary spasms and convulsive vibrations, by the relaxing power of the narcotic salts, and
the contracting force of the astringent oil and earth. And here it must be noticed, that oil
mixed with salt is rendered astringent: thus all vegetables, where a mixture of both prevails,
are reckoned stimulating. The narcotic power of the salt is derived from its hindering the
flux of the animal spirits through the nerves.

The stomach and bowels being weakened by the above causes, windy complaints or flatulencies
are consequently produced. This caused Dr. Whytt, in his advice to patients afflicted with
such diseases, to desire they would abstain from India tea, as one of the flatulent aliments
chiefly to be avoided.

If the slightest external motion alone produces the following changes in the body, what effects
may not be ascribed to the constant use of teas, which we find, as before stated, operate internally?
A person in perfect health, having his nostrils only touched with a feather, cannot avoid his
body being so convulsed as to produce what is commonly called sneezing. But if the number of
muscles agitated, the force and straining of the body by sneezing, are considered; the slightness
of the cause must excite no little astonishment; for this action is occasioned by the muscles
of the scapula, abdomen, diaphragm, thorax, lungs, &c. and if the sneezing continues, an universal
explosion of the liquids ensues: tears, mucus, saliva, and urine, are excreted. Thus, without
any moist, cold, hot, dry, sulphur, salt, or any other internal or external application, an
involuntary motion of all the solids and fluids is produced by a feather touching, in the slightest
manner, the inside of our nostrils. But Boerhaave relates further, "That if sneezing continues
a long time, as it will by taking one hundredth part of a grain of euphorbium up the nose,
grievous and continued convulsions will arise, head-aches, involuntary excretions of urine,
&c., vomitings, febrile heats, and other dreadful symptoms; and, at last, death itself will
ensue." It is therefore evident that the slightest bodies produce the greatest changes in the
human frame.

Such is the power of certain particles upon the nerves, that the stomach will be thrown into
convulsions that almost threaten an inversion, by taking only four ounces of a wine in which
so small a portion of glass of antimony as one scruple is infused in eight pounds of the former.
And what is still more remarkable is, that the glass of antimony remains not only undissolved,
but, comparatively speaking, undiminished in its weight.

These being a few of the fatal afflictions which experience shews to be frequently the consequence
of drinking India teas, its injurious nature is too evident to require any further investigation
of either their ascribed or positive qualities. The next subject to be considered, relative
to India teas, is their Preparation.

Among the different authors of any consequence that have written on the culture, preparation,
and virtues of foreign teas, may be ranked Kampfer, Postlethwaite, Dr. Cunningham, Priestley,
Lemery, Franchus, Meister, and Sigesbeck; as the limits of this Treatise will not permit a
detail of observations from the whole of these writers, remarks can only be selected from the
most principal of them. Most of the above, and many other, authors agree that the leaves are
spread upon iron plates, and thus dried with several little furnaces contained in one room.
This mode of preparation must greatly tend to deprive the shrub of its native juices, and to
contract a rust from the iron on which it is dried. This may probably be the cause of vitriol
turning tea into an inky blackness. We therefore do not think with Boerhaave, that the preparers
employ green vitriol for improving the colour of the finer green teas. It may however be concluded,
from the colour of bohea, souchong, and such as are called black teas, that they may be thus
tinctured, by the means of vitriol, after they have been dried upon the iron plates in the
furnace room; and this may likewise particularly cause that astringent quality which is more
experienced in all the black than any of the green teas. According to Sigesbeck, the colours
of these teas are artificial; so that if these pernicious arts are used even to give the tea
a particular colour, there is no difficulty in ascribing the cause of their injurious effects.

That the native virtues of these teas are liable to considerable perversion is evident from
the manner in which Meister relates they are prepared. He says the leaves are put into a hot
kettle just emptied of boiling water, and that they are kept in this closely covered until
they are cold, when they are strewed upon the hot plates above mentioned for drying. It is
easy to conceive how the virtues of a leaf, however salutary by nature, must be destroyed by
such a process. Being thus put into a steaming kettle, and suffered to remain there until they
are cold, must cause the greatest part of their Virtues to evaporate, and the leaves to imbibe
an unwholesome taint from the effluvia of the steaming metal. It cannot, therefore, be ascertained
whether teas that are imported in Europe, after such a mutating preparation, have the least
remains of their original odour or flavour, no more than they have of their qualities; but,
on the contrary, it seems impossible but that the original nature of this shrub is entirely
destroyed by an artificial preparation. Some falsely suppose that this species of management
is only to soften such of the leaves as are grown too dry, and are therefore liable to break
in the curling; but this will evidently appear not the cause, when it is considered that the
greater part of the teas must dry in such a hot climate while they are gathering: and as they
are particularly anxious to send them in as curious a curled state as possible, such teas must
be thus moistened again, in order to curl them afterwards in that perfect manner which is performed
on the iron plates of the furnace.

The opinion, therefore, of teas deriving their green colour from being dried upon copper being
founded on a misrepresentation of the manner in which they are really prepared, a few observations
upon the subject are indispensibly necessary. For those who have always understood that the
detrimental qualities of foreign teas were the consequence of their being dried upon copper,
may perhaps imagine they cannot be so pernicious if they were dried upon iron; but this opinion
cannot be entertained by any persons who have the least knowledge of the manner in which the
vegetable acid will corrode iron. Those who are acquainted with culinary processes must know
in what manner the acid of onions will operate upon any steel instrument; it corrodes a knife
so as to turn the onions black with the particles eaten away from the edge and the face of
the blade. To avoid this unwholsome and unseemly inconvenience, a wooden instrument is generally
used in all instances where onions form a part of the cookery appendages. It is consequently
evident, that although iron utensils are now greatly used instead of copper, yet many injurious
effects may happen from their being liable to be corroded by the acid of several vegetables.
And if the nitrous acid of the air will corrode iron so as to cause rust, when it will not
produce the proportionate effect upon copper, it is a demonstration that iron is the most liable
to such a corruption. The corrosions of copper are undoubtedly pernicious; but the damage that
tea would derive from its being dried upon sheets of this metal would not operate so injuriously
to those who drink it as it does now by lying dried upon iron. For the latter bring more liable
to the power of the mineral, vegetable, or animal acid, must impart more particles of its reduced
calax to the tea than copper would. And, in order to shew how susceptible of corrosion iron
is, the following instance is farther adduced: in Ireland, where some persons practise the
art of tanning leather with fern, which possesses a very strong acid, particular care is taken
to avoid using any iron vessels in the tannage, lest the colour of the leather should be blackened
by the corroding particle of the metal. As it is the peculiar property of iron or steely particles,
even in their most perfect state, to operate as too great an astringent for an aliment that
is taken twice a day constantly, tea, when dried upon it, must be rendered proportionably pernicious.
But admitting that the popular opinion of their being dried upon copper was just, the teas
must be rendered proportionably injurious to the quantity of copperas or crude vitriol they
imbibe from their acidity corroding the metal. Preparations of steel, that are, in many instances,
considered as most salutary, yet in all pulmonary disorders the most eminent physicians have
deemed them exceedingly dangerous. And in a country, like Great Britain, Holland, and other
places, where a cloudy atmosphere, caused from their marshy soil or watery situation, renders
most of the inhabitants subject to complaints of the lungs, foreign teas, contaminated by these
iron corrosions, must be particularly detrimental. It is therefore, from these considerations,
evident, that foreign teas, by being dried upon iron, have their bad qualities so increased
as to render them the most pernicious of any morning and evening liquid that has yet been taken.----To
return from whence we began this short digression.

It is remarkable that no satisfactory account has yet been given in what the bohea differs
from the green tea. Dr. Cunningham, physician to the English settlement at Cimsan, and Kampfer
assert, that the bohea is the leaves of the first collection.

This, however, being contrary to the general report of all travellers, that none of the first
produce is brought to Europe, must be discredited; for these are all preserved for the Princes,
to whom they are sold, even in China, at an immense price. Another proof is, that the boheas
are brought here in the most considerable quantities, at a price greatly inferior to what even
the second, third, and fourth crops are sold for in China. This not only evinces how inferior
in quality the black tea must be, but also how little they are valued among those who must
be acquainted with their properties.

Although the European dealers divide the green teas chiefly into three sorts, and the boheas
into five, yet it is unknown from what province they are brought, of what crop they are the
produce, and to which of the Chinese sorts they belong.

Added to their abuse of preparation may be that of their package. It is impossible but to know
that their bad qualities must be considerably augmented by being so closely packed, for such
a length of time, in such slight wooden chests, lined with a composition of wood and lead.
Considerable quantities are likewise damaged by salt water and other causes, which, by the
management of the tea dealers, are mostly mixed, and sold under different denominations. How
the tea must be affected by the corrosion of the lead and tin by the marine acid, those of
the least chemical knowledge will easily determine. To what danger must, therefore, the constitution
of those who are in the constant habit of drinking such an empoisoned drug be exposed, may
easily be imagined. Surely, when all these circumstances are considered respecting the pernicious
mode of preparation, and particularly the poisonous qualities they are also liable to contract
from the nature of their package, every person must be convinced to what a loss of health,
if not of life, the constant use of such teas must expose them. Such evidence of their deleterious
tendency is almost sufficient to alarm mankind against so prevailing an evil, without any further
arguments; but as health is too precious not to require every possible proof that can persuade
us to avoid what so immediately threatens our existence, the following arguments and testimonies
of the bad qualities of foreign teas must not be omitted. Previous, however, to an investigation
of their effects, it may be necessary to say a few words respecting

THE MANNER OF USING.

Foreign tea, as before observed, being taken as two principal meals of our daily aliment, is
undoubtedly one great reason of the constitution of the people having suffered an entire change
in its system. That vigour, spirits, and longevity, which characterised us in the last century,
is totally subverted; disease, dismay, and debility, now lead us prematurely to the grave,
where we end an existence too deplorable to excite the least desire for a longer continuance.
Dr. Priestley states, very justly, in his Medical Essays, that it is curious to observe the
revolution which hath taken place, within this century, in the constitutions of the inhabitants
of Europe. Inflammatory diseases more rarely occur, and in general are much less rapid and
violent in their progress than formerly; nor do they admit of the same antiphlogistic method
of cure which was practised with success a hundred years ago. The experienced Sydenham makes
forty ounces of blood the mean quantity to be drawn in the acute rheumatism; whereas this disease,
as it now appears in the London hospitals, will not bear above half that evacuation. Vernal
intermittents are frequently cured by a vomit and the bark, without venæsection, which is a
proof that, at present, they are accompanied with fewer symptoms of inflammation than they
were wont to be. This advantageous change, however, is more than counterbalanced by the introduction
of a numerous class of nervous aliments, in a greater measure, unknown to our ancestors, but
which now prevail universally, and are complicated with almost every other distemper. The bodies
of men are enfeebled and enervated; and it is not uncommon to observe very high degrees of
irritability under the external appearance of great strength and robustness. The hypochondriac,
palsies, cachexies, dropsies, and all those diseases which arise from laxity and debility,
are, in our days, endemic every where; and the hysterics, which used to be peculiar to the
women, as the name itself indicates, now attacks both sexes indiscriminately. It is evident
that so great a revolution could not be effected without the concurrence of many causes; but
amongst these, I apprehend, the present general use of tea holds the first and principal rank.
The second cause may perhaps be allotted to excess in spirituous liquors. This pernicious custom
owes its rise to the former, which, by the lowness and depression of spirits it occasions,
renders it almost necessary to have recourse to what is cordial and exhilarating; and hence
proceeds those odious and disgraceful habits of intemperance with which too many of the softer
sex of every degree are now, alas! chargeable. These are the sentiments of a character distinguished
for his elaborate researches and judicious discoveries in almost every branch of liberal science.
It may therefore be safely concluded, that the general manner of using India tea morning and
evening has been, and is, the principal cause of the greater part of the diseases with which
the natives of Europe are now afflicted. When it is considered that the first meal which is
taken to recruit the body, after the loss it sustains from the insensible perspiration of the
preceding night, and to prepare it for the avocations of the succeeding day, is India tea,
who can be surprised that nature should rapidly become the victim of disease? Thus, instead
of being supported by nutritious aliment, its nerves are enfeebled, its spirits diminished,
and all its functions enveloped with the gloom of melancholy. Even in the afternoon, when nature
is exhausted by care and fatigue, we fly for refreshment to tea, which, instead of bracing,
still further relaxes the unnerved system. Such are the evil effects of the imprudent manner
in which this pernicious drug is so constantly and universally used. But how must these evils
appear in their extent, when the following view is taken of India teas, with regard to their
variety of injurious EFFECTS.

