"To-morrow," said Martin one night, after scanning the sunset, the sky, and the storm-glass,
"if you can be up at five o'clock, we will cross to Sark."

I was up at four, in the first gray dawn of a September morning. We had the yacht to ourselves,
for Captain Carey declined running the risk of being weather-bound on the island--a risk which
we were willing to chance. The Havre Gosselin was still in morning shadow when we ran into
it; but the water between us and Guernsey was sparkling and dancing in the early light, as
we slowly climbed the rough path of the cliff. My eyes were dazzled with the sunshine, and
dim with tears, when I first caught sight of the little cottage of Tardif, who was stretching
out his nets, on the stone causeway under the windows. Martin called to him, and he flung down
his nets and ran to meet us.

"We are come to spend the day with you, Tardif," I cried, when he was within hearing of my voice.

"It will be a day from heaven," he said, taking off his fisherman's cap, and looking round
at the blue sky with its scattered clouds, and the sea with its scattered islets.

It was like a day from heaven. We wandered about the cliffs, visiting every spot which was
most memorable to either of us, and Tardif rowed us in his boat past the entrance of the Gouliot
Caves. He was very quiet, but he listened to our free talk together, for I could not think
of good old Tardif as any stranger; and he seemed to watch us both, with a far-off, faithful,
quiet look upon his face. Sometimes I fancied he did not bear what we were saying, and again
his eyes would brighten with a sudden gleam, as if his whole soul and heart shone through them
upon us. It was the last day of our holiday, for in the morning we were about to return to
London, and to work; but it was such a perfect day as I had never known before.

"You are quite happy, Mrs. Martin Dobrée?" said Tardif to me, when we were parting from him.

"I did not know I could ever be so happy," I answered.

"We saw him to the last moment standing on the cliff, and waving his hat to us high above his
head. Now and then there came a shout across the water. Before we were quite beyond ear-shot,
we heard Tardif's voice calling amid the splashing of the waves:

"God be with you, my friends. Adieu, mam'zelle!"

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-NINTH.

A POSTSCRIPT BY MARTIN DOBRÉE.

You may describe to a second person, with the most minute and exact fidelity in your power,
the leading and critical events in your life, and you will find that some trifle of his own
experience is ten times more vivid to his mind. You narrate to your friend, whom you have not
met for many years, the incident that has turned the whole current of your existence; and after
a minute or two of musing, he asks you, "Do you remember the day we two went bird-nesting on
Gull's Cliff?" That day of boyish daring and of narrow escapes is more real to him than your
deepest troubles or keenest joys. The brain receives but slightly second-hand impressions.

I had told Olivia faithfully all my dilemmas with regard to Julia and the Careys; and she had
seemed to listen with intense interest. Certainly it was during those four bewildering and
enchanted months immediately preceding our marriage, and no doubt the narrative was interwoven
with many a topic of quite a different character. However that might be, I was surprised to
find that Olivia was not half as nervous and anxious as I felt, when we were nearing Guernsey
on our visit to Julia and Captain Carey. Julia had seen her but once, and that for a few minutes
only in Sark. On her account she had suffered the severest mortification a woman can undergo.
How would she receive my wife?

Olivia did not know, though I did, that Julia was somewhat frigid and distant in her manner,
even while thoroughly hospitable in her welcome. Olivia felt the hospitality; I felt the frigidity.
Julia called her "Mrs. Dobrée." It was the first time she had been addressed by that name;
and her blush and smile were exquisite to me, but they did not thaw Julia in the least. I began
to fear that there would be between them that strange, uncomfortable, east-wind coolness, which
so often exists between the two women a man most loves.

It was the baby that did it. Nothing on earth could be more charming, or more winning, than
Olivia's delight over that child. It was the first baby she had ever had in her arms, she told
us; and to see her sitting in the low rocking-chair, with her head bent over it, and to watch
her dainty way of handling it, was quite a picture. Captain Carey had an artist's eye, and
was in raptures; Julia had a mother's eye, and was so won by Olivia's admiration of her baby,
that the thin crust of ice melted from her like the arctic snows before a Greenland summer.

I was not in the least surprised when, two days or so before we left Guernsey, Julia spoke
to us with some solemnity of tone and expression.

"My dear, Olivia," she said, "and you, Martin, Arnold and I would consider it a token of your
friendship for us both, if you two would stand as sponsors for our child."

"With the greatest pleasure, Julia," I replied; and Olivia crossed the hearth to kiss her,
and sat down on the sofa at her side.

"We have decided upon calling her Olivia," continued Julia, stroking my wife's hand with a
caressing touch--"Olivia Carey! That sounds extremely well, and is quite new in the island.
I think it sounds even better than Olivia Dobrée."

As we all agreed that no name could sound better, or be newer in Guernsey, that question was
immediately settled. There was no time for delay, and the next morning we carried the child
to church to be christened. As we were returning homeward, Julia, whose face had worn its softest
expression, pressed my arm with a clasp which made me look down upon her questioningly. Her
eyes were filled with tears, and her mouth quivered. Olivia and Captain Carey were walking
on in front, at a more rapid pace than ours, so that we were in fact alone.

"What is the matter?" I asked, hastily.

"O Martin!" she exclaimed, "we are both so happy, after all! I wish my poor, darling aunt could
only have foreseen this! but, don't you think, as we are both so happy, we might just go and
see my poor uncle? Kate Daltrey is away in Jersey, I know that for certain, and he is alone.
It would give him so much pleasure. Surely you can forgive him now."

"By all means let us go," I answered. I had not heard even his name mentioned before, by any
one of my old friends in Guernsey. But, as Julia said, I was so happy, that I was ready to
forgive and forget all ancient grievances. Olivia and Captain Carey were already out of sight;
and we turned into a street leading to Vauvert Road.

"They live in lodgings now," remarked Julia, as we went slowly up the steep street, "and nobody
visits them; not one of my uncle's old friends. They have plenty to live upon, but it is all
her money. I do not mean to let them got upon visiting terms with me--at least, not Kate Daltrey.
You know the house, Martin?"

I knew nearly every house in St. Peter-Port, but this I remembered particularly as being the
one where Mrs. Foster had lodged when she was in Guernsey. Upon inquiring for Dr. Dobrée, we
were ushered at once, without warning, into his presence.

Even I should scarcely have recognized him. His figure was sunken and bent, and his clothes,
which were shabby, sat in wrinkles upon him. His crisp white hair had grown thin and limp,
and hung untidily about his face. He had not shaved for a week. His waistcoat was sprinkled
over with snuff, in which he had indulged but sparingly in former years. There was not a trace
of his old jauntiness and display. This was a rusty, dejected old man, with the crow's-feet
very plainly marked upon his features.

"Father!" I said.

"Uncle!" cried Julia, running to him, and giving him a kiss, which she had not meant to do,
I am sure, when we entered the house.

He shed a few tears at the sight of us, in a maudlin manner; and he continued languid and sluggish
all through the interview. It struck me more forcibly than any other change could have done,
that he never once appeared to pluck up any spirit, or attempted to recall a spark of his ancient
sprightliness. He spoke more to Julia than to me.

"My love," he said, "I believed I knew a good deal about women, but I've lived to find out
my mistake. You and your beloved aunt were angels. This one never lets me have a penny of my
own: and she locks up my best suit when she goes from home. That is to prevent me going among
my own friends. She is in Jersey now; but she would not hear a word of me going with her, not
one word. I get nothing but black looks and cold shoulders. There never lived a cat and dog
that did not lead a more comfortable life than Kate leads me."

"You shall come and see Arnold and me sometimes, uncle," said Julia.

"She won't let me," he replied, with fresh tears; "she won't let me mention your name, or go
past your house. I should very much like to see Martin's wife--a very pretty creature they
say she is--but I dare not. O Julia! how little a man knows what is before him!"

We did not prolong our visit, for it was no pleasure to any one of us. Dr. Dobrée himself seemed
relieved when we spoke of going away. He and I shook hands with one another gravely; it was
the first time we had done so since he had announced his intention of marrying Kate Daltrey.

"My son," he said, "if ever you should find yourself a widower, be very careful how you select
your second wife."

These were his parting words--words which chafed me sorely as a young husband in his honeymoon.
I looked round when we were out of the house, and caught a glimpse of his withered face, and
ragged white hair, as he peeped from behind the curtain at us. Julia and I walked on in silence
till we reached her threshold.

"Yet I am not sorry we went, Martin," she observed, in a tone as if she thus summed up a discussion
with herself. Nor was I sorry.

A few days after our return to London, as I was going home to dinner, I met, about half-war
along Brook Street, Mrs. Foster. For the first time since my marriage I was glad to be alone;
I would not have had Olivia with me on any account. But the woman was coming away from our
house, and a sudden fear flashed across me. Could she have been annoying my Olivia?

"Have you been to see me?" I asked her, abruptly.

"Why should I come to see you?" she retorted.

"Nor my wife?" I said.

"Why shouldn't I go to see Mrs. Dobrée?" she asked again.

I felt that it was necessary to secure Olivia, and to gain this end I must be firm. But the
poor creature looked miserable and unhappy, and I could not be harsh toward her.

"Come, Mrs. Foster," I said, "let us talk reasonably together. You know as as well as I do
you have no claim upon my wife; and I cannot have her disturbed and distressed by seeing you;
I wish her to forget all the past. Did I not fulfil my promise to Foster? Did I not do all
I could for him?"

"Yes," she answered, sobbing, "I know you did all you could to save my husband's life."

"Without fee?" I said.

"Certainly. We were too poor to pay you."

"Give me my fee now, then," I replied. "Promise me to leave Olivia alone. Keep away from this
street, and do not thrust yourself upon her at any time. If you meet by accident, that will
be no fault of yours. I can trust you to keep your promise."

She stood silent and irresolute for a minute. Then she clasped my hand, with a strong grip
for a woman's fingers.

"I promise," she said, "for you were very good to him."

