We had been undetermined respecting our future course when we came to Dunkeld, whether to go
on directly to Perth and Edinburgh, or to make a circuit and revisit the Trossachs.  We decided
upon the latter plan, and accordingly after breakfast set forward towards Crieff, where we
intended to sleep, and the next night at Callander.  The first part of our road, after having
crossed the ferry, was up the glen of the Bran.  Looking backwards, we saw Dunkeld very pretty
under the hills, and surrounded by rich cultivated ground, but we had not a good distant view
of the abbey.

Left our car, and went about a hundred yards from the road to see the Rumbling Brig, which,
though well worth our going out of the way even much further, disappointed us, as places in
general do which we hear much spoken of as savage, tremendous, etc.,—and no wonder, for they
are usually described by people to whom rocks are novelties.  The gardener had told us that
we should pass through the most populous glen in Scotland, the glen of Amulree.  It is not
populous in the usual way, with scattered dwellings; but many clusters of houses, hamlets such
as we had passed near the Tummel, which had a singular appearance, being like small encampments,
were generally without trees, and in high situations—every house the same as its neighbour,
whether for men or cattle.  There was nothing else remarkable in the glen.  We halted at a
lonely inn at the foot of a steep barren moor, which we had to cross; then, after descending
considerably, came to the narrow glen, which we had approached with no little curiosity, not
having been able to procure any distinct description of it.

At Dunkeld, when we were hesitating what road to take, we wished to know whether that glen
would be worth visiting, and accordingly put several questions to the waiter, and, among other
epithets used in the course of interrogation, we stumbled upon the word ‘grand,’ to which he
replied, ‘No, I do not think there are any gentlemen’s seats in it.’  However, we drew enough
from this describer and the gardener to determine us finally to go to Callander, the Narrow
Glen being in the way.

Entered the glen at a small hamlet at some distance from the head, and turning aside a few
steps, ascended a hillock which commanded a view to the top of it—a very sweet scene, a green
valley, not very narrow, with a few scattered trees and huts, almost invisible in a misty gleam
of afternoon light.  At this hamlet we crossed a bridge, and the road led us down the glen,
which had become exceedingly narrow, and so continued to the end: the hills on both sides heathy
and rocky, very steep, but continuous; the rocks not single or overhanging, not scooped into
caverns or sounding with torrents: there are no trees, no houses, no traces of cultivation,
not one outstanding object.  It is truly a solitude, the road even making it appear still more
so: the bottom of the valley is mostly smooth and level, the brook not noisy: everything is
simple and undisturbed, and while we passed through it the whole place was shady, cool, clear,
and solemn.  At the end of the long valley we ascended a hill to a great height, and reached
the top, when the sun, on the point of setting, shed a soft yellow light upon every eminence.
The prospect was very extensive; over hollows and plains, no towns, and few houses visible—a
prospect, extensive as it was, in harmony with the secluded dell, and fixing its own peculiar
character of removedness from the world, and the secure possession of the quiet of nature more
deeply in our minds.  The following poem was written by William on hearing of a tradition relating
to it, which we did not know when we were there:—

   In this still place remote from men
   Sleeps Ossian, in the Narrow Glen,
   In this still place where murmurs on
   But one meek streamlet, only one.
   He sung of battles and the breath
   Of stormy war, and violent death,
   And should, methinks, when all was pass’d,
   Have rightfully been laid at last
   Where rocks were rudely heap’d, and rent
   As by a spirit turbulent;
   Where sights were rough, and sounds were wild,
   And everything unreconciled,
   In some complaining, dim retreat
   Where fear and melancholy meet;
   But this is calm; there cannot be
   A more entire tranquillity.

   Does then the bard sleep here indeed?
   Or is it but a groundless creed?
   What matters it?  I blame them not
   Whose fancy in this lonely spot
   Was moved, and in this way express’d
   Their notion of its perfect rest.
   A convent, even a hermit’s cell
   Would break the silence of this Dell;
   It is not quiet, is not ease,
   But something deeper far than these;
   The separation that is here
   Is of the grave; and of austere
   And happy feelings of the dead:
   And therefore was it rightly said
   That Ossian, last of all his race,
   Lies buried in this lonely place.

Having descended into a broad cultivated vale, we saw nothing remarkable. Observed a gentleman’s
house, {215} which stood pleasantly among trees. It was dark some time before we reached Crieff,
a small town, though larger than Dunkeld.

                                * * * * *

Saturday, September 10th.—Rose early, and departed without breakfast.  We were to pass through
one of the most celebrated vales of Scotland, Strath Erne.  We found it a wide, long, and irregular
vale, with many gentlemen’s seats under the hills, woods, copses, frequent cottages, plantations,
and much cultivation, yet with an intermixture of barren ground; indeed, except at Killin and
Dunkeld, there was always something which seemed to take from the composure and simplicity
of the cultivated scenes.  There is a struggle to overcome the natural barrenness, and the
end not attained, an appearance of something doing or imperfectly done, a passing with labour
from one state of society into another.  When you look from an eminence on the fields of Grasmere
Vale, the heart is satisfied with a simple undisturbed pleasure, and no less, on one of the
green or heathy dells of Scotland, where there is no appearance of change to be, or having
been, but such as the seasons make. Strath Erne is so extensive a vale that, had it been in
England, there must have been much inequality, as in Wensley Dale; but at Wensley there is
a unity, a softness, a melting together, which in the large vales of Scotland I never perceived.
The difference at Strath Erne may come partly from the irregularity, the undefined outline,
of the hills which enclose it; but it is caused still more by the broken surface, I mean broken
as to colour and produce, the want of hedgerows, and also the great number of new fir plantations.
After some miles it becomes much narrower as we approach nearer the mountains at the foot of
the lake of the same name, Loch Erne.

Breakfasted at a small public-house, a wretchedly dirty cottage, but the people were civil,
and though we had nothing but barley cakes we made a good breakfast, for there were plenty
of eggs.  Walked up a high hill to view the seat of Mr. Dundas, now Lord Melville—a spot where,
if he have gathered much wisdom from his late disgrace or his long intercourse with the world,
he may spend his days as quietly as he need desire.  It is a secluded valley, not rich, but
with plenty of wood: there are many pretty paths through the woods, and moss huts in different
parts.  After leaving the cottage where we breakfasted the country was very pleasing, yet still
with a want of richness; but this was less perceived, being huddled up in charcoal woods, and
the vale narrow.  Loch Erne opens out in a very pleasing manner, seen from a hill along which
the road is carried through a wood of low trees; but it does not improve afterwards, lying
directly from east to west without any perceivable bendings: and the shores are not much broken
or varied, not populous, and the mountains not sufficiently commanding to make up for the deficiencies.
Dined at the head of the lake.  I scarcely know its length, but should think not less than
four or five miles, and it is wide in proportion.  The inn is in a small village—a decent house.

Walked about half a mile along the road to Tyndrum, which is through a bare glen, {216} and
over a mountain pass.  It rained when we pursued our journey again, and continued to rain for
several hours.  The road which we were to take was up another glen, down which came a stream
that fell into the lake on the opposite side at the head of it, so, after having crossed the
main vale, a little above the lake, we entered into the smaller glen.  The road delightfully
smooth and dry—one gentleman’s house very pleasant among large coppice woods.  After going
perhaps three miles up this valley, we turned to the left into another, which seemed to be
much more beautiful.  It was a level valley, not—like that which we had passed—a wide sloping
cleft between the hills, but having a quiet, slow-paced stream, which flowed through level
green grounds tufted with trees intermingled with cottages.  The tops of the hills were hidden
by mists, and the objects in the valley seen through misty rain, which made them look exceedingly
soft, and indeed partly concealed them, and we always fill up what we are left to guess at
with something as beautiful as what we see.  This valley seemed to have less of the appearance
of barrenness or imperfect cultivation than any of the same character we had passed through;
indeed, we could not discern any traces of it.  It is called Strath Eyer.  ‘Strath’ is generally
applied to a broad vale; but this, though open, is not broad.

We next came to a lake, called Loch Lubnaig, a name which signifies ‘winding.’  In shape it
somewhat resembles Ulswater, but is much narrower and shorter, being only four miles in length.
The character of this lake is simple and grand.  On the side opposite to where we were is a
range of steep craggy mountains, one of which—like Place Fell—encroaching upon the bed of the
lake, forces it to make a considerable bending.  I have forgotten the name of this precipice:
it is a very remarkable one, being almost perpendicular, and very rugged.

We, on the other side, travelled under steep and rocky hills which were often covered with
low woods to a considerable height; there were one or two farm-houses, and a few cottages.
A neat white dwelling {218} on the side of the hill over against the bold steep of which I
have spoken, had been the residence of the famous traveller Bruce, who, all his travels ended,
had arranged the history of them in that solitude—as deep as any Abyssinian one—among the mountains
of his native country, where he passed several years.  Whether he died there or not we did
not learn; but the manner of his death was remarkable and affecting,—from a fall down-stairs
in his own house, after so many dangers through which fortitude and courage had never failed
to sustain him.  The house stands sweetly, surrounded by coppice-woods and green fields.  On
the other side, I believe, were no houses till we came near to the outlet, where a few low
huts looked very beautiful, with their dark brown roofs near a stream which hurried down the
mountain, and after its turbulent course travelled a short way over a level green, and was
lost in the lake.

Within a few miles of Callander we come into a grand region; the mountains to a considerable
height were covered with wood, enclosing us in a narrow passage; the stream on our right, generally
concealed by wood, made a loud roaring; at one place, in particular, it fell down the rocks
in a succession of cascades.  The scene is much celebrated in Scotland, and is called the Pass
of Leny.  It was nearly dark when we reached Callander.  We were wet and cold, and glad of
a good fire.  The inn was comfortable; we drank tea; and after tea the waiter presented us
with a pamphlet descriptive of the neighbourhood of Callander, which we brought away with us,
and I am very sorry I lost it.

FIFTH WEEK.

Sunday, September 11th.—Immediately after breakfast, the morning being fine, we set off with
cheerful spirits towards the Trossachs, intending to take up our lodging at the house of our
old friend the ferryman.  A boy accompanied us to convey the horse and car back to Callander
from the head of Loch Achray.  The country near Callander is very pleasing; but, as almost
everywhere else, imperfectly cultivated. We went up a broad vale, through which runs the stream
from Loch Ketterine, and came to Loch Vennachar, a larger lake than Loch Achray, the small
one which had given us such unexpected delight when we left the Pass of the Trossachs.  Loch
Vennachar is much larger, but greatly inferior in beauty to the image which we had conceived
of its neighbour, and so the reality proved to us when we came up to that little lake, and
saw it before us in its true shape in the cheerful sunshine.  The Trossachs, overtopped by
Benledi and other high mountains, enclose the lake at the head; and those houses which we had
seen before, with their corn fields sloping towards the water, stood very prettily under low
woods.  The fields did not appear so rich as when we had seen them through the veil of mist;
but yet, as in framing our expectations we had allowed for a much greater difference, so we
were even a second time surprised with pleasure at the same spot.

Went as far as these houses of which I have spoken in the car, and then walked on, intending
to pursue the road up the side of Loch Ketterine along which Coleridge had come; but we had
resolved to spend some hours in the neighbourhood of the Trossachs, and accordingly coasted
the head of Loch Achray, and pursued the brook between the two lakes as far as there was any
track.  Here we found, to our surprise—for we had expected nothing but heath and rocks like
the rest of the neighbourhood of the Trossachs—a secluded farm, a plot of verdant ground with
a single cottage and its company of out-houses.  We turned back, and went to the very point
from which we had first looked upon Loch Achray when we were here with Coleridge.  It was no
longer a visionary scene: the sun shone into every crevice of the hills, and the mountain-tops
were clear.  After some time we went into the pass from the Trossachs, and were delighted to
behold the forms of objects fully revealed, and even surpassing in loveliness and variety what
we had conceived.  The mountains, I think, appeared not so high; but on the whole we had not
the smallest disappointment; the heather was fading, though still beautiful.

Sate for half-an-hour in Lady Perth’s shed, and scrambled over the rocks and through the thickets
at the head of the lake.  I went till I could make my way no further, and left William to go
to the top of the hill, whence he had a distinct view, as on a map, of the intricacies of the
lake and the course of the river.  Returned to the huts, and, after having taken a second dinner
of the food we had brought from Callander, set our faces towards the head of Loch Ketterine.
I can add nothing to my former description of the Trossachs, except that we departed with our
old delightful remembrances endeared, and many new ones.  The path or road—for it was neither
the one nor the other, but something between both—is the pleasantest I have ever travelled
in my life for the same length of way,—now with marks of sledges or wheels, or none at all,
bare or green, as it might happen; now a little descent, now a level; sometimes a shady lane,
at others an open track through green pastures; then again it would lead us into thick coppice-woods,
which often entirely shut out the lake, and again admitted it by glimpses.  We have never had
a more delightful walk than this evening.  Ben Lomond and the three pointed-topped mountains
of Loch Lomond, which we had seen from the Garrison, were very majestic under the clear sky,
the lake perfectly calm, the air sweet and mild.  I felt that it was much more interesting
to visit a place where we have been before than it can possibly be the first time, except under
peculiar circumstances.  The sun had been set for some time, when, being within a quarter of
a mile of the ferryman’s hut, our path having led us close to the shore of the calm lake, we
met two neatly dressed women, without hats, who had probably been taking their Sunday evening’s
walk.  One of them said to us in a friendly, soft tone of voice, ‘What! you are stepping westward?’
I cannot describe how affecting this simple expression was in that remote place, with the western
sky in front, yet glowing with the departed sun.  William wrote the following poem long after,
in remembrance of his feelings and mine:—

   ‘What! you are stepping westward?’  Yea,
   ’Twould be a wildish destiny
   If we, who thus together roam
   In a strange land, and far from home,
   Were in this place the guests of chance:
   Yet who would stop, or fear to advance,
   Though home or shelter he had none,
   With such a sky to lead him on?

   The dewy ground was dark and cold,
   Behind all gloomy to behold,
   And stepping westward seem’d to be
   A kind of heavenly destiny;
   I liked the greeting, ’twas a sound
   Of something without place or bound;
   And seem’d to give me spiritual right
   To travel through that region bright.

   The voice was soft; and she who spake
   Was walking by her native Lake;
   The salutation was to me
   The very sound of courtesy;
   Its power was felt, and while my eye
   Was fix’d upon the glowing sky,
   The echo of the voice enwrought
   A human sweetness with the thought
   Of travelling through the world that lay
   Before me in my endless way.

We went up to the door of our boatman’s hut as to a home, and scarcely less confident of a
cordial welcome than if we had been approaching our own cottage at Grasmere.  It had been a
very pleasing thought, while we were walking by the side of the beautiful lake, that, few hours
as we had been there, there was a home for us in one of its quiet dwellings. Accordingly, so
we found it; the good woman, who had been at a preaching by the lake-side, was in her holiday
dress at the door, and seemed to be rejoiced at the sight of us.  She led us into the hut in
haste to supply our wants; we took once more a refreshing meal by her fireside, and, though
not so merry as the last time, we were not less happy, bating our regrets that Coleridge was
not in his old place.  I slept in the same bed as before, and listened to the household stream,
which now only made a very low murmuring.

                                * * * * *

Monday, September 12th.—Rejoiced in the morning to see the sun shining upon the hills when
I first looked out through the open window-place at my bed’s head.  We rose early, and after
breakfast, our old companion, who was to be our guide for the day, rowed us over the water
to the same point where Coleridge and I had sate down and eaten our dinner, while William had
gone to survey the unknown coast.  We intended to cross Loch Lomond, follow the lake to Glenfalloch,
above the head of it, and then come over the mountains to Glengyle, and so down the glen, and
passing Mr. Macfarlane’s house, back again to the ferry-house, where we should sleep.  So,
a third time we went through the mountain hollow, now familiar ground.  The inhabitants had
not yet got in all their hay, and were at work in the fields; our guide often stopped to talk
with them, and no doubt was called upon to answer many inquiries respecting us two strangers.

At the ferry-house of Inversneyde we had not the happy sight of the Highland girl and her companion,
but the good woman received us cordially, gave me milk, and talked of Coleridge, who, the morning
after we parted from him, had been at her house to fetch his watch, which he had forgotten
two days before.  He has since told me that he questioned her respecting the miserable condition
of her hut, which, as you may remember, admitted the rain at the door, and retained it in the
hollows of the mud floor: he told her how easy it would be to remove these inconveniences,
and to contrive something, at least, to prevent the wind from entering at the window-places,
if not a glass window for light and warmth by day.  She replied that this was very true, but
if they made any improvements the laird would conclude that they were growing rich, and would
raise their rent.

The ferryman happened to be just ready at the moment to go over the lake with a poor man, his
wife and child.  The little girl, about three years old, cried all the way, terrified by the
water.  When we parted from this family, they going down the lake, and we up it, I could not
but think of the difference in our condition to that poor woman, who, with her husband, had
been driven from her home by want of work, and was now going a long journey to seek it elsewhere:
every step was painful toil, for she had either her child to bear or a heavy burthen.  I walked
as she did, but pleasure was my object, and if toil came along with it, even that was pleasure,—pleasure,
at least, it would be in the remembrance.

We were, I believe, nine miles from Glenfalloch when we left the boat. To us, with minds at
ease, the walk was delightful; it could not be otherwise, for we passed by a continual succession
of rocks, woods, and mountains; but the houses were few, and the ground cultivated only in
small portions near the water, consequently there was not that sort of variety which leaves
distinct separate remembrances, but one impression of solitude and greatness.  While the Highlander
and I were plodding on together side by side, interspersing long silences with now and then
a question or a remark, looking down to the lake he espied two small rocky islands, and pointing
to them, said to me, ‘It will be gay {225a} and dangerous sailing there in stormy weather when
the water is high.’  In giving my assent I could not help smiling, but I afterwards found that
a like combination of words is not uncommon in Scotland, for, at Edinburgh, William being afraid
of rain, asked the ostler what he thought, who, looking up to the sky, pronounced it to be
‘gay and dull,’ and therefore rain might be expected.  The most remarkable object we saw was
a huge single stone, I believe three or four times the size of Bowder Stone. {225b}  The top
of it, which on one side was sloping like the roof of a house, was covered with heather.  William
climbed up the rock, which would have been no easy task but to a mountaineer, and we constructed
a rope of pocket-handkerchiefs, garters, plaids, coats, etc., and measured its height.  It
was so many times the length of William’s walking-stick, but, unfortunately, having lost the
stick, we have lost the measure.  The ferryman told us that a preaching was held there once
in three months by a certain minister—I think of Arrochar—who engages, as a part of his office,
to perform the service.  The interesting feelings we had connected with the Highland Sabbath
and Highland worship returned here with double force.  The rock, though on one side a high
perpendicular wall, in no place overhung so as to form a shelter, in no place could it be more
than a screen from the elements.  Why then had it been selected for such a purpose?  Was it
merely from being a central situation and a conspicuous object?  Or did there belong to it
some inheritance of superstition from old times?  It is impossible to look at the stone without
asking, How came it hither?  Had then that obscurity and unaccountableness, that mystery of
power which is about it, any influence over the first persons who resorted hither for worship?
Or have they now on those who continue to frequent it?  The lake is in front of the perpendicular
wall, and behind, at some distance, and totally detached from it, is the continuation of the
ridge of mountains which forms the vale of Loch Lomond—a magnificent temple, of which this
spot is a noble Sanctum Sanctorum.

We arrived at Glenfalloch at about one or two o’clock.  It is no village; there being only
scattered huts in the glen, which may be four miles long, according to my remembrance: the
middle of it is very green, and level, and tufted with trees.  Higher up, where the glen parts
into two very narrow ones, is the house of the laird; I daresay a pretty place. The view from
the door of the public-house is exceedingly beautiful; the river flows smoothly into the lake,
and the fields were at that time as green as possible.  Looking backward, Ben Lomond very majestically
shuts in the view.  The top of the mountain, as seen here, being of a pyramidal form, it is
much grander than with the broken outline, and stage above stage, as seen from the neighbourhood
of Luss.  We found nobody at home at the inn, but the ferryman shouted, wishing to have a glass
of whisky, and a young woman came from the hay-field, dressed in a white bed-gown, without
hat or cap.  There was no whisky in the house, so he begged a little whey to drink with the
fragments of our cold meat brought from Callander.  After a short rest in a cool parlour we
set forward again, having to cross the river and climb up a steep mountain on the opposite
side of the valley.  I observed that the people were busy bringing in the hay before it was
dry into a sort of ‘fauld’ or yard, where they intended to leave it, ready to be gathered into
the house with the first threatening of rain, and if not completely dry brought out again.
Our guide bore me in his arms over the stream, and we soon came to the foot of the mountain.
The most easy rising, for a short way at first, was near a naked rivulet which made a fine
cascade in one place.  Afterwards, the ascent was very laborious, being frequently almost perpendicular.

It is one of those moments which I shall not easily forget, when at that point from which a
step or two would have carried us out of sight of the green fields of Glenfalloch, being at
a great height on the mountain, we sate down, and heard, as if from the heart of the earth,
the sound of torrents ascending out of the long hollow glen.  To the eye all was motionless,
a perfect stillness.  The noise of waters did not appear to come this way or that, from any
particular quarter: it was everywhere, almost, one might say, as if ‘exhaled’ through the whole
surface of the green earth.  Glenfalloch, Coleridge has since told me, signifies the Hidden
Vale; but William says, if we were to name it from our recollections of that time, we should
call it the Vale of Awful Sound. We continued to climb higher and higher; but the hill was
no longer steep, and afterwards we pursued our way along the top of it with many small ups
and downs.  The walk was very laborious after the climbing was over, being often exceedingly
stony, or through swampy moss, rushes, or rough heather.  As we proceeded, continuing our way
at the top of the mountain, encircled by higher mountains at a great distance, we were passing,
without notice, a heap of scattered stones round which was a belt of green grass—green, and
as it seemed rich, where all else was either poor heather and coarse grass, or unprofitable
rushes and spongy moss.  The Highlander made a pause, saying, ‘This place is much changed since
I was here twenty years ago.’  He told us that the heap of stones had been a hut where a family
was then living, who had their winter habitation in the valley, and brought their goats thither
in the summer to feed on the mountains, and that they were used to gather them together at
night and morning to be milked close to the door, which was the reason why the grass was yet
so green near the stones.  It was affecting in that solitude to meet with this memorial of
manners passed away; we looked about for some other traces of humanity, but nothing else could
we find in that place.  We ourselves afterwards espied another of those ruins, much more extensive—the
remains, as the man told us, of several dwellings.  We were astonished at the sagacity with
which our Highlander discovered the track, where often no track was visible to us, and scarcely
even when he pointed it out.  It reminded us of what we read of the Hottentots and other savages.
He went on as confidently as if it had been a turnpike road—the more surprising, as when he
was there before it must have been a plain track, for he told us that fishermen from Arrochar
carried herrings regularly over the mountains by that way to Loch Ketterine when the glens
were much more populous than now.

Descended into Glengyle, above Loch Ketterine, and passed through Mr. Macfarlane’s grounds,
that is, through the whole of the glen, where there was now no house left but his.  We stopped
at his door to inquire after the family, though with little hope of finding them at home, having
seen a large company at work in a hay field, whom we conjectured to be his whole household—as
it proved, except a servant-maid, who answered our inquiries.  We had sent the ferryman forward
from the head of the glen to bring the boat round from the place where he left it to the other
side of the lake.  Passed the same farm-house we had such good reason to remember, and went
up to the burying-ground that stood so sweetly near the water-side.  The ferryman had told
us that Rob Roy’s grave was there, {229} so we could not pass on without going up to the spot.
There were several tomb-stones, but the inscriptions were either worn-out or unintelligible
to us, and the place choked up with nettles and brambles. You will remember the description
I have given of the spot.  I have nothing here to add, except the following poem which it suggested
to William:—

   A famous Man is Robin Hood,
   The English Ballad-singer’s joy,
   And Scotland boasts of one as good,
      She has her own Rob Roy!

   Then clear the weeds from off his grave,
   And let us chaunt a passing stave
      In honour of that Outlaw brave.

   Heaven gave Rob Roy a daring heart
   And wondrous length and strength of arm,
   Nor craved he more to quell his foes,
      Or keep his friends from harm.

   Yet Robin was as wise as brave,
   As wise in thought as bold in deed,
   For in the principles of things
      He sought his moral creed.

   Said generous Rob, ‘What need of books?
   Burn all the statutes and their shelves:
   They stir us up against our kind,
      And worse, against ourselves.

   ‘We have a passion; make a law,
   Too false to guide us or control:
   And for the law itself we fight
      In bitterness of soul.

   ‘And puzzled, blinded thus, we lose
   Distinctions that are plain and few:
   These find I graven on my heart:
      That tells me what to do.

   ‘The Creatures see of flood and field,
   And those that travel on the wind!
   With them no strife can last; they live
      In peace, and peace of mind.

   ‘For why?  Because the good old rule
   Suffices them, the simple plan
   That they should take who have the power,
      And they should keep who can.

   ‘A lesson which is quickly learn’d,
   A signal this which all can see!
   Thus nothing here provokes the strong
      To tyrannous cruelty.

   ‘And freakishness of mind is check’d;
   He tamed who foolishly aspires,
   While to the measure of their might
      All fashion their desires.

   ‘All kinds and creatures stand and fall
   By strength of prowess or of wit,
   ’Tis God’s appointment who must sway,
      And who is to submit.

   ‘Since then,’ said Robin, ‘right is plain,
   And longest life is but a day;
   To have my ends, maintain my rights,
      I’ll take the shortest way.’

   And thus among these rocks he lived
   Through summer’s heat and winter’s snow;
   The Eagle, he was lord above,
      And Rob was lord below.

   So was it—would at least have been
   But through untowardness of fate;
   For polity was then too strong:
      He came an age too late.

   Or shall we say an age too soon?
   For were the bold man living now,
   How might he flourish in his pride
      With buds on every bough?

   Then Rents and Land-marks, Rights of chase,
   Sheriffs and Factors, Lairds and Thanes,
   Would all have seem’d but paltry things
      Not worth a moment’s pains.

   Rob Roy had never linger’d here,
   To these few meagre vales confined,
   But thought how wide the world, the times
      How fairly to his mind.

   And to his Sword he would have said,
   ‘Do thou my sovereign will enact
   From land to land through half the earth;
      Judge thou of law and fact.

   ‘’Tis fit that we should do our part;
   Becoming that mankind should learn
   That we are not to be surpass’d
      In fatherly concern.
   France would have had her present Boast,
      And we our brave Rob Roy.

   Oh! say not so, compare them not;
   I would not wrong thee, Champion brave!
   Would wrong thee nowhere; least of all
      Here, standing by thy Grave.

   For thou, although with some wild thoughts,
   Wild Chieftain of a savage Clan,
   Hadst this to boast of—thou didst love
      The Liberty of Man.

   And had it been thy lot to live
   With us who now behold the light,
   Thou wouldst have nobly stirr’d thyself,
      And battled for the right.

   For Robin was the poor man’s stay;
   The poor man’s heart, the poor man’s hand,
   And all the oppress’d who wanted strength
      Had Robin’s to command.

   Bear witness many a pensive sigh
   Of thoughtful Herdsman when he strays
   Alone upon Loch Veol’s heights,
      And by Loch Lomond’s Braes.

   And far and near, through vale and hill,
   Are faces that attest the same;
   Kindling with instantaneous joy
      At sound of Rob Roy’s name.

Soon after we saw our boat coming over the calm water.  It was late in the evening, and I was
stiff and weary, as well I might, after such a long and toilsome walk, so it was no poor gratification
to sit down and be conscious of advancing in our journey without further labour.  The stars
were beginning to appear, but the brightness of the west was not yet gone;—the lake perfectly
still, and when we first went into the boat we rowed almost close to the shore under steep
crags hung with birches: it was like a new-discovered country of which we had not dreamed,
for in walking down the lake, owing to the road in that part being carried at a considerable
height on the hill-side, the rocks and the indentings of the shore had been hidden from us.
At this time, those rocks and their images in the calm water composed one mass, the surfaces
of both equally distinct, except where the water trembled with the motion of our boat. Having
rowed a while under the bold steeps, we launched out further when the shores were no longer
abrupt.  We hardly spoke to each other as we moved along receding from the west, which diffused
a solemn animation over the lake.  The sky was cloudless; and everything seemed at rest except
our solitary boat, and the mountain-streams,—seldom heard, and but faintly.  I think I have
rarely experienced a more elevated pleasure than during our short voyage of this night.  The
good woman had long been looking out for us, and had prepared everything for our refreshment;
and as soon as we had finished supper, or rather tea, we went to bed. William, I doubt not,
rested well, and, for my part, I slept as soundly on my chaff bed as ever I have done in childhood
after the long day’s playing of a summer’s holiday.

                                * * * * *

Tuesday, 13th September.—Again a fine morning.  I strolled into the green field in which the
house stands while the woman was preparing breakfast, and at my return found one of her neighbours
sitting by the fire, a feeble paralytic old woman.  After having inquired concerning our journey
the day before, she said, ‘I have travelled far in my time,’ and told me she had married an
English soldier who had been stationed at the Garrison; they had had many children, who were
all dead or in foreign countries; and she had returned to her native place, where now she had
lived several years, and was more comfortable than she could ever have expected to be, being
very kindly dealt with by all her neighbours. Pointing to the ferryman and his wife, she said
they were accustomed to give her a day of their labour in digging peats, in common with others,
and in that manner she was provided with fuel, and, by like voluntary contributions, with other
necessaries.  While this infirm old woman was relating her story in a tremulous voice, I could
not but think of the changes of things, and the days of her youth, when the shrill fife, sounding
from the walls of the Garrison, made a merry noise through the echoing hills.  I asked myself,
if she were to be carried again to the deserted spot after her course of life, no doubt a troublesome
one, would the silence appear to her the silence of desolation or of peace?

After breakfast we took a final leave of our hostess, and, attended by her husband, again set
forward on foot.  My limbs were a little stiff, but the morning being uncommonly fine I did
not fear to aim at the accomplishment of a plan we had laid of returning to Callander by a
considerable circuit.  We were to go over the mountains from Loch Ketterine, a little below
the ferry-house on the same side of the water, descending to Loch Voil, a lake from which issues
the stream that flows through Strath Eyer into Loch Lubnaig.  Our road, as is generally the
case in passing from one vale into another, was through a settling between the hills, not far
from a small stream.  We had to climb considerably, the mountain being much higher than it
appears to be, owing to its retreating in what looks like a gradual slope from the lake, though
we found it steep enough in the climbing.  Our guide had been born near Loch Voil, and he told
us that at the head of the lake, if we would look about for it, we should see the burying-place
of a part of his family, the MacGregors, a clan who had long possessed that district, a circumstance
which he related with no unworthy pride of ancestry.  We shook hands with him at parting, not
without a hope of again entering his hut in company with others whom we loved.

Continued to walk for some time along the top of the hill, having the high mountains of Loch
Voil before us, and Ben Lomond and the steeps of Loch Ketterine behind.  Came to several deserted
mountain huts or shiels, and rested for some time beside one of them, upon a hillock of its
green plot of monumental herbage.  William here conceived the notion of writing an ode upon
the affecting subject of those relics of human society found in that grand and solitary region.
The spot of ground where we sate was even beautiful, the grass being uncommonly verdant, and
of a remarkably soft and silky texture.

After this we rested no more till we came to the foot of the mountain, where there was a cottage,
at the door of which a woman invited me to drink some whey: this I did, while William went
to inquire respecting the road at a new stone house a few steps further.  He was told to cross
the brook, and proceed to the other side of the vale, and that no further directions were necessary,
for we should find ourselves at the head of the lake, and on a plain road which would lead
us downward.  We waded the river and crossed the vale, perhaps half a mile or more.  The mountains
all round are very high; the vale pastoral and unenclosed, not many dwellings, and but few
trees; the mountains in general smooth near the bottom.  They are in large unbroken masses,
combining with the vale to give an impression of bold simplicity.

Near the head of the lake, at some distance from us, we discovered the burial-place of the
MacGregors, and did not view it without some interest, with its ornamental balls on the four
corners of the wall, which, I daresay, have been often looked at with elevation of heart by
our honest friend of Loch Ketterine.  The lake is divided right across by a narrow slip of
flat land, making a small lake at the head of the large one.  The whole may be about five miles
long.

As we descended, the scene became more fertile, our way being pleasantly varied—through coppices
or open fields, and passing farm-houses, though always with an intermixture of uncultivated
ground.  It was harvest-time, and the fields were quietly—might I be allowed to say pensively?—enlivened
by small companies of reapers.  It is not uncommon in the more lonely parts of the Highlands
to see a single person so employed.

Towards the foot of the lake, on the opposite side, which was more barren than that on which
we travelled, was a bare road up a steep hill, which leads to Glen Finlas, formerly a royal
forest.  It is a wild and rocky glen, as we had been told by a person who directed our notice
to its outlet at Loch Achray.  The stream which passes through it falls into that lake near
the head.  At the end of Loch Voil the vale is wide and populous—large pastures with many cattle,
large tracts of corn.  We walked downwards a little way, and then crossed over to the same
road along which we had travelled from Loch Erne to Callander, being once again at the entrance
of Strath Eyer.  It might be about four or five o’clock in the afternoon; we were ten miles
from Callander, exceedingly tired, and wished heartily for the poor horse and car.  Walked
up Strath Eyer, and saw in clear air and sunshine what had been concealed from us when we travelled
before in the mist and rain.  We found it less woody and rich than it had appeared to be, but,
with all deductions, a very sweet valley.

Not far from Loch Lubnaig, though not in view of it, is a long village, with two or three public-houses,
and being in despair of reaching Callander that night without over-fatigue we resolved to stop
at the most respectable-looking house, and, should it not prove wretched indeed, to lodge there
if there were beds for us: at any rate it was necessary to take some refreshment.  The woman
of the house spoke with gentleness and civility, and had a good countenance, which reconciled
me to stay, though I had been averse to the scheme, dreading the dirt usual in Scotch public-houses
by the way-side.  She said she had beds for us, and clean sheets, and we desired her to prepare
them immediately.  It was a two-storied house, light built, though in other respects no better
than the huts, and—as all the slated cottages are—much more uncomfortable in appearance, except
that there was a chimney in the kitchen.  At such places it is fit that travellers should make
up their minds to wait at least an hour longer than the time necessary to prepare whatever
meal they may have ordered, which we, I may truly say, did with most temperate philosophy.
I went to talk with the mistress, who was making barley cakes, which she wrought out with her
hands as thin as the oaten bread we make in Cumberland.  I asked her why she did not use a
rolling-pin, and if it would not be much more convenient, to which she returned me no distinct
answer, and seemed to give little attention to the question: she did not know, or that was
what they were used to, or something of the sort.  It was a tedious process, and I thought
could scarcely have been managed if the cakes had been as large as ours; but they are considerably
smaller, which is a great loss of time in the baking.

This woman, whose common language was the Gaelic, talked with me a very good English, asking
many questions, yet without the least appearance of an obtrusive or impertinent curiosity;
and indeed I must say that I never, in those women with whom I conversed, observed anything
on which I could put such a construction.  They seemed to have a faith ready for all; and as
a child when you are telling him stories, asks for ‘more, more,’ so they appeared to delight
in being amused without effort of their own minds.  Among other questions she asked me the
old one over again, if I was married; and when I told her that I was not, she appeared surprised,
and, as if recollecting herself, said to me, with a pious seriousness and perfect simplicity,
‘To be sure, there is a great promise for virgins in Heaven;’ and then she began to tell how
long she had been married, that she had had a large family and much sickness and sorrow, having
lost several of her children.  We had clean sheets and decent beds.

                                * * * * *

Wednesday, September 14th.—Rose early, and departed before breakfast.  The morning was dry,
but cold.  Travelled as before, along the shores of Loch Lubnaig, and along the pass of the
roaring stream of Leny, and reached Callander at a little past eight o’clock.  After breakfast
set off towards Stirling, intending to sleep there; the distance eighteen miles.  We were now
entering upon a populous and more cultivated country, having left the mountains behind, therefore
I shall have little to tell; for what is most interesting in such a country is not to be seen
in passing through it as we did.  Half way between Callander and Stirling is the village of
Doune, and a little further on we crossed a bridge over a pleasant river, the Teith.  Above
the river stands a ruined castle of considerable size, upon a woody bank.  We wished to have
had time to go up to the ruin.  Long before we reached the town of Stirling, saw the Castle,
single, on its stately and commanding eminence.  The rock or hill rises from a level plain;
the print in Stoddart’s book does indeed give a good notion of its form.  The surrounding plain
appears to be of a rich soil, well cultivated.  The crops of ripe corn were abundant.  We found
the town quite full; not a vacant room in the inn, it being the time of the assizes: there
was no lodging for us, and hardly even the possibility of getting anything to eat in a bye-nook
of the house.  Walked up to the Castle.  The prospect from it is very extensive, and must be
exceedingly grand on a fine evening or morning, with the light of the setting or rising sun
on the distant mountains, but we saw it at an unfavourable time of day, the mid-afternoon,
and were not favoured by light and shade.  The Forth makes most intricate and curious turnings,
so that it is difficult to trace them, even when you are overlooking the whole.  It flows through
a perfect level, and in one place cuts its way in the form of a large figure of eight.  Stirling
is the largest town we had seen in Scotland, except Glasgow.  It is an old irregular place;
the streets towards the Castle on one side very steep.  On the other, the hill or rock rises
from the fields.  The architecture of a part of the Castle is very fine, and the whole building
in good repair: some parts indeed, are modern.  At Stirling we bought Burns’s Poems in one
volume, for two shillings.  Went on to Falkirk, ten or eleven miles.  I do not recollect anything
remarkable after we were out of sight of Stirling Castle, except the Carron Ironworks, seen
at a distance;—the sky above them was red with a fiery light.  In passing through a turnpike
gate we were greeted by a Highland drover, who, with many others, was coming from a fair at
Falkirk, the road being covered all along with horsemen and cattle.  He spoke as if we had
been well known to him, asking us how we had fared on our journey.  We were at a loss to conceive
why he should interest himself about us, till he said he had passed us on the Black Mountain,
near King’s House.  It was pleasant to observe the effect of solitary places in making men
friends, and to see so much kindness, which had been produced in such a chance encounter, retained
in a crowd.  No beds in the inns at Falkirk—every room taken up by the people come to the fair.
Lodged in a private house, a neat clean place—kind treatment from the old man and his daughter.

                                * * * * *

Thursday, September 15th.—Breakfasted at Linlithgow, a small town. The house is yet shown from
which the Regent Murray was shot.  The remains of a royal palace, where Queen Mary was born,
are of considerable extent; the banks of gardens and fish-ponds may yet be distinctly traced,
though the whole surface is transformed into smooth pasturage where cattle graze.  The castle
stands upon a gentle eminence, the prospect not particularly pleasing, though not otherwise;
it is bare and wide.  The shell of a small ancient church is standing, into which are crammed
modern pews, galleries, and pulpit—very ugly, and discordant with the exterior.  Nothing very
interesting till we came to Edinburgh.  Dined by the way at a small town or village upon a
hill, the back part of the houses on one side overlooking an extensive prospect over flat corn
fields.  I mention this for the sake of a pleasant hour we passed sitting on the bank, where
we read some of Burns’s poems in the volume which we had bought at Stirling.

Arrived at Edinburgh a little before sunset.  As we approached, the Castle rock resembled that
of Stirling—in the same manner appearing to rise from a plain of cultivated ground, the Firth
of Forth being on the other side, and not visible.  Drove to the White Hart in the Grass-market,
an inn which had been mentioned to us, and which we conjectured would better suit us than one
in a more fashionable part of the town.  It was not noisy, and tolerably cheap.  Drank tea,
and walked up to the Castle, which luckily was very near.  Much of the daylight was gone, so
that except it had been a clear evening, which it was not, we could not have seen the distant
prospect.

                                * * * * *

Friday, September 6th.—The sky the evening before, as you may remember the ostler told us,
had been ‘gay and dull,’ and this morning it was downright dismal: very dark, and promising
nothing but a wet day, and before breakfast was over the rain began, though not heavily.  We
set out upon our walk, and went through many streets to Holyrood House, and thence to the hill
called Arthur’s Seat, a high hill, very rocky at the top, and below covered with smooth turf,
on which sheep were feeding.  We climbed up till we came to St. Anthony’s Well and Chapel,
as it is called, but it is more like a hermitage than a chapel,—a small ruin, which from its
situation is exceedingly interesting, though in itself not remarkable.  We sate down on a stone
not far from the chapel, overlooking a pastoral hollow as wild and solitary as any in the heart
of the Highland mountains: there, instead of the roaring of torrents, we listened to the noises
of the city, which were blended in one loud indistinct buzz,—a regular sound in the air, which
in certain moods of feeling, and at certain times, might have a more tranquillizing effect
upon the mind than those which we are accustomed to hear in such places. The Castle rock looked
exceedingly large through the misty air: a cloud of black smoke overhung the city, which combined
with the rain and mist to conceal the shapes of the houses,—an obscurity which added much to
the grandeur of the sound that proceeded from it.  It was impossible to think of anything that
was little or mean, the goings-on of trade, the strife of men, or every-day city business:—the
impression was one, and it was visionary; like the conceptions of our childhood of Bagdad or
Balsora when we have been reading the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments.  Though the rain was
very heavy we remained upon the hill for some time, then returned by the same road by which
we had come, through green flat fields, formerly the pleasure-grounds of Holyrood House, on
the edge of which stands the old roofless chapel, of venerable architecture.  It is a pity
that it should be suffered to fall down, for the walls appear to be yet entire.  Very near
to the chapel is Holyrood House, which we could not but lament has nothing ancient in its appearance,
being sash-windowed and not an irregular pile.  It is very like a building for some national
establishment,—a hospital for soldiers or sailors.  You have a description of it in Stoddart’s
Tour, therefore I need not tell you what we saw there.

When we found ourselves once again in the streets of the city, we lamented over the heavy rain,
and indeed before leaving the hill, much as we were indebted to the accident of the rain for
the peculiar grandeur and affecting wildness of those objects we saw, we could not but regret
that the Firth of Forth was entirely hidden from us, and all distant objects, and we strained
our eyes till they ached, vainly trying to pierce through the thick mist.  We walked industriously
through the streets, street after street, and, in spite of wet and dirt, were exceedingly delighted.
The old town, with its irregular houses, stage above stage, seen as we saw it, in the obscurity
of a rainy day, hardly resembles the work of men, it is more like a piling up of rocks, and
I cannot attempt to describe what we saw so imperfectly, but must say that, high as my expectations
had been raised, the city of Edinburgh far surpassed all expectation.  Gladly would we have
stayed another day, but could not afford more time, and our notions of the weather of Scotland
were so dismal, notwithstanding we ourselves had been so much favoured, that we had no hope
of its mending.  So at about six o’clock in the evening we departed, intending to sleep at
an inn in the village of Roslin, about five miles from Edinburgh.  The rain continued till
we were almost at Roslin; but then it was quite dark, so we did not see the Castle that night.

                                * * * * *

Saturday, September 17th.—The morning very fine.  We rose early and walked through the glen
of Roslin, past Hawthornden, and considerably further, to the house of Mr. Walter Scott at
Lasswade.  Roslin Castle stands upon a woody bank above a stream, the North Esk, too large,
I think, to be called a brook, yet an inconsiderable river.  We looked down upon the ruin from
higher ground.  Near it stands the Chapel, a most elegant building, a ruin, though the walls
and roof are entire.  I never passed through a more delicious dell than the glen of Roslin,
though the water of the stream is dingy and muddy.  The banks are rocky on each side, and hung
with pine wood.  About a mile from the Castle, on the contrary side of the water, upon the
edge of a very steep bank, stands Hawthornden, the house of Drummond the poet, whither Ben
Jonson came on foot from London to visit his friend.  We did hear to whom the house at present
belongs, and some other particulars, but I have a very indistinct recollection of what was
told us, except that many old trees had been lately cut down.  After Hawthornden the glen widens,
ceases to be rocky, and spreads out into a rich vale, scattered over with gentlemen’s seats.

Arrived at Lasswade before Mr. and Mrs. Scott had risen, and waited some time in a large sitting-room.
Breakfasted with them, and stayed till two o’clock, and Mr. Scott accompanied us back almost
to Roslin, having given us directions respecting our future journey, and promised to meet us
at Melrose two days after. {246}

We ordered dinner on our return to the inn, and went to view the inside of the Chapel of Roslin,
which is kept locked up, and so preserved from the injuries it might otherwise receive from
idle boys; but as nothing is done to keep it together, it must in the end fall.  The architecture
within is exquisitely beautiful.  The stone both of the roof and walls is sculptured with leaves
and flowers, so delicately wrought that I could have admired them for hours, and the whole
of their groundwork is stained by time with the softest colours.  Some of those leaves and
flowers were tinged perfectly green, and at one part the effect was most exquisite: three or
four leaves of a small fern, resembling that which we call adder’s tongue, grew round a cluster
of them at the top of a pillar, and the natural product and the artificial were so intermingled
that at first it was not easy to distinguish the living plant from the other, they being of
an equally determined green, though the fern was of a deeper shade.

We set forward again after dinner.  The afternoon was pleasant. Travelled through large tracts
of ripe corn, interspersed with larger tracts of moorland—the houses at a considerable distance
from each other, no longer thatched huts, but farm-houses resembling those of the farming counties
in England, having many corn-stacks close to them.  Dark when we reached Peebles; found a comfortable
old-fashioned public-house, had a neat parlour, and drank tea.

SIXTH WEEK.

Sunday, September 8th.—The town of Peebles is on the banks of the Tweed.  After breakfast walked
up the river to Neidpath Castle, about a mile and a half from the town.  The castle stands
upon a green hill, overlooking the Tweed, a strong square-towered edifice, neglected and desolate,
though not in ruin, the garden overgrown with grass, and the high walls that fenced it broken
down.  The Tweed winds between green steeps, upon which, and close to the river side, large
flocks of sheep pasturing; higher still are the grey mountains; but I need not describe the
scene, for William has done it better than I could do in a sonnet which he wrote the same day;
the five last lines, at least, of his poem will impart to you more of the feeling of the place
than it would be possible for me to do:—

   Degenerate Douglass! thou unworthy Lord
   Whom mere despite of heart could so far please,
   And love of havoc (for with such disease
   Fame taxes him) that he could send forth word
   To level with the dust a noble horde,
   A brotherhood of venerable trees,
   Leaving an ancient Dome and Towers like these
   Beggar’d and outraged!

I was spared any regret for the fallen woods when we were there, not then knowing the history
of them.  The soft low mountains, the castle, and the decayed pleasure-grounds, the scattered
trees which have been left in different parts, and the road carried in a very beautiful line
along the side of the hill, with the Tweed murmuring through the unfenced green pastures spotted
with sheep, together composed an harmonious scene, and I wished for nothing that was not there.
When we were with Mr. Scott he spoke of cheerful days he had spent in that castle not many
years ago, when it was inhabited by Professor Ferguson and his family, whom the Duke of Queensberry,
its churlish owner, forced to quit it.  We discovered a very fine echo within a few yards of
the building.

The town of Peebles looks very pretty from the road in returning: it is an old town, built
of grey stone, the same as the castle.  Well-dressed people were going to church.  Sent the
car before, and walked ourselves, and while going along the main street William was called
aside in a mysterious manner by a person who gravely examined him—whether he was an Irishman
or a foreigner, or what he was; I suppose our car was the occasion of suspicion at a time when
every one was talking of the threatened invasion.  We had a day’s journey before us along the
banks of the Tweed, a name which has been sweet to my ears almost as far back as I can remember
anything.  After the first mile or two our road was seldom far from the river, which flowed
in gentleness, though perhaps never silent; the hills on either side high and sometimes stony,
but excellent pasturage for sheep.  In some parts the vale was wholly of this pastoral character,
in others we saw extensive tracts of corn ground, even spreading along whole hill-sides, and
without visible fences, which is dreary in a flat country; but there is no dreariness on the
banks of the Tweed,—the hills, whether smooth or stony, uncultivated or covered with ripe corn,
had the same pensive softness.  Near the corn tracts were large farm-houses, with many corn-stacks;
the stacks and house and out-houses together, I recollect, in one or two places upon the hills,
at a little distance, seemed almost as large as a small village or hamlet. It was a clear autumnal
day, without wind, and, being Sunday, the business of the harvest was suspended, and all that
we saw, and felt, and heard, combined to excite one sensation of pensive and still pleasure.

Passed by several old halls yet inhabited, and others in ruin; but I have hardly a sufficiently
distinct recollection of any of them to be able to describe them, and I now at this distance
of time regret that I did not take notes.  In one very sweet part of the vale a gate crossed
the road, which was opened by an old woman who lived in a cottage close to it; I said to her,
‘You live in a very pretty place!’  ‘Yes,’ she replied, ‘the water of Tweed is a bonny water.’
The lines of the hills are flowing and beautiful, the reaches of the vale long; in some places
appear the remains of a forest, in others you will see as lovely a combination of forms as
any traveller who goes in search of the picturesque need desire, and yet perhaps without a
single tree; or at least if trees there are, they shall be very few, and he shall not care
whether they are there or not.

The road took us through one long village, but I do not recollect any other; yet I think we
never had a mile’s length before us without a house, though seldom several cottages together.
The loneliness of the scattered dwellings, the more stately edifices decaying or in ruin, or,
if inhabited, not in their pride and freshness, aided the general effect of the gently varying
scenes, which was that of tender pensiveness; no bursting torrents when we were there, but
the murmuring of the river was heard distinctly, often blended with the bleating of sheep.
In one place we saw a shepherd lying in the midst of a flock upon a sunny knoll, with his face
towards the sky,—happy picture of shepherd life.

The transitions of this vale were all gentle except one, a scene of which a gentleman’s house
was the centre, standing low in the vale, the hills above it covered with gloomy fir plantations,
and the appearance of the house itself, though it could scarcely be seen, was gloomy.  There
was an allegorical air—a person fond of Spenser will understand me—in this uncheerful spot,
single in such a country,

    ‘The house was hearsed about with a black wood.’

We have since heard that it was the residence of Lord Traquair, a Roman Catholic nobleman,
of a decayed family.

We left the Tweed when we were within about a mile and a half or two miles of Clovenford, where
we were to lodge.  Turned up the side of a hill, and went along sheep-grounds till we reached
the spot—a single stone house, without a tree near it or to be seen from it.  On our mentioning
Mr. Scott’s name the woman of the house showed us all possible civility, but her slowness was
really amusing.  I should suppose it is a house little frequented, for there is no appearance
of an inn.  Mr. Scott, who she told me was a very clever gentleman, ‘goes there in the fishing
season;’ but indeed Mr. Scott is respected everywhere: I believe that by favour of his name
one might be hospitably entertained throughout all the borders of Scotland.  We dined and drank
tea—did not walk out, for there was no temptation; a confined barren prospect from the window.

At Clovenford, being so near to the Yarrow, we could not but think of the possibility of going
thither, but came to the conclusion of reserving the pleasure for some future time, in consequence
of which, after our return, William wrote the poem which I shall here transcribe:—

   From Stirling Castle we had seen
   The mazy Forth unravell’d,
   Had trod the banks of Clyde and Tay,
   And with the Tweed had travell’d.
   And when we came to Clovenford,
   Then said my winsome Marrow,
   ‘Whate’er betide we’ll turn aside
   And see the Braes of Yarrow.’

   ‘Let Yarrow Folk frae Selkirk Town,
   Who have been buying, selling,
   Go back to Yarrow:—’tis their own,
   Each Maiden to her dwelling.
   On Yarrow’s banks let herons feed,
   Hares couch, and rabbits burrow,
   But we will downwards with the Tweed,
   Nor turn aside to Yarrow.

   ‘There’s Gala Water, Leader Haughs,
   Both lying right before us;
   And Dryburgh, where with chiming Tweed
   The lintwhites sing in chorus.
   There’s pleasant Teviot Dale, a land
   Made blithe with plough and harrow,
   Why throw away a needful day,
   To go in search of Yarrow?

   ‘What’s Yarrow but a river bare,
   That glides the dark hills under?
   There are a thousand such elsewhere,
   As worthy of your wonder.’
   Strange words they seem’d of slight and scorn,
   My true-love sigh’d for sorrow,
   And look’d me in the face to think
   I thus could speak of Yarrow.

   ‘Oh! green,’ said I, ‘are Yarrow’s Holms,
   And sweet is Yarrow flowing,
   Fair hangs the apple frae the rock,
   But we will leave it growing.
   O’er hilly path and open Strath
   We’ll wander Scotland thorough,
   But though so near we will not turn
   Into the Dale of Yarrow.

   ‘Let beeves and home-bred kine partake
   The sweets of Burnmill Meadow,
   The swan on still St. Mary’s Lake
   Float double, swan and shadow.
   We will not see them, will not go,
   To-day nor yet to-morrow;
   Enough if in our hearts we know
   There’s such a place as Yarrow.

   ‘Be Yarrow stream unseen, unknown,
   It must, or we shall rue it,
   We have a vision of our own,
   Ah! why should we undo it?
   The treasured dreams of times long past,
   We’ll keep them, “winsome Marrow,”
   For when we’re there, although ’tis fair,
   ’Twill be another Yarrow.  I wish
I could have given you a better idea of what we saw between Peebles and
this place.  I have most distinct recollections of the effect of the
whole day’s journey; but the objects are mostly melted together in my
memory, and though I should recognise them if we revisit the place, I
cannot call them out so as to represent them to you with distinctness.
William, in attempting in verse to describe this part of the Tweed, says
of it,

   More pensive in sunshine
   Than others in moonshine.

which perhaps may give you more power to conceive what it is than all I have said.

                                * * * * *

Monday, September 19th.—We rose early, and went to Melrose, six miles, before breakfast.  After
ascending a hill, descended, and overlooked a dell, on the opposite side of which was an old
mansion, surrounded with trees and steep gardens, a curious and pleasing, yet melancholy spot;
for the house and gardens were evidently going to decay, and the whole of the small dell, except
near the house, was unenclosed and uncultivated, being a sheep-walk to the top of the hills.
Descended to Gala Water, a pretty stream, but much smaller than the Tweed, into which the brook
flows from the glen I have spoken of.  Near the Gala is a large modern house, the situation
very pleasant, but the old building which we had passed put to shame the fresh colouring and
meagre outline of the new one.  Went through a part of the village of Galashiels, pleasantly
situated on the bank of the stream; a pretty place it once has been, but a manufactory is established
there; and a townish bustle and ugly stone houses are fast taking place of the brown-roofed
thatched cottages, of which a great number yet remain, partly overshadowed by trees.  Left
the Gala, and, after crossing the open country, came again to the Tweed, and pursued our way
as before near the river, perhaps for a mile or two, till we arrived at Melrose.  The valley
for this short space was not so pleasing as before, the hills more broken, and though the cultivation
was general, yet the scene was not rich, while it had lost its pastoral simplicity.  At Melrose
the vale opens out wide; but the hills are high all round—single distinct risings.  After breakfast
we went out, intending to go to the Abbey, and in the street met Mr. Scott, who gave us a cordial
greeting, and conducted us thither himself.  He was here on his own ground, for he is familiar
with all that is known of the authentic history of Melrose and the popular tales connected
with it.  He pointed out many pieces of beautiful sculpture in obscure corners which would
have escaped our notice.  The Abbey has been built of a pale red stone; that part which was
first erected of a very durable kind, the sculptured flowers and leaves and other minute ornaments
being as perfect in many places as when first wrought.  The ruin is of considerable extent,
but unfortunately it is almost surrounded by insignificant houses, so that when you are close
to it you see it entirely separated from many rural objects, and even when viewed from a distance
the situation does not seem to be particularly happy, for the vale is broken and disturbed,
and the Abbey at a distance from the river, so that you do not look upon them as companions
of each other.  And surely this is a national barbarism: within these beautiful walls is the
ugliest church that was ever beheld—if it had been hewn out of the side of a hill it could
not have been more dismal; there was no neatness, nor even decency, and it appeared to be so
damp, and so completely excluded from fresh air, that it must be dangerous to sit in it; the
floor is unpaved, and very rough.  What a contrast to the beautiful and graceful order apparent
in every part of the ancient design and workmanship!  Mr. Scott went with us into the gardens
and orchards of a Mr. Riddel, from which we had a very sweet view of the Abbey through trees,
the town being entirely excluded. Dined with Mr. Scott at the inn; he was now travelling to
the assizes at Jedburgh in his character of Sheriff of Selkirk, and on that account, as well
as for his own sake, he was treated with great respect, a small part of which was vouchsafed
to us as his friends, though I could not persuade the woman to show me the beds, or to make
any sort of promise till she was assured from the Sheriff himself that he had no objection
to sleep in the same room with William.

                                * * * * *

Tuesday, September 20th.—Mr. Scott departed very early for Jedburgh, and we soon followed,
intending to go by Dryburgh to Kelso.  It was a fine morning.  We went without breakfast, being
told that there was a public-house at Dryburgh.  The road was very pleasant, seldom out of
sight of the Tweed for any length of time, though not often close to it. The valley is not
so pleasantly defined as between Peebles and Clovenford, yet so soft and beautiful, and in
many parts pastoral, but that peculiar and pensive simplicity which I have spoken of before
was wanting, yet there was a fertility chequered with wildness which to many travellers would
be more than a compensation.  The reaches of the vale were shorter, the turnings more rapid,
the banks often clothed with wood. In one place was a lofty scar, at another a green promontory,
a small hill skirted by the river, the hill above irregular and green, and scattered over with
trees.  We wished we could have brought the ruins of Melrose to that spot, and mentioned this
to Mr. Scott, who told us that the monks had first fixed their abode there, and raised a temporary
building of wood.  The monastery of Melrose was founded by a colony from Rievaux Abbey in Yorkshire,
which building it happens to resemble in the colour of the stone, and I think partly in the
style of architecture, but is much smaller, that is, has been much smaller, for there is not
at Rievaux any one single part of the ruin so large as the remains of the church at Melrose,
though at Rievaux a far more extensive ruin remains. It is also much grander, and the situation
at present much more beautiful, that ruin not having suffered like Melrose Abbey from the encroachments
of a town.  The architecture at Melrose is, I believe, superior in the exactness and taste
of some of the minute ornamental parts; indeed, it is impossible to conceive anything more
delicate than the workmanship, especially in the imitations of flowers.

We descended to Dryburgh after having gone a considerable way upon high ground.  A heavy rain
when we reached the village, and there was no public-house.  A well-dressed, well-spoken woman
courteously—shall I say charitably?—invited us into her cottage, and permitted us to make breakfast;
she showed us into a neat parlour, furnished with prints, a mahogany table, and other things
which I was surprised to see, for her husband was only a day-labourer, but she had been Lady
Buchan’s waiting-maid, which accounted for these luxuries and for a noticeable urbanity in
her manners.  All the cottages in this neighbourhood, if I am not mistaken, were covered with
red tiles, and had chimneys.  After breakfast we set out in the rain to the ruins of Dryburgh
Abbey, which are near Lord Buchan’s house, and, like Bothwell Castle, appropriated to the pleasure
of the owner.  We rang a bell at the gate, and, instead of a porter, an old woman came to open
it through a narrow side-alley cut in a thick plantation of evergreens.  On entering, saw the
thatch of her hut just above the trees, and it looked very pretty, but the poor creature herself
was a figure to frighten a child,—bowed almost double, having a hooked nose and overhanging
eyebrows, a complexion stained brown with smoke, and a cap that might have been worn for months
and never washed. No doubt she had been cowering over her peat fire, for if she had emitted
smoke by her breath and through every pore, the odour could not have been stronger.  This ancient
woman, by right of office, attended us to show off the curiosities, and she had her tale as
perfect, though it was not quite so long a one, as the gentleman Swiss, whom I remember to
have seen at Blenheim with his slender wand and dainty white clothes.  The house of Lord Buchan
and the Abbey stand upon a large flat peninsula, a green holm almost covered with fruit-trees.
The ruins of Dryburgh are much less extensive than those of Melrose, and greatly inferior both
in the architecture and stone, which is much mouldered away.  Lord Buchan has trained pear-trees
along the walls, which are bordered with flowers and gravel walks, and he has made a pigeon-house,
and a fine room in the ruin, ornamented with a curiously-assorted collection of busts of eminent
men, in which lately a ball was given; yet, deducting for all these improvements, which are
certainly much less offensive than you could imagine, it is a very sweet ruin, standing so
enclosed in wood, which the towers overtop, that you cannot know that it is not in a state
of natural desolation till you are close to it.  The opposite bank of the Tweed is steep and
woody, but unfortunately many of the trees are firs.  The old woman followed us after the fashion
of other guides, but being slower of foot than a younger person, it was not difficult to slip
away from the scent of her poor smoke-dried body.  She was sedulous in pointing out the curiosities,
which, I doubt not, she had a firm belief were not to be surpassed in England or Scotland.

Having promised us a sight of the largest and oldest yew-tree ever seen, she conducted us to
it; it was a goodly tree, but a mere dwarf compared with several of our own country—not to
speak of the giant of Lorton.  We returned to the cottage, and waited some time in hopes that
the rain would abate, but it grew worse and worse, and we were obliged to give up our journey,
to Kelso, taking the direct road to Jedburgh.

We had to ford the Tweed, a wide river at the crossing-place.  It would have been impossible
to drive the horse through, for he had not forgotten the fright at Connel Ferry, so we hired
a man to lead us.  After crossing the water, the road goes up the bank, and we had a beautiful
view of the ruins of the Abbey, peering above the trees of the woody peninsula, which, in shape,
resembles that formed by the Tees at Lickburn, but is considerably smaller.  Lord Buchan’s
house is a very neat, modest building, and almost hidden by trees.  It soon began to rain heavily.
Crossing the Teviot by a stone bridge—the vale in that part very wide—there was a great deal
of ripe corn, but a want of trees, and no appearance of richness.  Arrived at Jedburgh half
an hour before the Judges were expected out of Court to dinner.

We gave in our passport—the name of Mr. Scott, the Sheriff—and were very civilly treated, but
there was no vacant room in the house except the Judge’s sitting-room, and we wanted to have
a fire, being exceedingly wet and cold.  I was conducted into that room, on condition that
I would give it up the moment the Judge came from Court.  After I had put off my wet clothes
I went up into a bedroom, and sate shivering there, till the people of the inn had procured
lodgings for us in a private house.

We were received with hearty welcome by a good woman, who, though above seventy years old,
moved about as briskly as if she was only seventeen. Those parts of the house which we were
to occupy were neat and clean; she showed me every corner, and, before I had been ten minutes
in the house, opened her very drawers that I might see what a stock of linen she had; then
asked me how long we should stay, and said she wished we were come for three months.  She was
a most remarkable person; the alacrity with which she ran up-stairs when we rung the bell,
and guessed at, and strove to prevent, our wants was surprising; she had a quick eye, and keen
strong features, and a joyousness in her motions, like what used to be in old Molly when she
was particularly elated.  I found afterwards that she had been subject to fits of dejection
and ill-health: we then conjectured that her overflowing gaiety and strength might in part
be attributed to the same cause as her former dejection.  Her husband was deaf and infirm,
and sate in a chair with scarcely the power to move a limb—an affecting contrast!  The old
woman said they had been a very hard-working pair; they had wrought like slaves at their trade—her
husband had been a currier; and she told me how they had portioned off their daughters with
money, and each a feather-bed, and that in their old age they had laid out the little they
could spare in building and furnishing that house, and she added with pride that she had lived
in her youth in the family of Lady Egerton, who was no high lady, and now was in the habit
of coming to her house whenever she was at Jedburgh, and a hundred other things; for when she
once began with Lady Egerton, she did not know how to stop, nor did I wish it, for she was
very entertaining.  Mr. Scott sate with us an hour or two, and repeated a part of the Lay of
the Last Minstrel.  When he was gone our hostess came to see if we wanted anything, and to
wish us good-night.  On all occasions her manners were governed by the same spirit: there was
no withdrawing one’s attention from her.  We were so much interested that William, long afterwards,
thought it worth while to express in verse the sensations which she had excited, and which
then remained as vividly in his mind as at the moment when we lost sight of Jedburgh:—

   Age! twine thy brows with fresh spring flowers,
   And call a train of laughing Hours;
   And bid them dance, and bid them sing,
   And Thou, too, mingle in the Ring!
   Take to thy heart a new delight!
   If not, make merry in despite
   That one should breathe who scorns thy power.
   —But dance! for under Jedborough Tower
   A Matron dwells who, tho’ she bears
   Our mortal complement of years,
   Lives in the light of youthful glee,
   And she will dance and sing with thee.

   Nay! start not at that Figure—there!
   Him who is rooted to his Chair!
   Look at him, look again; for He
   Hath long been of thy Family.
   With legs that move not, if they can,
   And useless arms, a Trunk of Man,
   He sits, and with a vacant eye;
   A Sight to make a Stranger sigh!
   Deaf, drooping, such is now his doom;
   His world is in that single room—
   Is this a place for mirthful cheer?
   Can merry-making enter here?

   The joyous Woman is the Mate
   Of him in that forlorn estate;
   He breathes a subterraneous damp;
   But bright as Vesper shines her lamp,
   He is as mute as Jedborough Tower,
   She jocund as it was of yore
   With all its bravery on, in times
   When all alive with merry chimes
   Upon a sun-bright morn of May
   It roused the Vale to holiday.

   I praise thee, Matron! and thy due
   Is praise, heroic praise and true.
   With admiration I behold
   Thy gladness unsubdued and bold:
   Thy looks, thy gestures, all present
   The picture of a life well spent;
   This do I see, and something more,
   A strength unthought of heretofore.
   Delighted am I for thy sake,
   And yet a higher joy partake:
   Our human nature throws away
   Its second twilight, and looks gay,
   A Land of promise and of pride
   Unfolding, wide as life is wide.

   Ah! see her helpless Charge! enclosed
   Within himself as seems, composed;
   To fear of loss and hope of gain,
   The strife of happiness and pain—
   Utterly dead! yet in the guise
   Of little Infants when their eyes
   Begin to follow to and fro
   The persons that before them go,
   He tracks her motions, quick or slow.
   Her buoyant spirits can prevail
   Where common cheerfulness would fail.
   She strikes upon him with the heat
   Of July suns; he feels it sweet;
   An animal delight, though dim!
   ’Tis all that now remains for him!

   I look’d, I scann’d her o’er and o’er,
   And, looking, wondered more and more:
   When suddenly I seem’d to espy
   A trouble in her strong black eye,
   A remnant of uneasy light,
   A flash of something over-bright!
   Not long this mystery did detain
   My thoughts.  She told in pensive strain
   That she had borne a heavy yoke,
   Been stricken by a twofold stroke;
   Ill health of body, and had pined
   Beneath worse ailments of the mind.

   So be it!—but let praise ascend
   To Him who is our Lord and Friend!
   Who from disease and suffering
   As bad almost as Life can bring,
   Hath call’d for thee a second Spring;
   Repaid thee for that sore distress
   By no untimely joyousness;
   Which makes of thine a blissful state;
   And cheers thy melancholy Mate!

                                * * * * *

Wednesday, September 21st.—The house where we lodged was airy, and even cheerful, though one
of a line of houses bordering on the churchyard, which is the highest part of the town, overlooking
a great portion of it to the opposite hills.  The kirk is, as at Melrose, within the walls
of a conventual church; but the ruin is much less beautiful, and the church a very neat one.
The churchyard was full of graves, and exceedingly slovenly and dirty; one most indecent practice
I observed: several women brought their linen to the flat table-tombstones, and, having spread
it upon them, began to batter as hard as they could with a wooden roller, a substitute for
a mangle.

After Mr. Scott’s business in the Courts was over, he walked with us up the Jed—‘sylvan Jed’
it has been properly called by Thomson—for the banks are yet very woody, though wood in large
quantities has been felled within a few years.  There are some fine red scars near the river,
in one or two of which we saw the entrances to caves, said to have been used as places of refuge
in times of insecurity.

Walked up to Ferniehurst, an old hall, in a secluded situation, now inhabited by farmers; the
neighbouring ground had the wildness of a forest, being irregularly scattered over with fine
old trees.  The wind was tossing their branches, and sunshine dancing among the leaves, and
I happened to exclaim, ‘What a life there is in trees!’ on which Mr. Scott observed that the
words reminded him of a young lady who had been born and educated on an island of the Orcades,
and came to spend a summer at Kelso and in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh.  She used to say
that in the new world into which she was come nothing had disappointed her so much as trees
and woods; she complained that they were lifeless, silent, and, compared with the grandeur
of the ever-changing ocean, even insipid.  At first I was surprised, but the next moment I
felt that the impression was natural.  Mr. Scott said that she was a very sensible young woman,
and had read much.  She talked with endless rapture and feeling of the power and greatness
of the ocean; and with the same passionate attachment returned to her native island without
any probability of quitting it again.

The valley of the Jed is very solitary immediately under Ferniehurst; we walked down the river,
wading almost up to the knees in fern, which in many parts overspread the forest-ground.  It
made me think of our walks at Allfoxden, and of our own park—though at Ferniehurst is no park
at present—and the slim fawns that we used to startle from their couching-places among the
fern at the top of the hill.  We were accompanied on our walk by a young man from the Braes
of Yarrow, an acquaintance of Mr. Scott’s, {266} who, having been much delighted with some
of William’s poems which he had chanced to see in a newspaper, had wished to be introduced
to him; he lived in the most retired part of the dale of Yarrow, where he had a farm: he was
fond of reading, and well informed, but at first meeting as shy as any of our Grasmere lads,
and not less rustic in his appearance.  He had been in the Highlands, and gave me such an account
of Loch Rannoch as made us regret that we had not persevered in our journey thither, especially
as he told us that the bad road ended at a very little distance from the place where we had
turned back, and that we should have come into another good road, continued all along the shore
of the lake.  He also mentioned that there was a very fine view from the steeple at Dunkeld.

The town of Jedburgh, in returning along the road, as it is seen through the gently winding
narrow valley, looks exceedingly beautiful on its low eminence, surmounted by the conventual
tower, which is arched over, at the summit, by light stone-work resembling a coronet; the effect
at a distance is very graceful.  The hills all round are high, and rise rapidly from the town,
which though it stands considerably above the river, yet, from every side except that on which
we walked, appears to stand in a bottom.

We had our dinner sent from the inn, and a bottle of wine, that we might not disgrace the Sheriff,
who supped with us in the evening,—stayed late, and repeated some of his poem.

                                * * * * *

Thursday, September 22d.—After breakfast, the minister, Dr. Somerville, called upon us with
Mr. Scott, and we went to the manse, a very pretty house, with pretty gardens, and in a beautiful
situation, though close to the town.  Dr. Somerville and his family complained bitterly of
the devastation that had been made among the woods within view from their windows, which looked
up the Jed.  He conducted us to the church, which under his directions has been lately repaired,
and is a very neat place within.  Dr. Somerville spoke of the dirt and other indecencies in
the churchyard, and said that he had taken great pains to put a stop to them, but wholly in
vain.  The business of the assizes closed this day, and we went into Court to hear the Judge
pronounce his charge, which was the most curious specimen of old woman’s oratory and newspaper-paragraph
loyalty that was ever heard.  When all was over they returned to the inn in procession, as
they had come, to the sound of a trumpet, the Judge first, in his robes of red, the Sheriffs
next, in large cocked hats, and inferior officers following, a show not much calculated to
awe the beholders.  After this we went to the inn.  The landlady and her sister inquired if
we had been comfortable, and lamented that they had not had it in their power to pay us more
attention.  I began to talk with them, and found out that they were from Cumberland: they knew
Captain and Mrs. Wordsworth, who had frequently been at Jedburgh, Mrs. Wordsworth’s sister
having married a gentleman of that neighbourhood.  They spoke of them with great pleasure.
I returned to our lodgings to take leave of the old woman, who told me that I had behaved ‘very
discreetly,’ and seemed exceedingly sorry that we were leaving her so soon.  She had been out
to buy me some pears, saying that I must take away some ‘Jedderd’ pears.  We learned afterwards
that Jedburgh is famous in Scotland for pears, which were first cultivated there in the gardens
of the monks.

Mr. Scott was very glad to part from the Judge and his retinue, to travel with us in our car
to Hawick; his servant drove his own gig.  The landlady, very kindly, had put up some sandwiches
and cheese-cakes for me, and all the family came out to see us depart.  Passed the monastery
gardens, which are yet gardens, where there are many remarkably large old pear-trees.  We soon
came into the vale of Teviot, which is open and cultivated, and scattered over with hamlets,
villages, and many gentlemen’s seats, yet, though there is no inconsiderable quantity of wood,
you can never, in the wide and cultivated parts of the Teviot, get rid of the impression of
barrenness, and the fir plantations, which in this part are numerous, are for ever at war with
simplicity.  One beautiful spot I recollect of a different character, which Mr. Scott took
us to see a few yards from the road.  A stone bridge crossed the water at a deep and still
place, called Horne’s Pool, from a contemplative schoolmaster, who had lived not far from it,
and was accustomed to walk thither, and spend much of his leisure near the river.  The valley
was here narrow and woody.  Mr. Scott pointed out to us Ruberslaw, Minto Crags, and every other
remarkable object in or near the vale of Teviot, and we scarcely passed a house for which he
had not some story.  Seeing us look at one, which stood high on the hill on the opposite side
of the river, he told us that a gentleman lived there who, while he was in India, had been
struck with the fancy of making his fortune by a new speculation, and so set about collecting
the gods of the country, with infinite pains and no little expense, expecting that he might
sell them for an enormous price.  Accordingly, on his return they were offered for sale, but
no purchasers came.  On the failure of this scheme, a room was hired in London in which to
exhibit them as a show; but alas! nobody would come to see; and this curious assemblage of
monsters is now, probably, quietly lodged in the vale of Teviot.  The latter part of this gentleman’s
history is more affecting:—he had an only daughter, whom he had accompanied into Spain two
or three years ago for the recovery of her health, and so for a time saved her from a consumption,
which now again threatened her, and he was about to leave his pleasant residence, and attend
her once more on the same errand, afraid of the coming winter.

We passed through a village, whither Leyden, Scott’s intimate friend, the author of Scenes
of Infancy, was used to walk over several miles of moorland country every day to school, a
poor barefooted boy.  He is now in India, applying himself to the study of Oriental literature,
and, I doubt not, it is his dearest thought that he may come and end his days upon the banks
of Teviot, or some other of the Lowland streams—for he is, like Mr. Scott, passionately attached
to the district of the Borders.

Arrived at Hawick to dinner; the inn is a large old house with walls above a yard thick, formerly
a gentleman’s house.  Did not go out this evening.

                                * * * * *

Friday, September 23d.—Before breakfast, walked with Mr. Scott along a high road for about
two miles, up a bare hill.  Hawick is a small town.  From the top of the hill we had an extensive
view over the moors of Liddisdale, and saw the Cheviot Hills.  We wished we could have gone
with Mr. Scott into some of the remote dales of this country, where in almost every house he
can find a home and a hearty welcome.  But after breakfast we were obliged to part with him,
which we did with great regret: he would gladly have gone with us to Langholm, eighteen miles
further.  Our way was through the vale of Teviot, near the banks of the river.

Passed Branxholm Hall, one of the mansions belonging to the Duke of Buccleuch, which we looked
at with particular interest for the sake of the Lay of the Last Minstrel.  Only a very small
part of the original building remains: it is a large strong house, old, but not ancient in
its appearance—stands very near the river-side; the banks covered with plantations.

A little further on, met the Edinburgh coach with several passengers, the only stage-coach
that had passed us in Scotland.  Coleridge had come home by that conveyance only a few days
before.  The quantity of arable land gradually diminishes, and the plantations become fewer,
till at last the river flows open to the sun, mostly through unfenced and untilled grounds,
a soft pastoral district, both the hills and the valley being scattered over with sheep: here
and there was a single farm-house, or cluster of houses, and near them a portion of land covered
with ripe corn.

Near the head of the vale of Teviot, where that stream is but a small rivulet, we descended
towards another valley, by another small rivulet. Hereabouts Mr. Scott had directed us to look
about for some old stumps of trees, said to be the place where Johnny Armstrong was hanged;
but we could not find them out.  The valley into which we were descending, though, for aught
I know, it is unnamed in song, was to us more interesting than the Teviot itself.  Not a spot
of tilled ground was there to break in upon its pastoral simplicity; the same soft yellow green
spread from the bed of the streamlet to the hill-tops on each side, and sheep were feeding
everywhere.  It was more close and simple than the upper end of the vale of Teviot, the valley
being much narrower, and the hills equally high and not broken into parts, but on each side
a long range.  The grass, as we had first seen near Crawfordjohn, had been mown in the different
places of the open ground, where it might chance to be best; but there was no part of the surface
that looked perfectly barren, as in those tracts.

We saw a single stone house a long way before us, which we conjectured to be, as it proved,
Moss Paul, the inn where we were to bait.  The scene, with this single dwelling, was melancholy
and wild, but not dreary, though there was no tree nor shrub; the small streamlet glittered,
the hills were populous with sheep; but the gentle bending of the valley, and the correspondent
softness in the forms of the hills, were of themselves enough to delight the eye.  At Moss
Paul we fed our horse;—several travellers were drinking whisky.  We neither ate nor drank,
for we had, with our usual foresight and frugality in travelling, saved the cheese-cakes and
sandwiches which had been given us by our countrywoman at Jedburgh the day before.  After Moss
Paul, we ascended considerably, then went down other reaches of the valley, much less interesting,
stony and barren.  The country afterwards not peculiar, I should think, for I scarcely remember it.

Arrived at Langholm at about five o’clock.  The town, as we approached, from a hill, looked
very pretty, the houses being roofed with blue slates, and standing close to the river Esk,
here a large river, that scattered its waters wide over a stony channel.  The inn neat and
comfortable—exceedingly clean: I could hardly believe we were still in Scotland.

After tea walked out; crossed a bridge, and saw, at a little distance up the valley, Langholm
House, a villa of the Duke of Buccleuch: it stands upon a level between the river and a steep
hill, which is planted with wood.  Walked a considerable way up the river, but could not go
close to it on account of the Duke’s plantations, which are locked up.  When they ended, the
vale became less cultivated; the view through the vale towards the hills very pleasing, though
bare and cold.

                                * * * * *

Saturday, September 24th.—Rose very early and travelled about nine miles to Longtown, before
breakfast, along the banks of the Esk.  About half a mile from Langholm crossed a bridge. 
At this part of the vale, which is narrow, the steeps are covered with old oaks and every variety
of trees.  Our road for some time through the wood, then came to a more open country, exceedingly
rich and populous; the banks of the river frequently rocky, and hung with wood; many gentlemen’s
houses.  There was the same rich variety while the river continued to flow through Scottish
grounds; but not long after we had passed through the last turnpike gate in Scotland and the
first in England—but a few yards asunder—the vale widens, and its aspect was cold, and even
dreary, though Sir James Graham’s plantations are very extensive.  His house, a large building,
stands in this open part of the vale.  Longtown was before us, and ere long we saw the well-remembered
guide-post, where the circuit of our six weeks’ travels had begun, and now was ended.

We did not look along the white line of the road to Solway Moss without some melancholy emotion,
though we had the fair prospect of the Cumberland mountains full in view, with the certainty,
barring accidents, of reaching our own dear home the next day.  Breakfasted at the Graham’s
Arms.  The weather had been very fine from the time of our arrival at Jedburgh, and this was
a very pleasant day.  The sun ‘shone fair on Carlisle walls’ when we first saw them from the
top of the opposite hill. Stopped to look at the place on the sand near the bridge where Hatfield
had been executed.  Put up at the same inn as before, and were recognised by the woman who
had waited on us.  Everybody spoke of Hatfield as an injured man.  After dinner went to a village
six miles further, where we slept.

                                * * * * *

Sunday, September 25th, 1803.—A beautiful autumnal day. Breakfasted at a public-house by the
road-side; dined at Threlkeld; arrived at home between eight and nine o’clock, where we found
Mary in perfect health, Joanna Hutchinson with her, and little John asleep in the clothes-basket
by the fire.

                                * * * * *

SONNET

                  COMPOSED BETWEEN DALSTON AND GRASMERE,
                          SEPTEMBER 25TH, 1803.

   Fly, some kind spirit, fly to Grasmere Vale!
   Say that we come, and come by this day’s light
   Glad tidings!—spread them over field and height,
   But, chiefly, let one Cottage hear the tale!
   There let a mystery of joy prevail,
   The kitten frolic with unruly might,
   And Rover whine as at a second sight
   Of near-approaching good, that will not fail:
   And from that Infant’s face let joy appear;
   Yea, let our Mary’s one companion child,
   That hath her six weeks’ solitude beguiled
   With intimations manifold and dear,
   While we have wander’d over wood and wild—
   Smile on its Mother now with bolder cheer!

APPENDIX A.

‘And think and fear.’—PAGE 11.

The entire Poem as given in the works of the Poet stands thus:—

TO THE SONS OF BURNS, after visiting the grave of their father.

    ‘The Poet’s grave is in a corner of the churchyard.

   ’Mid crowded obelisks and urns
   I sought the untimely grave of Burns;
   Sons of the Bard, my heart still mourns
         With sorrow true;
   And more would grieve, but that it turns
         Trembling to you!

   Hath Nature strung your nerves to bear
   Intemperance with less harm, beware!

Two other Poems on the same subject may fitly be inserted in this place, though, as appears
from the Poet’s notes, one of them at least belongs to a later date.

AT THE GRAVE OF BURNS. 1803. SEVEN YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH.

   I shiver, Spirit fierce and bold,
   At thoughts of what I now behold:
   As vapours breathed from dungeons cold
         Strike pleasure dead,
   So sadness comes from out the mould
         Where Burns is laid.

   And have I then thy bones so near,
   And thou forbidden to appear?
   As if it were thyself that’s here,
         I shrink with pain;
   And both my wishes and my fear
         Alike are vain.

   Off weight—nor press on weight!—away
   Dark thoughts!—they came, but not to stay;
   With chastened feelings would I pay
         The tribute due
   To him, and aught that hides his clay
         From mortal view.

   Fresh as the flower, whose modest worth
   He sang, his genius ‘glinted’ forth,
   Rose like a star that touching earth,
         For so it seems,
   Doth glorify its humble birth
         With matchless beams.

   The piercing eye, the thoughtful brow,
   The struggling heart, where be they now?—
   Full soon the Aspirant of the plough,
         The prompt, the brave,
   Slept, with the obscurest, in the low
         And silent grave.

   The tear will start, and let it flow;
   Thou ‘poor Inhabitant below,’
   At this dread moment—even so—
         Might we together
   Have sate and talked where gowans blow,
         Or on wild heather.

   What treasures would have then been placed
   Within my reach; of knowledge graced
   By fancy what a rich repast!
         But why go on?—
   Oh! spare to sweep, thou mournful blast,
         His grave grass-grown.

   There, too, a Son, his joy and pride,
   (Not three weeks past the Stripling died,)
   Lies gathered to his Father’s side,
         Soul-moving sight!
   Yet one to which is not denied
         Some sad delight.

   For he is safe, a quiet bed
   Hath early found among the dead,
   Harboured where none can be misled,
         Wronged, or distrest;
   And surely here it may be said
         That such are blest.

   And oh for Thee, by pitying grace
   Checked oft-times in a devious race.
   May He who halloweth the place
         Where Man is laid,
   Receive thy Spirit in the embrace
         For which it prayed!

   Sighing I turned away; but ere
   Night fell I heard, or seemed to hear,
   Music that sorrow comes not near,
         A ritual hymn,
   Chanted in love that casts out fear
         By Seraphim.

From the notes appended to the latest editions of Wordsworth’s works, it appears that the preceding
poem, ‘though felt at the time, was not composed till many years afterwards.’

THOUGHTS SUGGESTED THE DAY FOLLOWING, ON THE BANKS OF NITH, NEAR THE POET’S RESIDENCE.

   Too frail to keep the lofty vow
   That must have followed when his brow
   Was wreathed—‘The Vision’ tells us how—
         With holly spray,
   He faultered, drifted to and fro,
         And passed away.

   Well might such thoughts, dear Sister, throng
   Our minds when, lingering all too long,
   Over the grave of Burns we hung
         In social grief—
   Indulged as if it were a wrong
         To seek relief.

   But, leaving each unquiet theme
   Where gentlest judgments may misdeem,
   And prompt to welcome every gleam
         Of good and fair,
   Let us beside this limpid Stream
         Breathe hopeful air.

   Enough of sorrow, wreck, and blight;
   Think rather of those moments bright
   When to the consciousness of right
         His course was true,
   When Wisdom prospered in his sight,
         And Virtue grew.

   Yes, freely let our hearts expand,
   Freely as in youth’s season bland,
   When side by side, his Book in hand,
         We wont to stray,
   Our pleasure varying at command
         Of each sweet Lay.

   How oft inspired must he have trod
   These pathways, yon far-stretching road!
   There lurks his home; in that Abode,
         With mirth elate,
   Or in his nobly-pensive mood,
         The Rustic sate.

   Proud thoughts that Image overawes,
   Before it humbly let us pause,
   And ask of Nature, from what cause,
         And by what rules
   She trained her Burns to win applause
         That shames the Schools.

   Through busiest street and loneliest glen
   Are felt the flashes of his pen;
   He rules ’mid winter snows, and when
         Bees fill their hives;
   Deep in the general heart of men
         His power survives.

   What need of fields in some far clime
   Where Heroes, Sages, Bards sublime,
   And all that fetched the flowing rhyme
         From genuine springs,
   Shall dwell together till old Time
         Folds up his wings?

APPENDIX B.

‘The Waterfall, Cora Linn.’—PAGE 36.

The following poem belongs to the series entitled Memorials of a Tour in Scotland, 1814.  It
is in a later, not better, manner than those of 1803.

    ‘—How Wallace fought for Scotland, left the name
    Of Wallace to be found, like a wild flower,
    All over his dear Country; left the deeds
    Of Wallace, like a family of ghosts,
    To people the steep rocks and river banks,
    Her natural sanctuaries, with a local soul
    Of independence and stern liberty.’—MS.

   Lord of the vale! astounding Flood;
   The dullest leaf in this thick wood
   Quakes—conscious of thy power;
   The caves reply with hollow moan;
   And vibrates to its central stone,
   Yon time-cemented Tower!

   And yet how fair the rural scene!
   For thou, O Clyde, hast ever been
   Beneficent as strong;
   Pleased in refreshing dews to steep
   The little trembling flowers that peep
   Thy shelving rocks among.

   Hence all who love their country, love
   To look on thee—delight to rove
   Where they thy voice can hear;
   And, to the patriot-warrior’s Shade,
   Lord of the vale! to Heroes laid
   In dust, that voice is dear!

   Along thy banks, at dead of night,
   Sweeps visibly the Wallace Wight;
   Or stands, in warlike vest,
   Aloft, beneath the moon’s pale beam,
   A Champion worthy of the stream,
   Yon grey tower’s living crest!

   But clouds and envious darkness hide
   A Form not doubtfully descried:—
   Their transient mission o’er,
   O say to what blind region flee
   These Shapes of awful phantasy?
   To what untrodden shore?

   Less than divine command they spurn;
   But this we from the mountains learn,
   And this the valleys show;
   That never will they deign to hold
   Communion where the heart is cold
   To human weal and woe.

   The man of abject soul in vain
   Shall walk the Marathonian plain;
   Or thrill the shadowy gloom,
   That still invests the guardian Pass,
   Where stood, sublime, Leonidas
   Devoted to the tomb.

   Nor deem that it can aught avail
   For such to glide with oar or sail
   Beneath the piny wood,
   Where Tell once drew, by Uri’s lake,
   His vengeful shafts—prepared to slake
   Their thirst in Tyrants’ blood.

APPENDIX C.

‘Poured out these verses.’—PAGE 139.
   Oh! there is life that breathes not; Powers there are
   That touch each other to the quick in modes
   Which the gross world no sense hath to perceive,
   No soul to dream of.  What art Thou, from care
   Cast off—abandoned by thy rugged Sire,
   Nor by soft Peace adopted; though, in place
   And in dimension, such that thou might’st seem
   But a mere footstool to yon sovereign Lord,
   Huge Cruachan, (a thing that meaner hills
   Might crush, nor know that it had suffered harm;)
   Yet he, not loth, in favour of thy claims
   To reverence, suspends his own; submitting
   All that the God of Nature hath conferred,
   All that he holds in common with the stars,
   To the memorial majesty of Time
   Impersonated in thy calm decay!
   Take, then, thy seat, Vicegerent unreproved!
   Yon foaming flood seems motionless as ice;
   Its dizzy turbulence eludes the eye,
   Frozen by distance; so, majestic Pile,
   To the perception of this Age, appear
   Thy fierce beginnings, softened and subdued
   And quieted in character—the strife,
   The pride, the fury uncontrollable,
   Lost on the aërial heights of the Crusades!

APPENDIX D.

‘Loch Leven.’—PAGE 165.

THE BLIND HIGHLAND BOY.
A TALE TOLD BY THE FIRESIDE, AFTER RETURNING TO THE VALE
OF GRASMERE.
   Jane hangs her head upon my breast,
   And you shall bring your stool and rest
         This corner is your own.

   There! take your seat, and let me see
   That you can listen quietly:
   And, as I promised, I will tell
   That strange adventure which befel
         A poor blind Highland Boy.

   A Highland Boy!—why call him so?
   Because, my Darlings, ye must know
   That, under hills which rise like towers,
   Far higher hills than these of ours!
         He from his birth had lived.

   He ne’er had seen one earthly sight,
   The sun, the day; the stars, the night;
   Or tree, or butterfly, or flower,
   Or fish in stream, or bird in bower,
         Or woman, man, or child.

   And yet he neither drooped nor pined,
   Nor had a melancholy mind;
   For God took pity on the Boy,
   And was his friend; and gave him joy
         Of which we nothing know.

   His Mother, too, no doubt, above
   Her other children him did love:
   For, was she here, or was she there,
   She thought of him with constant care,
         And more than mother’s love.

   And proud she was of heart, when clad
   In crimson stockings, tartan plaid,
   And bonnet with a feather gay,
   To Kirk he on the sabbath day
         Went hand in hand with her.

   A dog too, had he; not for need,
   But one to play with and to feed;
   Which would have led him, if bereft
   Of company or friends, and left
         Without a better guide.

   And then the bagpipes he could blow—
   And thus from house to house would go;
   And all were pleased to hear and see,
   For none made sweeter melody
         Than did the poor blind Boy.

   And of those tales, whate’er they were,
   The blind Boy always had his share;
   Whether of mighty towns, or vales
   With warmer suns and softer gales,
         Or wonders of the Deep.

   Yet more it pleased him, more it stirred,
   When from the water-side he heard
   The shouting, and the jolly cheers;
   The bustle of the mariners
         In stillness or in storm.

   But what do his desires avail?
   For He must never handle sail;
   Nor mount the mast, nor row, nor float
   In sailor’s ship, or fisher’s boat,
         Upon the rocking waves.

   His Mother often thought, and said,
   What sin would be upon her head
   If she should suffer this: ‘My Son,
   Whate’er you do, leave this undone;
         The danger is so great.’

   Thus lived he by Loch-Leven’s side
   Still sounding with the sounding tide,
   And heard the billows leap and dance,
   Without a shadow of mischance,
         Till he was ten years old.

   When one day (and now mark me well,
   Ye soon shall know how this befel)
   He in a vessel of his own,
   On the swift flood is hurrying down,
         Down to the mighty Sea.

   In such a vessel never more
   May human creature leave the shore!
   If this or that way he should stir,
   Woe to the poor blind Mariner!
         For death will be his doom.

   But say what bears him?—Ye have seen
   The Indian’s bow, his arrows keen,
   Rare beasts, and birds with plumage bright;
   Gifts which, for wonder or delight,
         Are brought in ships from far.

   Such gifts had those seafaring men
   Spread round that haven in the glen;
   Each hut, perchance, might have its own,
   And to the Boy they all were known—
         He knew and prized them all.

   And, as a Coracle that braves
   On Vaga’s breast the fretful waves,
   This shell upon the deep would swim,
   And gaily lift its fearless brim
         Above the tossing surge.

   And this the little blind Boy knew:
   And he a story strange yet true
   Had heard, how in a shell like this
   An English Boy, O thought of bliss!
         Had stoutly launched from shore;

   Launched from the margin of a bay
   Among the Indian isles, where lay
   His father’s ship, and had sailed far—
   To join that gallant ship of war,
         In his delightful shell.

   While there he sate, alone and blind,
   That story flashed upon his mind;—
   A bold thought roused him, and he took
   The shell from out its secret nook,
         And bore it on his head.

   He launched his vessel,—and in pride
   Of spirit, from Loch-Leven’s side,
   Stepped into it—his thoughts all free
   As the light breezes that with glee
         Sang through the adventurer’s hair.

   A while he stood upon his feet;
   He felt the motion—took his seat;
   Still better pleased as more and more
   The tide retreated from the shore,
         And sucked, and sucked him in.

   And there he is in face of Heaven.
   How rapidly the Child is driven!
   The fourth part of a mile, I ween,
   He thus had gone, ere he was seen
         By any human eye.

   But when he was first seen, oh me,
   What shrieking and what misery!
   For many saw; among the rest
   His Mother, she who loved him best,
         She saw her poor blind Boy.

   But for the child, the sightless Boy,
   It is the triumph of his joy!
   The bravest traveller in balloon,
   Mounting as if to reach the moon,
         Was never half so blessed.

   And let him, let him go his way,
   Alone, and innocent, and gay!
   For, if good Angels love to wait
   On the forlorn unfortunate,
         This Child will take no harm.

   But now the passionate lament,
   Which from the crowd on shore was sent,
   The cries which broke from old and young
   In Gaelic, or the English tongue,
         Are stifled—all is still.

   And quickly with a silent crew,
   A boat is ready to pursue;
   And from the shore their course they take,
   And swiftly down the running lake
         They follow the blind Boy.

   But soon they move with softer pace;
   So have ye seen the fowler chase
   On Grasmere’s clear unruffled breast
   A youngling of the wild-duck’s nest
         With deftly-lifted oar;

   Or as the wily sailors crept
   To seize (while on the Deep it slept)
   The hapless creature which did dwell
   Erewhile within the dancing shell,
         They steal upon their prey.

   With sound the least that can be made,
   They follow, more and more afraid,
   More cautious as they draw more near;
   But in his darkness he can hear,
         And guesses their intent.

   ‘Lei-gha—Lei-gha’—he then cried out,
   ‘Lei-gha—Lei-gha’—with eager shout;
   Thus did he cry, and thus did pray,
   And what he meant was, ‘Keep away,
         And leave me to myself!’

   Alas! and when he felt their hands—
   You’ve often heard of magic wands,
   That with a motion overthrow
   A palace of the proudest show,
         Or melt it into air:

   So all his dreams—that inward light
   With which his soul had shone so bright—
   All vanished;—’twas a heart-felt cross
   To him, a heavy, bitter loss,
         As he had ever known.

   But hark! a gratulating voice,
   With which the very hills rejoice:
   ’Tis from the crowd, who tremblingly
   Have watched the event, and now can see
         That he is safe at last.

   And then, when he was brought to land,
   Full sure they were a happy band,
   Which, gathering round, did on the banks
   Of that great Water give God thanks,
         And welcomed the poor Child.

   And in the general joy of heart
   The blind Boy’s little dog took part;
   He leapt about, and oft did kiss
   His master’s hands in sign of bliss,
         With sound like lamentation.

   But most of all, his Mother dear,
   She who had fainted with her fear,
   Rejoiced when waking she espies
   The Child; when she can trust her eyes,
         And touches the blind Boy.

   She led him home, and wept amain,
   When he was in the house again:
   Tears flowed in torrents from her eyes;
   She kissed him—how could she chastise?
         She was too happy far.

   Thus, after he had fondly braved
   The perilous Deep, the Boy was saved;
   And, though his fancies had been wild,
   Yet he was pleased and reconciled
         To live in peace on shore.

   And in the lonely Highland dell
   Still do they keep the Turtle-shell;
   And long the story will repeat
   Of the blind Boy’s adventurous feat,
         And how he was preserved.

APPENDIX E.

‘Mirrors upon the ceiling and against the walls.’—PAGE 210.

EFFUSION, IN THE PLEASURE-GROUND ON THE BANKS OF THE BRAN, NEAR DUNKELD.

   What He—who, mid the kindred throng
   Of Heroes that inspired his song,
   Doth yet frequent the hill of storms,
   The stars dim-twinkling through their forms!
   What! Ossian here—a painted Thrall,
   Mute fixture on a stuccoed wall;
   To serve—an unsuspected screen
   For show that must not yet be seen;
   And, when the moment comes, to part
   And vanish by mysterious art;
   Head, harp, and body, split asunder,
   For ingress to a world of wonder;
   A gay saloon, with waters dancing
   Upon the sight wherever glancing;
   One loud cascade in front, and lo!
   A thousand like it, white as snow—
   Streams on the walls, and torrent-foam
   As active round the hollow dome,
   Illusive cataracts! of their terrors
   Not stripped, nor voiceless in the mirrors,
   That catch the pageant from the flood
   Thundering adown a rocky wood.
   What pains to dazzle and confound!
   What strife of colour, shape, and sound
   In this quaint medley, that might seem
   Devised out of a sick man’s dream!
   Strange scene, fantastic and uneasy
   As ever made a maniac dizzy,
   When disenchanted from the mood
   That loves on sullen thoughts to brood!

      O Nature—in thy changeful visions,
   Through all thy most abrupt transitions,
   Smooth, graceful, tender, or sublime—
   Ever averse to pantomime,
   Thee neither do they know nor us
   Thy servants, who can trifle thus;
   Else verily the sober powers
   Of rock that frowns, and stream that roars,
   Exalted by congenial sway
   Of Spirits, and the undying Lay,
   And Names that moulder not away,
   Had wakened some redeeming thought
   More worthy of this favoured Spot;
   Recalled some feeling—to set free
   The Bard from such indignity!

      The Effigies of a valiant Wight
   I once beheld, a Templar Knight; {295}
   Not prostrate, not like those that rest
   On tombs, with palms together prest,
   But sculptured out of living stone,
   And standing upright and alone,
   Both hands with rival energy
   Employed in setting his sword free
   From its dull sheath—stern sentinel
   Intent to guard St. Robert’s cell;
   As if with memory of the affray
   Far distant, when, as legends say,
   The Monks of Fountain’s thronged to force
   From its dear home the Hermit’s corse,
   That in their keeping it might lie,
   To crown their abbey’s sanctity.
   So had they rushed into the grot
   Of sense despised, a world forgot,
   And torn him from his loved retreat,
   Where altar-stone and rock-hewn seat
   Still hint that quiet best is found,
   Even by the Living, under ground;
   But a bold Knight, the selfish aim
   Defeating, put the Monks to shame,
   There where you see his Image stand
   Bare to the sky, with threatening brand
   Which lingering NID is proud to show
   Reflected in the pool below.

      Thus, like the men of earliest days,
   Our sires set forth their grateful praise:
   Uncouth the workmanship, and rude!
   But, nursed in mountain solitude,
   Might some aspiring artist dare
   To seize whate’er, through misty air,
   A ghost, by glimpses, may present
   Of imitable lineament,
   And give the phantom an array
   That less should scorn the abandoned clay;
   Then let him hew with patient stroke
   An Ossian out of mural rock,
   And leave the figurative Man—
   Upon thy margin, roaring Bran!—
   Fixed like the Templar of the steep,
   An everlasting watch to keep;
   With local sanctities in trust,
   More precious than a hermit’s dust;
   And virtues through the mass infused,
   Which old idolatry abused.

      What though the Granite would deny
   All fervour to the sightless eye;
   And touch from rising suns in vain
   Solicit a Memnonian strain;
   Yet, in some fit of anger sharp,
   The wind might force the deep-grooved harp
   To utter melancholy moans
   Not unconnected with the tones
   Of soul-sick flesh and weary bones;
   While grove and river notes would lend,
   Less deeply sad, with these to blend!

      Vain pleasures of luxurious life,
   For ever with yourselves at strife;
   Through town and country both deranged
   By affectations interchanged,
   And all the perishable gauds
   That heaven-deserted man applauds;
   When will your hapless patrons learn
   To watch and ponder—to discern
   The freshness, the everlasting youth,
   Of admiration sprung from truth;
   From beauty infinitely growing
   Upon a mind with love o’erflowing—
   To sound the depths of every Art
   That seeks its wisdom through the heart?

      Thus (where the intrusive Pile, ill-graced
   With baubles of theatric taste,
   O’erlooks the torrent breathing showers
   On motley bands of alien flowers
   In stiff confusion set or sown,
   Till Nature cannot find her own,
   Or keep a remnant of the sod
   Which Caledonian Heroes trod)
   I mused; and, thirsting for redress,
   Recoiled into the wilderness.

APPENDIX F.

‘Three or four times the size of Bowder Stone.’—PAGE 225.

I.

   To barren heath, bleak moor, and quaking fen,
   Or depth of labyrinthine glen;
   Or into trackless forest set
   With trees, whose lofty umbrage met;
   World-wearied Men withdrew of yore;
   (Penance their trust, and prayer their store;)
   And in the wilderness were bound
   To such apartments as they found;
   Or with a new ambition raised;
   That God might suitably be praised.

II.

   High lodged the Warrior, like a bird of prey;
   Or where broad waters round him lay:
   But this wild Ruin is no ghost
   Of his devices—buried, lost!
   Within this little lonely isle
   There stood a consecrated Pile;
   Where tapers burned, and mass was sung,
   For them whose timid Spirits clung
   To mortal succour, though the tomb
   Had fixed, for ever fixed, their doom!

III.

   Upon those servants of another world,
   When madding Power her bolts had hurled,
   Their habitation shook;—it fell,
   And perished, save one narrow cell;
   Whither at length, a Wretch retired
   Who neither grovelled nor aspired:
   He, struggling in the net of pride,
   The future scorned, the past defied;
   Still tempering, from the unguilty forge
   Of vain conceit, an iron scourge!

IV.

   Proud Remnant was he of a fearless Race,
   Who stood and flourished face to face
   With their perennial hills;—but Crime,
   Hastening the stern decrees of Time,
   Brought low a Power, which from its home
   Burst, when repose grew wearisome;
   And, taking impulse from the sword,
   And, mocking its own plighted word,
   Had found, in ravage widely dealt,
   Its warfare’s bourn, its travel’s belt!

V.

   All, all were dispossessed, save him whose smile
   Shot lightning through this lonely Isle!
   No right had he but what he made
   To this small spot, his leafy shade;
   But the ground lay within that ring
   To which he only dared to cling;
   Renouncing here, as worse than dead,
   The craven few who bowed the head
   Beneath the change; who heard a claim
   How loud! yet lived in peace with shame.

VI.

   From year to year this shaggy Mortal went
   (So seemed it) down a strange descent:
   Till they, who saw his outward frame,
   Fixed on him an unhallowed name;
   Him, free from all malicious taint,
   And guiding, like the Patmos Saint,
   A pen unwearied—to indite,
   In his lone Isle, the dreams of night;
   Impassioned dreams, that strove to span
   The faded glories of his Clan!

VII.

   Suns that through blood their western harbour sought,
   And stars that in their courses fought;
   Towers rent, winds combating with woods,
   Lands deluged by unbridled floods;
   And beast and bird that from the spell
   Of sleep took import terrible;—
   These types mysterious (if the show
   Of battle and the routed foe
   Had failed) would furnish an array
   Of matter for the dawning day!

VIII.

   How disappeared He?—ask the newt and toad,
   Inheritors of his abode;
   The otter crouching undisturbed,
   In her dark cleft;—but be thou curbed,
   O froward Fancy! ’mid a scene
   Of aspect winning and serene;
   For those offensive creatures shun
   The inquisition of the sun!
   And in this region flowers delight,
   And all is lovely to the sight.

IX.

   Spring finds not here a melancholy breast,
   When she applies her annual test
   To dead and living; when her breath
   Quickens, as now, the withered heath;—
   Nor flaunting Summer—when he throws
   His soul into the briar-rose;
   Or calls the lily from her sleep
   Prolonged beneath the bordering deep;
   Nor Autumn, when the viewless wren
   Is warbling near the BROWNIE’S Den.

X.

   Wild Relique! beauteous as the chosen spot
   In Nysa’s isle, the embellished grot;
   Whither, by care of Libyan Jove,
   (High Servant of paternal Love)
   Young Bacchus was conveyed—to lie
   Safe from his step-dame Rhea’s eye;
   Where bud, and bloom, and fruitage, glowed,
   Close-crowding round the infant god;
   All colours,—and the liveliest streak
   A foil to his celestial cheek!

APPENDIX G.

‘The bonny Holms of Yarrow.’—PAGE 254.

   And is this—Yarrow?—This the Stream
      Of which my fancy cherished,
   So faithfully, a waking dream?
      An image that hath perished!
   O that some Minstrel’s harp were near,
      To utter notes of gladness,
   And chase this silence from the air,
      That fills my heart with sadness!

   Yet why?—a silvery current flows
      With uncontrolled meanderings;
   Nor have these eyes by greener hills
      Been soothed, in all my wanderings.
   And, through her depths, St. Mary’s Lake
      Is visibly delighted;
   For not a feature of those hills
      Is in the mirror slighted.

   A blue sky bends o’er Yarrow vale,
      Save where that pearly whiteness
   Is round the rising sun diffused
      A tender hazy brightness;
   Mild dawn of promise! that excludes
      All profitless dejection;
   Though not unwilling here to admit
      A pensive recollection.

   Where was it that the famous Flower
      Of Yarrow Vale lay bleeding?
   His bed perchance was yon smooth mound
      On which the herd is feeding:
   And haply from this crystal pool,
      Now peaceful as the morning,
   The Water-wraith ascended thrice—
      And gave his doleful warning.

   Delicious is the Lay that sings
      The haunts of happy Lovers,
   The path that leads them to the grove,
      The leafy grove that covers:
   And Pity sanctifies the Verse
      That paints, by strength of sorrow,
   The unconquerable strength of love;
      Bear witness, rueful Yarrow!

   That region left, the vale unfolds
      Rich groves of lofty stature,
   With Yarrow winding through the pomp
      Of cultivated nature;
   And, rising from those lofty groves,
      Behold a Ruin hoary!
   The shattered front of Newark’s Towers,
      Renowned in Border story.

   Fair scenes for childhood’s opening bloom,
      For sportive youth to stray in;
   For manhood to enjoy his strength;
      And age to wear away in!
   Yon cottage seems a bower of bliss,
      A covert for protection
   Of tender thoughts, that nestle there—
      The brood of chaste affection.

   How sweet, on this autumnal day,
      The wild-wood fruits to gather,
   And on my True-love’s forehead plant
      A crest of blooming heather!

   I see—but not by sight alone,
      Loved Yarrow, have I won thee;
   A ray of fancy still survives—
      Her sunshine plays upon thee!
   Thy ever-youthful waters keep
      A course of lively pleasure;
   And gladsome notes my lips can breathe,
      Accordant to the measure.

   The vapours linger round the Heights,
      They melt, and soon must vanish;
   One hour is theirs, nor more is mine—
      Sad thoughts, which I would banish,
   But that I know, where’er I go,
      Thy genuine image, Yarrow!
   Will dwell with me—to heighten joy,
      And cheer my mind in sorrow.

It may interest many to read Wordsworth’s own comment on the two following poems. Both the
“Yarrow Revisited” and the “Sonnet” were sent him before his departure from England.’

YARROW REVISITED.

   The gallant Youth, who may have gained,
      Or seeks, a ‘winsome Marrow,’
   Was but an Infant in the lap
      When first I looked on Yarrow;
   Once more, by Newark’s Castle-gate
      Long left without a warder,
   I stood, looked, listened, and with Thee,
      Great Minstrel of the Border!

   For thee, O SCOTT! compelled to change
      Green Eildon-hill and Cheviot
   For warm Vesuvio’s vine-clad slopes;
      And leave thy Tweed and Teviot
   For mild Sorento’s breezy waves;
      May classic Fancy, linking
   With native Fancy her fresh aid,
      Preserve thy heart from sinking!

   O! while they minister to thee,
      Each vying with the other,
   May Health return to mellow Age,
      With Strength, her venturous brother;
   And Tiber, and each brook and rill
      Renowned in song and story,
   With unimagined beauty shine,
      Nor lose one ray of glory!

   For Thou, upon a hundred streams,
      By tales of love and sorrow,
   Of faithful love, undaunted truth
      Hast shed the power of Yarrow;
   And streams unknown, hills yet unseen,
      Wherever they invite Thee,
   At parent Nature’s grateful call,
      With gladness must requite Thee.

   A gracious welcome shall be thine,
      Such looks of love and honour
   As thy own Yarrow gave to me
      When first I gazed upon her;
   Beheld what I had feared to see,
      Unwilling to surrender
   Dreams treasured up from early days,
      The holy and the tender.

   And what, for this frail world, were all,
      That mortals do or suffer,
   Did no responsive harp, no pen,
      Memorial tribute offer?
   Yea, what were mighty Nature’s self?
      Her features, could they win us,
   Unhelped by the poetic voice
      That hourly speaks within us?

   Flow on for ever, Yarrow Stream!
      Fulfil thy pensive duty,
   Well pleased that future Bards should chant
      For simple hearts thy beauty;
   To dream-light dear while yet unseen,
      Dear to the common sunshine,
   And dearer still, as now I feel,
      To memory’s shadowy moonshine!

ON THE DEPARTURE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT FROM ABBOTSFORD FOR NAPLES.

      A trouble, not of clouds, or weeping rain,
      Nor of the setting sun’s pathetic light
      Engendered, hangs o’er Eildon’s triple height:
      Spirits of Power, assembled there, complain
      For kindred Power departing from their sight;
      While Tweed, best pleased in chanting a blithe strain,
   Saddens his voice again, and yet again.

   Lift up your hearts, ye Mourners! for the might
   Of the whole world’s good wishes with him goes;
   Blessings and prayers in nobler retinue
   Than sceptered king or laurelled conqueror knows,
   Follow this wondrous Potentate.  Be true,
   Ye winds of ocean, and the midland sea,
   Wafting your Charge to soft Parthenope!

THE TROSSACHS.

[Compare with this Sonnet the poem composed about thirty years earlier on nearly the same spot
of ground, ‘What! you are stepping westward?’  (See p. 221.)  This earlier poem, one of the
most truly ethereal and ideal Wordsworth ever wrote, is filled with the overflowing spirit
of life and hope.  In every line of it we feel the exulting pulse of the

         ‘traveller through the world that lay
   Before him on his endless way.’

The later one is stilled down to perfect autumnal quiet.  There is in it the chastened pensiveness
of one to whom all things now

         ‘do take a sober colouring from an eye
   That hath kept watch o’er man’s mortality.’

But the sadness has at the heart of it peaceful hope.  This is
Wordsworth’s own comment:—‘As recorded in my sister’s Journal, I had
first seen the Trossachs in her and Coleridge’s company.  From scenes of art which chase
   That thought away, turn, and with watchful eyes
   Feed it ’mid Nature’s old felicities,
   Rocks, rivers, and smooth lakes more clear than glass
   Untouched, unbreathed upon.  Thrice happy quest,
   If from a golden perch of aspen spray
   (October’s workmanship to rival May)
   The pensive warbler of the ruddy breast
   That moral sweeten by a heaven-taught lay,
   Lulling the year, with all its cares, to rest!

NOTES.

{2}  NOTE 1.—‘Hatfield was condemned.’—PAGE 2.

James Hatfield, indicted for having, in the Lake district, under the assumed name of Hon. Alexander
Augustus Hope, brother of the Earl of Hopetoun, forged certain bills of exchange.  He was condemned
to death at Carlisle on August 16, 1803.  His atrocious treatment of a beautiful girl, known
in the district as ‘Mary of Buttermere,’ had drawn more than usual attention to the criminal.

{5}  NOTE 2.—‘In Captain Wordsworth’s ship.’—PAGES xxx, 3.

The ‘Brother John’ here alluded to was a sailor.  He was about two years and eight months younger
than the poet, who found in him quite a congenial spirit.  He perished, with nearly all his
crew, in the ‘Earl of Abergavenny,’ East-Indiaman, which he commanded, and which, owing to
the incompetency of a pilot, was in his last outward voyage wrecked on the Shambles of the
Bill of Portland on the night of Friday, February 5, 1805.

{3}  NOTE 3.—‘There is no stone to mark the spot.’—PAGE 5.

‘The body of Burns was not allowed to remain long in this place.  To suit the plan of a rather
showy mausoleum, his remains were removed into a more commodious spot of the same kirkyard
on the 5th July 1815.  The coffin was partly dissolved away; but the dark curling locks of
the poet were as glossy, and seemed as fresh, as on the day of his death.’—Life of Burns, by
Allan Cunningham.

{19}  NOTE 4.—‘They had a large library.’—PAGE 19.

The following account of this library is taken from Dr. John Brown’s delightful tract, The
Enterkin.  The author will excuse wholesale appropriation to illustrate a journal which, I
believe, will be dear to him, and to all who feel as he does:—

    ‘The miners at Leadhills are a reading, a hard-reading people; and to
    any one looking into the catalogue of their “Reading Society,”
    selected by the men themselves for their own uses and tastes, this
    will be manifest.  We have no small gratification in holding their
    diploma of honorary membership—signed by the preses and clerk, and
    having the official seal, significant of the craft of the place—of
    this, we venture to say, one of the oldest and best village-libraries
    in the kingdom, having been founded in 1741, when the worthy miners
    of that day, headed by James Wells and clerked by William Wright,
    did, on the 23d November, “condescend upon certain articles and
    laws”—as grave and thorough as if they were the constitution of a
    commonwealth, and as sturdily independent as if no Earl were their
    superior and master.  “It is hereby declared that no right is hereby
    given, nor shall at any time be given, to the said Earl of Hopetoun,
    or his aforesaids, or to any person or persons whatever, of disposing
    of any books or other effects whatever belonging to the Society, nor
    of taking any concern with the Society’s affairs,” etc.  As an
    indication of the wild region and the distances travelled, one of the
    rules is, “that every member not residing in Leadhills shall be
    provided with a bag sufficient to keep out the rain.”  Here is the
    stiff, covenanting dignity cropping out—“Every member shall (at the
    annual meeting) deliver what he hath to say to the preses; and if two
    or more members attempt to speak at a time, the preses shall
    determine who shall speak first;” and “members guilty of indecency,
    or unruly, obstinate behaviour” are to be punished “by fine,
    suspension, or exclusion, according to the nature of the
    transgression.”  The Westminster Divines could not have made a
    tighter job.’

{31b}  NOTE 5.—‘The first view of the Clyde.’—PAGE 31.

This was not their first view of the Clyde.  They had been travelling within sight of it without
knowing it for full twenty miles before this, ever since coming down the Daer Water from Leadhills
to Elvanfoot: they there reached the meeting-place of that water with a small stream that flows
from Ericstane.  These two united become the Clyde.

{41}  NOTE 6.—‘I wished Joanna had been there to laugh.’—PAGE 41.

Joanna Hutchinson, Mrs. Wordsworth’s sister.  Among the ‘Poems on the Naming of Places’ is
one addressed to her, in 1800, in which the following well-known lines occur:—

               “As it befel,
   One summer morning we had walked abroad
   At break of day, Joanna and myself.
   —’Twas that delightful season when the broom,
   Full-flowered, and visible on every steep,
   Along the copses runs in veins of gold.
   Our pathway led us on to Rotha’s banks,
   And when we came in front of that tall rock
   That eastward looks, I there stopped short and stood
   Tracing the lofty barrier with my eye
   From base to summit; such delight I found
   To note in shrub and tree, in stone and flower
   That intermixture of delicious hues,
   Along so vast a surface, all at once,
   In one impression, by connecting force
   Of their own beauty, imaged in the heart.

‘When I wrote this account of the village of Luss, I fully believed I had a perfect recollection
of the two bells, as I have described them; but I am half tempted to think they have been a
creation of my own fancy, though no image that I know I have actually seen is at this day more
vividly impressed upon my mind.’—MS. note, Author, 1806.

{70}  NOTE 8.—‘Her countenance corresponded with the unkindness of denying us a fire in a cold
night.’—PAGE 70.

The writer, inhospitably as she had been treated, was more fortunate than a distinguished French
traveller, who arrived at Luss at night, a few years earlier.  The hostess made signs to him
that he should not speak, hustled him into a stable, and said solemnly, ‘The Justiciary Lords
do me the honour to lodge here when they are on this circuit.  There is one of them here at
present.  He is asleep, and nobody must disturb him.’  And forthwith she drove him out into
the rain and darkness, saying, ‘How can I help it?  Make no noise, his Lordship must not be
disturbed.  Every one should pay respect to the law.  God bless you.  Farewell.’  And on they
had to go fifteen miles to Tarbet.—St. Fond’s Travels, vol. i. p. 233.

{80b}  NOTE 9.—‘I could not help smiling when I saw him lying by the roadside.’—PAGE 80.

‘The ferryman happened to mention that a fellow-countryman of his had lately come from America—a
wild sort of genius.  This reminded us of our friend whom we had met at Loch Lomond, and we
found that it was the same person.  He was the brother of the Lady of Glengyle, who had made
a gentleman of him by new-clothing him from head to foot.  “But,” said the ferryman, “when
the clothes are worn out, and his sister is tired of supplying him with pocket-money (which
will probably be very soon), he will be obliged to betake himself again to America.”  The Lady
of Glengyle has a house not far from the ferry-house, but she now lives mostly at Callander
for the sake of educating her son.’—Author’s MS., 1806.

{100}  NOTE 10.—‘In a word, the Trossachs beggar all description.’ PAGE 100.

The world believes, and will continue to believe, that Scott was the first ‘Sassenach’ who
discovered the Trossachs, as it was his Poem which gave them world-wide celebrity.  It would
probably be as impossible to alter this impression, as it would be to substitute for Shakespeare’s
Macbeth and Lady Macbeth the very different versions of the facts and characters which historical
research has brought to light.  And yet it would be interesting, to those who care for truth
and fact, to inquire, did time allow, what first brought the Trossachs into notice, and who
first did so.  That they had, as I have said in the Preface, some fame before Scott’s Poem
appeared, is clear, else a stranger like Wordsworth would never have gone so far out of his
way to search for them.  Pending a thorough examination of the question, it may be worth while
here to note the following facts.  Miss Wordsworth refers in the text to some work on the Trossachs,
from which the words at the head of this note are taken.

I was under the impression that the work referred to was the well-known ‘Sketches descriptive
of Picturesque Scenery on the Southern Confines of Perthshire,’ by the Rev. Patrick Graham,
minister of Aberfoyle, but it is satisfactory to find that Mr. Graham was not alone in his
admiration of Highland scenery in those early days.  A neighbour of his, the Rev. James Robertson,
who was presented to the parish of Callander in 1768, wrote a description of the Trossachs
in Sir John Sinclair’s Statistical Account, and from the fact of his using the very sentence
quoted by Miss Wordsworth, I have no doubt he was the author of the little pamphlet. Miss Spence
in her ‘Caledonian Excursion,’ 1811, says that the Honourable Mrs. Murray told the minister
of Callander that Scott ought to have dedicated ‘The Lady of the Lake’ to her as the discoverer
of the Trossachs—‘Pray, Madam,’ said the good doctor, ‘when did you write your Tour?’  ‘In
the year 1794.’ {314}  ‘Then, Madam, it is no presumption in me to consider that I was the
person who in 1790 made the Trossachs first known, for except to the natives and a few individuals
in this neighbourhood, this remarkable place had never been heard of.’  Mr. Robertson died
in 1812.  There were thus at least two notices of the Trossachs published before Mr. Graham’s
Sketches: these were not published till 1806.  The Lady of the Lake was first published in 1810.

{101}  NOTE 11.—‘Dutch myrtle.’—PAGE 101.

This seems to be the name by which Miss Wordsworth knew the plant which Lowlanders generally
call bog myrtle, Border men gale, or sweet gale, and Highlanders roid (pronounced as roitch).
Botanists, I believe, know it as Myrica Gale, a most fragrant plant or shrub, growing generally
in moist and mossy ground.  Perhaps nothing more surely brings back the feeling that you are
in the very Highlands than the first scent of this plant caught on the breeze.

{116}  NOTE 12.—‘Bonnier than Loch Lomond.’—PAGE 116.

As an illustration of local jealousy, I may mention that when Mr. Jamieson, the editor of the
fifth edition of Burt’s Letters, was in the Highlands in 1814, four years after the publication
of Scott’s Poem, and eleven after the Wordsworths’ visit, he met a savage-looking fellow on
the top of Ben Lomond, the image of ‘Red Murdoch,’ who told him that he had been a guide to
the mountain for more than forty years, but now ‘a Walter Scott’ had spoiled his trade.  ‘I
wish,’ said he, ‘I had him in a ferry over Loch Lomond; I should be after sinking the boat,
if I drowned myself into the bargain, for ever since he wrote his “Lady of the Lake,” as they
call it, everybody goes to see that filthy hole, Loch Ketterine. The devil confound his ladies
and his lakes!’

{145}  NOTE 13.—‘For poor Ann Tyson’s sake.’—PAGE 145.

The dame with whom Wordsworth lodged at Hawkshead.  Of her he has spoken with affectionate
tenderness in the ‘Prelude:’—

    ‘The thoughts of gratitude shall fall like dew
    Upon thy grave, good creature!’

Her garden, its brook, and dark pine tree, and the stone table under it, were all dear to his
memory, and the chamber in which he

    ‘Had lain awake on summer nights to watch
    The moon in splendour couched among the leaves
    Of a tall ash that near our cottage stood.’

She lived to above fourscore; unmarried, and loving her young inmates as her children, and
beloved by them as a mother.

    ‘Childless, yet by the strangers to her blood
    Honoured with little less than filial love.’

                                          Wordsworth’s Life, vol. i. 39.

{196}  NOTE 14.—‘The woman said it had been a palace.’—PAGE 196.

A mistake.  The old mansion here described was the building formerly used as a prison-house
of the Regality of Athole in which the Dukes, and formerly the Earls, of Athole confined their
criminals during the ages when they, in common with all the other Scottish Barons, exercised
the right of heritable jurisdiction.  This right was abolished after the ’45, and then this,
like all other baronial prison-houses, fell into disuse and decay.  Nearly entire seventy years
ago, it has now wholly disappeared, having been used up, no doubt, as material for the neighbouring
buildings.  There was, however, at Logierait, a Royal Castle, from which the place itself and
the large adjacent parish take their name—Lag-an-raith, the hollow of the Castle,—while the
neighbouring small hamlet and railway station on the other side of the Tummel are called Balla-na-luig—the
town of the hollow.  The Castle stood on a high knoll overlooking the church and inn of Logierait,
commanding a view of the junction of the Tummel and the Tay immediately underneath, and of
the whole of southern Athole, as far as Dunkeld.  This knoll is now crowned by a high Celtic
cross, memorial of the late Duke of Athole.  Immediately around it are seen lying here and
there blocks of solid masonry, the sole remnants of the Castle in which Robert II. is said
to have dwelt during his visits to Athole.  Traces of the Castle moat are still discernible.

{229}  NOTE 15.—‘Rob Roy’s grave was there.’—PAGE 229.  The grave is covered by a rude grey
slab, on which a long claymore is roughly engraved.  The Guide-book informs us that the arms
on his tombstone are a Scotch pine, the badge of Clan Gregor, crossed by a sword, and supporting
a crown, this last to denote the relationship claimed by the Gregarach with the royal Stuarts.
When I last saw the tombstone, as far as I remember, I observed nothing but the outline of
the long sword.

{237}  NOTE 16.—‘Thomas Wilkinson’s “Tour in Scotland.”’—PAGE 237.

Probably one of Wilkinson’s poems, of which Wordsworth speaks occasionally in his letters.

Wordsworth wrote the poem ‘To a Spade of a Friend,’ composed ‘while we were labouring together
in his pleasure-grounds,’ commencing—

   ‘Spade with which Wilkinson hath tilled his land,
   And shaped these pleasant walks by Emont’s side,’

in memory of this friend.—See Life, vol. i. pp. 55, 323, 349.

DISTANCES FROM PLACE TO PLACE.

                                   MILES                         MILES

Grasmere to Keswick                   13  Suie (road                13
                                          excellent)

Hesket Newmarket (road very           15  Killin                     7 bad)               
(tolerable)

Carlisle (bad road)                   14  Kenmore                   15
                                          (baddish)

Longtown (newly mended, not            8  Blair (bad)               23 good)

Annan (good)                          14  Fascally                  18
                                          (wretchedly
                                          bad)

Dumfries (good)                       15  Dunkeld (bad)             12

Brownhill (pretty good)               12  Ambletree                 10
                                          (hilly—good)

Leadhills (tolerable)                 19  Crieff                    11
                                          (hilly—goodish)

Douglass Mill (very bad)              12  Loch Erne Head            20
                                          (tolerable)

Lanark (baddish)                       9  Callander (most           14
                                          excellent)

Hamilton (tolerable)                  15  Trossachs                 16

Glasgow (tolerable)                   11  Ferryman’s                 8
                                          House (about 8)

Dumbarton (very good)                 15  Callander to              27
                                          Falkirk
                                          (baddish)

Luss (excellent)                      13  Edinburgh                 24
                                          (good)

Tarbet (not bad)                       8  Roslin (good)              6

Arrochar (good)                        2  Peebles (good)            16

Cairndow (middling)                   12  Clovenford                16
                                          (tolerable)

Inverary (very good)                  10  Melrose                    8
                                          (tolerable)

Dalmally (tolerable)                  16  Dryburgh (good)            4

Taynuilt (excellent)                  13  Jedburgh                  10
                                          (roughish)

Portnacroish (tolerable)              15  Hawick (good)             12

Ballachulish (part most               12  Langholm (very            24 excellent)         
good)

King’s House (bad)                    12  Longtown (good)           12

Tyndrum (good)                        18  Carlisle                   8

                                          Grasmere                  36

FOOTNOTES.

{0a}  See Essays of R. H. Hutton, Esq., vol. ii.

{0b}  See Appendix, pp. 304, 307.

{0c}  The following is the entry referred to:—

    ‘October 4th, 1832.—I find that this tour was both begun and ended on
    a Sunday.  I am sorry that it should have been so, though I hope and
    trust that our thoughts and feelings were not seldom as pious and
    serious as if we had duly attended a place devoted to public worship.
    My sentiments have undergone a great change since 1803 respecting the
    absolute necessity of keeping the Sabbath by a regular attendance at
    church.

                                                                   ‘D. W.’

{9a}  Criffel.

{9b}  Annandale.

{11}  See Appendix A.

{20}  There is some mistake here.  The Hopetoun title was not taken from any place in the Leadhills,
much less from the house shaped like an H.—Ed.

{27}  Probably the Rev. John Aird, minister of the parish, 1801–1815.

{30}  Ragweed.

{31a}  Tinto.

{33}  New Lanark, Robert Owen’s mills.

{36a}  Lady Mary Ross.

{36b}  Corehouse.

{36c}  See Appendix B.

{45}  The house belonging to the Earls of Hopetoun at Leadhills, not that which bears this
name about twelve miles from Edinburgh.—Ed.

{53}  Glasgow Green.

{56}  No doubt Erskine House, the seat of Lord Blantyre.—Ed.

{61}  A huge isolated rock in Borrowdale, Cumberland, which bears that name.—Ed.

{63}  The inscription on the pillar was written by Professor George Stuart of Edinburgh, John
Ramsay of Ochtertyre, and Dr. Samuel Johnson; for Dr. Johnson’s share in the work see Croker’s
Boswell, p. 392.—Ed.

{67}  Camstraddan House and bay.—Ed.

{80a}  This distinction between the foot and head is not very clear. What is meant is this:
They would have to travel the whole length of the lake, from the west to the east end of it,
before they came to the Trossachs, the pass leading away from the east end of the lake.—Ed.

{93}  There is a mistake here.  His bones were laid about fifteen or twenty miles from thence,
in Balquhidder kirkyard.  See Note 15 at the end of volume.—Ed.

{97}  Goblins’ Cave.

{113}  To a Highland Girl.  At Inversneyde upon Loch Lomond.

{124}  I should rather think so!—Ed.

{131}  ‘Capability’ Brown.

{134}  Quære, Cladich.—Ed.

{139a}  Not very probable.

{139b}  See Appendix C.

{142}  The Pass of Awe.—Ed.

{155}  Lochnell House.

{160}  Castle Stalker.

{161}  George, seventh Marquis of Tweeddale, being in France in 1803, was detained by Bonaparte,
and died at Verdun, 9th August 1804.—Ed.

{165}  See Appendix D

{177}  Buchal, the Shepherd of Etive.

{186}  Quære, Luib.

{187}  The burial-place of Macnab of Macnab.

{190}  In this interval her dear brother, Captain Wordsworth, had been drowned, as stated in
note to page 3, in the wreck of the ‘Abergavenny,’ on February 5, 1805.

{210}  See Appendix E.

{215}  Monzie probably.

{216}  Glen Ogle.

{218}  Ardhullary.

{225a}  This is none other than the well-known Scottish word ‘gey,’—indifferently, tolerable,
considerable.—Ed.

{225b}  See Appendix F.

{246}  See Lockhart’s Life of Scott for an account of this visit, vol. i. pp. 402–7.  Mr. L.
says, ‘I have drawn up the account of this meeting from my recollection, partly of Mr. W.’s
conversation, partly from that of his sister’s charming “Diary,” which he was so kind as to
read to me on the 16th May 1836.’—Ed.

{254}  See Appendix G.

{266}  W. Laidlaw.  See Scott’s Life, vol. i.

{295}  On the banks of the River Nid, near Knaresborough.

{314}  If this is not a misprint, the Lady had antedated her tour by two years, as she made
it in 1796 and published it in 1799.