The travellers, however, took care to gather up the gold, the rubies, and the emeralds.

"Where are we?" cried Candide. "The king's children in this country must be well brought up,
since they are taught to despise gold and precious stones."

Cacambo was as much surprised as Candide. At length they drew near the first house in the village.
It was built like an European palace. A crowd of people pressed about the door, and there were
still more in the house. They heard most agreeable music, and were aware of a delicious odour
of cooking. Cacambo went up to the door and heard they were talking Peruvian; it was his mother
tongue, for it is well known that Cacambo was born in Tucuman, in a village where no other
language was spoken.

"I will be your interpreter here," said he to Candide; "let us go in, it is a public-house."

Immediately two waiters and two girls, dressed in cloth of gold, and their hair tied up with
ribbons, invited them to sit down to table with the landlord. They served four dishes of soup,
each garnished with two young parrots; a boiled condor[19] which weighed two hundred pounds;
two roasted monkeys, of excellent flavour; three hundred humming-birds in one dish, and six
hundred fly-birds in another; exquisite ragouts; delicious pastries; the whole served up in
dishes of a kind of rock-crystal. The waiters and girls poured out several liqueurs drawn from
the sugar-cane.

Most of the company were chapmen and waggoners, all extremely polite; they asked Cacambo a
few questions with the greatest circumspection, and answered his in the most obliging manner.

As soon as dinner was over, Cacambo believed as well as Candide that they might well pay their
reckoning by laying down two of those large gold pieces which they had picked up. The landlord
and landlady shouted with laughter and held their sides. When the fit was over:

"Gentlemen," said the landlord, "it is plain you are strangers, and such guests we are not
accustomed to see; pardon us therefore for laughing when you offered us the pebbles from our
highroads in payment of your reckoning. You doubtless have not the money of the country; but
it is not necessary to have any money at all to dine in this house. All hostelries established
for the convenience of commerce are paid by the government. You have fared but very indifferently
because this is a poor village; but everywhere else, you will be received as you deserve."

Cacambo explained this whole discourse with great astonishment to Candide, who was as greatly
astonished to hear it.

"What sort of a country then is this," said they to one another; "a country unknown to all
the rest of the world, and where nature is of a kind so different from ours? It is probably
the country where all is well; for there absolutely must be one such place. And, whatever Master
Pangloss might say, I often found that things went very ill in Westphalia."

XVIII

WHAT THEY SAW IN THE COUNTRY OF EL DORADO.

Cacambo expressed his curiosity to the landlord, who made answer:

"I am very ignorant, but not the worse on that account. However, we have in this neighbourhood
an old man retired from Court who is the most learned and most communicative person in the
kingdom."

At once he took Cacambo to the old man. Candide acted now only a second character, and accompanied
his valet. They entered a very plain house, for the door was only of silver, and the ceilings
were only of gold, but wrought in so elegant a taste as to vie with the richest. The antechamber,
indeed, was only encrusted with rubies and emeralds, but the order in which everything was
arranged made amends for this great simplicity.

The old man received the strangers on his sofa, which was stuffed with humming-birds' feathers,
and ordered his servants to present them with liqueurs in diamond goblets; after which he satisfied
their curiosity in the following terms:

"I am now one hundred and seventy-two years old, and I learnt of my late father, Master of
the Horse to the King, the amazing revolutions of Peru, of which he had been an eyewitness.
The kingdom we now inhabit is the ancient country of the Incas, who quitted it very imprudently
to conquer another part of the world, and were at length destroyed by the Spaniards.

"More wise by far were the princes of their family, who remained in their native country; and
they ordained, with the consent of the whole nation, that none of the inhabitants should ever
be permitted to quit this little kingdom; and this has preserved our innocence and happiness.
The Spaniards have had a confused notion of this country, and have called it El Dorado; and
an Englishman, whose name was Sir Walter Raleigh, came very near it about a hundred years ago;
but being surrounded by inaccessible rocks and precipices, we have hitherto been sheltered
from the rapaciousness of European nations, who have an inconceivable passion for the pebbles
and dirt of our land, for the sake of which they would murder us to the last man."

The conversation was long: it turned chiefly on their form of government, their manners, their
women, their public entertainments, and the arts. At length Candide, having always had a taste
for metaphysics, made Cacambo ask whether there was any religion in that country.

The old man reddened a little.

"How then," said he, "can you doubt it? Do you take us for ungrateful wretches?"

Cacambo humbly asked, "What was the religion in El Dorado?"

The old man reddened again.

"Can there be two religions?" said he. "We have, I believe, the religion of all the world:
we worship God night and morning."

"Do you worship but one God?" said Cacambo, who still acted as interpreter in representing
Candide's doubts.

"Surely," said the old man, "there are not two, nor three, nor four. I must confess the people
from your side of the world ask very extraordinary questions."

Candide was not yet tired of interrogating the good old man; he wanted to know in what manner
they prayed to God in El Dorado.

"We do not pray to Him," said the worthy sage; "we have nothing to ask of Him; He has given
us all we need, and we return Him thanks without ceasing."

Candide having a curiosity to see the priests asked where they were. The good old man smiled.

"My friend," said he, "we are all priests. The King and all the heads of families sing solemn
canticles of thanksgiving every morning, accompanied by five or six thousand musicians."

"What! have you no monks who teach, who dispute, who govern, who cabal, and who burn people
that are not of their opinion?"

"We must be mad, indeed, if that were the case," said the old man; "here we are all of one
opinion, and we know not what you mean by monks."

During this whole discourse Candide was in raptures, and he said to himself:

"This is vastly different from Westphalia and the Baron's castle. Had our friend Pangloss seen
El Dorado he would no longer have said that the castle of Thunder-ten-Tronckh was the finest
upon earth. It is evident that one must travel."

After this long conversation the old man ordered a coach and six sheep to be got ready, and
twelve of his domestics to conduct the travellers to Court.

"Excuse me," said he, "if my age deprives me of the honour of accompanying you. The King will
receive you in a manner that cannot displease you; and no doubt you will make an allowance
for the customs of the country, if some things should not be to your liking."

Candide and Cacambo got into the coach, the six sheep flew, and in less than four hours they
reached the King's palace situated at the extremity of the capital. The portal was two hundred
and twenty feet high, and one hundred wide; but words are wanting to express the materials
of which it was built. It is plain such materials must have prodigious superiority over those
pebbles and sand which we call gold and precious stones.

Twenty beautiful damsels of the King's guard received Candide and Cacambo as they alighted
from the coach, conducted them to the bath, and dressed them in robes woven of the down of
humming-birds; after which the great crown officers, of both sexes, led them to the King's
apartment, between two files of musicians, a thousand on each side. When they drew near to
the audience chamber Cacambo asked one of the great officers in what way he should pay his
obeisance to his Majesty; whether they should throw themselves upon their knees or on their
stomachs; whether they should put their hands upon their heads or behind their backs; whether
they should lick the dust off the floor; in a word, what was the ceremony?

"The custom," said the great officer, "is to embrace the King, and to kiss him on each cheek."

Candide and Cacambo threw themselves round his Majesty's neck. He received them with all the
goodness imaginable, and politely invited them to supper.

While waiting they were shown the city, and saw the public edifices raised as high as the clouds,
the market places ornamented with a thousand columns, the fountains of spring water, those
of rose water, those of liqueurs drawn from sugar-cane, incessantly flowing into the great
squares, which were paved with a kind of precious stone, which gave off a delicious fragrancy
like that of cloves and cinnamon. Candide asked to see the court of justice, the parliament.
They told him they had none, and that they were strangers to lawsuits. He asked if they had
any prisons, and they answered no. But what surprised him most and gave him the greatest pleasure
was the palace of sciences, where he saw a gallery two thousand feet long, and filled with
instruments employed in mathematics and physics.

After rambling about the city the whole afternoon, and seeing but a thousandth part of it,
they were reconducted to the royal palace, where Candide sat down to table with his Majesty,
his valet Cacambo, and several ladies. Never was there a better entertainment, and never was
more wit shown at a table than that which fell from his Majesty. Cacambo explained the King's
bon-mots to Candide, and notwithstanding they were translated they still appeared to be bon-mots.
Of all the things that surprised Candide this was not the least.

They spent a month in this hospitable place. Candide frequently said to Cacambo:

"I own, my friend, once more that the castle where I was born is nothing in comparison with
this; but, after all, Miss Cunegonde is not here, and you have, without doubt, some mistress
in Europe. If we abide here we shall only be upon a footing with the rest, whereas, if we return
to our old world, only with twelve sheep laden with the pebbles of El Dorado, we shall be richer
than all the kings in Europe. We shall have no more Inquisitors to fear, and we may easily
recover Miss Cunegonde."

This speech was agreeable to Cacambo; mankind are so fond of roving, of making a figure in
their own country, and of boasting of what they have seen in their travels, that the two happy
ones resolved to be no longer so, but to ask his Majesty's leave to quit the country.

"You are foolish," said the King. "I am sensible that my kingdom is but a small place, but
when a person is comfortably settled in any part he should abide there. I have not the right
to detain strangers. It is a tyranny which neither our manners nor our laws permit. All men
are free. Go when you wish, but the going will be very difficult. It is impossible to ascend
that rapid river on which you came as by a miracle, and which runs under vaulted rocks. The
mountains which surround my kingdom are ten thousand feet high, and as steep as walls; they
are each over ten leagues in breadth, and there is no other way to descend them than by precipices.
However, since you absolutely wish to depart, I shall give orders to my engineers to construct
a machine that will convey you very safely. When we have conducted you over the mountains no
one can accompany you further, for my subjects have made a vow never to quit the kingdom, and
they are too wise to break it. Ask me besides anything that you please."

"We desire nothing of your Majesty," says Candide, "but a few sheep laden with provisions,
pebbles, and the earth of this country."

The King laughed.

"I cannot conceive," said he, "what pleasure you Europeans find in our yellow clay, but take
as much as you like, and great good may it do you."

At once he gave directions that his engineers should construct a machine to hoist up these
two extraordinary men out of the kingdom. Three thousand good mathematicians went to work;
it was ready in fifteen days, and did not cost more than twenty million sterling in the specie
of that country. They placed Candide and Cacambo on the machine. There were two great red sheep
saddled and bridled to ride upon as soon as they were beyond the mountains, twenty pack-sheep
laden with provisions, thirty with presents of the curiosities of the country, and fifty with
gold, diamonds, and precious stones. The King embraced the two wanderers very tenderly.

Their departure, with the ingenious manner in which they and their sheep were hoisted over
the mountains, was a splendid spectacle. The mathematicians took their leave after conveying
them to a place of safety, and Candide had no other desire, no other aim, than to present his
sheep to Miss Cunegonde.

"Now," said he, "we are able to pay the Governor of Buenos Ayres if Miss Cunegonde can be ransomed.
Let us journey towards Cayenne. Let us embark, and we will afterwards see what kingdom we shall
be able to purchase."

XIX

WHAT HAPPENED TO THEM AT SURINAM AND HOW CANDIDE GOT ACQUAINTED WITH MARTIN.

Our travellers spent the first day very agreeably. They were delighted with possessing more
treasure than all Asia, Europe, and Africa could scrape together. Candide, in his raptures,
cut Cunegonde's name on the trees. The second day two of their sheep plunged into a morass,
where they and their burdens were lost; two more died of fatigue a few days after; seven or
eight perished with hunger in a desert; and others subsequently fell down precipices. At length,
after travelling a hundred days, only two sheep remained. Said Candide to Cacambo:

"My friend, you see how perishable are the riches of this world; there is nothing solid but
virtue, and the happiness of seeing Cunegonde once more."

"I grant all you say," said Cacambo, "but we have still two sheep remaining, with more treasure
than the King of Spain will ever have; and I see a town which I take to be Surinam, belonging
to the Dutch. We are at the end of all our troubles, and at the beginning of happiness."

As they drew near the town, they saw a negro stretched upon the ground, with only one moiety
of his clothes, that is, of his blue linen drawers; the poor man had lost his left leg and
his right hand.

"Good God!" said Candide in Dutch, "what art thou doing there, friend, in that shocking condition?"

"I am waiting for my master, Mynheer Vanderdendur, the famous merchant," answered the negro.

"Was it Mynheer Vanderdendur," said Candide, "that treated thee thus?"

"Yes, sir," said the negro, "it is the custom. They give us a pair of linen drawers for our
whole garment twice a year. When we work at the sugar-canes, and the mill snatches hold of
a finger, they cut off the hand; and when we attempt to run away, they cut off the leg; both
cases have happened to me. This is the price at which you eat sugar in Europe. Yet when my
mother sold me for ten patagons[20] on the coast of Guinea, she said to me: 'My dear child,
bless our fetiches, adore them for ever; they will make thee live happily; thou hast the honour
of being the slave of our lords, the whites, which is making the fortune of thy father and
mother.' Alas! I know not whether I have made their fortunes; this I know, that they have not
made mine. Dogs, monkeys, and parrots are a thousand times less wretched than I. The Dutch
fetiches, who have converted me, declare every Sunday that we are all of us children of Adam--blacks
as well as whites. I am not a genealogist, but if these preachers tell truth, we are all second
cousins. Now, you must agree, that it is impossible to treat one's relations in a more barbarous
manner."

"Oh, Pangloss!" cried Candide, "thou hadst not guessed at this abomination; it is the end.
I must at last renounce thy optimism."

"What is this optimism?" said Cacambo.

"Alas!" said Candide, "it is the madness of maintaining that everything is right when it is wrong."

Looking at the negro, he shed tears, and weeping, he entered Surinam.

The first thing they inquired after was whether there was a vessel in the harbour which could
be sent to Buenos Ayres. The person to whom they applied was a Spanish sea-captain, who offered
to agree with them upon reasonable terms. He appointed to meet them at a public-house, whither
Candide and the faithful Cacambo went with their two sheep, and awaited his coming.

Candide, who had his heart upon his lips, told the Spaniard all his adventures, and avowed
that he intended to elope with Miss Cunegonde.

"Then I will take good care not to carry you to Buenos Ayres," said the seaman. "I should be
hanged, and so would you. The fair Cunegonde is my lord's favourite mistress."

This was a thunderclap for Candide: he wept for a long while. At last he drew Cacambo aside.

"Here, my dear friend," said he to him, "this thou must do. We have, each of us in his pocket,
five or six millions in diamonds; you are more clever than I; you must go and bring Miss Cunegonde
from Buenos Ayres. If the Governor makes any difficulty, give him a million; if he will not
relinquish her, give him two; as you have not killed an Inquisitor, they will have no suspicion
of you; I'll get another ship, and go and wait for you at Venice; that's a free country, where
there is no danger either from Bulgarians, Abares, Jews, or Inquisitors."

Cacambo applauded this wise resolution. He despaired at parting from so good a master, who
had become his intimate friend; but the pleasure of serving him prevailed over the pain of
leaving him. They embraced with tears; Candide charged him not to forget the good old woman.
Cacambo set out that very same day. This Cacambo was a very honest fellow.

Candide stayed some time longer in Surinam, waiting for another captain to carry him and the
two remaining sheep to Italy. After he had hired domestics, and purchased everything necessary
for a long voyage, Mynheer Vanderdendur, captain of a large vessel, came and offered his services.

"How much will you charge," said he to this man, "to carry me straight to Venice--me, my servants,
my baggage, and these two sheep?"

The skipper asked ten thousand piastres. Candide did not hesitate.

"Oh! oh!" said the prudent Vanderdendur to himself, "this stranger gives ten thousand piastres
unhesitatingly! He must be very rich."

Returning a little while after, he let him know that upon second consideration, he could not
undertake the voyage for less than twenty thousand piastres.

"Well, you shall have them," said Candide.

"Ay!" said the skipper to himself, "this man agrees to pay twenty thousand piastres with as
much ease as ten."

He went back to him again, and declared that he could not carry him to Venice for less than
thirty thousand piastres.

"Then you shall have thirty thousand," replied Candide.

"Oh! oh!" said the Dutch skipper once more to himself, "thirty thousand piastres are a trifle
to this man; surely these sheep must be laden with an immense treasure; let us say no more
about it. First of all, let him pay down the thirty thousand piastres; then we shall see."

Candide sold two small diamonds, the least of which was worth more than what the skipper asked
for his freight. He paid him in advance. The two sheep were put on board. Candide followed
in a little boat to join the vessel in the roads. The skipper seized his opportunity, set sail,
and put out to sea, the wind favouring him. Candide, dismayed and stupefied, soon lost sight
of the vessel.

"Alas!" said he, "this is a trick worthy of the old world!"

He put back, overwhelmed with sorrow, for indeed he had lost sufficient to make the fortune
of twenty monarchs. He waited upon the Dutch magistrate, and in his distress he knocked over
loudly at the door. He entered and told his adventure, raising his voice with unnecessary vehemence.
The magistrate began by fining him ten thousand piastres for making a noise; then he listened
patiently, promised to examine into his affair at the skipper's return, and ordered him to
pay ten thousand piastres for the expense of the hearing.

This drove Candide to despair; he had, indeed, endured misfortunes a thousand times worse;
the coolness of the magistrate and of the skipper who had robbed him, roused his choler and
flung him into a deep melancholy. The villainy of mankind presented itself before his imagination
in all its deformity, and his mind was filled with gloomy ideas. At length hearing that a French
vessel was ready to set sail for Bordeaux, as he had no sheep laden with diamonds to take along
with him he hired a cabin at the usual price. He made it known in the town that he would pay
the passage and board and give two thousand piastres to any honest man who would make the voyage
with him, upon condition that this man was the most dissatisfied with his state, and the most
unfortunate in the whole province.

Such a crowd of candidates presented themselves that a fleet of ships could hardly have held
them. Candide being desirous of selecting from among the best, marked out about one-twentieth
of them who seemed to be sociable men, and who all pretended to merit his preference. He assembled
them at his inn, and gave them a supper on condition that each took an oath to relate his history
faithfully, promising to choose him who appeared to be most justly discontented with his state,
and to bestow some presents upon the rest.

They sat until four o'clock in the morning. Candide, in listening to all their adventures,
was reminded of what the old woman had said to him in their voyage to Buenos Ayres, and of
her wager that there was not a person on board the ship but had met with very great misfortunes.
He dreamed of Pangloss at every adventure told to him.

"This Pangloss," said he, "would be puzzled to demonstrate his system. I wish that he were
here. Certainly, if all things are good, it is in El Dorado and not in the rest of the world."

At length he made choice of a poor man of letters, who had worked ten years for the booksellers
of Amsterdam. He judged that there was not in the whole world a trade which could disgust one more.

This philosopher was an honest man; but he had been robbed by his wife, beaten by his son,
and abandoned by his daughter who got a Portuguese to run away with her. He had just been deprived
of a small employment, on which he subsisted; and he was persecuted by the preachers of Surinam,
who took him for a Socinian. We must allow that the others were at least as wretched as he;
but Candide hoped that the philosopher would entertain him during the voyage. All the other
candidates complained that Candide had done them great injustice; but he appeased them by giving
one hundred piastres to each.

XX

WHAT HAPPENED AT SEA TO CANDIDE AND MARTIN.

