TRIVIA

By Logan Pearsall Smith

1917

Bibliographical Note

Some of these pieces were privately printed at the Chiswick Press in 1902. Others have appeared
in the "New Statesman" and "The New Republic," and are here reprinted with the Editors' permission.

Preface

"You must beware of thinking too much about Style," said my kindly adviser, "or you will become
like those fastidious people who polish and polish until there is nothing left."

"Then there really are such people?" I asked, lost in the thought of how much I should like
to meet them. But the well-informed lady could give me no precise information about them.

I often hear of them in this tantalizing manner, and perhaps one day I shall get to know them.
They sound delightful.

The Author

These pieces of moral prose have been written, dear Reader, by a large Carnivorous Mammal,
belonging to that suborder of the Animal Kingdom which includes also the Orang-outang, the
tusked Gorilla, the Baboon with his bright blue and scarlet bottom, and the long-eared Chimpanzee.

List of Contents

BOOK I

    Preface

    The Author

    Happiness

    To-day

    The Afternoon Post

    The Busy Bees

    The Wheat

    The Coming of Fate

    My Speech

    Stonehenge

    The Stars

    Silvia Doria

    Bligh House

    In Church

    Parsons

    The Sound of a Voice

    What Happens

    A Precaution

    The Great Work

    My Mission

    The Birds

    High Life

    Empty Shells

    Dissatisfaction

    A Fancy

    They

    In the Pulpit

    Human Ends

    Lord Arden

    The Starry Heaven

    My Map

    The Snob

    Companions

    Edification

    The Rose

    The Vicar of Lynch

    Tu Quoque Fontium

    The Spider

BOOK II

    L'Oiseau Bleu

    At the Bank

    Mammon

    I See the World

    Social Success Apotheosis

    The Spring in London

    Fashion Plates

    Mental Vice

    The Organ of Life

    Humiliation

    Green Ivory

    In the Park

    The Correct

    "Where Do I Come In?"

    Microbes

    The Quest

    The Kaleidoscope

    Oxford Street

    Beauty

    The Power of Words

    Self-Analysis

    The Voice of the World

    And Anyhow

    Drawbacks

    Talk

    The Church of England

    Misgiving

    Sanctuaries

    Symptoms

    Shadowed

    The Incredible

    Terror

    Pathos

    Inconstancy

    The Poplar

    On the Doorstep Old Clothes

    Youth

    Consolation

    Sir Eustace Carr

    The Lord Mayor

    The Burden

    Under an Umbrella

TRIVIA

BOOK I

How blest my lot, in these sweet fields assign'd Where Peace and Leisure soothe the tuneful mind.

SCOTT, of Amwell, Moral Eclogues (1773)

Happiness

Cricketers on village greens, haymakers in the evening sunshine, small boats that sail before
the wind--all these create in me the illusion of Happiness, as if a land of cloudless pleasure,
a piece of the old Golden World, were hidden, not (as poets have imagined), in far seas or
beyond inaccessible mountains, but here close at hand, if one could find it, in some undiscovered
valley. Certain grassy lanes seem to lead between the meadows thither; the wild pigeons talk
of it behind the woods.

To-Day

I woke this morning out of dreams into what we call Reality, into the daylight, the furniture
of my familiar bedroom--in fact into the well-known, often-discussed, but, to my mind, as yet
unexplained Universe.

Then I, who came out of Eternity and seem to be on my way thither, got up and spent the day
as I usually spend it. I read, I pottered, I talked, and took exercise; and I sat punctually
down to eat the cooked meals that appeared at stated intervals.

The Afternoon Post

The village Post Office, with its clock and letter-box, its postmistress lost in tales of love-lorn
Dukes and coroneted woe, and the sallow-faced grocer watching from his window opposite, is
the scene of a daily crisis in my life, when every afternoon I walk there through the country
lanes and ask that well-read young lady for my letters. I always expect good news and cheques;
and then, of course, there is the magical Fortune which is coming, and word of it may reach
me any day. What it is, this strange Felicity, or whence it shall come, I have no notion; but
I hurry down in the morning to find the news on the breakfast table, open telegrams in delighted
panic, and say to myself "Here it is!" when at night I hear wheels approaching along the road.
So, happy in the hope of Happiness, and not greatly concerned with any other interest or ambition,
I live on in my quiet, ordered house; and so I shall live perhaps until the end. Is it, indeed,
merely the last great summons and revelation for which I am waiting? I do not know.

The Busy Bees

Sitting for hours idle in the shade of an apple tree, near the garden-hives, and under the
aerial thoroughfares of those honey-merchants--sometimes when the noonday heat is loud with
their minute industry, or when they fall in crowds out of the late sun to their night-long
labours-I have sought instruction from the Bees, and tried to appropriate to myself the old
industrious lesson.

And yet, hang it all, who by rights should be the teachers and who the learners? For those
peevish, over-toiled, utilitarian insects, was there no lesson to be derived from the spectacle
of Me? Gazing out at me with myriad eyes from their joyless factories, might they not learn
at last--might I not finally teach them--a wiser and more generous-hearted way to improve the
shining hour?

The Wheat

The Vicar, whom I met once or twice in my walks about the fields, told me that he was glad
that I was taking an interest in farming. Only my feeling about wheat, he said, puzzled him.

Now the feeling in regard to wheat which I had not been able to make clear to the Vicar was
simply one of amazement. Walking one day into a field that I had watched yellowing beyond the
trees, I found myself dazzled by the glow and great expanse of gold. I bathed myself in the
intense yellow under the intense blue sky; how dim it made the oak trees and copses and all
the rest of the English landscape seem! I had not remembered the glory of the Wheat; nor imagined
in my reading that in a country so far from the Sun there could be anything so rich, so prodigal,
so reckless, as this opulence of ruddy gold, bursting out from the cracked earth as from some
fiery vein below. I remembered how for thousands of years Wheat had been the staple of wealth,
the hoarded wealth of famous cities and empires; I thought of the processes of corn-growing,
the white oxen ploughing, the great barns, the winnowing fans, the mills with the splash of
their wheels, or arms slow-turning in the wind; of cornfields at harvest-time, with shocks
and sheaves in the glow of sunset, or under the sickle moon; what beauty it brought into the
northern landscape, the antique, passionate, Biblical beauty of the South!

The Coming of Fate

When I seek out the sources of my thoughts, I find they had their beginning in fragile Chance;
were born of little moments that shine for me curiously in the past. Slight the impulse that
made me take this turning at the crossroads, trivial and fortuitous the meeting, and light
as gossamer the thread that first knit me to my friend. These are full of wonder; more mysterious
are the moments that must have brushed me with their wings and passed me by: when Fate beckoned
and I did not see it, when new Life trembled for a second on the threshold; but the word was
not spoken, the hand was not held out, and the Might-have-been shivered and vanished, dim as
a into the waste realms of non-existence.

So I never lose a sense of the whimsical and perilous charm of daily life, with its meetings
and words and accidents. Why, to-day, perhaps, or next week, I may hear a voice, and, packing
up my Gladstone bag, follow it to the ends of the world.

My Speech

"Ladies and Gentlemen," I began--The Vicar was in the chair; Mrs. La Mountain and her daughters
sat facing us; and in the little schoolroom, with its maps and large Scripture prints, its
blackboard with the day's sums still visible on it, were assembled the labourers of the village,
the old family coachman and his wife, the one-eyed postman, and the gardeners and boys from
the Hall. Having culled from the newspapers a few phrases, I had composed a speech which I
delivered with a spirit and eloquence surprising even to myself, and which was now enthusiastically
received. The Vicar cried "Hear, Hear!", the Vicar's wife pounded her umbrella with such emphasis,
and the villagers cheered so heartily, that my heart was warmed. I began to feel the meaning
of my own words; I beamed on the audience, felt that they were all brothers, all wished well
to the Republic; and it seemed to me an occasion to express my real ideas and hopes for the
Commonwealth.

Brushing therefore to one side, and indeed quite forgetting my safe principles, I began to
refashion and new-model the State. Most existing institutions were soon abolished; and then,
on their ruins, I proceeded to build up the bright walls and palaces of the City within me--the
City I had read of in Plato. With enthusiasm, and, I flatter myself, with eloquence, I described
it all--the Warriors, that race of golden youth bred from the State-ordered embraces of the
brave and fair; those philosophic Guardians, who, being ever accustomed to the highest and
most extensive views, and thence contracting an habitual greatness, possessed the truest fortitude,
looking down indeed with a kind of disregard on human life and death. And then, declaring that
the pattern of this City was laid up in Heaven, I sat down, amid the cheers of the uncomprehending
little audience.

And afterward, in my rides about the country, when I saw on walls and the doors of barns, among
advertisements of sales, or regulations about birds' eggs or the movements of swine, little
weather-beaten, old-looking notices on which it was stated that I would "address the meeting,"
I remembered how the walls and towers of the City I had built up in that little schoolroom
had shone with no heavenly light in the eyes of the Vicar's party.

Stonehenge

They sit there forever on the dim horizon of my mind, that Stonehenge circle of elderly disapproving
Faces--Faces of the Uncles and Schoolmasters and Tutors who frowned on my youth.

In the bright centre and sunlight I leap, I caper, I dance my dance; but when I look up, I
see they are not deceived. For nothing ever placates them, nothing ever moves to a look of
approval that ring of bleak and contemptuous Faces.

The Stars

Battling my way homeward one dark night against the wind and rain, a sudden gust, stronger
than the others, drove me back into the shelter of a tree. But soon the Western sky broke open;
the illumination of the Stars poured down from behind the dispersing clouds.

I was astonished at their brightness, to see how they filled the night with their soft lustre.
So I went my way accompanied by them; Arcturus followed me, and becoming entangled in a leafy
tree, shone by glimpses, and then emerged triumphant, Lord of the Western sky. Moving along
the road in the silence of my own footsteps, my thoughts were among the Constellations. [Sidenote:
The Burghers mobilised.]

This note of September 22nd, together with a second communication
of the same date, in which Mr. Chamberlain warmly repudiated the charges
of bad faith brought against Sir William Greene, reached the Pretoria
Executive on the 25th, and on the same day it was known that a British
force had entrained at Ladysmith for Glencoe.

On the 26th intelligence of so serious a nature reached Lord Milner, that he telegraphed to
warn the Home Government that the Transvaal and Free State were likely to take the initiative.
According to Mr. Amery,[174] an ultimatum had been drafted upon receipt of the British note,
and telegraphed on the following day to President Steyn for his approval. At Bloemfontein,
however, the document was entirely recast by Mr. Fischer. Even so, in its amended form, it was ready
on the 27th.

On that day the Free State Raad, after six days of secret session, determined to join the sister
Republic in declaring war upon Great Britain, and on the 28th the Transvaal commandos were mobilised.
The ultimatum, according to the same authority, would have been delivered to Sir William Greene
on Monday, October 2nd, had not deficiencies in the Boer transport and commissariat arrangements
made it impossible for the burgher forces to advance immediately upon the British troops in Natal.
At the last moment, also, President Steyn seems to have had some misgivings. On September 26th,
together with the draft ultimatum from Pretoria, a suggestive telegram from Capetown, signed
"Micaiah," and bidding him "Read chapter xxii. 1st Book of Kings, and accept warning," had
reached him;[175] and a few days later he received, through Mr. Fischer,
a powerful appeal for peace from Sir Henry de Villiers.

[Footnote 174: Times correspondent and editor of The Times History of the War.


But, in spite of her father, and her own girlish love of gold and rank, it was not for Henry
that she cared, not for the old Lord, but for Francis, the younger son. Did Francis know of
this? They were secretly lovers, the old scandal reported; and the scandal, it may be, had
reached her father's ears.

For one day a coach with foaming horses, and the wicked face of an old man at its window, galloped
up the avenue; and soon afterwards, when the coach drove away, Silvia Doria was sitting by
the old man's side, sobbing bitterly.

And after she had gone, a long time, many of the old, last-century years, went by without any
change. And then Henry, the eldest son, was killed in hunting; and the old Lord dying a few
years later, the titles and the great house and all the land and gold came to Francis, the
younger son. But after his father's death he was but seldom there; having, as it seemed, no
love for the place, and living for the most part abroad and alone, for he never married.

And again, many years went by. The trees grew taller and darker about the house; the yew hedges
unclipt now, hung their branches over the moss-grown paths; ivy almost smothered the statues;
and the plaster fell away in great patches from the discoloured garden temples.

But at last one day a chariot drove up to the gates; a footman pulled at the crazy bell, telling
the gate-keeper that his mistress wished to visit the Park. So the gates creaked open, the
chariot glittered up the avenue to the deserted place; and a lady stepped out, went into the
garden, and walked among its moss-grown paths and statues. As the chariot drove out again,
"Tell your Lord," the lady said, smiling, to the lodge-keeper, "that Silvia Doria came back."

Bligh House

To the West, in riding past the walls of Bligh, I remembered an incident in the well-known
siege of that house, during the Civil Wars: How, among Waller's invading Roundhead troops,
there happened to be a young scholar, a poet and lover of the Muses, fighting for the cause,
as he thought, of ancient Freedom, who, one day, when the siege was being more hotly urged,
pressing forward and climbing a wall, suddenly found himself in a quiet old garden by the house.
And here, for a time forgetting, as it would seem, the battle, and heedless of the bullets
that now and then flew past him like peevish wasps, the young Officer stayed, gathering roses--old-fashioned
damask roses, streaked with red and white--which, for the sake of a Court Beauty, there besieged
with her father, he carried to the house; falling, however, struck by a chance bullet, or shot
perhaps by one of his own party. A few of the young Officer's verses, written in the stilted
fashion of the time, and almost unreadable now, have been preserved. The lady's portrait hangs
in the white drawing room at Bligh; a simpering, faded figure, with ringlets and drop-pearls,
and a dress of amber-coloured silk.

In Church

"For the Pen," said the Vicar; and in the sententious pause that followed, I felt that I would
offer any gifts of gold to avert or postpone the solemn, inevitable, hackneyed, and yet, as
it seemed to me, perfectly appalling statement that "the Pen is mightier than the Sword."

Parsons

All the same I like Parsons; they think nobly of the Universe, and believe in Souls and Eternal
Happiness. And some of them, I am told, believe in Angels--that there are Angels who guide
our footsteps, and flit to and fro unseen on errands in the air about us.

The Sound of a Voice

As the thoughtful Baronet talked, as his voice went on sounding in my ears, all the light of
desire, and of the sun, faded from the Earth; I saw the vast landscape of the world dim, as
in an eclipse; its populations eating their bread with tears, its rich men sitting listless
in their palaces, and aged Kings crying "Vanity, Vanity, all is Vanity!" lugubriously from
their thrones.

What Happens

"Yes," said Sir Thomas, speaking of a modern novel, "it certainly does seem strange; but the
novelist was right. Personally speaking, I could find it in me to wish that Mr. MAURICE
HEWLETT would consult a good man about the Saga habit, which appears
to be growing upon him, to the loss (or so I think) of all those who
were lovers of his more human and companionable fiction.



A Precaution

The folio gave at length philosophic consolations for all the ills and misfortunes said by
the author to be inseparable from human existence--Poverty, Shipwreck, Plague, Love-Deceptions,
and Inundations. Against these antique Disasters I armed my soul; and I thought it as well
to prepare myself against another inevitable ancient calamity called "Cornutation," or by other
less learned names. How Philosophy taught that after all it was but a pain founded on conceit,
a blow that hurt not; the reply of the Cynic philosopher to one who reproached him, "Is it
my fault or hers?"; how Nevisanus advises the sufferer to ask himself if he have not offended;
Jerome declares it impossible to prevent; how few or none are safe, and the inhabitants of
some countries, especially parts of Africa, consider it the usual and natural thing; How Caesar,
Pompey, Augustus, Agamemnon, Menelaus, Marcus Aurelius, and many other great Kings and Princes
had all worn Actaeon's badge; and how Philip turned it to a jest, Pertinax the Emperor made
no reckoning of it; Erasmus declared it was best winked at, there being no remedy but patience,
Dies dolorem minuit; Time, Age must mend it; and how according to the best authorities, bars,
bolts, oaken doors, and towers of brass, are all in vain. "She is a woman," as the old Pedant
wrote to a fellow Philosopher....

The Great Work

