So he mooches down to the barn till Sandy come in with Buck Devine. They was chattering about
three hundred thousand dollars in round numbers when they got near enough for him to overhear
their private conversation. They wondered why they had wasted so much of their lives in the
cattle business, but now them old hard-working days was over, or soon would be, with nothing
to do but travel round in Pullman palace cars and see America first, and go to movies, and
so forth. Safety wished to haggle some about the mules, but Sandy says he's already stated
the price in clear, ringing tones, and he has no time to waste, being that I must send him
down that night to get an order on the wire for two carloads of the Little Giant peanut. Safety
just blinked at this, not even asking why the peanuts; and the boys left him cold.

When I told 'em about the offer to me of sixty or a possible sixty-five, they at once done
a medicine dance.

"This here will be the richest coop ever pulled off west of Cheyenne," says Buck; and Sandy
says he guesses anybody not blind can now see that well-known street in New York he ought to
have his office on. He says he hopes Safety don't fall too easy, because he wants more chance
to work it up.

But Sandy is doomed to disappointment. Safety holds off only two days more. Two days he loafs
round at mealtimes, listening to their rich converse and saying he'd like to know who's a better
friend of this outfit than he's been for twenty years. The boys tell him if he's such a good
friend to go ahead and prove it with a little barter that would be sure to touch my heart.
And the first day Safety offers seventy-five a head for these here jack rabbits, which they
calmly ignore and go on talking about Liberty Bonds being a good safe investment; and the second
day he just cries like a child that he'll pay eighty-five and trust to their honour that he's
to have in on this new sure-thing deal.

That seemed enough, so they all shook hands with the spendthrift and slapped him on the back
in good fellowship, and said they knew all the time he had a heart of gold and they feel free
to say now that once the money has passed he won't be let to go off the place till he has heard
all about the new enterprise and let in on the ground floor, and they hope he won't ever forget
this moment when the money begins to roll in fit to smother him in round numbers. So Safety
says he knows they're a good square set of boys, as clean as a hound's tooth, and he'll be
over to-morrow to take over the stock and hear the interesting details.

The boys set up late that night figuring their share of the burglary. There was twenty-five
of these ground squirrels. I was to get my fifty a head, at least ten of which was illegitimate.
Then for the thirty-five, which was the real robbery, I was to take half, and eight of the
boys the other half. I begun to wonder that night just what could be done to us under the criminal
law. It looked like three years in some good jail wouldn't be a bit too harsh.

Next day bright and early here comes frugal Safety, gangling along behind his whiskers and
bringing one of his ill-fed hirelings to help drive the stuff back. Safety is rubbing his hands
and acting very sprightly, with an air of false good fellowship. It almost seems like he was
afraid they had thought better of the trade and might try to crawl out. He wants it over quick.
They all go down and help him drive his purchase out of the lower field, where they been hiding
in the tall grass, and in no time at all have the bunch headed down the lane on to the county
road, with Safety's man keeping well up to protect 'em from the coyotes.

Next there's kind of a solemn moment when the check is being made out. Safety performs that
serious operation down at the bunk house. Making out any check is always the great adventure
with him. He writes it with his heart's blood, and not being the greatest scholar in the world
he has to count the letters in his name after it's written--he knows there ought to be nine
together--and then he has to wipe the ink off his hands and sigh dismally and say if this thing
keeps up he'll be spending his old age at the poor farm, and so forth. It all went according
to schedule, except that he seemed strangely eager and under a severe nervous strain.

Me? I'd been, sort of hanging round on the edge of events while the dastardly deed was being
committed, not seeming to be responsible in any way. My Lord! I still wanted to be able to
face the bereaved man as an honest woman and tell him it was only some nonsense of the boys
for which I could not be held under the law, no matter how good a lawyer he'd get. When they
come trooping out of the bunk house I was pretending to consult Abner, the blacksmith, about
some mower parts. And right off I was struck by the fact that Safety seemed to be his old self
again; his air of false gayety and nervous strain had left him and he was cold and silent and
deadly, like the poisonous cobra of India.

But now they was going to spring the new secret enterprise on him, so I moved off toward the
house a bit, not wanting to be too near when his screams begun. It did seem kind of shameful,
taking advantage of the old miser's grasping habits; still, I remembered a few neat things
he'd done to me and I didn't slink too far into the background. Safety was standing by his
horse with the boys all gathered close round him, and I heard Sandy say "Elephants--nothing
but elephants--that's the new idea!"

Then they all begun to talk at once, jabbering about the peanuts and popcorn that crowds of
people will come to buy from us to feed back to our stock, and how there's more meat in an
elephant than in six steers, and about how the punchers will be riding round in these little
cupalos up on top of their big saddle elephants; and they kept getting swifter and more excited
in their talk, till at last they just naturally exploded when they made sure Safety got the
idea and would know he'd been made a fool of. They had a grand time; threw their hats in the
air and danced round their victim and punched each other, and their yells and hearty laughter
could of been heard for miles up and down the creek. Two or three had guns they let off to
add to the gleeful noise. Oh, it was deuces wild for about three minutes. They nearly died
laughing.

Then the whole thing kind of died a strange and painful death. Safety wasn't taking on one
bit like a man that's been stung. He stood there cold and malignant and listened to the noise
and didn't bat an eye till he just naturally quelled the disorder. It got as still as a church,
and then Safety talked a little in a calm voice.

"Elephants?" says he, kind of amused. "Why, elephants ain't no good stock proposition because
it takes 'em so long to mature! Elephants is often a hundred and twenty years old. You'd have
to feed one at least forty years to get him fit to ship. I really am surprised at you boys,
going into a proposition like that without looking up the details. It certainly ain't anything
for my money. Why, you couldn't even veal an elephant till he was about fifteen years old,
which would need at least six thousand dollars' worth of peanuts; and what kind of a stock
business is that, I'd like to know. And even if they could rustle their own feed, what kind
of a business is it where you could only ship once in a lifetime? You boys make me tired, going
hell-bent into an enterprise where you'd all be dead and forgotten before the first turnover
of your stock."

He now looked at 'em in a sad, rebuking manner. It was like an icy blast from Greenland the
way he took it.

Two or three tried to start the big laugh again, but their yips was feeble and died quickly
out. They just stood there foolish. Even Sandy Sawtelle couldn't think of anything bright to say.

Safety now climbs on his horse, strangely cheerful, and says; "Well, I'll have to be getting
along with them new mules of mine." Then he kind of giggled at the crowd and says: "I certainly
got the laugh on this outfit, starting a business where this here old Methusalem hisself could
hardly get it going good before death cut him off!"

And away he rides, chuckling like it was an awful joke on us. Not a single scream of agony
about what had been done to him with them stunted mules.

Of course that was all I needed to know. One deadly chill of fear took me from head to foot.
I knew perfectly well our trench was mined and the fuse lighted. Up comes this chucklehead
of a Sawtelle, and for once in his life he's puzzled.

"Well," he says, "you got to give old S.F. credit for one thing. Did you see the way he tried
to switch the laugh over on to us, and me with his trusty check right here in my hand? I never
would have thought it, but he is certainly one awful good game loser!"

"Game loser nothing!" I says. "He's just a game winner. Any time you see that old boy acting
game he's won. And he's won now, no matter how much the known facts look against it. I don't
know how, but he's won."

They all begin to tell me I must be mistaken, because look at the price we got for stuff we
hadn't been able to sell at any price before. I says I am looking at that, but I'm also obliged
to look at Safety after he's paid that price, and the laws of Nature certainly ain't been suspended
all at once. I offer to bet 'em what they've made on the deal that Safety has run true to form.
"Mark my words," I says, "this is one sad day for the Arrowhead! I don't know how or why, but
we'll soon find out; and if you don't believe me, now's the time to double your money."

But they hung off on that. They got too much respect for my judgment. And they admitted that
Safety's way of standing the gaff had been downright uncanny. So there was nothing to do but
pay over their share of this tainted money and wait for the blow, eight hundred and seventy-five
dollars being the amount I split with 'em for their masterly headwork in the depredation.

That very day in the mail comes a letter that has been delayed because this here Government
of ours pinches a penny even worse than old Timmins does. Yes, sir; this letter had been mailed
at Seattle with a two-cent stamp the day after the Government had boosted the price to three
cents. And what does the Government do? Does it say: "Oh, send it along! Why pinch pennies?"
Not at all. It takes a printed card and a printed envelope and the time of a clerk and an R.F.D.
mail carrier to send me word that I must forward one cent if I want this letter--spends at
least two cents to get one cent. Well, it takes two days for that notice to reach me; and of
course I let it lie round a couple of days, thinking it's probably an advertisement; and then
two days for my one-cent stamp to go back to this parsimonious postmaster; and two days for
the letter to get here; making about eight days, during which things had happened that I should
of known about. Yes, sir; it's a great Government that will worry over one cent and then meet
one of these smooth profiteers and loosen up on a million dollars like a cowhand with three
months' pay hitting a wet town. Of course it was all over when I read this letter.

       *       *       *       *       *

I rolled another cigarette for the injured woman it being no time for words.

"It just goes to show," she observed after the first relishing draft, "that we should be honest,
even with defectives like old Timmins. This man in Seattle that keeps track of prices for me
writes that the top of the mule market has blown sky-high; that if I got anything looking at
all like a mule not to let it go off the place for less than two hundred dollars, because mule
buyers is sure desperate. Safety must of got the same tip, only you can bet his correspondent
put the full three cents on the letter. Safety would never have trusted a strange postmaster
with the excess. Anyway he sold that bunch of rabbits a week later for one hundred and seventy-five
a head, thus adding twenty-two hundred and fifty dollars of my money to his tainted fortune.
You can imagine the pins and needles he'd been on for a week, scared I'd get the tip and knowing
if he even mentioned them runts at any price whatever that I'd be wise at once. That joke of
the boys must of seemed heaven-sent to him.

"You ought to heard the lecture I read them fool punchers on common honesty and how the biter
is always bit. I scared 'em good; there hasn't been an elephant on the place since that day.
They're a chastened lot, all right. I was chastened myself. I admit it. I don't hardly believe
I'll ever attempt anything crooked on old Safety again---and yet, I don't know."

The lady viciously expelled the last smoke from her cigarette and again took up the knitting.

"I don't really know but if there was some wanton, duplicity come up that I could handle myself
and not have to leave to that pack of amateur thieves out in the bunk house, and it was dead
sure and I didn't risk doing more than two years' penal servitude--yes, I really don't know.
Even now mebbe all ain't over between us."

II

A LOVE STORY

I had for some time been noting a slight theatrical tinge to the periodical literature supported
by the big table in the Arrowhead living room. Chiefly the table's burden is composed of trade
journals of the sober quality of the Stockbreeder's Gazette or Mine, Quarry & Derrick or the
"Farmer's Almanac." But if, for example, one really tired of a vivacious column headed "Chats
on Fertilizers" one could, by shuffling the litter, come upon a less sordid magazine frankly
abandoned to the interests of the screen drama.

The one I best recall has limned upon its cover in acceptable flesh tints a fair young face
of flawless beauty framed in a mass of curling golden ringlets. The dewy eyes, shaded to mystery
by lashes of uncommon length, flash a wistful appeal that is faintly belied by the half-smiling
lips and the dimpling chin. The contours are delicate yet firm; a face of haunting appeal--a
face in which tears can be seldom but the sprightly rain of April, and the smile, when it melts
the sensitive lips, will yet warn that hearts are made to ache and here is one not all too
merry in its gladness. It is the face of one of our famous screen beauties, and we know, even
from this tinted half-tone, that the fame has been deserved.

On one of those tired Arrowhead nights, inwardly debating the possible discourtesy of an early
bedding after ten wet miles of trout stream, I came again and again to this compelling face
of the sad smile and the glad tears. It recalled an ideal feminine head much looked at in my
nonage. It was lithographed mostly in pink and was labeled "Tempest and Sunshine." So I loitered
by the big table, dreaming upon the poignant perfections of this idol of a strange new art.
I dreamed until awakened by the bustling return of my hostess, Mrs. Lysander John Pettengill,
who paused beside me to build an after-dinner cigarette, herself glancing meantime at the flawless
face on the magazine cover. I perceived instantly that she also had been caught by its not
too elusive charm.

"A beautiful face," I said.

Ma Pettengill took the magazine from me and studied the dainty thing.

"Yes, he's certainly beautiful," she assented. "He's as handsome as a Greek goddess." Thus
did the woman ambiguously praise that famous screen star, J. Harold Armytage. "And the money
he makes! His salary is one of them you see compared with the President's so as to make the
latter seem a mere trifle. That's a funny thing. I bet at least eighteen million grown people
in this country never did know how much they was paying their president till they saw it quoted
beside some movie star's salary in a piece that tells how he's getting about four times what
we pay the man in the White House. Ain't it a great business, though! Here's this horrible
male beauty that would have to be mighty careful to escape extermination if he was anything
but an actor. Being that, however, he not only eludes the vengeance of a sickened populace,
but he can come out and be raw about it. Here, let me show you."

She turned to the page where J. Harold Armytage began to print a choice few of the letters
he daily received from admirers of the reputedly frailer sex. She now read me one of these
with lamentable efforts of voice to satirize its wooing note: "My darling! I saw that dear
face of yours again to-night in All For Love! So noble and manly you were in the sawmill scene
where first you turn upon the scoundrelly millionaire father of the girl you love, then save
him from the dynamite bomb of the strikers at the risk of your own. Oh, my dearest! Something
tells me your heart is as pure and sweet as your acting, that your dear face could not mask
an evil thought. Oh, my man of all the world! If only you and I together might--"

It seemed enough. Ma Pettengill thought so too. The others were not unlike it. The woman then
read me a few of the replies of J. Harold Armytage to his unknown worshippers. The famous star
was invariably modest and dignified in these. Tactfully, as a gentleman must in any magazine
of wide circulation, he deprecated the worship of these adoring ones and kindly sought to persuade
them that he was but a man--not a god, even if he did chance to receive one of the largest
salaries in the business. The rogue! No god--with the glorious lines of his face there on the
cover to controvert this awkward disclaimer! His beauty flaunted to famished hearts, what avail
to protest weakly that they should put away his image or even to hint, as now and again he
was stern enough to do, that their frankness bordered on the unmaidenly?

I called Ma Pettengill's attention to this engaging modesty. I said it must be an affair of
some delicacy to rebuff ardent and not too reticent fair ones in a public print, and that I
considered J. Harold Armytage to have come out of it with a display of taste that could be
called unusual. The woman replied, with her occasional irrelevance, that if the parties that
hired him should read this stuff they probably wouldn't even then take him out on the lot and
have him bitterly kicked by a succession of ten large labouring men who would take kindly to
the task. She then once more said that the movies was sure one great business, and turned in
the magazine to pleasanter pages on which one Vida Sommers, also a screen idol, it seemed,
gave warning and advice to young girls who contemplated a moving-picture career.

Portraits of Vida Sommers in her best-known roles embellished these pages. In all of the portraits
she wept. In some the tears were visible; in others they had to be guessed, the face being
drawn by anguish. Her feminine correspondents wished particularly to be told of the snares
and temptations besetting the path of the young girl who enters this perilous career. Many
of them seemed rather vague except upon this point. They all seemed to be sure that snares
and temptations would await them, and would Vida Sommers please say how these could be avoided
by young and impressionable girls of good figure and appearance who were now waiting on table
at the American House in Centralia, Illinois, or accepting temporary employment in mercantile
establishments in Chicago, or merely living at home in Zanesville, Ohio, amid conditions unbearably
cramping to their aspirations?

And Vida Sommers told every one of them not to consider the pictures but as a final refuge
from penury. She warned them that they would find the life one of hard work and full of disappointments.
It seemed that even the snares and temptations were disappointing, being more easily evaded
than many of her correspondents appeared to suspect. She advised them all to marry some good,
true man and make a home for him. And surely none of them could have believed the life to be
a joyous one after studying these sorrowful portraits of Vida Sommers.

"That's my little actress friend," said Ma Pettengill. "Doesn't she cry something grand!"

"You've been cheating me," I answered. "I never knew you had a little actress friend. How did
you get her? And doesn't she ever play anything cheerful?"

"Of course not! She only plays mothers, and you know what that means in moving pictures. Ever
see a moving-picture mother that had a chance to be happy for more than the first ten feet
of film? You certainly got to cry to hold down that job. Ain't she always jolted quick in the
first reel by the husband getting all ruined up in Wall Street, or the child getting stole,
or the daughter that's just budding into womanhood running off with a polished shoe-drummer
with city ways, or the only son robbing a bank, or husband taking up with a lady adventuress
that lives across the hall in the same flat and outdresses mother?

"Then it's one jolt after another for her till the last ten feet of the last reel, when everything
comes right somewhere on a ranch out in the great clean West where husband or son has got to
be a man again by mingling with the honest-hearted drunken cowboys in their barroom frolics,
or where daughter has won back her womanhood and made a name for herself by dancing the Nature
dance in the Red Eye Saloon for rough but tender-hearted miners that shower their gold on her
when stewed. Only, in this glad time of the last ten feet she still has to cry a-plenty because
the clouds have passed and she's Oh, so happy at last! Yes, sir; they get mother going and
coming. And when she ain't weeping she has to be scared or mad or something that keeps her
face busy. Here--I got some programmes of new pieces Vida just sent me. You can see she's a
great actress; look at that one: 'Why Did You Make My Mamma Cry?' And these other two."

I looked and believed. The dramas were variously and pithily described as The Picture with
the Punch Powerful--The Smashing Five-Reel Masterpiece--A Play of Peculiar Problems and Tense
Situations--Six Gripping Reels, 7,000 Feet and Every Foot a Punch! Vida Sommers, in the scenes
reproduced from these plays, had indeed a busy face. In the picture captioned "Why Did You
Make My Mamma Cry?" the tiny golden-haired girl is reproaching her father in evening dress.
I read the opening lines of the synopsis: "A young business man, who has been made successful
through his wife's money, is led to neglect her through pressure of affairs, falls into the
toils of a dancer in a public place and becomes a victim of her habit, that of drinking perfume
in her tea--"

But I had not the heart to follow this tragedy. In another, "The Woman Pays--Powerful and Picturesque,
a Virile Masterpiece of Red-Blooded Hearts," Vida Sommers is powerfully hating her husband
whom she has confronted in the den of a sneering and superbly gowned adventuress who declares
that the husband must choose between them. Of course there can be no doubt about the husband's
choice. No sane movie actor would hesitate a second. The caption says of Vida Sommers: "Her
Love Has Turned to Hate." It may be good acting, but it would never get her chosen by the male
of her species--the adventuress being what is known in some circles as a pippin.

I studied still another of these documents--"Hearts Asunder." Vida Sommers has sent her beautiful
daughter to the spring for a pail of water, though everyone in the audience must know that
Gordon Balch, the detestable villain, is lurking outside for precisely this to occur. The synopsis
beautiful says: "The mother now goes in search of her darling, only to find her struggling
in the grasp of Gordon Balch, who is trying to force his attentions on her." This is where
Vida Sommers has to look frightened, though in a later picture one sees that her fright changed
to "A Mother's Honest Rage." The result is that Gordon Balch gets his, and gets it good. The
line under his last appearance is "The End of a Misspent Life." Vida Sommers here registers
pity. As Ma Pettengill had said, her face seemed never to have a moment's rest.

While I studied these exhibits my hostess had not been silent upon the merits of her little
actress friend. Slowly she made me curious as to the origin and inner life of this valued member
of an exalted profession.

"Yes, sir; there she is at the top, drawing down big money, with a nice vine-clad home in this
film town, furnished from a page in a woman's magazine, with a big black limousine like a hearse--all
but the plumes--and a husband that she worships the ground he walks on. Everything the heart
can desire, even to being mother to some of the very saddest persons ever seen on a screen.
It shows what genius will do for a woman when she finds out what kind of genius she's got and
is further goaded by the necessity of supporting a husband in the style to which he has been
accustomed by a doting father. She's some person now, let me tell you.

"She spent a week with me in Red Gap last fall, and you'd ought to seen how certain parties
kowtowed to me so they'd get to meet her. I found that about every woman under fifty in our
town is sure she was born for this here picture work, from Henrietta Templeton Price to Beryl
Mae Macomber, who's expecting any day to be snapped up by some shrewd manager that her type
is bound to appeal to, she being a fair young thing with big eyes and lots of teeth, like all
film actresses. Metta Bigler, that teaches oil painting and burnt wood, give Vida a reception
in her Bohemian studio in Red Gap's Latin Quarter--the studio having a chain of Chianti bottles
on the wall and an ash tray with five burnt cigarette ends on a taboret to make it look Bohemian--and
that was sure the biggest thrill our town has had since the Gus Levy All Star Shamrock Vaudeville
Company stranded there five years ago. It just shows how important my little actress friend
is--and look what she come up from!"

I said I wouldn't mind looking what she come up from if she had started low enough to make
it exciting.

Ma Pettengill said she had that! She had come up from the gutter. She said that Vida Sommers,
the idol of thousands, had been "a mere daughter of the people." Her eyes crinkled as she uttered
this phrase. So I chose a chair in the shadow while she built a second cigarette.

Ten years ago I'm taking a vacation down in New York City. Along comes a letter from Aunt Esther
Colborn, of Fredonia, who is a kind of a third cousin of mine about twice removed. Says her
niece, Vida, has had a good city job as cashier of a dairy lunch in Boston, which is across
the river from some college, but has thrown this job to the winds to marry the only college
son of a rich New York magnate or Wall Street crook who has cast the boy off for contracting
this low alliance with a daughter of the people. Aunt Esther is now afraid Vida isn't right
happy and wants I should look her up and find out. It didn't sound too good, but I obliged.

I go to the address in Sixty-seventh Street on the West Side and find that Vida is keeping
a boarding house. But I was ready to cheer Aunt Esther with a telegram one second after she
opened the door on me--in a big blue apron and a dustcap on her hair. She was the happiest
young woman I ever did see--shining it out every which way. A very attractive girl about twenty-five,
with a slim figure and one of these faces that ain't exactly of howling beauty in any one feature,
but that sure get you when they're sunned up with joy like this one was.

She was pleased to death when I told her my name, and of course I must come in and stay for
dinner so I could see all her boarders that was like one big family and, above all, meet her
darling husband Clyde when he got home from business. The cheeriest thing she was, and I adore
to meet people that are cheery, so I said nothing would please me better. She took me up to
her little bedroom to lay my things off and then down to the parlour where she said I must
rest and excuse her because she still had a few little things to supervise. She did have too.
In the next hour and a half she run up and down two flights of stairs at least ten times. I
could hear her sweeping overhead and jamming things round on the stove when she raced down
to the kitchen. Yes, she had several little things to supervise and one girl to help her. I
peeked into the kitchen once while I was wandering through the lower rooms, and she seemed
to be showing this girl how to boil potatoes. I wondered if she never run down and if her happy
look was really chronic or mebbe put on for my benefit. Still, I could hear her singing to
herself and she moved like a happy person.

In looking round the parlour I was greeted on every wall by pictures of a charming youth I
guessed was darling Clyde. A fine young face he had, and looked as happy as Vida herself. There
was pictures of him with a tennis racket and on a sailboat and with a mandolin and standing
up with his college glee club and setting on a high-powered horse and so forth, all showing
he must be a great social favourite and one born to have a good time. I wondered how he'd come
to confer himself on the cashier of a quick-lunch place. I thought it must be one of these
romances. Then--I'm always remembering the foolishest things--I recalled a funny little absent
look in Vida's eyes when she spoke of her darling coming home from business. I thought now
it must of been pride; that he was performing some low job in a factory or store while she
run the boarding house, and she didn't want me to know it. I thought he must be a pretty fine
rich man's son to stand the gaff this way when cast off by his father for mixing up with a
daughter of the people.

It come dinnertime; about a dozen boarders straggling in, with Vida in a pretty frock anxious
because darling Clyde was ten minutes late and of course something fatal must of happened to
him in crossing a crowded street. But nothing had. He showed up safe and sound and whistling
in another ten minutes, and became the life of the party. He looked near as happy as Vida did
when she embraced him out in the hall, a fine handsome young fellow, the best-natured in the
world, jollying the boarders and jollying me and jollying Vida that he called Baby Girl, or
Babe. I saw, too, that I must of been mistaken about the job he was holding down. He was dressed
in a very expensive manner, with neat little gold trinkets half concealed about him, the shirt
and collar exactly right and the silk socks carefully matching the lavender tie.

He kept the table lively all through dinner with jokes and quips from the latest musical comedies
and anecdotes of his dear old college days, and how that very afternoon he had won a silver
cup and the pool championship of his college club--and against a lot of corking good players,
too, he didn't mind saying. Also I noticed we was eating a mighty good dinner; so darned good
you didn't see how Vida could set it up at the price boarders usually pay.

After dinner Clyde sat down to the piano in the parlour and entertained one and all with songs
of a comic or sentimental character. He knew a piano intimately, and his voice was one of these
here melting tenors that get right inside of you and nestle. He was about the most ingratiating
young man I'd ever met, and I didn't wonder any more about Vida's look of joy being permanent.
She'd look in on the party every once in a while from the kitchen or the dining room where
she was helping her Swede do the dishes for fifteen people and set the table for breakfast.

She was about an hour at this, and when at last she'd slipped out of her big apron and joined
us she was looking right tuckered but still joyous. Clyde patted his Baby Girl's hand when
she come in, and she let herself go into an easy-chair near him that one of the boarders got
up to give her. I got the swift idea that this was the first time all day she'd set down with
any right feeling of rest.

Then Clyde sung to her. You could tell it was a song he meant for her and never sung till she'd
got the work done up. A right pretty old song it was, Clyde throwing all the loving warmth
of his first-class tenor voice into the words:

Good night, good night, beloved! I come to watch o'er thee, To be near thee, to be near thee.

I forget the rest, but there was happy tears in Vida's eyes when he finished in one climbing
tenor burst. Then Clyde gets up and says he has an engagement down to his college club because
some of his dear old classmates has gathered there for a quiet little evening of reminiscence
and the jolly old rascals pretend they can't get along without him. Vida beams on him brighter
than ever and tells him to be sure and have a good time, which I'd bet money he'd be sure to.

It was a very pretty scene when they said good night. Vida pretended that Clyde's voice was
falling off from smoking too many cigarettes at this club. "I wouldn't mind you're going there,
but I just know you spend most of the time in the club's horrid old smoking room!" She tells
him this with a pout. Smoking room of a club! The knowing little minx! And Clyde chided her
right back in a merry fashion. He lifted one of her hands and said his Baby Girl would have
to take better care of them because the cunnun' little handies was getting all rough. Then
they both laughed and went out for a long embrace in the hall.

Vida come back with a glowing countenance, and the boarders having dropped off to their rooms
when the life of the party went to his club we had a nice chat. All about Clyde. She hoped
I did like him, and I frankly said he was about the most taking young brat I'd ever been close
to. She explained how their union had been a dream; that during their entire married life of
a year and a half he had never spoken one cross word to her. She said I couldn't imagine his
goodness of heart nor his sunny disposition nor how much everyone admired him. But the tired
thing got so sleepy in ten minutes, even talking about her husband, that she couldn't keep
back the yawns, so I said I'd had a wonderful evening and would have to go now.

But up in the bedroom, while I'm putting my things on, she gets waked up and goes more into
detail about her happiness. I've never been able to figure out why, but women will tell each
other things in a bedroom that they wouldn't dream of telling in any other room. Not that Vida
went very far. Just a few little points. Like how Clyde's father had cast him off when they
married and how she had felt herself that she was nothing but a bad woman taking advantage
of this youth, she being a whole year older than he was; but Clyde had acted stunning in the
matter, telling his father he had chosen the better part. Also it turned out this father hadn't
cast him off from so much after all, because the old man went flat broke in Wall Street a couple
of months later, perishing of heart failure right afterward, and about the only thing Clyde
would of drawn from the estate anyway was an old-fashioned watch of his grandfather's with
a chain made from his grandmother's hair when she was a bride.

I gathered they had been right up against it at this time, except for the two thousand dollars
that had been left Vida by her Uncle Gideon in the savings bank at Fredonia. Clyde, when she
drew this out, wanted they should go to Newport with it where they could lead a quiet life
for a couple of months while he looked about for a suitable opening for himself. But Vida had
been firm, even ugly, she said, on this point. She'd took the two thousand and started a boarding
house that would be more like a home than a boarding house, though Clyde kept saying he'd never
be able to endure seeing the woman bearing his name reduced to such ignoble straits.

Still he had swallowed his foolish pride and been really very nice about it after she got the
business started. Now he was always telling her to be sure and set a good table. He said if
you were going to do a thing, even if it was only keeping a boarding house, to do it well.
That was his motto--do it well or don't do it at all! So she was buying the best cuts of meats
and all fresh vegetables because of his strict ideas in this matter, and it didn't look as
if they'd ever really make a fortune at it--to say nothing of there being more persons than
I'd believe that had hard luck and got behind in their payments, and of course one couldn't
be stern to the poor unfortunates.

I listened to this chatter till it seemed about time to ask what business Clyde had took up.
It seemed that right at the moment he was disengaged. It further seemed that he had been disengaged
at most other moments since he had stooped to this marriage with a daughter of the people.
I mustn't think it was the poor boy's fault, though. He was willing at all times to accept
a situation and sometimes would get so depressed that he'd actually look for work. Twice he
had found it, but it proved to be something confining in an office where the hours were long
and conditions far from satisfactory.

That's how she put it, with glowing eyes and flushed cheeks: "It proved to be mere dull routine
work not in the least suited to darling Clyde's talents and the conditions were far from satisfactory.
I had the hardest time prevailing on him to give the nasty old places up and wait patiently
for a suitable opening. He was quite impatient with me when he consented--but, of course, he's
only a boy of twenty-four, a whole year younger than I am. I tell him every day a suitable
opening is bound to occur very soon. You see, he had so many grand friends, people of the right
sort that are wealthy. I insist on his meeting them constantly. Just think; only last week
he spent Saturday and Sunday at one of the biggest country houses on Long Island, and had such
a good time. He's a prime favourite with a lot of people like that and they're always having
him to dine or to the opera or to their balls and parties. I miss him horribly, of course,
and the poor dear misses me, but I tell him it will surely lead to something. His old college
chums all love him too--a boy makes so many valuable friends in college, don't you think? A
lot of them try to put things in his way. I couldn't bear to have him accept a situation unworthy
of him--I know it would kill him. Why, he wilts like a flower under the least depression."

Well, I set and listened to a long string of this--and not a word for me to say. What could
any one of said? Wasn't it being told to me by the happiest woman I ever set eyes on? Yes,
sir; I'd never believe how gentle natured the boy was. Why, that very morning, being worried
about something that went wrong with breakfast, which she had to turn out at five A. M. to
get started hadn't she clean forgot to change his studs to a fresh shirt? And, to make it worse,
hadn't she laid out a wrong color of socks with his lavender tie? But had he been cross to
her, as most men would of been? Not for one second! He'd simply joked her about it when she
brought up his breakfast tray, just as he'd joked her to-night about her hands getting rough
from the kitchen work. And so forth and so forth!

The poor thing had got so dead for sleep by this time that she was merely babbling. She'd probably
of fallen over in her clothes if I hadn't been there. Anyway, I got her undressed and into
bed. She said Clyde's goodnight song always rung in her ears till she slept. It didn't ring
long this night. She was off before I got out the door. Darned if I hadn't been kind of embarrassed
by her talk, knowing it would never do for me to bust in with anything bordering on the vicious,
such as suggesting that if Clyde now and then went into the kitchen and helped Baby Girl with
the dishes it would make a very attractive difference in him. I took another good look at his
pictures in the parlour before I let myself out of the house. He still looked good--but hell!

I wrote Aunt Esther the same evening not to worry one minute about Vida's happiness, because
I wished we could all be as happy as she was. All the same I took pains to go round to that
boarding house a couple times more because it seemed like the girl's happiness might have a
bum foundation. Darling Clyde was as merry and attentive as ever and Vida was still joyous.
I guess she kept joyous at her work all day by looking forward to that golden moment after
dinner when her boy would sing Good night, good night, beloved--he'd come to watch o'er her!
How that song did light her face up!

She confided to me one of these times that the funny men are always making jokes about how
much it costs a woman for clothes, and she wondered why they didn't make some of their old
jokes about how much it costs for men's clothes too. She said I wouldn't believe how much they
had to lay out on Clyde's clothes so he'd be sure to look right when a suitable opening occurred.
I could take the item of shirts alone that had to be made to order and cost seven-fifty each,
to say nothing of collars and ties and suits from what Clyde said was the only tailor in New
York that could dress a gentleman so he looked like one. She said if these funny humourists
could see what they spent on her clothes and what they had to spend on Clyde's, she bet they'd
feel mighty cheap. She laughed like she had a bully joke on the poor things.

She was glad, too, for Clyde's sake that a suitable opening was just about to occur any moment,
because the poor chap said himself it was a dog's life he was leading, with nothing much to
do every day but go to the club and set round. And how thankful she'd ought to be that he never
drank--the least bit of liquor made him ill--and so many young men of his class nowadays drank
to excess.

No; nothing for me to say and nothing to do. Here was one happy love match. So I come home,
making Vida promise to write often.

She did write about six times in the next three years. The chief fact standing out was that
the right opening for Clyde hadn't opened yet--and he was getting more impatient every day.
He always had something in view. But I judged he was far-sighted. And some way when he had
got his rope over a job the hondoo wouldn't seem to render. He couldn't cinch anything. He
was as full of blandishment as ever, though, and not a one of his staunch old friends had dropped
him on account of his unfortunate marriage. He was a great diner-out and spent lots of week-ends,
and just now was on a jolly houseboat in Florida for three months with an old college mate
worth nine million dollars, and wasn't that nice! She could just see him keeping the whole
party gay with his mandolin and his songs. The summer before that this same friend had let
Clyde have an elegant motor car for his own use, and the foolish boy had actually took her
out in it one Sunday, there being a pongee motor coat in the car that fit her beautifully so
that none of his rich friends could have told she wasn't dressed as smartly as they was. He
not only kept her out all afternoon, but would have took her to dinner some place only she
had to get back to the boarding house because you couldn't trust these raw Swedes.

And there was one thing she was going to bring herself to confess to me, no matter if it did
sound disloyal--a dreadful thing about Clyde. It was ugly of her to breathe a word against
him, but she was greatly worried and mebbe I could help her. The horrible truth was that her
boy was betraying an inclination to get fat, and he'd only laugh at her when she warned him.
Many a night her pillow had been wet with tears on this account, and did I believe in any of
these remedies for reducing? Wasn't there something she could slip into his pudding that would
keep him down without his knowing it, because otherwise, though it was a thing no true wife
ought to say, her beloved would dig his grave with his teeth.

I thought that was about enough and even ample. I started a hot answer to this letter, saying
that if darling Clyde was digging his grave with his teeth it was her own fault because she
was providing the spade and the burial plot, and the quickest way to thin her darling down
would be for her to quit work. But shucks! Why insult the poor thing? I got back my composure
and wrote her a nice letter of sympathy in her hour of great trouble. I didn't say at all that
if I had been in her place Mr. Clyde would of long since had my permission to go to the devil.
Yes, sir; I'd have had that lad going south early in the second year. Mebbe not at that! A
woman never really knows how some other man might of made a fool of her.

Two more years drug on, with about two letters from Vida, and then I get a terrible one announcing
the grand crash. First, the boarding house had died a lingering death, what from Vida buying
the best the market afforded and not having learned to say "No!" to parties that got behind,
and Clyde having had to lend a couple hundred dollars to a fraternity brother that was having
a little hard luck. She'd run the business on a narrow trail for the last two months, trying
to guard every penny, but it got so she and Clyde actually had to worry over his next club
dues, to say nothing of a new dress suit he was badly needing. Then some parties she owed bills
to come along and pushed her over the cliff by taking her furniture. She was at first dreadfully
worried about how her boy would stand the blow, but he'd took it like the brave, staunch man
he was, being such a help to her when they had to move to a furnished room near the old home
where they both had been so happy. He'd fairly made the place ring with his musical laughter
and his merry jesting about their hardships.

Then she'd got a good job as cashier in a big grocery she'd dealt with, not getting a million
dollars a year, to be sure, but they were doing nicely, because Clyde took most of his meals
with his thoughtful friends--and then crash out of a clear sky a horrible tragedy happened
that for a minute darkened the whole world.

Yes, it was a bitter tragedy. Clyde's two-year-old dress suit, that he was bravely wearing
without a murmur, had needed pressing and she promised to do it; but she overslept herself
till seven-thirty that morning, which made her late at the store, so she'd asked the girl in
this rooming house to do it down in the kitchen. The girl had been willing but weak-minded.
She started with too hot an iron and didn't put a damp cloth between the iron and the goods.
In the midst of the job something boiled over on the stove. She got rattled and jumped for
that, and when she come back the dress coat of darling Clyde was branded for fair in the middle
of the back--a nifty flatiron brand that you could of picked him out of a bunch of animals
by in one second. The girl was scared stiff and hung the clothes back in the closet without
a word. And poor Clyde discovered the outrage that night when he was dressing for a class reunion
of his dear old Alvah Mater.

I had to read between the lines some, but I gathered that he now broke down completely at this
betrayal of his trusting nature. Vida must of been suffering too keenly herself to write me
all the pitiful details. And right on top of this blow comes the horrible discovery, when he
takes his mandolin out of the case, that it has been fatally injured in the moving. One blow
right on another. How little we realize the suffering that goes on all about us in this hard
world. Imagine the agony in that furnished room this night!

Clyde wasn't made of iron. When the first flood of grief subsided he seems to of got cold and
desperate. Said Vida in this letter: "My heart stopped when he suddenly declared in cool, terrible
tones: 'There's always the river!' I could see that he had resolved to end it all, and through
the night I pleaded with my boy."

I bet she made mistakes as a grocer's cashier next day, but it was worth it because her appeals
to Clyde's better nature had prevailed. He did disappear that day, getting his trunks from
the house while she was at the store and not being able to say good-bye because he couldn't
remember which store she was accepting a situation at. But he left her a nice note. He wasn't
going to end it all in the river. He was going off on the private steamboat of one of his dearest
friends for a trip round the world that might last a year--and she mustn't worry about the
silly old dress coat, because his new dinner-jacket suit would be ample for a boat trip. Also
she'd be glad to know that he had a new mandolin, though she wasn't to worry about the bill
for it, because the man didn't expect his pay on time and, anyway, he could wait, so with fondest
love!

And Vida was so relieved at this good fortune. To think that her despondent boy was once more
assured of his rightful position for a whole year, while she was saving her princely wages
till she got enough to start another boarding house that would be more like a home. Wasn't
it all simply too good to be true--wasn't it always darkest just before dawn!

I didn't trust myself to answer that letter, beyond wiring her that if she ever felt she was
having any really hard luck to be sure and call on me. And she went on working and putting
her money by. It was two years later when I next saw her. I looked her up the first thing when
I got to New York.

She was still accepting a position in this grocery, but of course had changed to a much smaller
furnished room where she could be cozy and feed herself from a gas stove on the simple plain
foods that one just can't seem to get at high-priced restaurants.

She'd changed a lot. Lines in her face now, and streaks in her brown hair, and she barely thirty.
I made up my mind to do something harsh, but couldn't just tell how to start. She'd had a picture
card from her boy the first year, showing the Bay of Naples and telling how he longed for her;
but six months later had come a despondent letter from Japan speaking again of the river and
saying he often felt like ending it all. Only, he might drag out his existence a bit longer
because another wealthy old chum was in port and begging him to switch over to his yacht and
liven up the party, which was also going round the world--and maybe he would, because "after
all, does anything in life really matter?"

That was the last line. I read it myself while Vida watched me, setting on her little iron
bed after work one night. She had a plain little room with no windows but one in the roof,
though very tastefully furnished with photos of Clyde on every wall. The only other luxury
she'd indulged in was a three-dollar revolver because she was deathly afraid of burglars. She'd
also bought a hammer to shoot the revolver off with, keeping 'em both on the stand at the head
of her bed. Yes; she said that was the way the man was firing it off in the advertisement--hitting
it on a certain spot with a hammer. She was a reckless little scoundrel. She told me all about
how to shoot a revolver while I was thinking up what to say about Clyde.

I finally said if he had ended it all she must cheer up, because it might be for the best.
She considered this sadly and said she didn't believe dear Clyde had been prepared to die.
I could see she was remembering old things that had been taught her in Sabbath school about
God and wickedness and the bad place, so I cheered her on that point. I told her they hadn't
been burning people for about thirty years now, the same not being considered smart any longer
in the best religious circles. I also tried in a delicate manner to convince her that her boy
would never end it all by any free act of his. I offered to bet her a large sum of money on
this at any odds she wanted--she could write her own ticket. I said I knew men well enough
to be certain that with this one it would be a long life but a merry one. Gee! The idea of
this four-carder hurting himself!

And I had to cheer her up on another point. This was that she didn't have about three babies,
all the image of their father. Yes, sir; she was grieving sorely about that. It give me a new
line on her. I saw all at once she was mostly mother--a born one. Couldn't ever be anything
else and hadn't ever really felt anything but mothersome to this here wandering treasure of
hers. It give me kind of a shock. It made me feel so queer I wanted to swear.

Well, I wrastled with that mulish female seven straight days to make her leave that twelve-hour
job of hers and come out here with me. I tried everything. I even told her what with long hours
and bum food she was making herself so old that her boy wouldn't give her a second look when
he got back. That rattled her. She took hold of her face and said that massage cream would
take all those silly lines out when she got time to rub it in properly; and as for the gray
in her hair, she could never bring herself to use a dye, but if Clyde come back she might apply
a little of the magic remedy that restores the natural colour. She also said in plain words
that to come out here with me would look like deserting her boy. Do you get that?

"Dear Clyde is so sensitive," she says. "I couldn't bear the thought of his coming back and
finding that I had left our home."

My work was cut for me, all right. I guess I'd failed if I hadn't been helped by her getting
a sick spell from worry over what the good God would do to Clyde if he should end it all in
some nasty old river, and from the grocery being sold to a party that had his own cashier.
But I won, she being too sick to hunt another job just then. A least I got a fair compromise.

She wouldn't come here to live with me, but she remembered that Clyde had often talked of Southern
California, where he had once gone with genial friends in a private car. He had said that some
day when he had acquired the means he would keep a home there. So she was willing to go there
herself and start a home for him. I saw it was the best I could get from her, so I applauded.

I says: "That's fine. You take this three hundred and eighty dollars you got saved and I'll
put a few dollars more with it and get you a little country place down there where you can
be out of doors all day and raise oranges and chickens, and enough hogs for table use, and
when the dear boy comes back he'll be awful proud of you."

"Oh, he always was that," says Vida. "But I'll go--and I'll always keep a light in the window
for him."

And a lot of folks say women ought to vote!

So we start for Los Angeles, deserting Clyde just as mean as dirt. Sure, I went with her! I
didn't trust her to finish the trip. As it was, she wanted to get off the train twice before
we got to Chicago--thinking of the shock to her boy's tender heart if he should come back and
find himself deserted.

But then, right after we left Chicago, she got interested. In the section across from us was
a fifty-five-year-old male grouch with a few gray bristles on his head who had been snarling
at everyone that come near him ever since the train left New York. The porters and conductors
had got so they'd rush by him like they was afraid of getting bit on the arm. He had a gray
face that seemed like it had been gouged out of stone. It was like one of these gargles you
see on rare old churches in Europe. He was just hating everyone in the world, not even playing
himself a favourite. And Vida had stood his growling as long as she could. Having at last give
up the notion of tracking back to New York, she plumped herself down in the seat with this
raging wild beast and begged for his troubles. I looked to see her tore limb from limb, instead
of which in three minutes he was cooing to her in a rocky bass voice. His trouble was lumbago
or pleurisy or some misery that kept him every minute in this pernickety state.

That was all old mother Vida needed to know. She rustled a couple hot-water bags and kept 'em
on the ribs of this grouch for about two thousand miles, to say nothing of doping him with
asperin and quinine and camphor and menthol and hot tea and soothing words. He was the only
son in sight, so he got it good. She simply has to mother something.

The grouch got a little human himself the last day out and begun to ask Vida questions about
herself. Being one that will tell any person anything at all, she told him her life history
and how her plans was now unsettled, but she hoped to make a home out on this coast. The grouch
come right out and asked her how big her roll was, saying he lived out here and it cost something
to make a home. Vida told him she had her two years' savings of three hundred and eighty good
dollars and that I had promised to loan her a few dollars to piece out with. At this the old
boy looked me over carefully and could see no signs of vast wealth because I never wear such
in Pullman cars, so he warns her that I'll have to piece out her savings with a few thousand
instead of a few dollars if she's to start anything worth keeping, because what they do to
you in taxes down there is a-plenty.

After which he goes to sleep.

Vida moves over and asks what I meant by saying I'd only have to put in a few dollars when
I must of known it would take a few thousand, and didn't I realize that Clyde would be hurt
to the quick if he come back and found she hadn't been independent? She indignantly said she'd
have to give up the country place and work till she had enough to start another home for paying
guests.

I was so mad at this truthful grouch for butting in on my game that I up and told her flat
she could never run a boarding house and make it pay; that no woman could who hadn't learned
to say "No!" and she was too much of a mush-head for that. She was quite offended by this and
says firmness has always been considered a strong point in her personality. A first-class palmist
had told her this only two weeks before. While we are squabbling back and forth the grouch
wakes up again and says that he's in the moving-picture business and will give her a good job
in the wardrobe department of the company he's with, so she must show up there at eight o'clock
the next morning. Just like that! He didn't ask her. He told her.

Vida is kind of took off her feet, but mumbles "Yes, sir!" and puts his card in her bag. Me?
I was too mad to talk, seeing the girl get into the mill again when I'd tried so hard to get
her out. But I swore to myself I'd stick round and try to get some sense into the cup-custard
she called her brain.

So the next morning I took her out to this moving-picture joint that they call a studio--not
a bit like Metta Bigler's studio in Red Gap--and sure enough here's the grouch ready to put
Vida on a job. The job is in a room about ninety feet long filled with boxes and sewing machines
and shelves full of costumes, and Vida is to be assistant wardrobe mistress. Yes, sir; a regular
title for the job. And the pay is twenty-five a week, which is thirteen more than she'd ever
dreamed of making before. The grouch is very decent to her and tells everybody she's a friend
of his, and they all pay polite attention to him because he's someone important in the works.
It seems he's a director. He stands round and yells at the actors how to act, which I had always
supposed they knew already but it seems not. Anyway, I left Vida there to get on to her new duties.

She was full of good reports that night about how well she'd got along, and how interesting
the work was, and how she'd helped doctor up another boy. She said he was one of the world's
greatest actors, because if they give him four or five stiff drinks first he would fall off
a forty-foot cliff backwards into the ocean. She'd helped bandage a sprained wrist for him
that he got by jumping out of a second-story window in a gripping drama replete with punch
and not landing quite right.

I said to myself it must be a crazy joint and she'd soon give up and let me get her a nice
little place on the edge of town that I'd already looked over. So I let her go three days more,
but still she stuck there with great enthusiasm. Then I had to be leaving for home, so the
afternoon of the fourth day I went out to see for myself how things looked.

Vida is tickled to see me and takes me right in where they're beginning to act a gripping feature
production. Old Bill Grouch is there in front of a three-legged camera barking at the actors
that are waiting round in their disguises--with more paint on 'em than even a young girl will
use if her mother don't watch her. The grouch is very polite to Vida and me and shows us where
to stand so we won't get knocked over by other actors that are carrying round furniture and
electric light stands and things.

They got a parlour in a humble home where the first scene is to be. There's a mother and a
fair-haired boy of twenty and a cop that's come to pinch him for a crime. The play at this
point is that the mother has to plead with the cop not to drag her boy off to a prison cell,
and she has to do it with streaming eyes. It was darned interesting. The boy is standing with
bowed head and the cop is looking sympathetic but firm, and mother is putting something into
her eyes out of a medicine dropper. I whisper to Vida and she says it's glycerine for the tears.
She holds her head back when she puts 'em in and they run down her cheeks very lifelike when
she straightens up.

So mother comes forward with her streaming face and they're all ready to act when the grouch
halts things and barks at the boy that he ain't standing right. He goes up and shows him how
to stand more shamefully. But the tears on mother's face have dripped away and have to be renewed.
She was a nice, kind-appearing mother all right, but I noticed she looked peeved when this
delay happened. Vida explains that glycerine don't damage the eyes really, but it makes 'em
smart a lot, and this actress, Miss St. Clair, has a right to feel mad over having to put in
some more.

But she does it, though with low muttering when the grouch calls "All right, Miss St. Clair!"
and is coming forward to act with this here second batch of tears when the grouch stops it
with another barking fit. He barks at the policeman this time. He says the policeman must do
more acting.

"You know you have a boy of your own," says he, "and how you'd hate to have him arrested for
this crime, but you're also remembering that law is law and you're sworn to uphold it. Try
to get that now. All ready, Miss St. Clair--we're waiting for you, Miss St. Clair!"

I'd watched this actress the second time her tears was spoiled and her expression didn't fit
a loving mother's face one bit. Her breath come as in scenes of tense emotion, but she hotly
muttered something that made me think I must of misunderstood her, because no lady actress
would say it, let alone a kind old mother. However, she backs off and for the third time has
this medicine dropper worked on her smarting eyes. Once more she comes forward with streaming
eyes of motherly love, and I'm darned if this grouch don't hold things up again.

This time he's barking about a leather sofa against the far wall of the humble home. He says
it's an office sofa and where in something is the red plush one that belongs to the set? He's
barking dangerously at everyone round him when all at once he's choked off something grand
by the weeping mother that has lost her third set of tears. She was wiping glycerine off her
face and saying things to the grouch that must of give him a cold chill for a minute. I'm sometimes
accused of doing things with language myself, but never in my life have I talked so interestingly--at
least not before ladies. Not that I blamed her.

Everyone kept still with horror till she run down; it seems it's a fierce crime in that art
to give a director what's coming to him. The policeman and the erring son was so scared they
just stood there acting their parts and the grouch was frozen with his mouth half open. Probably
he hadn't believed it at first. Then all at once he smiled the loveliest smile you ever seen
on a human face and says in chilled tones: "That will be all, Miss St. Clair! We will trouble
you no further in this production." His words sounded like cracking up a hunk of ice for the
cocktail shaker. Miss St. Clair then throws up her arms and rushes off, shrieking to the limit
of a bully voice.

It was an exciting introduction for me to what they call the silent drama.

Then I looked at Vida and she was crying her eyes out. I guessed it was from sympathy with
the mother actress, but the grouch also stares at her with his gimlet eyes and says:

"Here, don't you waste any tears on her. That's all in the day's work."

"I--wasn't thinking of her," sobs Vida.

"Then what you crying for?" says he.

"For that poor dear boy that's being dragged from his mother to prison for some childish prank,"
she blubbers.

Me, I laughed right out at the little fool, but the director didn't laugh.

"Well, I'll be damned!" says he in low, reverent tones.

Then he begins to look into her face like he'd lost something there. Then he backed off and
looked into it a minute more. Then he went crazy all over the place.

"Here," he barks at another actress, "get this woman into your dressing room and get the number
five on her quick. Make her up for this part, understand? You there, Eddie, run get that calico
skirt and black-satin waist off Miss St. Clair and hustle 'em over to Miss Harcourt's room,
where this lady will be making up. Come on now! Move! Work quick! We can't be on this scene
all day."

Then, when everybody run off, he set down on the red plush sofa that was now in place, relighted
a cigar that smelled like it had gone out three days before, and grinned at me in an excited
manner.

"Your little friend is a find," he says. "Mark my words, Mrs. Pettijohn, she's got a future
or I don't know faces. She'll screen well, and she's one of the few that can turn on the tears
when she wants to. I always did hate glycerine in this art. Now if only I can get her camera
wise--and I'll bet I can! Lucky we'd just started on this piece when St. Clair blew up. Only
one little retake, where she's happy over her boy's promotion in the factory. She's bound to
get away with that; then if she can get the water again for this scene it will be all over
but signing her contract."

I was some excited myself by this time, you'd better believe. Nervous as a cat I found myself
when Vida was led out in the sad mother's costume by this other actress that had made her up.
But Vida wasn't nervous the least bit. She was gayly babbling that she'd always wanted to act,
and once she had played a real part in a piece they put on at Odd Fellows' Hall in Fredonia,
and she had done so well that even the Methodist minister said she was as good as the actress
he saw in Lawrence Barrett's company before he was saved; and he had hoped she wouldn't be
led away by her success and go on the real stage, because he could not regard it as a safe
pursuit for young persons of her sex, owing to there being so little home life--and now what
did she do first?

This director had got very cold and businesslike once more.

"Stop talking first," says he. "Don't let me hear another word from you. And listen hard. You're
sitting in your humble home sewing a button on your boy's coat. He's your only joy in life.
There's the coat and the button half sewed on with the needle and thread sticking in it. Sit
down and sew that button on as if you were doing it for your own son. No pretending, mind you.
Sew it on as if--"

He hesitated a minute and got a first-class inspiration.

"Sew it on as if it was a button on your husband's coat that you told me about. Every two or
three stitches look up to show us how happy you are. When you get it sewed, take the coat up
this way and hug it. You look still happier at that. Then you walk over to the mantel, pick
up the photograph of your boy that's there by that china dog and kiss it. I won't tell you
how to do that. Remember who he is and do it your own way, only let us see your face. Then
put back the picture slowly, go get the coat, and start to the left as if you were going to
hang it up in his room; but you hear steps on the stair outside and you know your boy has come
home from work. We see that because your face lights up. Stand happy there till he comes in.

"You expect him to rush over to you as usual, but he's cast down; something has happened. You
get a shock of fright. Walk over to him--slow; you're scared. Get your arms round him. He stiffens
at first, then leans on you. He's crying himself now, but you ain't--not yet. You're brave
because you don't know about this fight he's had with the foreman that's after your boy's sweetheart
for no good purpose.

"Now go through it that far and see if you remember everything I told you. When we get down
to the crying scene after the officer comes on, I'll rehearse you in that too, only for God's
sake don't cry in the rehearsal! You'll go dry. Now then! Coat--button--sewing. Goon!"

Well, sir, I stood there trembling like a leaf while she went through what he'd told her like
she'd been at it all her life--or rather like it was her dear Clyde's coat and her dear Clyde's
photo and her dear Clyde that come in the door. Then he rehearsed her in the end of the scene
where the cop comes on, and she got that, too, though alarming him because she couldn't even
rehearse it without crying. I could see this director was nervous himself by this time, thinking
she was too good to be true. But he got her into the chair sewing again, all ready for the
real work.

"Remember only three things," he says: "Don't look at this machine, move slowly when you move
at all, and don't try to act. Now then! Camera!"

It was a historic occasion, all right. The lad at the camera begun to turn a crank and Vida
begun to act like she wasn't acting at all. The director just give her a low word when she
had to move. He didn't bark now. And say, that crying scene! Darned if I didn't near cry myself
looking at her, and I heard this stonefaced director breathing mighty short when she had to
stand there with her hands clenched and watch her boy go out the door with this cop.

Vida was too excited to sleep that night. She said the director had advised her privately not
to make a contract just yet, because she would get better terms when she'd showed 'em what
she could really do. For this picture she would get paid seventy-five dollars a week. A week,
mind you, to a girl that had been thinking herself lucky to get twelve in New York.

She was very let down and happy, and cried a little bit out of working hours for me because
it was all so wonderful, and her drowned boy might be resting on some river bottom at that
very moment. I said it was a safe bet he was resting, wherever he was; but she didn't get it
and I didn't say it twice.

And such was the beginning of Vida Sommers' glittering sob career in the movies. She's never
had but one failure and they turned that into a success. It seems they tried her in one of
these "Should a Wife Forgive?" pieces in which the wife did not forgive, for a wonder, and
she made a horrible mess of it. She was fine in the suffering part, of course, only when it
come to not forgiving at the end--well, she just didn't know how to not forgive. They worked
with her one whole day, then had to change the ending. She's said to be very noble and womanly
in it.

I went home next day, leaving her in pursuit of her art. But I got glowing letters from her
about every week, she doing new pictures and her salary jumping because other film parties
was naturally after so good a weeper. And the next year I run down to see her. She was a changed
woman all right. She had a home or bungalow, a car, a fashionable dog, a Jap cook, a maid and
real gowns for the first time in her life. But the changes was all outside. She was still the
same Vida that wanted to mother every male human on earth. She never seemed to worry about
girls and women; her idea is that they're able to look out for themselves, but that men are
babies needing a mother's protection as long as they live.

And of course one of these men she had mothered down there had took a base advantage of her--this
same ugly old grouch of a director. She locked the bedroom door and told me about it in horrified
whispers the first night I got there. She said it might of been her fault, that he might of
misunderstood something she had said about Clyde. And anyway she'd ought to of remembered that
some men are beasts at heart.

Anyway, this infamous brute had come to the house one night and insulted her in the grossest
manner, and it was all true about moving-picture directors having designs on unprotected females
that work for 'em. Yielding to his lowest brute instincts he had thrown decency to the winds
and made her such an evil proposition that she could hardly bear to put it in words. But she
did. It seems that the scoundrel had listened to some studio gossip to the effect that she
had divorced the husband who deserted her, and so he come right out and said he had been deeply
in love with her ever since that first day on the train, and now that she was free, would she
marry him?

Of course she was insulted to the limit and told him so in what would probably of made a gripping
scene of a good woman spurning the advances of a moral leper. She overwhelmed him with scorn
and horror for his foul words. How dared he say her Clyde had deserted her, or think she would
ever divorce him! That showed, what a vile mind he must have. She said he got awful meek and
apologetic when he learned that she still clung to the memory of Clyde, who would one day fight
his way back to her if he hadn't ended it all. She told him fully what a perfect man Clyde
was, and she said at last the ugly old wretch just grinned weakly at her in a very painful
way, like it hurt him, and said: "Oh, my dearest, you must try to forgive me. I didn't know--I
didn't know half the truth." Then he patted her hand and patted her cheek and choked up and
swallowed a couple of times, and says he:

"I was an old man dreaming and dreams make fools of old men!"

Then he swallowed again and stumbled out through her garden where the orange blossoms had just
come. She said he'd never been offensive since that time, barking as nasty to her as to any
of the others when she was acting, so that no one would dream what a foul heart he had, except
that he always kept a bunch of white roses in her dressing room. But she hadn't cared to make
him trouble about that because maybe he was honestly trying to lead a better life.

Some entertainment Vida give me, telling this, setting on her bed under a light that showed
up more lines than ever in her face. She was looking close to forty now--I guess them crying
scenes had told on her, and her yearning for the lost Clyde--anyway she was the last woman
on earth could of got herself insulted even if she had tried her prettiest, only she didn't
know that. And she'd had her little thrill. We've all dreamed of how we'd some day turn down
some impossible party who was overcome by our mere beauty.

I said I'd always known this director was an unspeakable scoundrel, because he insisted on
calling me Mrs. Pettijohn.

Then we had a nice talk about Clyde. She'd had no word for a year now, the last being a picture
card saying he would spend the winter in Egypt with some well-known capitalists that wouldn't
take no for an answer. And did I believe he might now be wandering over the face of the earth,
sick and worn, and trying to get back to her; didn't I think some day he would drag himself
to her door, a mere wreck of his former self, to be soothed at last on her breast? That was
why she kept a light burning in the front window of this here bungalow. He would know she had
waited.

Well, I'd never said a word against Clyde except in conversation with myself, and I wasn't
going to break out now. I did go so far as to hint that an article that had come out about
her in this same magazine might draw Clyde back a little quicker than the light in the window.
The article said her salary was enormous. I thought its rays might carry.

So I come home again and near a year later I get a telegram from Vida: "Happy at last--my own
has come home to me." I threw up my hands and swore when I read this. The article had said
her salary was seven hundred and fifty dollars a week.

The next winter I run down to see the happy couple. Vida was now looking a good forty, but
Clyde was actually looking younger than ever; not a line nor a wrinkle to show how he had grieved
for her, and not a sign of writer's cramp from these three picture cards he had sent her in
five years. She'd been afraid he'd come back worn to the bone.

But listen! By the time I got there Clyde was also drawing money. He'd felt a little hurt at
first to find his wife a common actress, and asked to see her contract because you couldn't
believe what you see in these magazines. Then he'd gone round the lot and got to be an actor
himself. I gathered that he hadn't been well liked by the men at first, and two or three other
directors, when Vida insisted he should have a chance to act, had put him into rough-house
funny plays where he got thrown downstairs or had bricks fall on him, or got beat up by a willing
ex-prize fighter, or a basket of eggs over his head, or custard pies in his perfect features,
with bruises and sprains and broken bones and so forth--I believe the first week they broke
everything but his contract.

Anyway, when he begun to think he wasn't meant for this art, who steps in but this same director
that had made such a beast of himself with Vida? He puts Clyde into a play in which Vida is
the mother and Clyde is the noble son that takes the crime on his shoulders to screen the brother
of the girl he loves, and it was an awful hit. Naturally Vida was never so good before and
Clyde proved to be another find. He can straighten up and look nobler when he's wrongfully
accused of a crime than any still actor I ever see. He's got now to where they have to handle
him with gloves or he'd leave 'em flat and go with another company. Vida wrote me only last
week that they had a play for him where he's cast off on a desert island with a beautiful but
haughty heiress, and they have to live there three months subsisting on edible foods which
are found on all desert islands. But Clyde had refused the part because he would have to grow
whiskers in this three months. He said he had to think of his public, which would resent this
hideous desecration. At pages 15, 24, 26, 28, and elsewhere in his Munich address, Virchow strongly
insists that only that objective knowledge may be taught which we possess as absolutely certain
fact! and then at page 29 he requires us to conclude that the basis of instruction shall continue
to be the purely subjective dogmas of the Church; revelations and dogmas which not only are
not proved by any facts whatever, but on the contrary, stand in the most trenchant contradiction
to the most obvious facts of natural experience and fly in the face of all human reason. These
contradictions, to be sure, are no greater than some others which stand out conspicuous and
incomprehensible in Virchow's discourse. Thus at the beginning of his address he glorifies
Lorenz Oken and deeply laments "that he, that highly-valued and honoured
master, that ornament of the high school of Munich, had been forced
to die in exile!

That cruel exile which oppressed Oken's latter years, which left him to perish far from those
cities to which he had sacrificed the best powers of his life, that exile will be remembered as
the note of the time which we have passed through. And so long as there continue to be meetings
of German naturalists, so long may we gratefully remember that this man to his death bore upon
him all the signs of a martyr, so long shall we point to him as one
of the witnesses who have fought for us and for the liberty of science."

Verily these words from Virchow's lips sound like the bitterest irony; for was not Lorenz Oken
one of the foremost and most zealous champions of that monistic doctrine of development against
which Rudolf Virchow at this day is most violently striving? Did not Oken himself proceed farther
in the construction of bold hypotheses and comprehensive theories than any supporter of the doctrine
of evolution at the present time?

Is not Oken justly considered as the one typical representative of that older period of natural philosophy
who rose to much higher and bolder flights of fancy, and left the
solid ground of facts much farther behind him than any tyro of the
new philosophy?

And this makes the irony seem all the greater with which Virchow
at the beginning of his address glorifies Oken the free teacher, as
a martyr to the freedom of science, and at the end of it insists that
this freedom applies only to inquiry and not to teaching, and that
the master must teach no problem, no theory, no hypothesis.

While this unheard-of demand sets Virchow's views of teaching in the most extraordinary light,
and while every unprejudiced and experienced teacher must most emphatically protest against this
strait-waistcoat for instruction, he will feel no less bound to resist Virchow's other strange
demand, that every ascertained truth shall forthwith be taught in all schools, down to the elementary
schools.

I myself, in my Munich address, sought the instructional value of our monistic evolution theory
above all in the genetic method, in the inquiry, that is to say, for the effective causes of
the facts taught; and I added these words--"How far the principles of the doctrine of universal
evolution ought to be at once introduced into our schools, and in what succession its most important
branches ought to be taught in the different classes--cosmogony, geology, the phylogenesis of
animals and plants, and anthropology--this we must leave to practical
teachers to settle.

But we believe that an extensive reform of instruction in this direction is inevitable, and
will be crowned by the fairest results." I purposely avoided any closer discussion of this specialist
question, as I felt not even approximately capable of solving it, and I believe, in fact, that
none but skilled and experienced practical teachers can undertake the solution of it with any success.

For
Virchow these specialist difficulties seem not to exist; he regards my reticence as a mere "postponement
of the task," and he answers in the following astonishing sentences:--"If
the theory of descent is as certain as Herr Haeckel assumes, then
we must demand--for it is a necessary consequence--that it shall be
taught in schools.

How is it conceivable that a doctrine of such importance, which must effect such a total revolution
in all our mental consciousness, which directly tends to create a new kind of religion, should
not be included in the school scheme of instruction? How is it possible that such a--revelation,
shall I say--should be in any measure suppressed, or that the promulgation of the greatest and
most important advance which has been made in our views during the present century should be
left to the discretion of schoolmasters? Ay, gentlemen, that would indeed be a renunciation
of the hardest kind, and practically it could never be carried out! Every schoolmaster who assumes
this doctrine for himself will involuntarily teach it, how can it be otherwise?"

I must here be permitted to take Virchow exactly at his word.

I endorse almost all that he has said in these and the following sentences. The only difference
in our views is this, that Virchow regards the theory of descent
as an unproved and unproveable hypothesis; I, on the contrary, as
a fully established and indispensable theory.

How then will it be if the teachers of whom Virchow speaks agree with my views, if--apart,
of course, from all special theories of descent--they, like me, consider the general theory of
descent as the indispensable basis of all biological teaching?

And that that is actually the case Virchow may easily convince himself
if he looks over the recent literature of zoology and botany!

Our whole morphological literature in particular is already so deeply and completely penetrated
by the doctrine of descent, phylogenetic principles already prevail so universally as a certain
and indispensable instrument of inquiry, that no man for the future would deprive himself of
their help. As Oscar Schmidt justly observes--"Perhaps ninety-nine per cent. of all living,
or rather of all working zoologists, are convinced by inductive methods of the truth of the doctrine
of descent." And Virchow with his magisterial requirements will attain only the very reverse of
what he aims at. How often has it not been said already that science must either have perfect
freedom or else none at all? This is as true of teaching as it is of inquiry, for the two are
intrinsically and inseparably connected. And so it is not in vain that it is written in section
152 of the German Code, and in section 20 of the Prussian Charter,
"Science and her teaching shall be free!"

CHAPTER VI.

THE DOCTRINE OF DESCENT AND SOCIAL DEMOCRACY.

Every great and comprehensive theory which affects the foundations of human science, and which,
consequently, influences the systems of philosophy, will, in the first place, not only further
our theoretical views of the universe, but will also react on practical
philosophy, ethics, and the correlated provinces of religion and politics.

In my paper read at Munich I only briefly pointed out the happy results which, in my opinion,
the modern doctrine of evolution will entail when the true, natural religion, founded on reason,
takes the place of the dogmatic religion of the Church, and its leading principle derives
the human sense of duty from the social instincts of animals.

The references to the social instincts which I, in common with Darwin
and many others, regard as the proper source and origin of all moral
development, appear to have afforded Virchow an opportunity in his
reply for designating the doctrine of inheritance as a "socialist
theory," and for attributing to it the most dangerous and objectionable
character which, at the present time, any political theory can have;
and these startling denunciations so soon as they were known called
forth such just indignation and such comprehensive refutation that
I might very properly pass them over here.

Still we must at least shortly examine them, in so far as they supply a further proof that Virchow
is unacquainted with the most important principles of the development-theory of the day, and therefore
is incompetent to judge it. Moreover, Virchow, as a politician, manifestly attributed special
importance to this political application of his paper, for he gave it the title, which otherwise would
have been hardly suitable, of "The Freedom of Science in the Modern Polity." Unfortunately he forgot
to add to this title the two words in which the special tendency
of his discourse culminates; the two pregnant words, "must cease!"

The surprising disclosures in which Virchow denounces the doctrine of evolution, and particularly
the doctrine of descent, as socialist theories and dangerous to the community, run as follows:--"Now,
picture to yourself the theory of descent as it already exists in the brain of a socialist. Ay,
gentlemen, it may seem laughable to many, but it is in truth very
serious, and I only hope that the theory of descent may not entail
on us all the horrors which similar theories have actually brought
upon neighbouring countries.

At all times this theory, if it is logically carried out to the end, has an uncommonly suspicious
aspect, and the fact that it has gained the sympathy of socialism has not, it is to be hoped,
escaped your notice. We must make that quite clear to ourselves."

On reading this statement, which seems extracted from the Berlin "Kreuz-Zeitung,"
or the Vienna "Vaterland," I ask myself in surprise, "What in the
world has the doctrine of descent to do with socialism?"

It has already been abundantly proved on many sides, and long since, that these two theories
are about as compatible as fire and water. Oscar Schmidt might with justice retort, "If the
socialists would think clearly they would feel that they must do all they can to choke the doctrine
of descent, for it declares with express distinctness that socialist ideas are impracticable."
And he proceeds to add, "And why has not Virchow made the gentle doctrines of Christianity responsible
for the excesses of socialism? That would have had some sense. His denunciation flung so mysteriously
and so confidently before the great public, as though it concerned
'a sure and attested scientific truth,' is, at the same time, so hollow
that it cannot be brought into harmony with the dignity of science."

With all these empty accusations, as with all the empty reproaches and groundless objections which
Virchow brings against the doctrine of evolution, he takes good care in no way to touch the
kernel of the matter. How, indeed, would it have been possible without arriving at conclusions wholly
opposed to those which he has declared? For the theory of descent proclaims more clearly than any
other scientific theory, that that equality of individuals which socialism strives after is
an impossibility, that it stands, in fact, in irreconcilable contradiction to the inevitable inequality
of individuals which actually and everywhere subsists. Socialism demands equal rights, equal
duties, equal possessions, equal enjoyments for every citizen alike;
the theory of descent proves, in exact opposition to this, that the
realisation of this demand is a pure impossibility, and that in the
constitutionally organised communities of men, as of the lower animals,
neither rights nor duties, neither possessions nor enjoyments have
ever been equal for all the members alike nor ever can be.

Throughout the evolutionist theory, as in its biological branch, the theory of descent--the
great law of specialisation or differentiation--teaches us that a multiplicity of phenomena is developed
from original unity, heterogeneity from original similarity, and the composite organism from original
simplicity. The conditions of existence are dissimilar for each individual from the beginning
of its existence; even the inherited qualities, the natural "disposition," are more or less unlike;
how, then, can the problems of life and their solution be alike for all? The more highly political
life is organised, the more prominent is the great principle of the
division of labour, and the more requisite it becomes for the lasting
security of the whole state that its members should be variously distributed
in the manifold tasks of life; and as the work to be performed by
different individuals is of the most various kind, as well as the
corresponding outlay of strength, skill, property, &c., the reward
of the work must naturally be also extremely various.

These are such simple and tangible facts that one would suppose that every reasonable and
unprejudiced politician would recommend the theory of descent, and the evolution hypothesis
in general, as the best antidote to the fathomless absurdity of extravagant socialist levelling.

Besides,
Darwinism, the theory of natural selection--which Virchow aimed at in his denunciation, much
more especially than at transformation, the theory of descent--which is often confounded with
it--Darwinism, I say, is anything rather than socialist! If this English hypothesis is to be
compared to any definite political tendency--as is, no doubt, possible--that
tendency can only be aristocratic, certainly not democratic, and least
of all socialist.

The theory of selection teaches that in human life, as in animal and plant life everywhere, and at
all times, only a small and chosen minority can exist and flourish, while the enormous majority starve
and perish miserably and more or less prematurely. The germs of every species of animal and plant
and the young individuals which spring from them are innumerable, while the number of those
fortunate individuals which develop to maturity and actually reach their hardly-won life's goal is
out of all proportion trifling. The cruel and merciless struggle for existence which rages throughout
all living nature, and in the course of nature must rage, this unceasing and inexorable competition
of all living creatures, is an incontestable fact; only the picked minority of the qualified "fittest"
is in a position to resist it successfully, while the great majority of the competitors must necessarily
perish miserably. We may profoundly lament this tragical state of things, but we can neither
controvert it nor alter it. "Many are called but few are chosen." The selection, the picking
out of these "chosen ones," is inevitably connected with the arrest and destruction of the remaining
majority. Another English naturalist, therefore, designates the kernel of Darwinism very frankly
as the "survival of the fittest," as the "victory of the best." At any rate, this principle of
selection is nothing less than democratic, on the contrary, it is aristocratic in the strictest
sense of the word. If, therefore, Darwinism, logically carried out, has, according to Virchow,
"an uncommonly suspicious aspect," this can only be found in the
idea that it offers a helping hand to the efforts of the aristocrats.

But how the socialism of the day can find any encouragement in these efforts, and how the horrors
of the Paris Commune can be traced to them, is to me, I must frankly confess, absolutely incomprehensible.

Moreover,
we must not omit this opportunity of pointing out how dangerous such a direct and unqualified transfer
of the theories of natural science to the domain of practical politics must be. The highly elaborate
conditions of our modern civilised life require from the practical
politician such circumspect and impartial consideration, such thorough
historical training and powers of critical comparison, that he will
not venture to make such an application of a "natural law" to the
practice of civilised life, but with the greatest caution and reserve.

How, then, is it possible that Virchow, the experienced and skilled politician, who, above all
things, preaches caution and reserve in theory, suddenly makes just such an application of transformation
and Darwinism--an application so radically perverse that it actually flies in the face of the
fundamental ideas of these doctrines? I myself am nothing less than a politician. In direct
contrast with Virchow, I lack alike the gift and the training for it, as well as taste and vocation.
Hence I neither shall play any political part in the future, nor
have I hitherto made any attempt of the kind.

Though here and there I have occasionally uttered a political opinion, or have made a political
application of some theory of natural science, these subjective opinions have no objective
value. In point of fact I have by so doing overstepped the limits of my competence, just as Virchow
has by going into questions of zoology and particularly that of the transformation of apes:
I am a layman in political practice, as Virchow is in the province of zoological hypothesis. Moreover,
such success as Virchow has attained during the twenty years of his painful, wearisome, and exhausting
activity as a politician does not, in truth, make me pine for such laurels.

But this at least I, as a theoretical naturalist, may demand of practical politicians, that in
utilising our theories for political ends they should first make themselves exactly acquainted
with them; they then, for the future, would forbear drawing conclusions from them, the very opposite
to those which ought reasonably to be inferred.

Misunderstandings would never thus be wholly avoided, it is true, but what doctrine is universally
secure against misunderstanding? And from what theory, however sound and true, may not the most
unsound and frantic inferences be drawn?

Nothing, perhaps, shows so plainly as the history of Christianity how little theory and practice
harmonise in human life; how little pains are taken, even by those whose calling it is to uphold
established doctrines, to apply their natural consequences to practical life. The Christian religion,
no doubt, as well as the Buddhist, when stripped of all dogmatic and fabulous nonsense, contains
an admirable human kernel, and precisely that human portion of Christian
teaching--in the best sense social-democratic--which preaches the
equality of all men before God, the loving of your neighbour as yourself,
love in general in the noblest sense, a fellow-feeling with the poor
and wretched, and so forth--precisely, those truly human sides of
the Christian doctrine are so natural, so noble, so pure, that we
unhesitatingly adopt them into the moral doctrine of our monistic
natural religion.

Nay, the social instincts of the higher animals on which we found this religion (for instance
the marvellous sense of duty of ants, &c.) are in this best sense strictly Christian.

And what--we may ask--what have the professed supporters, the "learned divines" of this religion
of love done? Their deeds are written in letters of blood in the history of the civilisation of mankind
during the last 1800 years.

All else that differing church-religions have accomplished for the forcible extension of their doctrines
and for the extirpation of heretics of other creeds, all that the Jews have been guilty of towards
the heathen, the Roman emperors towards the Christians, the Mohammedans towards Christians and
Jews alike--all this is outdone by the hecatombs of human victims which Christianity has demanded
for the spread of her doctrines.
 Vernabelle was soon telling him how refreshing it was to meet away out here
one who was by way of doing things, and she had read that very morning his review of the film
entitled A Sister of Sin, and had found it masterly in its clear-cut analysis, but why did
he waste himself here when the great world lay open. Edgar thrust back his falling hair with
a weary hand and tried to look modest, but it was useless. Vernabelle devoted most of her chat
to Edgar. She was an incessant person but it seemed to take a man to bring out all that was
best in her.

Pretty soon Metta went over to a table and brought back some glasses of wine on a tray, of
which all partook with more or less relish. I recognized it from the bottle. It was elderberry
wine that Metta's mother had put up. You have to be resourceful in a dry state.

"I'm afraid you'll all think me frightfully Bohemian," said Metta proudly.

Beryl Mae held her glass up to the light and said, "After all, does anything in life really
matter?" She appeared very blase in all her desperate young beauty. She and Edgar Tomlinson
looked as near right as anything you'd see in Washington Square. Vernabelle said the true spirit
of Bohemia knew neither time nor place; it was wherever those gathered who were doing things,
and wasn't it splendid that even here in this crude Western town a few of the real sort could
meet and make their own little quarter and talk about the big things, the lasting things! Everyone
said yes, quite so; and they all tried to handle their wine like it was a rare old vintage.
But you can't hold much wassail on the juice of the elderberry; it ain't the most jocund stuff
the world as fermented by Metta's mother.

However, it livened things up a bit and Vernabelle set down her glass and chattered some more.
She said after all life was anything but selective, but didn't we think that all the arts rounded
out one's appreciation of the beautiful. Several said "How true--how true indeed!" and sighed
importantly. Then Metta said Vernabelle must show us some of her work and Vernabelle said she
could hardly bring herself to do that; but yet she could and did, getting up promptly. She
had designs for magazine covers and designs for war posters and designs for mural decorations
and designs for oil paintings and so forth--"studies; crude, unfinished bits" she called 'em,
but in a tone that didn't urge any one else to call 'em that.

It was mostly clouds and figures of females, some with ladies' wearing apparel and many not,
engaged in dancing or plucking fruit or doing up their hair. Quite different stuff from Metta's
innocent pictures of kittens and grapes and daffodils. After everyone was put on the easel
Henrietta Templeton Price would stick her thumb up in the air and sight across it with one
eye shut and say "A stunning bit, that!" and the others would gasp with delight and mutter
to each other about its being simply wonderful.

Vernabelle listened in an all-too-negligent manner, putting in a tired word or two now and
then. She admitted that one or two was by way of being precious bits. "Rather precious in an
elemental way," she would say. "Of course I am trying to develop the psychology of the line."
Everyone said "Oh, of course!"

While she had one up showing part of a mottled nude lady who was smiling and reaching one hand
up over to about where her shoulder blades would meet in the back, who should be let in on
the scene but Lon Price and Cousin Egbert Floud. Lon had called for Henrietta, and Cousin Egbert
had trailed along, I suppose, with glass blowing in mind. Vernabelle forgot her picture and
fluttered about the two new men. I guess Lon Price is a natural-born Bohemian. He took to her
at once.

"Sit here and tell me all about yourself," says Vernabelle, and Lon did so while the girl hung
breathless on his words. In no time at all he was telling her about Price's Addition to Red
Gap, how you walk ten blocks and save ten dollars a block and your rent money buys a home in
this, the choicest villa site on God's green earth. Vernabelle had sort of kept hold of Cousin
Egbert's sleeve with an absent hand--that girl was a man hound if ever there was one--and pretty
soon she turned from Lon to Egbert and told him also to tell her all about himself.

Cousin Egbert wasn't so glib as Lon. He looked nervous. He'd come expecting a little glass
blowing and here was something strange. He didn't seem to be able to tell her all about himself.
He couldn't start good.

"Tell me what you are reading, then," says Vernabelle; and Cousin Egbert kind of strangled
at this, too. He finally manages to say that he tried to read Shakespere once but it was too
fine print. The old liar! He wouldn't read a line of Shakespere in letters a foot high. It
just showed that he, too, was trying to bluff along with the rest of 'em on this Bohemian chatter.

Vernabelle continued full of blandishment for the two men and poured 'em out stiff hookers
of this demon elderberry wine and lighted cigarettes for 'em from hers. I don't know whether
this beverage got to Lon Price or not, but in a minute he was telling her that beauty in her
sex was a common-enough heritage, but how all-too rare it was to find beauty and brains in
the same woman! Vernabelle called him comrade after that, and then she was telling Cousin Egbert
that he was of the great outdoors--a man's man! Egbert looked kind of silly and puzzled at
this. He didn't seem to be so darned sure about it.

Then Vernabelle worked over by the easel--it took her about six attitudes leaning against things,
to get there--and showed her oil paintings to the newcomers. Lon Price was full of talk and
admiration and said she must do a poster for him showing a creature of rare beauty up in the
clouds beckoning home-buyers out to Price's Addition, where it was Big Lots, Little Payments,
and all Nature seemed to smile. He said this figure, however, had better have something in
the shape of a garment on it because the poster would go into homes where art in its broader
extent was still regarded in a suspicious or even hostile manner, if she caught what he meant.
The artist says she can readily understand, and that life after all is anything but selective.

Cousin Egbert just looked at the pictures in an uncomfortable manner. He spoke only once and
that was about the mottled lady reaching over her shoulder and smiling. "Grinitch," says he
with a knowing leer. But Vernabelle only says, yes, it was painted in the dear old village.

Then the crowd sort of got together on the couch and in chairs and Vernabelle talked for one
and all. She said how stimulating it was for a few of the real people who did things to come
together in this way after the day's turmoil--to get away from it all! Beryl Mae said she had
often wanted to get away from it all, but her aunt was narrow-minded. Henrietta Price lighted
her ninth cigarette and said how it reminded her of the Latin Quarter of Paris, which she had
never been to, but her cousin had spent a whole afternoon there once and had been simply wild
about it. Vernabelle said it was times like this, with a few real people, that she got her
biggest ideas; that life in the rough was too terribly a labyrinth, didn't we think, stunning
one with its immensity, while in these dear little half-lighted moments the real came out unafraid,
if we understood what she meant. Many of us said we did.

It was when we got up to go that Vernabelle told me things about Cousin Egbert. She said he
must have great reserve strength in his personality. She said he fairly frightened her, he
was so superbly elemental.

"It is not so much Mr. Floud that frightens me," says she, "as the inevitability of him--just
beautifully that! And such sang fraw!"

Poor Egbert was where he had to overhear this, and I had never seen him less sang fraw--if
that's the word. He looked more like a case of nettle rash, especially when Vernabelle gripped
his hand at parting and called him comrade!

We finally groped our way through the smoke of the door and said what a lovely time we'd had,
and Metta said we must make a practice of dropping in at this hour. Vernabelle called us all
comrade and said the time had been by way of being a series of precious moments to her, even
if these little studio affairs did always leave poor her like a limp lily. Yep; that's the
term she used and she was draped down a bookcase when she said it, trying to look as near as
possible like a limp lily.

The awestruck group split up outside. Nothing like this had ever entered our dull lives, and
it was too soon to talk about it. Cousin Egbert walked downtown with me and even he said only
a few little things. He still called the lady a glass blower, and said if she must paint at
all why not paint family pictures that could be hung in the home. He said, what with every
barroom in the state closed, there couldn't be much demand for them Grinitch paintings. He
also said, after another block, that if he owned this lady and wanted to get her in shape to
sell he'd put her out on short sand grass, short almost to the roots, where she'd wear her
teeth down. And a block later he said she hadn't ought to be calling everyone comrade that
way--it sounded too much like a German. Still and all, he said, there was something about her.
He didn't say what.

So now the Latin Quarter had begun, and in no time at all it was going strong. It seemed like
everybody had long been wanting to get away from it all but hadn't known how. They gathered
daily in Metta's studio, the women setting round in smocks, they all took to wearing smocks,
of course, while hungry-eyed Vernabelle got the men to tell her all about themselves, and said
wasn't it precious that a few choice spirits could thus meet in the little half-lighted hour,
away from it all, and be by way of forgetting that outer world where human souls are bartered
in the market place.

Of course the elderberry wine was by way of giving plumb out after the second half-lighted
hour, but others come forward with cherished offerings. Mrs. Dr. Percy Hailey Martingale brought
round some currant wine that had been laid down in her cellar over a year ago, and Beryl Mae
Macomber pilfered a quart of homemade cherry brandy that her aunt had been saving against sickness,
and even Mrs. Judge Ballard kicked in with some blackberry cordial made from her own berries,
though originally meant for medicine.

Lon Price was a feverish Bohemian from the start, dropping in almost every day to tell Vernabelle
all about himself and get out of convention's shell into the raw throb of life, as it was now
being called. Lon always was kind of light-minded, even after the state went dry. He told Vernabelle
he had a treasured keepsake hid away which he would sacrifice to Bohemia at the last moment,
consisting of one quart bottle of prime old rye. And he was going to make over to her a choice
building lot in Price's Addition, right near the proposed site of the Carnegie library, if
Vernabelle would put up something snappy on it in the way of a Latin Quarter bungalow.

Lon also added Jeff Tuttle to the Bohemians the day that old horned toad got down from his
ranch. After going once Jeff said darned if he hadn't been a Bohemian all his life and never
knew what was the matter with him. Vernabelle had him telling her all about himself instantly.
She said he was such a colourful bit, so virile and red-blooded, and she just knew that when
he was in his untamed wilderness he put vine leaves in his hair and went beautifully barefoot.
She said it wasn't so much him as the inevitability of him. She'd said this about Cousin Egbert,
too, but she was now saying of this old silly that he had a nameless pathos that cut to her
artist's heart. CERTAIN PROOFS OF THE DOCTRINE OF DESCENT 10

III. THE SKULL THEORY AND THE APE THEORY 29

IV. THE CELL-SOUL AND CELLULAR PSYCHOLOGY 46

V. THE GENETIC AND DOGMATIC METHODS OF TEACHING 61

VI. THE DOCTRINE OF DESCENT AND SOCIAL DEMOCRACY 88

VII. IGNORABIMUS ET RESTRINGAMUR 99

FREEDOM IN SCIENCE AND TEACHING.

CHAPTER I.

DEVELOPMENT AND CREATION.

Nothing is more helpful for the understanding of scientific controversies, or for the clearing of
confused conceptions, than a contrasted statement, as defined and clear as possible, of the simplest
leading propositions of the contending doctrines. Hence it is highly favourable to the victory
of our modern doctrine of evolution that its chief problem, the question as to the origin of
species, is being more and more pressed by these opposite alternatives: Either all organisms
are naturally evolved, and must in that case be all descended from the simplest common parent-forms--or:
That is not the case, and the distinct species of organisms have originated independently of each
other, and in that case can only have been created in a supernatural
way, by a miracle. Natural evolution, or supernatural creation of
species--we must choose one of these two possibilities, for a third
there is not.

But as Virchow, like many other opponents of the doctrine
of evolution, constantly confounds this latter proposition with the
doctrine of descent, and that again with Darwinism, it will not be
superfluous to indicate here, in a few words, the limitation and subordination
of these three great theories.

I. The general doctrine of development,
the progenesis-theory or evolution-hypothesis (in the widest sense),
as a comprehensive philosophical view of the universe, assumes that
a vast, uniform, uninterrupted and eternal process of development
obtains throughout all nature; and that all natural phenomena without
exception, from the motions of the heavenly bodies and the fall of
a rolling stone to the growth of plants and the consciousness of men,
obey one and the same great law of causation; that all may be ultimately
referred to the mechanics of atoms--the mechanical or mechanistic,
homogeneous or monistic view of the universe; in one word, Monism. And it was time something was
done to stem this tide of corruption.

Mrs. Cora Wales and Mrs. Tracy Bangs, president and vice-president of our anti-tobacco league,
was the leaders of this movement and sent in a long complaint to the chamber of commerce urging
instant action or a foul blot would be splashed on the fair name of our city, to say nothing
of homes being broken up. They was ably backed up in this move by a committee from the civic
purity league.

And of course this added to the attractions of the Latin Quarter, giving each Bohemian a new
thrill. Vernabelle said it was by way of being ancient history; that from time immemorial these
little groups of choice spirits who did things had been scorned and persecuted, but that every
true Bohemian would give a light laugh and pursue his carefree way, regardless of the Philistine
And so it went, venomous on both sides, but with Vernabelle holding the bridge. She'd brought
new stuff to town and had a good working majority in favour of it.

Downtown one day I met Metta in the Red Front grocery buying olives and sardines in an excited
way. I suppose it's for one of her unspeakable orgies, but she tells me it's something special
and I must be sure to come.

"Dear Vernabelle," she says, "has consented to give an evening cycle of dance portrayals for
just a few of the choicer spirits. I know there has been dreadful talk about our little group,
but this will be a stunning bit and you are broad-minded, so do come."

I could just see Vernabelle consenting, almost peevishly; but it sounded like it might be disorderly
enough, so I says I'll come if she promises to leave at least one window down at the top, me
not having a gas mask.

Metta thinks a minute, then says she guesses she can leave one window down a mite; not much,
on account of the nature of Vernabelle's dance costume. I says if such is to be the nature
of her costume I'll come anyway and risk being gassed. Metta chides me gravely. She says the
costume is perfectly proper to the artist eye, being a darling little early Greek thing; built
on simple lines that follow the figure, it is true, yet suggest rather than reveal, and if
the early Greeks saw no harm in it why should we? I tell her to say no more, but reserve me
a ringside seat, though near a window if one can be opened; say, as far as the early Greeks
would have done at such a time, on account of the punk sticks.

And of course I wouldn't miss it. I'm there at eight-thirty and find quite a bunch of Latin
Quarter denizens already gathered and full of suppressed emotion. The punk sticks, of course,
are going strong. Vernabelle in a pink kimono says they supply atmosphere; which is the only
joke I ever heard her get off, if she knew it was one. Bohemians Lon Price and Jeff Tuttle
are hanging over the punch bowl, into which something illegal has been poured. Jeff is calling
Vernabelle little woman and telling her if worse comes to worst they might try being Bohemians
on a mixture his men up on the ranch thought of for a New Year's celebration. He says they
took a whole case of vanilla extract and mixed it with one dozen cans of condensed milk, the
vanilla having a surprising kick in it and making 'em all feel like the good old days next morning.

Vernabelle says he reminds her of some untamed creature of the open, some woodsy monster of
the dells, and Jeff says that's just what he feels like. He's going on to tell her some more
about what he feels like, but Vernabelle is now greeting Oswald Cummings, the pagan of splendid
sins, from the Elite Bootery. She tells Oswald there is a cold cruelty in the lines of his
face that reminds her of the emperor Nero.

Finally about twenty choice spirits who did things was gathered for this half-lighted hour,
so everybody set down on chairs and the couch and the floor, leaving a clear space for Vernabelle;
and Professor Gluckstein, our music teacher, puts down his meerschaum pipe and goes to the
piano and plays a soft piece. The prof is a German, but not a pro-German, and plays first rate
in the old-fashioned way, with his hands. Then, when all the comrades get settled and their
cigarettes lighted, the prof drifted into something quite mournful and Vernabelle appeared
from behind a screen without her kimono.

The early Greeks must of been strong on art jewellery. Vernabelle clanked at every step with
bracelets and anklets and necklaces. She had a priceless ruby weighing half a pound fastened
to the middle of her bony forehead. Her costume was spangled, but not many spangles had been
needed. The early Greeks couldn't of been a dressy lot. If Vernabelle had been my daughter
I could of give her what she deserved with almost no trouble. The costume, as Metta had said,
not only followed the lines of the figure, so far as it went anywhere at all, but it suggested
and almost revealed that Vernabelle had been badly assembled. The Bohemians kind of gasped
and shivered, all except Jeff Tuttle, who applauded loudly. They seemed to feel that Vernabelle
was indeed getting away from it all.

Then came this here cycle-of-dance portrayals. The first one wasn't much dance; it was mostly
slow, snaky motions with the arms and other things, and it was to portray a mother cobra mourning
her first-born. At least that's the way I understood it. Another one was called "The Striving
Soul," to which the prof played something livelier. Vernabelle went round and round, lifting
her feet high. It looked to me like she was climbing a spiral staircase that wasn't there.
Then she was a hunted fawn in a dark forest and was finally shot through the heart by a cruel
hunter--who was probably nearsighted. And in the last one she was a Russian peasant that has
got stewed on vodka at the Russian county fair. This was the best one. You couldn't see her
so well when she moved quick.

Of course there was hearty applause when it was all over, and pretty soon Vernabelle come out
again in her kimono. Panting like a tuckered hound she was when the comrades gathered to tell
her how wonderful she had been.

"That music tears me," says Vernabelle, putting her hands to her chest to show where it tore.
"That last maddening Russian bit--it leaves me like a limp lily!" So she was led to the punch
bowl by Comrades Price and Tuttle, with the others pushing after and lighting cigarettes for her.

It was agreed that the evening had been a triumph for Vernabelle's art. Almost every Bohemian
present, it seemed, had either been tore or maddened by that last Russian bit.

Vernabelle was soon saying that if she had one message for us it was the sacred message of
beauty. Jeff Tuttle says, "You've certainly delivered it, little woman!" Vernabelle says, oh,
perhaps, in her poor, weak way--she was being a limp lily against the piano then--but art is
a terrible master to serve, demanding one's all. Comrade Price says what more could she give
than she has to-night. And then, first thing I know, they're all talking about an intimate theatre.

This was another part of Vernabelle's message. It seems intimate theatres is all the rage in
New York, and the Bigler barn is just the place to have one in. Vernabelle says they will use
the big part where the hay used to be and paint their own scenery and act their own plays and
thus find a splendid means of self-expression the way people of the real sort are doing in
large cities.

Everyone is wild about this in a minute, and says how quaint and jolly Bohemian it will be.
The Bigler barn is just the place, with no horse there since Metta bought one of the best-selling
cars that ever came out of Michigan, and Vernabelle says she has written a couple of stunning
little one-act pieces, too powerful for the big theatres because they go right to the throbbing
raw of life, and it will be an inspiration and uplift to the community, of which all present
can be proud. Lon Price says he will furnish a good drop curtain free, painted with a choice
nine-room villa with just a line mentioning Price's Addition to Red Gap, Big Lots, Little Payments.
And he's quite hurt when Vernabelle tells him no, that they must keep entirely out of the slime
of commercialism. I don't think Lon ever again felt the same toward Vernabelle--calling his
business slime, that way.

However, the party broke up full of plans for the new intimate theatre, leaving an empty punch
bowl and a million cigarette ends.

And right here was where the Philistine opposition braided feathers in its hair and done a
war dance. Members of the little group that did things spoke freely the next day of Vernabelle's
art in the dance and her early Greek costume, taking a mean enjoyment in the horror they inspired
among pillars of the church and the civic purity league. It is probable that in their artistic
relish they endowed Vernabelle with even fewer clothes than she had wore. At any rate, they
left a whole lot to be inferred, and it promptly was inferred.

The opposition now said this was no job for a chamber of commerce; it had become a simple matter
for the police. The civic purity league had a special meeting at which the rind was peeled
off Vernabelle's moral character, and the following Sabbath one of the ministers gave a hot
sermon in which the fate of Babylon and a few other undesirable residence centres mentioned
in the Bible was pointed out. He said that so-called Bohemia was the gateway to hell. He never
minced his words, not once.

And the Latin Quarter come in for some more shock assaults when the talk about an intimate
theatre in the Bigler barn got out. The regular theatre was bad enough, said the civic purity
league; in fact, they had started a campaign against that the month before, right after a one-night
engagement of the Jolly Paris Divorcees Burlesque Company, which, I gathered, had not upheld
the very highest standards of dramatic art. And if the town was going to stand for anything
more intimate than this show had provided, why, it was time for drastic action if any wholesome
family life was to be saved from the wreck.

Feeling ran high, I want to tell you, and a few of the younger set fell out of the ranks of
good old Bohemia--or was yanked out. Luella Stultz's father, who is old-fashioned, it was said,
had give Luella a good licking for smoking cigarettes, and old Jesse Himebaugh had threatened
his daughter Gussie with the reform school if she didn't stop trying to get away from it all.
Even Beryl Mae's aunt put her foot down. Beryl Mae met me in the post office one day and says
auntie won't let her be a Bohemian any more, having threatened to take her new ukulele away
from her if she goes to that Latin Quarter another single time; and poor Beryl Mae having hoped
to do a Hawaiian dance in native costume for the intimate theatre, where it wouldn't be misunderstood!

Things was just in this shape, with bitterness on every side and old friends not speaking,
and the opposition passing the Bohemians on the street with the frown of moral disgust, and
no one knowing how it would all end, when I hear that Cora Wales has a niece coming from New
York to visit her--a Miss Smith. I says to myself, "My lands! Here's another Miss Smith from
New York when it looks to me like the one we got is giving us a plenty of the big league stuff."
But I meet Cora Wales and learn that this one's first name is Dulcie, which again seemed to
make a difference.

Cora says this Dulcie niece is one of New York's society leaders and she's sorry she invited
her, because what kind of a town is it in which to introduce a pure young girl that never smoked
or drank in her life and whose people belong to one of the very most exclusive churches in
the city. She had hoped to give Dulcie a good time, but how can she sully herself with any
of our young people that have took up Bohemianism? She being fresh from her social triumphs
in New York, where her folks live in one of the very most fashionable apartment houses on Columbus
Avenue, right in the centre of things and next to the elevated railway, will be horrified at
coming to a town where society seems to be mostly a little group of people who do things they
hadn't ought to.

Dulcie is a dear girl and very refined, everything she wears being hand embroidered, and it
would of been a good chance for Red Gap to get acquainted with a young society girl of the
right sort, but with this scandal tearing up the town it looks like the visit will be a failure
for all parties.

I tell Cora on the contrary it looks like a good chance to recall the town to its better self.
If this here Dulcie is all that is claimed for her she can very probably demolish the Latin
Quarter and have us all leading correct society lives in no time, because the public is fickle
and ever ready for new stuff, and as a matter of fact I suspect the Latin Quarter is in a bad
way because of everything in town of an illegal character having been drunk up by the comrades.
Me? I was trying to get some new life into the fight, understand, being afraid it would die
natural and leave us to a dull winter.

Cora's eyes lighted up with a great hope and she beat it off to the Recorder office to have
a piece put in the paper about Dulcie's coming. It was a grand piece, what with Cora giving
the points and Edgar Tomlinson writing it. It said one of Gotham's fair daughters would winter
in our midst, and how she was a prominent society leader and an ornament of the fast hunting
set, noted for her wit and beauty and dazzling costumes, and how a series of brilliant affairs
was being planned in her honour by her hostess and aunt, Mrs. Leonard Wales, Red Gap's prominent
society matron and representative of all that was best in our community, who would entertain
extensively at her new and attractive home in Price's Addition. And so forth.

I'm bound to say it created a flurry of interest among the younger dancing set, and more than
one begun to consider whether they would remain loyal to Bohemia or plunge back into society
once more, where stockings are commonly wore, and smoking if done at all is hurriedly sneaked
through out on the porch or up in the bathroom.

From Cora's description I was all prepared to find Dulcie a tall, stately creature of twenty-eight,
kind of blase and haggard from her wearing social duties in New York. But not so. Not so at
all. Cora had invitations out for a tea the day after Dulcie come; invitations, that is, to
the non-Bohemians and such as had reformed or give good signs of it. I don't know which head
I got in under. And this Dulcie niece was nothing but a short, fat, blond kid of seventeen
or eighteen that had never led any society whatever. You could tell that right quick.

She was rapidly eating cream-cheese sandwiches when I was presented to her. I knew in one look
that society had never bothered Dulcie any. Victuals was her curse. In the cattle business
it ain't riding disrespectful horses that gets you the big money; it's being able to guess
weights. And if Dulcie pulled a pound less than one hundred and eighty then all my years of
training has gone for naught. She was certainly big-framed stock and going into the winter
strong. Between bites of sandwich, with a marshmallow now and then, she was saying that she
was simply crazy about the war, having the dandiest young French soldier for a godson and sending
him packages of food and cigarettes constantly, and all the girls of her set had one, and wasn't
it the darlingest idea.

And her soldier was only twenty-two, though his beard made him look more mature, and he wrote
such dandy letters, but she didn't suppose there would ever be anything between them because
papa was too busy with his coal yard to take her over there.

As the girl chattered on it didn't seem to me that our Latin Quarter was in the slightest danger
from her. Still, some of the girls that was there seemed quite impressed or buffaloed by her
manner. One idea she give out now was new in Red Gap. She had all her rings named after meals.
She had a breakfast ring and a dinner ring and a supper ring and a banquet ring, and Daisy
Estelle Maybury admired the necklace she had on, and Dulcie said that was a mere travelling
necklace; and how did they like this cute little restaurant frock she was wearing? A little
dressmaker over on Amsterdam Avenue had turned it out. All the parties she dealt with, apparently,
was little. She had a little dressmaker and a little hair woman and a little manicure and a
little florist, and so forth. She'd et five cream-cheese sandwiches by this time, in spite
of its being quite painful for her to pick up a dropped napkin. Dulcie didn't fold over good.
You could tell here was a girl that had never tried to get away from it all. She wanted to
be right where it was.

Pretty soon one of the girls said something about the Bohemians of the Latin Quarter, probably
aiming to show this New York chatterbox that Red Gap wasn't so far west as it looked. But Dulcie
gave 'em the laugh. She said oh, dear, New York society had simply quit taking up Bohemians,
it not being considered smart any longer, and did we really take them up here? The girls backed
up at this. And Dulcie went on being superior. She said of course society people now and then
made up a party and went down to Washington Square to look them over, but as for taking them
up, oh, dear, no! It was more like a slumming party. One could stare at them, but one simply
didn't know them.

And perhaps, if she could get Aunt Cora to chaperon them, they might make up one of these slumming
parties some evening and go down to Red Gap's Latin Quarter; it might be amusing. Cora Wales
glistened at this. She said she guessed people could now see how such goings-on were regarded
by society in the true sense of the word. And it did give the girls a chill, calling the Bigler
home a slum. But I still didn't see any stuff in Dulcie to vanquish Vernabelle.

And I didn't see it a minute later when Dulcie wolfed her tenth marshmallow and broke out about
winter sports. She first said what perfectly darling snow we had here. This caused some astonishment,
no one present having ever regarded snow as darling but merely as something to shovel or wade
through. So Dulcie pronged off a piece of sticky chocolate cake and talked on. She said that
everyone in New York was outdooring, and why didn't we outdoor. It was a shame if we didn't
go in for it, with all this perfectly dandy snow. New York people had to go out of town for
their winter sports, owing to the snow not being good for sport after it fell there; but here
it was right at hand, and did we mean to say we hadn't organized a winter-sports club.

No one spoke, for no one could guess what you did to outdoor properly. About all they could
think of was hustling out after another chunk for the fireplace or bringing a scuttle of coal
up from the cellar. But they soon got the idea. Dulcie said right from this window she could
see a corking hill for a toboggan slide, and it would be perfectly darling to be out there
with plenty of hot coffee and sandwiches; and there must be some peachy trips for snowshoe
parties with sandwiches and coffee at the end; or skating in the moonlight with a big bonfire
and coffee and sandwiches.

She suggested other things with coffee and sandwiches and finally got up some real enthusiasm
when she said she had brought some of the dearest sport toggery with her. The girls was excited
enough when they found out you had to dress especial for it. They was willing to listen to
anything like that if New York society was really mad about it, even if it conflicted with
lifelong habits--no one in Red Gap but small boys having ever slid downhill.

And still I didn't suspect Dulcie was going to groundsluice Vernabelle. It looked like the
Latin Quarter would still have the best of it, at least during a cold winter. Which goes to
show that you can't tell what society will go mad about, even in Red Gap, when you can dress
for it.

The girls had got a line on Dulcie and was properly impressed by her, and then with an evening
affair at the Wales home the dancing men had their chance. Even some of the Bohemians was let
to come, just to have 'em see that there was indeed a better life; and reports of Dulcie was
such that all took advantage of it. The male sex was strong for the girl at once. She didn't
know that life is anything but selective, or that all the arts round out one's appreciation
of the beautiful, or that anything was "by way of being" something. But all the food she took
didn't make her torpid; she giggled easily and had eyes like hothouse grapes, and in spite
of her fat there was something about her, like Cousin Egbert said of Vernabelle. Anyway, she
prevailed. Oswald Cummings, the pagan, for one, quickly side-stepped his destiny of splendid
sins, and Hugo Jennings told Dulcie he had merely gone to this Latin Quarter as he would go
to an animal show, never having meant for one moment to take Bohemians up, any more than New
York society would.

First thing I hear, the winter-sports club has been organized, snowshoes sent for and a couple
of toboggans, and a toboggan slide half a mile long made out in Price's Addition, starting
at the top of the highest hill, where Lon's big board sign with the painted bungalow made a
fine windshield, and running across some very choice building lots to the foot of the grade,
where it stopped on the proposed site of the Carnegie Library. Lon was very keen about the
sport himself after meeting Dulcie, and let a fire be built near his sign that burned it down
one night, but he said it was all good advertising, more than he'd ever got out of being a
Bohemian.

Of course there was a great deal of fuss about the proper sport toggery, but everyone got rigged
out by the time the toboggans got there. Dulcie was a great help in this and was downtown every
day advising one or another about the proper sweaters or blanket coats or peaked caps with
tassels, or these here big-eyed boots. You'd meet her in a store with Stella Ballard, eating
from a sack of potato chips; and half an hour later she'd be in another store with Daisy Estelle
Maybury, munching from a box of ginger wafers; with always a final stop at the Bon Ton Kandy
Kitchen for a sack of something to keep life in her on the way home. There really got to be
so much excitement about winter sports that you hardly heard any more talk about the Latin
Quarter. People got to speaking to each other again.

By the opening day of the sports club you wouldn't of thought any one in town had ever tried
to get away from it all. Even them that thought it crazy came and stood round and said so.
Cousin Egbert Floud said this Dulcie was some sparrow, but nutty--going out in the cold that
way when nothing drove her out. Dulcie made a great hit with the club this first day, having
the correct Canadian toggery and being entirely fearless in the presence of a toboggan. She'd
zip to the bottom, come tramping back, shooting on all six, grab a sandwich--for not a morsel
of food had passed her lips since she went down the time before--and do it all over again.
And every last ex-Bohemian, even Edgar Tomlinson, fighting for the chance to save her from
death by starvation! Dulcie played no favourites, being entranced with 'em all. She said they
was the dearest gentleman friends she'd ever had. The way they was fighting for her favours
she could of called 'em her gentleman frenzy. Ain't I the heinous old madcap, thinking of jokes
like that?

Next day there was a snowshoe trip up to Stender's spring and back by way of the tie camp.
Dulcie hadn't ever snowshoed and it wasn't any light matter when her shoes threw her down--requiring
about three of the huskiest boys to up-end her--but she was game and the boys was game and
she was soon teaching snowshoeing shoes how to take a joke. And from that on winter sports
ruled in Red Gap. The chamber of commerce even talked of building an ice palace next year and
having a carnival and getting the town's name in the papers. Oh, there certainly must of been
a surprised lot of snow round there that winter. Nothing like this had ever happened to it before.

And all being done on nothing stronger than coffee, with hardly a cigarette and never anything
that was by way of being a punk stick in a closed room. It was certainly a lot healthier than
a Latin Quarter for these young people, and for the old ones, too. Dulcie had sure put one
large crimp into Bohemia, even if she could not be justly called an intellectual giantess.

And Vernabelle knew who to blame, too, when the little group quit coming round to get away
from it all. She knew it was Dulcie. She said that Dulcie seemed to be a pampered society butterfly
that devoted all her thoughts to dress. This was repeated to Dulcie by an ex-Bohemian, but
she found no poison in it. She said of course she devoted all her thoughts to dress; that a
young girl with her figure had to if she ever expected to get anywhere in the world.

Even ex-comrade Lon Price would now shut his office at four o'clock every day and go up on
the hill and outdoor a bit, instead of getting away from it all in a smoky Bohemian way. Besides
he'd had a difference of opinion with Vernabelle about the poster she was doing for him, the
same being more like an advertisement for some good bath soap, he said, than for choice villa
sites.

"I don't know anything about art," says Lon, "but I know what my wife likes." Which left Vernabelle
with another design on her hands and brought Comrade Price out of Bohemia.

Even if Dulcie's winter sports hadn't done the trick I guess it would of been done easy by
her report that Bohemians was no longer thought to be smart in New York, Red Gap being keenly
sensitive in such matters. Metta Bigler's mother firmly turned out the half-lights in Bohemia
when she heard of this talk of Dulcie's. I don't blame her. She didn't one bit relish having
her neat home referred to as a slum, say nothing of having her only child using a lip stick
and acting like an abandoned woman with cigarettes and the wine cup.

She said just that to me, Metta's mother did. She said she had heard that New York was all
broken up into social sets, the same way Red Gap is, and if Bohemians wasn't being took up
by the better element in New York, then they shouldn't be took up by the better element of
Red Gap--at least not in any home of which the deed was still in her name. She said of course
she couldn't keep Metta's guest from being a Bohemian, but she would have to be it alone. She
wasn't going to have a whole mob coming round every day and being Bohemians all over the place,
it being not only messy but repugnant alike to sound morality and Christian enlightenment.
And that settled it. Our town was safe for one more winter. Of course God only knows what someone
may start next winter. We are far off from things, but by no means safe.

Cousin Egbert was kind of sorry for Vernabelle. He said if she'd just stuck to plain glass
blowing she might of got by with it. He's a wonder, that man--as teachable as a granite bowlder.

My Godfrey! Ten-thirty, and me having to start the spring sport of ditch cleaning to-morrow
morning at seven! Won't I ever learn!

IV

VENDETTA

By the evening lamp in the Arrowhead living room I did my bit, for the moment, by holding a
hank of gray wool for Ma Pettengill to wind. While this minor war measure went forward the
day's mail came. From a canvas sack Lew Wee spilled letters and papers on the table. Whereupon
the yarn was laid by while Ma Pettengill eagerly shuffled the letters. She thought fit to extenuate
this eagerness. She said if people lived forever they would still get foolishly excited over
their mail; whereas everyone knew well enough that nothing important ever came in it. To prove
this she sketched a rapid and entirely unexciting summary of the six unopened letters she held.

One of them, she conceded, might be worth reading; and this she laid aside. Of the remaining
five she correctly guessed the contents of four. Of the fifth she remarked that it would be
from a poor feckless dub with a large family who had owed her three hundred dollars for nine
years. She said it would tell a new hard-luck tale for non-payment of a note now due for the
eighth time. Here she was wrong. The letter inclosed a perfectly new note for four hundred
and fifty dollars; and would Mrs. Pettengill send on the extra one hundred and fifty dollars
that would enable the debtor to get on his feet and pay all his debts, as there was a good
season of hog buying ahead of him!

"I guessed wrong," admitted the lady. "I certainly did that little man an injustice, not suspecting
he could think up something novel after nine years." Grimly she scanned the new note. "As good
as a treaty with Germany!" she murmured and threw it aside, though I knew that the old note
and the new hundred and fifty would go forward on the morrow; for she had spoken again of the
debtor's large family. She said it was wonderful what good breeders the shiftless are.

"Ain't I right, though, about the foolish way people fly at their mail?" she demanded. "You
might think they'd get wise after years and years of being fooled; but--no, sir! Take me day
after to-morrow, when the next mail comes. I'll fall on it like I fell on this, with all my
old delusions uninjured. There sure does seem to be a lot of human nature in most of us."

Then she opened the possibly interesting letter that had been put aside. The envelope, at least,
was interesting, bearing as it did the stamp of a military censor for the American Expedition
to France.

"You remember Squat Tyler, that long cow-puncher working for me when you were here last time?"

I remembered Squat, who was indeed a long cow-puncher--long enough to be known, also, to his
intimates as Timberline.

"Well, Squat is over there in the trenches helping to make the world a pleasant place to live
in. He's a good shot, too."

The lady read the letter hurriedly to herself; then regaled me with bits of it.

"The life here is very," she read. "That's all he says, at first--'The life here is very.'
I should judge it might be that from what I read in the papers. Or mebbe he couldn't just think
of the word. Let's see! What else? Oh, yes--about digging. He says he didn't take to digging
at first, not having gone there for any common purpose, but one day he was told to dig, and
while he was thinking up something to say a million guns began to go off; so he dug without
saying a word. Hard and fast he says he dug. He says: 'If a badger would of been there he would
of been in my way.' I'll bet! Squat wouldn't like to be shot at in all seriousness. What next?
Here he says I wouldn't dream what a big outfit this here U.S. outfit is; he says it's the
biggest outfit he ever worked for--not even excepting Miller & Lux. What next? Oh, yes; here
he tells about getting one.

"'Last night I captured a big fat enemy; you know--a Heinie. It was as dark as a cave, but
I heard one snooping close. I says to my pardner I keep hearing one snoop close; and he says
forget it, because my hive is swarming or something; and I says no; I will go out there and
molest that German. So I sneaked over the bank and through our barbed-wire fence that everyone
puts up here, and out a little ways to where I had heard one snoop; and, sure enough--what
do you think? He seen me first and knocked my gun out of my hands with the butt of his. It
got me mad, because it is a new gun and I am taking fine care of it; so I clanched him'--that's
what Squat says, clanched. 'And, first, he run his finger into my right eye, clear up to the
knuckle it felt like; so I didn't say a word, but hauled off quick and landed a hard right
on the side of his jaw and dropped him just like that. It was one peach I handed him and he
slumped down like a sack of mush. I am here to tell you it was just one punch, though a dandy;
but he had tried to start a fight, so it was his own fault. So I took all his weapons away
and when he come alive I kicked him a few times and made him go into the U.S. trenches. He
didn't turn out to be much--only a piano tuner from Milwaukee; and I wish it had of been a
general I caught snooping. I certainly did molest him a-plenty, all right. Just one punch and
I brought him down out of control. Ha! Ha! The life here is very different.'

"There; that must of been what he tried to say at the beginning--'The life here is very different.'
I should think he'd find it so, seeing the only danger that boy was ever in here was the sleeping
sickness." 

In my Munich discourse (p. 12), I had alluded to the "grand and fruitful application which Virchow
had made, in his system of cellular pathology, of the cell-theory to the general province
of theoretic medicine;" and as a logical amplification of that idea, I asserted emphatically that
we must ascribe an independent soul-life to every individual organic cell. "This conception is validly
proved by the study of infusoria, amoebæ, and other one-celled organisms; for, in these individual,
isolated, living cells we find the same manifestations of soul-life--feelings, and ideas (mental
images), will and motion, as is in the higher animals compounded
of many cells"

(p. 13). Virchow now rises up in the strongest protest against this theory of a cellular sensibility,
which I regard as the inevitable consequence of his early views of cellular physiology; it is
to him "mere trifling with words." He combats with equal decisiveness "the scientific necessity
of extending the province of psychical processes beyond the circle of those bodies in and by which
we actually see them exhibited."

Finally he says, "I assert without any hesitation that for us the sum total of psychical phenomena
is connected with certain animals only, and not with the collective mass of all organic beings;
nay, not even with all animals in general. We have no ground as yet for speaking of the lowest
animals as possessing psychical properties; we find such properties only in the higher grades,
and with perfect certainty only in the very highest."

When I first read this and other astounding statements in Virchow's paper, I involuntarily
asked myself, "Can this be the same Virchow from whom, twenty-five years ago, I learnt in Würzburg
that the soul-functions of man and animals depend on mechanical processes in the soul-organs;
that these organs are, like all other organs, composed of cells, and that the functional activity
of an organ is nothing more than the sum of the activity of all the
cells which compose it?

Is this the same Virchow whose most vital doctrine it was that all the physical and psychical
processes of the human organism were to be referred to the mechanics of cell life; who supported
the view of the unity of all the phenomena of life with the same emphasis with which we are
now obliged to defend it against his attacks?"

In fact, and beyond a doubt, we have here a new proof of Virchow's complete change in all fundamental
scientific principles. For the cellular psychology which I advance is only a necessary consequence
of the cellular physiology promulgated by Virchow. His present opposition to the former is
either a renunciation of the latter or an untenable and inconsequent position. To explain this
astonishing metapsychosis, we shall do well first to glance at the soul in general, and then
give particular consideration to the cell-soul.

What is the Soul or Psyche? The innumerable different answers which have been given to this crowning
question of psychology, may collectively, when freed from all extraneous matter, be brought under
two groups which we may shortly designate as the dualistic and the monistic soul-hypothesis.
According to the monistic (or realistic) soul-hypothesis, the "soul" is nothing more than
the sum or aggregate of a multitude of special cell-activities, among which sensation and volition--sensual
perception and voluntary movement--are the most important, the most common, and the most widely
diffused; associated with these in the higher animals and in man, we find the more developed activities
of the ganglionic cells which are included under the conceptions of Thought, Consciousness, Intellect,
and Reason. Like all the other functional-activities of the organic cells, these soul-functions
depend ultimately on material phenomena of motion, and more particularly on the motions of the plasson-molecules
or plastidules, the ultimate atoms of the protoplasma, and perhaps of the nucleus also; therefore
we should be able actually to grasp and explain them, as well as every other cognisable natural
process, if we were in a position to refer them to the mechanics
of atoms.

This monistic soul-hypothesis, then, is at bottom mechanistic. If psychical mechanics--psychophysics--were
not so infinitely complex and involved, if we were in a position to take a complete view of the
historical evolution of the psychic functions, we could reduce the whole of them (including consciousness)
to a mathematical "soul-formula."

According to the opposite, or dualistic (or spiritualistic) soul-hypothesis, the soul is, on the
contrary, a peculiar substance, which most people somewhat grossly conceive of as a gaseous body,
while others picture it with more subtlety, as an immaterial essence. This "soul-substance"
subsists independently of the animal-body, and stands in only a temporary connection with certain
organs of that body--the soul-, or mental-organs. It has been imagined that this soul-matter, which
resembles that imponderable ether which is the medium of light, is
diffused between the ponderable molecules of the soul-organs and especially
of the nerve-cells, and that this connection of the imponderable "soul"
with the ponderable body subsists only so long as the individual life
lasts.

At the instant of the first beginning of the individual organism, at the moment of generation,
this imponderable "soul" passes into the body, and at the instant of death, at the annihilation
of the living individual, it again quits the body. This mystical or dualistic soul-hypothesis,
which, as is well known, is to this day universally accepted, is fundamentally vitalistic,
inasmuch as it regards the force which is bound up with the soul-substance, like the "vital force"
of a past time, as a peculiar force quite independent of mechanical forces. This force does
not depend on the material phenomena of motion, and is quite independent of the mechanics of atoms.
The highest law of modern natural science, the law of the conservation of force, has, therefore,
no application in the region of soul-life, and that mechanical causality which prevails throughout
all the processes of nature does not exist for the soul. The Psyche, in a word, is a supernatural
phenomenon, and the supernatural department of the spiritual world stands free and independent
of the natural department of the material world.

If we now compare the psychological views of the youthful and unprejudiced Virchow of Würzburg
with those of the older and mystical Virchow of Berlin, there can be no doubt in the minds of the
impartial that the former, a quarter of a century ago, was as decided and logical a monist as
the latter is at present a confessed and convicted dualist. The distinguished position which
Virchow, twenty-five years since, won by his natural conception of the nature of man, and the
great fame which he then earned in the fight for the truth, rest precisely on this, that on
every occasion he maintained with his utmost vigour the unity of all vital phenomena, and asserted
their mechanical character.

All organic life, even the soul-life, rests on mechanical principles, on that causal mechanism
of which Kant said that "it alone contained a practical interpretation of nature," and that
"without it no natural science can exist." On this point Virchow says well in his discourse
on "Efforts at Unity in Scientific Medicine," 1849:--"Life is only a peculiar sort of mechanics,
though it is indeed the most complex form of mechanics; that in which the usual mechanical laws
fall under the most unusual and manifold conditions. Thus life, compared with the universal processes
of motion in nature, is a thing peculiar in itself; but it does not constitute a diametrical,
dualistic opposition to those laws; it is only a peculiar species of motion. The motion itself
is a mechanical one, for how should we become cognisant of it if
it were not based on the sensible properties of bodies?

The media of the motion are certain chemical matters, for we recognise none but chemical matter
in bodies. The individual acts of motion reduce themselves to mechanical, or physico-chemical, modifications
of the constituent elements of the organic unities, the cells and their equivalents." These
and many similar utterances in Virchow's earlier writings, and especially
in the essay I have mentioned, "On the Mechanical Conception of Life,"
leave no doubt that he formerly supported, with a clear conscience
and his utmost energy, in psychology as in the other collected departments
of physiology, that very mechanical standpoint which we to-day accept
as the essential basis of our monism, and which stands in irreconcilable
antagonism to the dualism of the vitalistic doctrine.

To none of my teachers am I so deeply indebted for my emancipation from all the prejudices of
the dualistic doctrine, and for my conversion to the monistic, as to Rudolf Virchow; for it
was his superior guidance which most firmly convinced me, and many others, of the exclusive
importance of the mechanical view of nature. He led me to a clear recognition of the fact that
the nature of man, like every other organism, can only be rightly understood as a united whole,
that this spiritual and corporeal being are inseparable, and that the phenomena of the soul-life
depend, like all other vital phenomena, on material motion only--on mechanical (or physico-chemical)
modifications of cells. And it was in perfect agreement with my most honoured master that
I subscribed then, and at this day still subscribe, to the proposition with which he, in September
1849, closed the preface to the above-mentioned "Efforts at Unity." "It is possible that I may
have erred in details; in the future I shall be ready and willing to acknowledge my mistakes
and to rectify them, but I enjoy this conviction, that I shall never
find myself in the position of denying the principle of the unity
of the human nature with all its consequences!"

To err is human! Who can say to what diametrical contradiction to his firmest convictions man
may not in the future be driven by his adaptation to new relations in life? If we compare these
stout monistic declarations of 1849 and 1858 with the equally decided dualistic utterances in
Virchow's Munich address of 1877, we perceive that he could not give the lie more fiercely to
his former fundamental opinions than he has there done. Not quite twenty years have passed by,
and yet, in the course of that time, in Virchow's views of the universe, in his conception of human
nature, and of the soul-life, a change has been effected than which we can conceive of no greater.
We learn to our surprise that psychical and corporeal processes are wholly different phenomena;
that no scientific necessity whatever exists for extending the province
of psychical processes beyond the circle of those bodies in which,
and by which, we see them actually exhibited.

"We may ultimately explain the processes of the human mind as chemical, but at any rate, it
is not yet our business to amalgamate these two subjects!"

From the whole psychological discussion which is involved in Virchow's Munich address, it is
made clear that at the present time he regards the "soul" in a purely dualistic sense as a substance,
an immaterial essence which only temporarily takes up its abode in the body. If we substitute for
the word "psyche" the word which corresponds to Virchow's earlier mechanistic view--the word
"motion" (or peculiar mode of motion)--the sentence runs thus: "If I explain attraction and
repulsion as phenomena of motion, I simply throw motion out of the
window."

Almost more remarkable is Virchow's assertion that the lowest animals have no psychic properties;
that, on the contrary, "these are only to be found in the higher, and, with perfect certainty,
only in the highest animals." It is only to be regretted that Virchow has not here stated what
he understands by the higher and the highest animals; where that remarkable dividing line is, beyond
which the soul suddenly appears in the hitherto soulless body. Every zoologist who is in some
degree familiar with the results of comparative morphology and physiology
will here clasp his hands in astonishment, for by this proposition
Virchow seems to mean that we must ascribe a soul-life only to those
animals in which special soul-organs, in the form of a central and
peripheral nerve-system, are developed from sense-organs and muscles.

But it is admitted that all these different soul-organs with their characteristic properties
have originated from single cells through the division of labour (differentiation); and the
nerves and muscles especially have been developed by differentiation from the neuro-muscular
cells.

The cells from which all these different nerve-cells, muscle-cells, mind-cells, and so forth,
are derived, are originally the simple neutral cells of the epithelium of the ectoderm or exterior
germ-layer, and these cells, again, like all the cells of many-celled
animal bodies, originated in the repeated division of one single original
cell, the ovum-cell.

The individual development or ontogenesis of each of these many-celled animal-forms, brings this
histological process of development so clearly and evidently before our eyes that we can but
directly infer from it the truth of the phylogenesis, or gradual historical evolution of the
soul-organs. The association of cells and the division of labour among them are the modes by which,
in the first instance, the compound many-celled organism has originated, historically, from
the simple one-celled organism. And an impartial comparative consideration teaches us in the clearest
way that a functional-activity of the soul-cells exists in the lowest one-celled animals as
well as in the highest and many-celled; in the infusoria as well as in man. Volition and sensation,
the universal and unmistakable signs of soul-life, may be observed among the former as well
as in the latter. Voluntary motion and conscious sensation (of pressure, light, warmth, &c.) come under
our observation so undoubtedly in the commonest forms of infusorial
animals--for instance the Ciliata, that one of their most persevering
observers, Ehrenberg, asserted undeviatingly to the day of his death
that all Infusoria must possess nerves and muscles, organs of sense
and of soul, as well as the higher animals.

It is well known that the enormous advance which our science has lately
made in the natural history of these lowest organisms culminates in
the statement--clearly made by Siebold thirty years since, but only
recently "ascertained as proved"--that these minute creatures are
one-celled, and that in the case of these infusoria one single cell
is capable of all the various vital functions--including soul-functions--which
in the zoophytes (plant-animals), as the hydra and the sponges, are
distributed among the cells of the two germ-layers, and in all the
higher animals among the different tissues, organs, and apparatus
of a highly developed and constructed organism.

The psychic functions of sensation and voluntary motion, which are here distributed to such very
various organs and tissues, are in the infusoria fulfilled by the neutral plasson material of
the cell, by the protoplasma, and possibly also by the nucleus (compare
my treatise "The Morphology of the Infusoria."

Jena, Zeitschriften, 1873, vol. vii. p. 516). And just as we must attribute to these primary
animal forms an independent "soul," just as we must plainly be convinced
that the single independent cell has a "psyche," we must as decidedly
attribute a soul to every other cell; for the most important active
constituent of the cell, the protoplasm, everywhere exhibits the same
psychic properties of sensibility or irritability, and motive power
or will.

The only difference is this, that in the organism of the higher animals and plants the numerous
collected cells, to a great extent, give up their individual independence, and are subject, like
good citizens, to the soul-polity which represents the unity of the
will and sensations in the cell community.

We here also must distinguish clearly between the central soul of the whole many-celled organism
or the personal psyche (the person-soul), and the particular individual soul or elementary
soul of the individual cells constituting that organism (the cell-soul). Their relations are
strikingly illustrated in the instructive group of Siphonophora, as I have briefly shown in
my article on "The Cell-soul and Soul-cells" (Deutsche Rundschau, July 1878). Beyond a doubt the
whole stock or polity of Siphonophora has a very definite united will and a united sensibility,
and yet each of the individual persons of which this stock (or Cormus) is composed has its
own personal will and its own particular sensations. Each of these persons indeed was originally
a separate Medusa, and the individual Siphonophora stock originated,
by association and division of labour, out of these united Medusa
communities.

When I developed this theory of the cell-soul and designated it in my Munich address as the "surest
foundation of empirical psychology," I believed I was drawing an inference quite to Virchow's
mind, from his own views of mechanical and cellular-physiology; and for that reason I took
the same occasion specially to celebrate his very great services to the cell theory. How astonished
then was I when in his reply this very theory was violently attacked
and satirised as "mere trifling with words."

It never could have occurred to me that Virchow had long since become unfaithful to his most
important biological principles, and had deserted his own mechanical "theory of cells;" it
never had occurred to me that Virchow could be in great measure wanting in that zoological
knowledge which is requisite for a practical comprehension of the cell-soul theory.
 Ed says
get all the help necessary and he'll pay the bill, and not to leave out even the longer descriptive
parts, because if it's as well written as Ben says it is he may have it printed in a little
volume for sending round to his friends.

The next day Ed is sunning himself on the station platform when Number 18 steams in. He's told
a lot of people that Charlie is bringing this report and he's aiming to read it aloud, just
to show 'em what a man can pass through and live to tell of it. Charlie swings down and hands
him one folded sheet of yellow paper. Ed says, what's the matter--couldn't he get to copy the
report? Charlie says the report is all there on that sheet, every word of it. One sheet! And
Ed had been expecting at least forty pages of able narrative, even without hysteria. Even before
he looks at it Ed says there is crooked work somewhere.

Then he read Ben's report. It didn't fill even the one sheet--not more than half of it. It
merely says: "Brakeman Steptoe had trouble holding two cars of concentrates he was letting
down from the Tiger-Poorman mine at Burke. Cars ran to Wallace and left track. Steptoe thrown
some distance. Right leg and arm broken; left shoulder dislocated; head cut some. Not serious."

It was unbelievable; so Ed did the simple thing and didn't believe it. Not for one minute!
He says to Charlie Holzman: "Charlie, I know you're honest; and, furthermore, you are a brother
Moose. You've brought me what's on file in that office; so now I know there's a conspiracy
to hush my accident up. I've thought so a long time--the way people acted round here. Now I
know it. Don't say a word; but I'm going to take it up with Ben at once. Good old Ben! Won't
he be in a frenzy when he finds this paltry insult has been sneaked into the files in place
of his report on me!" So into the station he goes and wires Ben up the line to come there at
once on account of something serious.

Ben gets in that night. He thought Ed must be dying and had got a lay-off. He goes over to
the hospital and is a mite disappointed to find Ed ain't even worse, but is almost well and
using only one crutch.

Ed first makes sure no one can overhear, then tells Ben about this conspiracy, showing him
the false report that has been smuggled into the files in place of the real one Ben had sent
in. It takes Ben a couple of minutes to get the idea of what Ed is so worked up over. But he
finally does get it. He then sweeps all ideas of a conspiracy out of Ed's mind forever. He
says his talk is all nonsense; that this here is the very report he made, every word of it;
and, as to that, if he had it to write over again he could shorten it by at least six words,
but he must of been excited at the time. He says he has already told Ed that the Old Man complimented
him on it because he hadn't lost his head and got hysterical, showing he had the makings of
a good railroad man in him. And what had Ed expected, anyway? Didn't he know that your superiors
want the simple facts in cases of this kind and no fancy work, wanting chiefly to know about
damage to the rolling stock and how long before the main line will be open? Ed must be crazy,
making him get a lay-off just for this! Had he looked for some verses of poetry about his accident,
or a novel? Ben wasn't any novelist and wouldn't be one if you give him a chance. He was just
a brakeman, with a bright future before him.

Ben was quite indignant himself by this time thinking of two days' pay lost, and Ed could hardly
believe his own ears. He just set there, swelling up like a toad in a very feverish way. "But
'some distance,'" says Ed in low tones of awe. "You say I was thrown 'some distance,' like
it was a casual remark. Is that any way to talk about a man hurled two hundred and thirty-five
feet from start to finish?--which I can prove by the man that taped it. Why, any one would
think them two cheap box cars was the real heroes of this accident. No one would dream that
a precious human life was at stake. And 'Not serious!' And 'Head cut some!' Great suffering
cats! Was that any way to talk about a fellowman--not to say a first cousin?"

Ben was pretty mad himself now and swore right out--at least the only oath he ever swears,
which is "By doggie!" He says, by doggie, it ain't his fault that Ed was so brittle! And, by
doggie, he wasn't going to let family affection interfere none with his career, because it
wouldn't be right by the children he hopes some day to be the father of! Then he got his temper
back and tried patiently to explain once more to Ed that what a railroad company wants in such
cases is facts and figures, and not poetry--chiefly about the rolling stock. He says Ed can't
expect a great corporation, with heavy freight and passenger traffic, to take any deep personal
interest in the bone troubles of a mere brakeman.

It was about here, I guess, that Ed's feelings must of overcome him. He saw it was no use bandying
words any more; so he started to do foul murder. He committed several acts of frightfulness
on Ben with his crutch, seeming quite active for a cripple. Ben finally got out of range and
went and had some stitches took in his own scalp. He swore, by doggie, he was through with
that maniac forever! But he wasn't through. Not by no means!

Ed was now well enough to stand shipping; so he come down to Red Gap and started to work. He
couldn't get round with his machines yet; so he got a new Home Queen and parked himself in
the doorway of a vacant store and made embroidered hat marks for the multitude at one dollar
a throw. Yes, sir; he congested traffic there on Fourth Street for about two weeks, taking
a strip of satin ribbon and embroidering people's initials on it, so they could sew it in their
hats and know whose hat it was. Hardly a hat in town that didn't have one, with thrilled crowds
looking on while he done it.

I begged him to take it easy and stay at my house till he was strong again; but he wouldn't.
He said he had to do something just to keep from thinking. Of course the poor lollop had never
been able to think under any circumstances; but it sounded good. And, of course, he told me
his trouble. I don't believe he held back the least little thing from the beginning of the
accident down to the time he lammed Ben with his crutch. He now blamed everything on Ben. He
said neither the company nor any one else could take his accident seriously after that lying
report Ben put in. No wonder there hadn't been any real excitement about it. He was right bitter.

"'Some distance' Ben says I was thrown. I should think it was some distance! I'll bet it's
farther than any other man was ever thrown on their whole rotten system. And 'Not serious'!
Great Jeeminetty! What would have to happen to a person before he'd call it serious? Oh, I'll
make him take that back if ever I get to be the man I once was! The only trouble with Ben is,
he hasn't anything here and he hasn't anything here"--Ed put his hand first on his head and
next on his heart, to show me where Ben hadn't got anything--"and that kind of trash may make
fine railroad men, but they hadn't ought to be classed with human beings. Just wait till I
get firmly knitted together again! You'll see! I'll certainly interfere with that man's career
a-plenty. 'Not serious!' He won't make any such report about himself when I get through fussing
with him. He certainly does need handling--that Ben Steptoe."

And so on for half an hour at a time, while he might be stitching G. W. G. in purple letters
on a strip of yellow satin ribbon. I used to stop on purpose to hear some more about what he
was going to do to Ben when he got to be the man he once was.

Pretty soon he had identified all the hats in Red Gap; so he moved over to Colfax with his
Home Queen, and then on to other towns. It was spring again before he seemed to be the man
he once was. He wrote me from Tekoa that if I read in the papers about something sad happening
to Ben I wasn't to be alarmed, because, though it would be serious enough, it would probably
not prove fatal if he had skilled nursing. So I watched the papers, but couldn't find any crime
of interest. And a few days later Ed come over to Red Gap again. He looked pretty good, except
for an overripe spot round his left eye.

"Well, did you lick Ben?" I says.

"No; Ben licked me," he says.

I'd never heard such a simple and astounding speech from any man on earth before. I started
to find out what his excuse was--whether he wasn't in good shape yet, or his foot slipped,
or Ben took a coupling pin to him, or something. But he didn't have a single word of excuse.
He ought to of been locked up in a glass case in a museum right there. He said he was in fine
shape and it had been a fair fight, and Ben had nearly knocked his head off.

I says what is he going to do now; and he says oh, he'll wait a while and give Cousin Ben another
go.

I says: "Mebbe you can't lick Ben."

He says: "Possibly so; but I can keep on trying. I have to protect my honour, don't I?"

That's how it seemed to the poor fish by this time--his honour! And I knew he was going to
keep on trying, like he had said. If he had made the usual excuses that men put up when they've
had the worst of it I'd of known he'd been well licked, and once would be a-plenty. But, seeing
that he was probably the only man who had been honest under such conditions since the world
began, I had a feeling he would keep on. He was sure going to annoy Ben from time to time,
even if he didn't panic him much. He was just as turbulent as ever. Now he went off and joined
a circus, being engaged to lecture in front of the side show about the world's smallest midget,
and Lulu the snake empress, and the sheep-headed twins from Ecuador. And Ben could devote the
whole summer to his career without worry. I saw him over at Colfax one day.

"Mark my words; that lad was never cut out for a railroad man," says Ben. "He lets his emotions
excite his head too much. Oh, I give him a good talking to, by doggie! I says to him: 'Why,
you poor little hopeless, slant-headed, weak-minded idiot, you'--you know I always talk to
Ed like he was my own brother--'what did you expect?' I says. 'I'm quite sorry for your injuries;
but that was the first chance I'd ever had to make a report and I couldn't write one of these
continuous stories about you. You ought to see that.' And what does he do but revile me for
this commonsense talk! Tightminded--that's what he is; self-headed, not to say mulish, by doggie!
And then pestering round me to have a fist altercation till I had to give in to keep him quiet,
though I'm not a fighting character. I settled him, all right. I don't know where he is now;
but I hope he has three doctors at his bedside, all looking doubtful. That little cuss always
did contrary me."

I told him Ed had gone with this circus side show. "Side show!" he says. "That's just where
he belongs. He ought to be setting right up with the other freaks, because he's a worse freak
than the living skeleton or a lady with a full beard--that's what he is. And yet he's sane
on every subject but that. Sometimes he'll talk along for ten minutes as rational as you or
me; but let him hear the word accident and off he goes. But, by doggie, he won't bother me
again after what I give him back of the Wallace freight shed." "He solemnly promised he would,"
I says, "when I saw him last. He was still some turbulent."

And he did bother Ben again, late that fall. When the circus closed he travelled back a thousand
miles in a check suit and a red necktie, just to get another good licking. Ben must of been
quite aggravated by that time, for he wound up by throwing Ed into the crick in all his proud
clothes.

Ed was just as honest about it as before. He says Ben licked him fair. But it hadn't changed
his mind. He felt that Ben's report had knocked his just celebrity and he was still hostile.

"Mebbe you can't lick Ben," I says to him again. "I can keep on doing my endeavours," he says.
"I had to come off in a friend of mine's coat because my own was practically destroyed; but
I'll be back again before Ben has clumb very high on that ladder of his career."

The adventurer was interned at my house for ten days, till his bruises lost their purple glow
and he looked a little less like a bad case of erysipelas. Then he started out again, crazy
as a loon! I didn't hear from him for nearly two years. Then I got a letter telling about his
life of adventure down on the Border. It seems he'd got in with a good capable stockman down
there and they was engaged in the cattle business. The business was to go over into Mexico,
attracting as little notice as possible, cut out a bunch of cattle, and drive 'em across into
the land of the free. Naturally what they sold for was clear profit.

Ed said he was out for adventure and this had a-plenty. He said I wouldn't believe how exciting
it could be at times. He wanted to know what Ben was promoted to by this time, and was he looking
as hearty as ever? Some day he was coming back and force Ben to set him right before the world.

About a year later he writes that the cattle business is getting too tame. He's done it so
much that all the excitement has gone. He says I wouldn't believe how tame it can be, with
hardly any risk of getting shot. He says he wouldn't keep on running off these Mexican cattle
if it wasn't for the money in it; and, furthermore, it sometimes seems to him when he's riding
along in the beautiful still night, with only God's stars for companions, that there's something
about it that ain't right.

But it's another year before he writes that he has disposed of his stock interests and is coming
North to lick Ben proper. He does come North. He was correct to that extent. He outfitted at
the Chicago Store in Tucson, getting the best all-wool ready-made suit in Arizona, with fine
fruit and flower and vegetable effects, shading from mustard yellow to beet colour; and patent-leather
ties, with plaid socks--and so on. He stopped off at Red Gap on his way up to do this outrage.
His face was baked a rich red brown; so I saw it wouldn't show up marks as legibly as when
he was pale.

He said Ben wasn't a right bad fellow and he had no personal grudge against him, except he
needed to have his head beat off on account of his inhumanity.

I told him Ben had worked up from yardmaster at Wallace to assistant division superintendent
at Tekoa, where he would probably find him; and I wished him God-speed.

He said he rejoiced to know of Ben's promotion, because he had probably softened some, setting
round an office. He promised to let me know the result at once. He did. It was the same old
result. The fight had gone a few more rounds, I gathered, but Ed still gave the decision against
himself in the same conscientious way. He said Ben had licked him fair. It was uncanny the
way he took these defeats. No other human being but would of made some little excuse. He came
back in another suit and a bit blemished in the face, and said Ben seemed to be getting a fair
amount of exercise in spite of his confining office duties; but--mark his words--that indoor
work would get him in time. He'd never seen a man yet that could set at a desk all day and
keep in shape to resent fighting talk, even from a lighter man by twenty pounds. He said he
might have to wait till Ben was general manager, or something; but his day was coming, and
it would be nothing for Ben to cheer about when it got here. He now once more drifted out over
the high horizon, only one eye being much help to him in seeing the way.

Then Ben come down and had a wholehearted session with me. He said I ought to have a talk with
Ed and reason him out of his folly. I said Ed would listen to a number of things, but not to
reason. He said he knew it; that the poor coot should be in some good institution right now,
where the state could look after him. He said he couldn't answer for the consequences if Ed
kept on in this mad way. He said here he was, climbing up in his profession, and yet with this
scandal in his private life that might crop out any time and blast his career; and, by doggie,
it was a shame! He said it was hanging over him like a doom and sometimes he even woke up in
the night and wished he had made a different report about the accident--one with a little hysterics
or description in it, like this maniac had seemed to crave.

"It ain't that I can't lick him," says Ben--"I've proved that three times; but having to do
it every so often, which is beneath the dignity of a high railroad official. I might as well
be a common rowdy and be done with it, by doggie! And no telling what will happen if he don't
get his mind back. The little devil is an awful scrapper. I noticed it more than ever this
last time. One of these times he might get me. He might get me good."

"You better let him, then," I says, "and have it over. That's the only thing which will ever
stop him. You take a man that says he was licked fair, but still keeps at it, and he's deadly.
Next time he comes along you lay down after making a decent resistance. Then he'll probably
be your friend for life, especially if you tell him you been thinking about his accident and
it now seems like the most horrible accident that ever happened to man."

It was the most encouragement I could give and he went off gloomy. Ben was certainly one conscientious
objector.

Nothing come from Ed for over a year. Then he writes that he has give up the cattle business
for good, because Mexico is in a state of downright anarchy and he has been shot through the
shoulder. He put it well. He said he had been shot from ambush by a cowardly Mexican and I
wouldn't believe how lawless that country was. So now he was going to take up mining in God's
own country, where a man could get a square deal if he kept out of railroading. And was Ben
keeping up his exercise?

He stayed under the surface for about three years. Neither Ben nor I heard a word from him.
I told Ben it was many chances to one that he had gone under at the hands of someone that wanted
to keep his cattle or his mine or something. Ben looked solemn and relieved at this suggestion.
He said if the Grim Reaper had done its work, well and good! Life was full of danger for the
best of us, with people dropping off every day or so; and why should Ed have hoped to be above
the common lot?

But the very next week comes a letter from the deceased wanting to know whether Ben has been
promoted some more and how he is looking by this time. Is he vigorous and hearty, or does office
work seem to be sapping his vitality? It was the same old Ed. He goes on to say that the reason
he writes is that the other night in Globe, Arizona, he licked a man in the Miners' Rest saloon
that looked enough like Ben to be his twin; not only looked the image of him but had his style
of infighting. And he had licked him right and made him quit. He said the gent finally fled,
going through the little swinging doors with such force that they kept swinging for three minutes
afterward. So now is the time for him to come up and have another go at Ben.

Of course he ain't superstitious, but it does seem like Providence has taken this means of
pointing out the time to him. But he is in reduced circumstances at this moment, owing to complications
it would take too long to explain; so will I lend him about two hundred and fifty dollars to
make the trip on? And he will have Ben off his mind forever and be able to settle down to some
life work. Just as sane as ever--Ed was.

I sent the letter to Ben, not wishing him to rest in false security. But I wrote Ed firmly
that I couldn't see my money's worth in his proposition. I told him Ben was keeping in splendid
condition, having the glow of health in his cheeks and a grip like an osteopath, and I'd be
darned if I was going to back a three-time loser in the same old fight. I said he wasn't the
only sensitive person in the world. I was a little fussy myself about what people might think
of my judgment. And I gave him some good advice which was to forget his nonsense and settle
down to something permanent before he died of penury.

He wrote a kind, forgiving answer. He said he couldn't blame me for turning against him after
his repeated failures to lick Ben, but his nature was one I should never understand. He said
he would amass the money by slow grinding toil, and when he next come North and got through
handling Ben I would be the very first to grasp him by the hand and confess that I had wronged
him. It was as nutty a letter as Ed ever wrote; which is some tribute. I sent it on to Ben
and I believe it was right after that he ordered one of these exercising machines put up in
his bedroom, with a book showing how to become a Greek god by pulling the weights five minutes,
morning and evening.

But this time come silence so long that I guess even Ben forgot he had a doom hanging above
his head by a single hair. I know I did. Let's see. It must of been a good five years before
I hear from Ed again. It was another hard-luck letter. He had just worked a whole season for
a contractor that blew up and left him with one span of mules in place of his summer's wages;
which was a great disappointment, because he had been looking forward to an active reunion
with Ben. How was Ben, anyway? And did he show the ravages of time?

And no one had wanted these mules, because they was inferior mules; but when he was on the
point of shooting them to stop their feed bill along come two men that had a prospect over
in the Bradshaw Mountains and offered him a one third interest in it for his span. So he had
sawed the mules off onto these poor dubs and told 'em all right about the third interest in
their claim, and forget it; but they insisted on his taking it. So he did, and was now working
in the B.&.B. store at Prescott, selling saddles and jewellery and molasses and canned fruit
and lumber, and such things. He didn't care much for the life, but it was neck-meat or nothing
with him now.

No wonder these men that cheated him out of his mules had made him take a third interest in
their claim. It was now taking all his salary to pay assessments and other expenses on it.
But he was trying to trade this third interest off for something that wouldn't be a burden
to him; then he should have a chance to put his money by and come up to give Ben what he was
sooner or later bound to get if there was a just God in Heaven. He spoke as freshly about Ben
as if his trouble had begun the day before. You wouldn't think twelve years had gone by. He
was now saying Ben had put a stigma on him. It had got to be a stigma by this time, though
he probably hadn't any idea what a stigma really is. He'd read it somewhere.

Then the waves closed over the injured man for about three years more. This time it looked
as if he'd gone down for good, stigma and all. Ben thought the same. He said it was a great
relief not to be looking forward any more to these brutal affrays that Ed insisted on perpetrating.
And high time, too, because he was now in line for general manager, and how would it look for
him to be mixed up in brawls?

And everything was serene till the papers broke out into headlines about a big strike made
in the Bradshaw Mountains of Arizona by three partners, of whom one was named Steptoe. They
seemed to have found all the valuable minerals in that claim of theirs except platinum. Ben
tried first to believe it was someone else named Steptoe; but no such luck. We read that a
half interest in the property had been sold to an Eastern syndicate for three million dollars
and a company organized of which Edward J. Steptoe was president.

"It may be all for the best, anyway," Ben says to me. "Now that he's a big mining man he'll
probably have other aims in life than being a thug."

You could see he was hoping to make a separate peace with the new millionaire, who would forget
the grudge of his old days when he had to work for what he got, or at least run the risk of
getting shot for it. But I wasn't so sure. I reminded Ben that Ed had never yet done anything
you'd think a human being would do, so why expect him to begin now, when he had abundant leisure?
I advised him to give deep thought to the matter of his defense, and if the battle went against
him to withdraw to a position previously prepared, like the war reports say. Ben said a few
warm things about Ed, by doggie, that no cousin ought to say of another cousin, and went off,
hoping against hope.

And, sure enough, Ed came promptly to the front. It seems he waited only long enough to get
a new suit and an assorted lot of the snappiest diamond jewellery he could find. Then he wired
me he was coming to right the wrongs of a lifetime. Reaching San Francisco, it occurred to
him that he could put it all over Ben in another way that would cut him to the heart; so he
there chartered the largest, goldest, and most expensive private car on the market, having
boudoirs and shower baths and conservatories and ballrooms, and so on; something that would
make Ben's dinky little private car look like a nester's shack or a place for a construction
gang to bunk in. And in this rolling palace Ed invaded our peaceful country, getting lots of
notice. The papers said this new mining millionaire was looking us over with an eye to investment
in our rich lands. Little they knew he merely meant to pull off a brutal fist altercation with
a prominent railroad official that was somewhat out of condition.

Ben was one worried man, especially after he heard of Ed's private car. It was one thing to
lick an exbrakeman, but entirely different to have an affray with a prominent capitalist that
come after you regardless of expense. Furthermore, this was the time for the annual tour of
inspection by the officers of the road, and they was now on the way to Ben's division, with
him hoping to create a fine impression by showing his miracles of management. And here was
Ed, meaning to start something scandalous at sight! No wonder Ben lost his nerve and tried
to run out on his antagonist. He was trying to put it off at least till after his officials
had come and gone.

So for six days he kept about thirty miles of standard-gauge track between his car and Ed's.
Ed would get word that he was at such a station and have his car dropped there, only to find
that Ben had gone on. Ed would follow on the next train, or mebbe hire a special engine; and
Ben would hide off on some blind spur track. They covered the whole division about three times
without clashing, thanks to Ben's superior information bureau; it being no trick at all to
keep track of this wheeled apartment house of Ed's.

Ed couldn't understand it at first. Here he'd come up to lick Ben, and Ben was acting queer
about it. Ed would send messages every day wanting to know when and where he could have a nice
quiet chat with Ben that would not be interfered with by bystanders; and Ben would wire back
that his time wasn't his own and company business was keeping him on the jump, but as soon
as this rush was over he would arrange an interview; and kind regards, and so on. Or he might
say he would be at some station all the following day; which would be a clumsy falsehood, because
he was at that moment pulling out, as Ed would find when he got there. The operating department
must of thought them a couple of very busy men, wanting so much to meet, yet never seeming
able to get together.

Ed got peeved at last by the way Ben was putting him off. It wasn't square and it wasn't businesslike.
He had large mining interests in charge and here was Ben acting like he had all summer to devote
just to this one little matter. He called Ben's attention to this by telegraph, but Ben continued
to be somewhere else from where he said he was going to be.

After a week of this pussy-wants-a-corner stuff Ed got wise that the thing had come to be a
mere vulgar chase, and that his private car was hampering him by being so easy to keep track
of. So he disguised himself by taking off his diamond ornaments and leaving his private car
at Colfax, and started out to stalk Ben as a common private citizen in a day coach. He got
results that way, Ben supposing he was still with his car. After a couple of scouting trips
up and down the line he gets reliable word that Ben, with his bunch of high officials, is over
at Wallace.

So much the better, thinks Ed. It will be fine to have this next disturbance right on the spot
where a great wrong was done him fifteen years before. So he starts for Wallace, wiring for
his car to follow him there. He'd found this car poor for the bloodhound stuff, but he wanted
Ben to have a good look at it and eat his heart out with envy, either before or after what
was going to happen to him.

He gets to Wallace on the noon train and finds that Ben with his officials has gone up the
canon, past Burke, on the president's private car, to return in about an hour. After Ed's inquiries
the agent kindly wires up to Ben that his cousin from Arizona is waiting for him. Ed spends
the time walking round Ben's shabby little private car and sneering at it. He has his plans
all made, now that he has run his man to earth. He won't pull anything rough before the officials,
but about twenty miles out on the line is a siding with a shipping corral beside it and nothing
else in sight but vistas. They'll get an engine to run the two cars out there that night and
leave 'em, and everything can be done decently and in order. No hurry and no worry and no scandal.

Ed is just playing the coming fight over in his mind for the fifth time, correcting some of
his blows here and there, when he hears a whistle up the canon and in comes the special. The
officials pile off and Ben comes rushing up to Ed with a glad smile and effusive greetings
and hearty slaps on the back; and how is everything, old man?--and so on--with a highly worried
look lurking just back of it all; and says what rare good luck to find Ed here, because he's
the very man they been talking about all the way down from Burke.

Ed says if they come down as fast as he did one time they didn't get a chance to say much about
him; but Ben is introducing him to the president of the road and the general manager and the
chief engineer and three or four directors, and they all shake hands with him till it seems
like quite a reception. The president says is this really the gentleman who has made that last
big strike in Arizona! And if it is he knows something still more interesting about him, because
he has just listened to a most remarkable tale of his early days as a brakeman on this very
line. Their division superintendent has been telling of his terrific drop down the canon and
his incredible flight through the air of three hundred and thirty-five feet.

"How far did he say I was hurled?" says Ed, and the president again says three hundred and
thirty-five feet, which was a hundred more than Ed had ever claimed; so he looks over at Ben
pretty sharp.

Ben is still talking hurriedly about the historic accident, saying that in all his years of
railroad experience he never heard of anything approaching it, and if they will step up the
track a piece he will show them just where the cars left the rails. Ben must of done a lot
of quick thinking that day. He had the bunch over to see the exact spot, and they all stood
and looked over to the ice house and said it was incredible; and a director from Boston said
it was perfectly preposterous; really now! And Ben kept on reciting rapidly about the details.
He said Ed had come down the seven miles in less than three minutes, which was lopping a minute
and a half off the official time; and that when picked up he hadn't a whole bone left in his
body, which was also a lie; and that his cousin never could of survived if he hadn't probably
had the most marvellous constitution a man was ever endowed with. He then made the bunch go
over to the ice house to see the other exact spot, and they looked back to where he started
from, and again said it was incredible and preposterous.

I don't know. Mebbe they wouldn't of thought it preposterous that a mere brakeman was hurled
that far, but Ed was a capitalist now. Anyway, the president had him into his car for lunch
with the party, and they might possibly of got to talking about other things of less importance,
but Ben wouldn't have any thing else. He made 'em insist that Ed should tell his version of
the whole thing; how he felt when the cars started, and how the scenery was blurred, and how
his whole past life flashed before him, and the last thing he remembered before he hit the
sawdust. And Ben set there looking so proud of Ed, like a mother having her little tot recite
something. And when Ed had finally lit, Ben made him tell about his slow recovery. And after
Ed got himself well again Ben would go back to the start and ask for more details, such as
whether he hadn't wanted to jump off on the way down, or whether he had been conscious while
going through the air for nearly four hundred feet.

Ed got little food; but much he cared! He'd come into his own at last. And suddenly he was
surprised by finding a warm glow in his heart for Ben, especially after Ben had said for about
the third time: "I was certainly a green hand in those days; so green that I didn't begin to
realize what a whale of an occurrence this was." Ed was getting a new light on Ben.

After lunch Ed's own car got in from Colfax and he had the party over there for cigars and
more talk about himself, which was skillfully led by Ben. Then the president invited Ed to
hitch his car on and come along with them for a little trip, and talk over mining and investments,
and so on, and what the outlook was in the Southwest. So Ed went with 'em and continued to
hear talk of his accident. Ben would bring it up and harp back to it, and bring it forward
and sandwich it in whenever the conversation had an open moment. It was either the wild thoughts
Ed must of had sliding down the canon, or the preposterous constitution he had been endowed
with, or the greenness of himself for not recognizing it as the prize accident of the ages.
And I don't wonder Ben went on that way for the next two days. He knew what a tenacious idiot
Ed was, and that he had come miles out of his way to try something he had often tried before.
The most he could hope for was to stave off the collision till his officials got away.

And it looked, the second night, like he wasn't going to be able to do even this much. He'd
been detecting cold looks from Ed all day, in spite of his putting on another record about
the accident every ten minutes or so. They was laid out at some little station, and just before
dinner Ed give Ben the office that he wanted a word private with him. Ben thinks to himself
it's coming now in spite of all his efforts to smooth it over. But he leaves the car with Ed
and they walk a piece up the track, Ben hoping they can make the lee of a freight car before
Ed starts his crime of violence. He makes up his mind quick. If Ed jumps him there in the open
he will certainly do his best to win the contest. But if he waits till they get this freight
car between them and the public, then he will let Ed win the fight and get the scandal out
of his life forever.

Ben walks quite briskly, but Ed begins to slow up when they ain't more than a hundred yards
from the president's car. Finally Ed stops short.

"The little foci is going to pull the fight here in the open!" thinks Ben; so he gets ready
to do his best.

Then Ed says:

"Say, Ben, what's the matter with you, anyway? Are you losing your mind? It ain't so much on
my account; I could make allowance for you. But here's these officials of yours, and you want
to make a good impression on 'em; instead of which you are making yourself the grandest bore
that ever needed strangling for continuous talk on one subject."

Ben didn't get him yet. He says come on up the other side of them freight cars, where they
can be more private for their consultation.

Ed says no; this is far enough to tell him for his own good not to be such a bore; an' Ben
says how is he a bore?

"A bore?" says Ed. "Why, for forty-eight hours you ain't been able to talk about anything but
that stale old accident of mine, and you got me so sick of it I could jump on you every time
you begin. You got everybody in the party sick of it. Don't you see how they all try to get
away from you? For the Lord's sake, can't you think up something else to talk about now and
then--at least for five minutes, just to give your silly chatter a little different flavour?
I never been so sick of anything in my life as I am of this everlasting prattle of yours about
something that was over and forgotten fifteen long years ago! What's got into you to keep dragging
that accident up out of the dead past that way? Anyway, you better cut it out. I have to listen
because you're my cousin; but these officials don't. Your next pay check is liable to be your
last on this road if you don't think up some other kind of gossip. Darned if it don't seem
like you had been getting weak-minded in your old age!"

Ben had got his bearings by this time. He apologized warmly to Ed; he said it was true this
magnificent catastrophe had lately taken possession of his mind, but now that he finds Ed is
so sensitive about it he'll try to keep it out of his talk, and he hopes Ed won't cherish hard
feelings against him.

Ed says no, he won't cherish anything if Ben will only quit his loathsome gushing about the
accident; and Ben says he will quit. And so they shook hands on it.

That's the way the feud ended. The champion grudge hoarder of the universe had been dosed to
a finish with his own medicine. It showed Ben has a weakness for diplomacy; kind of an iron
hand in a velvet glove, or something.

Ed is still a nut, though. There was a piece in a Sunday paper not long ago about this new
mining millionaire. He spoke some noble words to the youth of our land. He said young American
manhood could still make its fortune in this glorious country of opportunity by strict attention
to industry and good habits and honest dealing and native pluck--him that had had these mules
forced on him in the first place, and then his interest in this claim forced on him for the
mules, and then hadn't been able to get shut of the claim. Ain't it lovely how men will dig
up a license to give themselves all credit for hog luck they couldn't help!

Ma Pettengill busied herself with a final cigarette and remarked that she never knew when to
stop talking. Some parties did, but not her; and she having to be up and on the way to Horsefly
Mountain by six-thirty in the A.M.! Her last apology was for a longing she had not been able
to conquer: She couldn't help a debased wish to know how that last fight would of come out.

"Of course it ain't nice to want men to act like the brutes," said the lady. "Still, I can't
help wondering; not that I'm inquisitive, but just out of curiosity."

V

ONE ARROWHEAD DAY

It began with the wonted incitement to murder. A wooden staff projects some five feet above
the topmost roof peak of the Arrowhead ranch house, and to this staff is affixed a bell of
brazen malignity. At five-thirty each morning the cord controlling this engine of discord is
jerked madly and forever by Lew Wee, our Chinese chef. It is believed by those compelled to
obey the horrid summons that this is Lew Wee's one moment of gladness in a spoiled life. The
sound of the noon bell, the caressing call of the night bell--these he must know to be welcome.
The morning clangour he must know to be a tragedy of foulest import. It is undeniably rung
with a keener relish. There will be some effort at rhythm with the other bells, but that morning
bell jangles in a broken frenzy of clangs, ruthlessly prolonged, devilish to the last insulting
stroke. Surely one without malice could manage this waking bell more tactfully.

A reckless Chinaman, then, takes his life in his hands each morning at five-thirty. Something
like a dozen men are alarmed from deep sleep to half-awakened incredulity, in which they believe
the bell to be a dream bell and try to dream on of something noiseless. Ten seconds later these
startled men have become demons, with their nice warm feet on the icy floor of the bunk-house,
and with prayers of simple fervour that the so-and-so Chink may be struck dead while his hand
is still on the rope. This prayer is never answered; so something like a dozen men dress hurriedly
and reach the Arrowhead kitchen hurriedly, meaning to perform instantly there a gracious deed
which Providence has thus far unaccountably left undone.

That the Arrowhead annals are, as yet, unspiced with a crime of violence is due, I consider,
to Lew Wee's superb control of his facial muscles. His expression when he maniacally yanks
the bell cord is believed by his victims to be one of hellish glee; so they eagerly seek each
morning for one little remaining trace of this. The tiniest hint would suffice. But they encounter
only a rather sad-faced, middle-aged Chinaman, with immovable eyes and a strained devotion
to delicate tasks, of whom it is impossible to believe that ever a ray of joy gladdened his life.

There is a secondary reason why the spirit of Lew Wee has not long since been disembodied by
able hands: His static Gorgon face stays the first murderous impulse; then his genial kitchen
aroma overpowers their higher natures and the deed of high justice is weakly postponed. This
genial kitchen aroma is warm, and composed cunningly from steaming coffee and frying ham or
beef, together with eggs and hot cakes almost as large as the enamelled iron plates from which
they are eaten. It is no contemptible combination on a frosty morning. No wonder strong men
forget the simple act of manslaughter they come there to achieve and sit sullenly down to be
pandered to by him who was erst their torturer.

On a morning in late May, when I had been invited to fare abroad with my hostess, Mrs. Lysander
John Pettengill--who would breakfast in her own apartment--I joined this assemblage of thwarted
murderers as they doggedly ate. It is a grim business, that ranch breakfast. Two paling lamps
struggle with the dawn, now edging in, and the half light is held low in tone by smoke from
the cake griddle, so that no man may see another too plainly. But no man wishes to see another.
He stares dully into his own plate and eats with stern aversion. We might be so many strangers
in a strange place, aloof, suspicious, bitter, not to say truculent.

No quip or jest will lighten the gloom. Necessary requests for the sugar or the milk or the
stewed apples are phrased with a curtly formal civility. We shall be other men at noon or at
night, vastly other, sunnier men, with abundance of quip and jest and playful sally with the
acid personal tang. But from warm beds of repose! We avoid each other's eyes, and one's subdued
"please pass that sirup pitcher!" is but tolerated like some boorish profanation of a church
service.

The simple truth, of course, is that this is the one hour of the day when we are face to face
with the evil visage of life unmasked; our little rosy illusions of yestereve are stale and
crumpled. Not until we are well out in the sun, with the second cigarette going good, shall
we again become credulous about life and safe to address. It is no meal to linger over. We
grimly rise from the wrecked table and clatter out.

Only one of us--that matchless optimist, Sandy Sawtelle--sounds a flat note in the symphony
of disillusion. His humanness rebounds more quickly than ours, who will not fawn upon life
for twenty minutes yet. Sandy comes back to the table from the hook whence he had lifted his
hat. He holds aloft a solitary hot cake and addresses Lew Wee in his best Anglo-Chinese, and
with humorous intent:

"I think take-um hot cake, nail over big knot hole in bunk-house--last damn long time better
than sheet iron!"

Swiftly departing pessimists accord no praise or attention to this ill-timed sketch; least
of all Lew Wee, who it is meant to insult. His face retains the sad impassivity of a granite
cliff as yet beyond the dawn.

Now I am out by the saddle rack under the poplars, where two horses are tied. Ma Pettengill's
long-barrelled roan is saddled. My own flea-bitten gray, Dandy Jim, is clad only in the rope
by which he was led up from the caviata. I approach him with the respectful attention his reputed
character merits and try to ascertain his mood of the moment. He is a middle-aged horse, apparently
of sterling character, and in my presence has always conducted himself as a horse should. But
the shadow of scandal has been flung athwart him. I have been assured that he has a hideous
genius for cinch binding. Listening at first without proper alarm, it has been disclosed to
me that a cinch binder ain't any joke, by a darned sight! A cinch binder will stand up straight
and lean over backward on me. If I'm there when he hits the ground I'll wish I wasn't--if I
am able to wish anything at all and don't simply have to be shipped off to wherever my family
wants it to take place.

I am further enlightened: Dandy Jim ain't so likely to start acting if not saddled when too
cold. If I saddle him then he will be expecting to have more fun out of it than I have any
right to. But if the sun is well up, why, sometimes a baby could handle him. So for three weeks
I have saddled Dandy Jim with the utmost circumspection and with the sun well up. Now the sun
is not well up. Shall I still survive? I pause to wish that the range of high hills on the
east may be instantly levelled. The land will then be worth something and the sun will be farther
up. But nothing of a topographical nature ensues. The hills remain to obscure the sun. And
the brute has to be saddled. The mood of that grim breakfast, voiceless, tense, high with portent,
is still upon me.

I approach and speak harshly to the potential cinch binder, telling him to get over there!
He does not; so I let it pass. After all, he is only a horse. Why should I terrorize him? I
bridle him with a manner far from harsh. He doesn't like the taste of the bit--not seasoned
right, or something. But at last he takes it without biting my fingers off; which shows that
the horse has no mind to speak of.

I look him calmly in the eye for a moment; then pull his head about, so that I can look him
calmly in the other eye for a moment. This is to show the animal that he has met his master
and had better not try any of that cinch-binding stuff if he knows when he's well off. Still,
I treat him fairly. I smooth his back of little vegetable bits that cling there, shake out
the saddle blanket and tenderly adjust it. Whistling carelessly I swing up the saddle. Dandy
Jim flinches pitifully when it rests upon him and reaches swiftly round to bite my arm off.
I think this is quite perfunctory on his part. He must have learned long since that he will
never really bite any one's arm off. His neck is not enough like a swan's.

I adjust saddle and blanket carefully from both sides, pulling the blanket well up under the
horn of the saddle and making sure that it sets comfortably. One should be considerate of the
feelings of a dumb beast placed at one's mercy. Then I reach for the cinch, pass it twice through
the rings, and delicately draw it up the merest trifle. Dandy Jim shudders and moans pathetically.
He wishes to convey the impression that his ribs have been sprung. This, of course, is nonsense.
I measureably increase the pressure. Dandy Jim again registers consternation, coughs feebly,
and rolls his eyes round appealingly, as if wondering whether the world is to sit, without
heart, and watch a poor defenseless horse being slain. He is about to expire.

I now lead him gently about by the bridle. It occurs to me that a horse with this curious mania
for binding cinches or cinching binders--or, in other words, a cinch binder--will be as willing
to indulge in his favourite sport with the saddle unoccupied as otherwise. He may like it even
better with no one up there; and I know I will. Nothing happens, except that Dandy Jim stumbles
stiffly and pretends to be lame. The sun is not yet well up; still, it is a lot better. Perhaps
danger for the day is over. I again lead the dangerous beast--

"What you humouring that old skate for?"

Ma Pettengill, arrayed in olive-drab shirt and breeches, leather puttees, and the wide-brimmed
hat of her calling with the four careful dents in the top, observed me with friendly curiosity
as she ties a corduroy coat to the back of her saddle.

Hereupon I explained my tactful handling of the reputed cinch binder. It evoked the first cheerful
sound I had heard that day:

Ma Pettengill laughed heartily.

"That old hair trunk never had the jazz to be any cinch binder. Who told you he was?"

I named names--all I could remember. Almost everyone on the ranch had passed me the friendly
warning, and never had I saddled the brute without a thrill.

"Sure! Them chuckleheads always got to tell everybody something. It's a wonder they ain't sent
you in to the Chink to borrow his meat auger, or out to the blacksmith shop for a left-handed
monkey wrench, or something. Come on!"

So that was it! Just another bit of stale ranch humour--alleged humour--as if it could be at
all funny to have me saddle this wreck with the tenderest solicitude morning after morning!

"Just one moment!" I said briskly.

I think Dandy Jim realized that everything of a tender nature between us was over. Some curious
and quite charming respect I had been wont to show him was now gone out of my manner. He began
to do deep breathing exercises before I touched the cinch. I pulled with the strength of a
fearless man. Dandy Jim forthwith inflated his chest like a gentleman having his photograph
taken in a bathing suit. I waited, apparently foiled. I stepped back, spoke to Ma Pettengill
of the day's promise, and seemed carelessly to forget what I was there for. Slowly Dandy Jim
deflated himself; and then, on the fair and just instant, I pulled. I pulled hard and long.
The game was won. Dandy Jim had now the waist of that matron wearing the Sveltina corset, over
in the part of the magazine where the stories die away. I fearlessly bestrode him and the day
was on.

I opened something less than a hundred gates, so that we could take our way through the lower
fields. Ma Pettengill said she must see this here Tilton and this here Snell, and have that
two hundred yards of fence built like they had agreed to, as man to man; and no more of this
here nonsense of putting it off from day to day.

She was going to talk straight to them because, come Thursday, she had to turn a herd of beef
cattle into that field.

Then I opened a few dozen more gates and we were down on the flats. Here the lady spied a coyote,
furtively skirting some willows on our left. So, for a few merry miles, we played the game
of coyote. It is a simple game to learn, but requires a trained eye. When one player sees a
coyote the other becomes indebted to him in the sum of one dollar.

This sport dispelled the early morning gloom that had beset me. I won a dollar almost immediately.
It may have been the same coyote, as my opponent painfully suggested; but it showed at a different
breach in the willows, and I was firm.

Then the game went fiercely against me. Ma Pettengill detected coyotes at the far edges of
fields--so far that I would have ignored them for jack rabbits had I observed them at all.
I claimed an occasional close one; but these were few. The outlook was again not cheering.
It was an excellent morning for distant coyotes, and presently I owed Mrs. Lysander John Pettengill
seven dollars, she having won two doubleheaders in succession. This ride was costing me too
much a mile. Being so utterly outclassed I was resolving to demand a handicap, but was saved
from this ignominy by our imminent arrival at the abode of this here Tilton, who presently
sauntered out of a feeding corral and chewed a straw at us idly.

We soon took all that out of him. The air went something like this:

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. L. J. P.--brightly: Morning, Chester! Say, look here! About that gap in the fence across
Stony Creek field--I got to turn a beef herd in there Thursday.

TILTON--crouching luxuriously on one knee still chewing the straw: Well, now, about that little
job--I tell you, Mis' Pett'ngill; I been kind o' holdin' off account o' Snell bein' rushed
with his final plowin'. He claims--

MRS. L. J. P.--still brightly: Oh, that's all right! Snell will be over there, with his men,
to-morrow morning at seven o'clock. He said you'd have to be there, too.

TILTON--alarmed, he rises, takes straw from his mouth, examines the chewed end with dismay
and casts it from him; removes his hat, looks at this dubiously, burnishes it with a sleeve,
and sighs: To-morrow morning! You don't mean to-morrow--

MRS. L. J. P.--carefully yet rapidly: To-morrow morning at seven o'clock. You don't want to
throw Snell down on this; and he's going to be there. How many men can you take?

TILTON--dazed: Now--now lemme see!

MRS. L. J. P.--quickly: You can take Chris and Shorty and Jake and yourself. Any one else?

TILTON--swept over the falls: Why, no'm; I don't guess there's any other I could spare, account
of--

MRS. L. J. P.--almost sweetly: All right, then. To-morrow; seven sharp.

TILTON--from the whirlpool, helplessly: Yes'm! Yes'm!

MRS. L. J. P.: Morning!

       *       *       *       *       *

We ride on. Tilton fades back toward the corral; he has forgotten to replace his hat.

I now decided to make a little conversation rather than have the stupid and ruinous game of
coyote for a pastime.

"I thought you hadn't seen Snell yet."

"I haven't; not since he promised his half of the job two weeks ago."

"But you just told Tilton--"

"Well, Snell is going to be there, ain't he?"

"How do you know?"

"I'm going to tell him now."

And the woman did even so. If you wish the scene with Snell go back and read the scene with
Tilton, changing the names. Nothing else need you change. Snell was hitching two mules to a
wood wagon; but he heard the same speeches and made approximately the same replies. And the
deed was done.

"There now!" boomed Mrs. Talleyrand as we rode beyond earshot of the dazed and lingering Snell.
"Them two men been trying for two weeks to agree on a day to do this trifling job. They wasn't
able; so I agreed on a day myself. Anything wrong with it?"

"You said you were going to talk straight to them."

"Ain't I just talked straight to Snell? Tilton will be there, won't he?"

"How about the way you talked to Tilton before you saw Snell?"

"Well, my lands! How you talk! You got to have a foundation to build on, haven't you?"

I saw it as a feat beyond my prowess to convict this woman in her own eyes of a dubious and
considering veracity. So I merely wondered, in tones that would easily reach her, how the gentlemen
might relish her diplomacy when they discovered it on the morrow. I preceded the word diplomacy
with a slight and very affected cough.

The lady replied that they would never discover her diplomacy, not coughing in the least before
the word. She said each of them would be so mad at the other for setting a day that they would
talk little. They would simply build fence. She added that a woman in this business had to
be looking for the worst of it all the time. She was bound to get the elbow if she didn't use
her common sense.

I ignored her casuistry, for she was now rolling a cigarette with an air of insufferable probity.
I gave her up and played a new game of smashing horseflies as they settled on my mount. Dandy
Jim plays the game ably. When a big fly settles on his nose he holds his head round so I can
reach it. He does not flinch at the terrific smash of my hat across his face. If a fly alights
on his neck or shoulder, and I do not remark it, he turns his head slightly toward me and winks,
so I can stalk and pot it. He is very crafty here. If the fly is on his right side he turns
and winks his left eye at me so the insect will not observe him. And yet there are people who
say horses don't reason.

I now opened fifty more gates and we left the cool green of the fields for a dusty side road
that skirts the base of the mesa. We jogged along in silence, which I presently heard stir
with the faint, sweet strain of a violin; an air that rose and wailed and fell again, on a
violin played with a certain back-country expertness. The road bent to show us its source.
We were abreast of the forlorn little shack of a dry-farmer, weathered and patched, set a dozen
yards from the road and surrounded by hard-packed earth. Before the open door basked children
and pigs and a few spiritless chickens.

All the children ran to the door when we halted and called to someone within. The fiddle played
on with no faltering, but a woman came out--a gaunt and tattered woman who was yet curiously
cheerful. The children lurked in her wake as she came to us and peered from beyond her while
we did our business.

Our business was that the redskin, Laura, official laundress of the Arrowhead, had lately attended
an evening affair in the valley at which the hitherto smart tipple of Jamaica ginger had been
supplanted by a novel and potent beverage, Nature's own remedy for chills, dyspepsia, deafness,
rheumatism, despair, carbuncles, jaundice, and ennui. Laura had partaken freely and yet again
of this delectable brew, and now suffered not only from a sprained wrist but from detention,
having suffered arrest on complaint of the tribal sister who had been nearest to her when she
sprained her wrist. Therefore, if Mrs. Dave Pickens wanted to come over to-morrow and wash
for us, all right; she could bring her oldest girl to help.

Mrs. Dave thereupon turned her head languidly toward the ignoble dwelling and called: "Dave!"
Then again, for the fiddle stayed not: "Dave! Oh, Dave!"

The fiddle ceased to moan--complainingly it seemed to me--and Dave framed his graceful figure
in the doorway. He was one appealing droop, from his moustache to his moccasin-clad feet. He
wore an air of elegant leisure, but was otherwise not fussily arrayed.

"Dave, Mis' Pett'ngill says there's now a day's washin' to do over to her place to-morrow.
What think?"

Dave deliberated, then pondered, then thought, then spoke:

"Well, I d'no', Addie; I d'no' as I got any objections if you ain't. I d'no' but it's all the
same to me."

Hereupon we meanly put something in Dave's unsuspecting way, too.

"You must want a day's work yourself," called out Ma Pettengill. "You go up to Snell's about
six in the morning and he'll need you to help do some fencing on that gap in Stony Creek field.
If he don't need you Tilton will. One of 'em is bound to be short a man."

"Fencin'?" said Dave with noticeable disrelish.

"You reckon we better both leave the place at once?" suggested Mrs. Dave.

"That's so," said Dave brightly. "Mebbe I--"

"Nonsense!" boomed Ma Pettengill, dispelling his brightness. "Addie can drop you at Snell's
when she comes over to Arrowhead. Now that's settled!"

And we rode off as unvoiced expostulations were gathering. I began to wonder whether it must,
throughout a beautiful day, be the stern mission of this woman to put tribulation upon her
neighbours. She was becoming a fell destroyer. The sun was well up. I thirsted. Also, breakfast
seemed to have been a thing in the remote past.

We now rode three torrid miles up a narrow green slit in the hills for a scant ten minutes
of talk with a most uninteresting person, whose sole claim to notice seemed to be that he had
gone and fenced the wrong water hole over back of Horsefly Mountain, where we have a summer
range. The talk was quick and pointed and buttressed with a blue-print map, and the too-hasty
fencer was left helpless after a pitiful essay at quibbling. We rode off saying that he could
do just as he liked about sending someone over right away to take that fence down, because
we had already took it down the minute we set eyes on it. We was just letting him know so he
needn't waste any more wire and posts and time in committing felonious depredations that would
get him nothing but high trouble if he was so minded. Another scalp to our belt!

I now briefly recalled to the woman that we had stopped at no peaceful home that morning save
to wreck its peace. I said I was getting into the spirit of the ride myself. I suggested that
at the next ranch we passed we should stop and set fire to the haystacks, just to crown the
day's brutalities with something really splendid. I also said I was starving to death in a
land of plenty.

Ma Pettengill gazed aloft at the sun and said it was half-past twelve. I looked at my watch
and said the sun was over ten minutes slow, which was probably due to the heavy continuous
gunfire on the Western Front. This neat bit went for just nothing. As we rode on I fondly recalled
that last cold hot cake which Sandy Sawtelle had sacrificed to his gift for debased whimsy.
I also recalled other items of that gloomy repast, wondering how I could so weakly have quit
when I did.

We rode now under a sun that retained its old fervour if not its velocity. We traversed an
endless lane between fields, in one of which grazed a herd of the Arrowhead cattle. These I
was made to contemplate for many valuable moments. I had to be told that I was regarding the
swallow-fork herd, pure-breds that for one reason or another--the chief being careless help--had
not been registered. The omission was denoted by the swallow fork in the left ear.

The owner looked upon them with fond calculation. She was fondly calculating that they would
have been worth about fifty per cent. more to her with ears unmutilated. She grew resentful
that their true worth should not be acclaimed by the world. In the sight of heaven they were
pure-breds; so why should they suffer through the oversight of a herd boss that hadn't anywhere
near such distinguished ancestry? And so on, as the lady says.

We left the lane at last and were on the county road, but headed away from the Arrowhead and
food. No doubt there remained other homes for us to wreck. We mounted a rise and the road fell
from us in a long, gentle slope. And then a mile beyond, where the slope ended, I beheld a
most inviting tiny pleasance in this overwhelming welter of ranch land, with its more or less
grim business of cattle.

It was a little homestead fit to adorn an art calendar to be entitled Peace and Plenty--a veritable
small farm from some softer little country far to the east. It looked strangely lost amid these
bleaker holdings. There was a white little house and it sported nothing less than green blinds.
There was a red barn, with toy outbuildings. There was a vegetable garden, an orchard of blossoming
fruit trees, and, in front of the glistening little house, a gay garden of flowers. Even now
I could detect the yellow of daffodils and the martial--at least it used to be martial--scarlet
of tulips. The little place seemed to drowse here in the noontide, dreaming of its lost home
and other little farms that once companioned it.

To my pleased surprise this unbelievable little farm proved to be our next stopping place.
At its gate Ma Pettengill dismounted, eased the cinch of her saddle and tied her horse to the
hitching rack. I did likewise by the one-time cinch binder.

"Now," I wondered, "what devastating bomb shall we hurl into this flower-spiced Arcady? What
woe will she put upon its unsuspecting dwellers, even as she has ruined four other homes this
day? This should be something really choice." But I said no word and followed where the avenger
stalked.

We unlatched the white gate and went up a gravelled walk between the rows of daffodils and
tulips and hyacinths. We did not ascend the spotless front porch to assault its innocent white
door, but turned aside on a narrow-gauge branch of the gravelled pathway and came to a side
porch, shaded by maples. And here, in strict conformity to the soundest behests of tradition,
sat two entirely genuine Arcadians in wooden rocking-chairs. The male was a smiling old thing
with winter-apple cheeks and white hair, and the female was a smiling old thing with winter-apple
cheeks and white hair; both had bright eyes of doll blue, and both wore, among other neat things,
loose and lovely carpet slippers and white stockings.

And, of course, the male was named Uncle Henry and the other one was named Aunt Mollie, for
I was now presented to them. They shyly greeted me as one returned to them after many years
in which they had given me up. And again I wondered what particular iniquity we had come here
to do.

Then Ma Pettengill eased my worry. She said in a few simple but affecting words, that we had
stopped in for a bite to eat. No self-torturing stylist could have put the thing better. And
results were sudden. Uncle Henry, the male one, went to take our horses round to the barn,
and the other one said they had et an hour ago; but give her ten minutes and she'd have a couple
of them young pullets skinned and on the fire.

Ma Pettengill said, with very questionable taste, I thought: "Oh, no; nothing like that!"--because
we didn't want to make the least bit of trouble. The woman is dense at times. What else had
we come there for? But Aunt Mollie said, then, how about some prime young pork tenderline?
And Ma Pettengill said she guessed that would do, and I said I guessed that would do. And there
we were! The ladies went to the kitchen, where they made quick and grateful noises.

Pretty soon Uncle Henry came round a lovely corner and said try a tumbler of this here grape
wine, which he poured from a pressed-glass pitcher; so I tried it and gave him a town cigarette,
which he tucked between his beautiful white moustache and his beautiful white whiskers. And
I hoped he didn't use gasoline to get them so clean, because if he did something might happen
when he lighted the cigarette; but nothing did, so probably he didn't. I tried the grape wine
again; and dear old Uncle Henry said he was turning out quite a bit of it since the Gov'ment
had shet down on regular dram-shops, quite considerable of parties happening along from time
to time to barter with him, getting it for dances or colds, or something.

A yellow cat, with blue eyes like Uncle Henry's, came and slept on his lap. A large fussy hen
with a litter of chickens--or however a hen designates her assemblage of little ones--clucked
her way to our feet. I could see three hives of bees, a grape arbour, and a row of milk pans
drying in the sun, each leaning on its neighbour along a white bench. Uncle Henry said drink
it up while it was cold. All Nature seemed to smile. The hen found a large and charming bug,
and chuckled humorously while her cunning little ones tore it limb from limb. It was idyllic.

Then Aunt Mollie pushed open the screen door and said come in and set up; so I came in and
set up quickly, having fried pork tenderloin and fried potatoes, and hot biscuit and pork gravy,
and cucumber pickles, and cocoanut cake and pear preserves, peach preserves, apricot preserves,
loganberry jelly, crab-apple jelly, and another kind of preserves I was unable to identify,
though trying again and again.

Ma Pettengill ate somewhat, but talked also, keeping Uncle Henry and Aunt Mollie shiny with
smiles. They both have polished white teeth of the most amazing regularity. I ate almost exclusively,
affecting to be preoccupied about something. The time was urgent. I formed an entangling alliance
with the pork tenderloin, which endured to a point where but one small fragment was left on
the platter. I coolly left it there, so that Aunt Mollie might believe she had cooked more
than enough.

I have never ceased to regret that hollow bit of chivalry. Was it honest, genuine, open? No!
Why will men at critical junctures stoop to such trickery? Aunt Mollie said I might think that
tenderline was fresh-killed; but not so--she has fried it last December and put it down in
its own juice in a four-gallon crock, and now look how fresh it come out! She seemed as proud
as if she had invented something. She had a right to be. It was a charming notion and I could
have eaten the rest of the crock--but, no matter. Half a dozen biscuits copiously gummed up
with preserves of one kind or another would do as well--almost.

So Aunt Mollie showed me objects of interest in the room, including her new carpet sweeper,
a stuffed road runner, a ship built in a bottle, and the coloured crayon portraits of herself
and Uncle Henry, wearing blue clothes and gold jewellery and white collars and ecru neckties.
Also, the marriage certificate. This was no mere official certificate. It was the kind that
costs three dollars flat, over and above what you give to the party that does it for you, being
genuine steel-engraved, with a beautiful bridal couple under a floral bell, the groom in severe
evening dress, and liberally spotted with cupids and pigeons. It is worth the money and an
ornament to any wall, especially in the gilt frame.

Aunt Mollie seemed as proud of this document as she had been with the tenderloin. I scanned
it word by word for her pleasure. I noticed especially the date. Aunt Mollie said that her
and Henry were now in the fortieth year on this place, and it had changed in looks a whole
lot since they came here. I again looked at the date of the certificate.

Ma Pettengill said, well, we must be getting on, and they must both come over to the Arrowhead
for a day right soon. And Uncle Henry said here was a quart bottle of his peach brandy, going
on eight year old, and would I take it along back with me and try it? Parties had told him
it was good; but he didn't know--mebbe so, mebbe not. He'd like to know what I thought. It
seemed little enough to do to bring a bit of gladness into this old gentleman's life, and I
was not the man to wound him by refusal. It was as if Michelangelo had said "Come on round
to the Sistine Chapel this afternoon and look over a little thing I've dashed off." If he had
brought two bottles instead of one my answer would have been the same.

So we were out on our refreshed horses and heading home; and I said, without loss of time,
that Aunt Mollie might have a good heart and a cunning way with pork interiors, and it was
none of my business, anyway; but, nevertheless, she had mentioned forty long years with this
amateur saloon keeper, whereas her marriage certificate was dated but one year previous, in
figures all too shamefully legible. So what about it? I said I mind observing the underworld
from time to time; but I like to be warned in advance, even when its denizens were such a charming,
bright-eyed winter-apple-cheeked old couple as the two we were now leaving.

The sun was on our backs, a light breeze fanned us, the horses knew which way they were going,
and work for the day was over; so Ma Pettengill spoke, in part, as follows:

"Oh, well, of course everyone knows about that. Simple enough! Aunt Mollie and her first husband
trekked in here forty years ago. He was a consumptive and the first winter put him out. They
had a hard time; no neighbours to speak of, harsh weather, hard work, poor shelter, and a dying
man. Henry Mortimer happened by and stayed to help--nursed the invalid, kept the few head of
stock together, nailed up holes in the shack, rustled grub and acted like a friend in need.
At the last he nailed a coffin together; did the rest of that job; then stayed on to nurse
Aunt Mollie, who was all in herself. After he got her to stepping again he put in a crop for
her. Then he stayed to build a barn and do some fencing. Then he harvested the crop. And getting
no wages! They was both living off the land. Pretty soon they got fond of each other and decided
to marry. It's one of Aunt Mollie's jokes that she owed him two years' wages and had to marry him.

"Marriage was easier said than done. No preacher, or even a justice of the peace, was within
ninety miles, which meant a four days' trip over the roads of that day, and four days back,
providing high water or some other calamity didn't make it a month; and no one to leave on
the place, which meant there wouldn't be a head of stock left when they got back, what with
Indians and rustlers. Uncle Henry will tell you how it seemed too bad that just one of 'em
wouldn't make the trip down and have the ceremony done, leaving the other to protect the place.

"Then along comes a horse trader, who stops over to rest his stock, and learns their trouble.
He tells 'em to quit their worry; that he's a notary public and can perform a marriage as good
as any Baptist preacher they ever saw. I never been able to make out whether he was crazy or
just a witty, practical joker. Anyway, he married the pair with something like suitable words,
wouldn't take a cent for it, and gave 'em a paper saying he had performed the deed. It had
a seal on it showing he was a genuine notary public, though from back in Iowa somewhere. That
made no difference to the new bride and groom. A notary public was a notary public to them,
highly important and official.

"They had enough other things to worry about, anyway. They had to buckle down to the hard life
that waits for any young couple without capital in a new country. They had years of hard sledding;
but they must of had a good time somehow, because they never have any but pleasant things to
tell of it. Whatever that notary public was, he seemed to of pulled off a marriage that took
as well or better than a great many that may be more legal. So that's all there is to it--only,
here about a year ago they was persuaded to have it done proper at last by a real preacher
who makes Kulanche two Sundays a month. That's why the late date's on that certificate. The
old lady is right kittenish about that; shows it to everyone, in spite of the fact that it
makes her out of been leading an obliquitous life, or something, for about thirty-eight years.

"But then, she's a sentimental old mush-head, anyhow. Guess what she told me out in the kitchen!
She's been reading what the Germans did to women and children in Belgium, and she says: 'Of
course I hate Germans; and yet it don't seem as if I could ever hate 'em enough to want to
kill a lot of German babies!' Wasn't that the confession of a weakling? I guess that's all
you'd want to know about that woman. My sakes! Will you look at that mess of clouds? I bet
it's falling weather over in Surprise Valley. A good moisting wouldn't hurt us any either."

That seemed to be about all. Yet I was loath to leave the topic. I still had a warm glow in
my heart for the aged couple, and I could hear Uncle Henry's bottle of adolescent peach brandy
laughing to itself from where it was lashed to the back of my saddle. I struck in the only
weak spot in the wall.

"You say they were persuaded into this marriage. Well, who persuaded them? Isn't there something
interesting about that?"

It had, indeed, been a shrewd stroke. Ma Pettengill's eyes lighted.

"Say, didn't I ever tell you about Mrs. Julia Wood Atkins, the well-known lady reformer?"

"You did not. We have eight miles yet."

"Oh, very well!"

So for eight miles of a road that led between green fields on our right and a rolling expanse
of sagebrush on our left, I heard something like this:

"Well, this prominent club lady had been out on the Coast for some time heading movements and
telling people how to do things, and she had got run down. She's a friend of Mrs. W.B. Hemingway,
the well-known social leader and club president of Yonkers, who is an old friend of mine; and
Mrs. W.B. writes that dear Julia is giving her life to the cause--I forget what cause it was
right then--and how would it be for me to have her up here on the ranch for a vacation, where
she could recover her spirits and be once more fitted to enter the arena. I say I'm only too
glad to oblige, and the lady comes along.

"She seemed right human at first--kind of haggard and overtrained, but with plenty of fights
left in her; a lady from forty-eight to fifty-four, with a fine hearty manner that must go
well on a platform, and a kind of accusing face. That's the only word I can think of for it.
She'd be pretty busy a good part of the day with pamphlets and papers that she or someone else
had wrote, but I finally managed to get her out on a gentle old horse--that one you're riding--so
she could liven up some; and we got along quite well together.

"The only thing that kind of went against me was, she's one of them that thinks a kind word
and a pleasant smile will get 'em anywhere, and she worked both on me a little too much like
it was something professional.

"Still, I put it by and listened to her tell about the awful state the world is in, and how
a few earnest women could set it right in a week if it wasn't for the police.

"Prison reform, for instance. That was the first topic on which she delivered addresses to
me. I couldn't make much out of it, except that we don't rely enough on our convicts' rugged
honour. It was only a side line with her; still, she didn't slight it. She could talk at length
about the innate sterling goodness of the misunderstood burglar. I got tired of it. I told
her one day that, if you come right down to it, I'd bet the men inside penitentiaries didn't
average up one bit higher morally than the men outside. She said, with her pleasantest smile,
that I didn't understand; so I never tried to after that.

"The lady had a prowling mind. Mebbe that ain't the right word, but it come to me soon after
she got here. I think it was the day she begun about our drinking water. She wanted to know
what the analysis showed it to contain. She was scared out of her pleasant smile for a minute
when she found I'd never had the water analyzed. I thought, first, the poor thing had been
reading these beer advertisements; you know--the kind they print asking if you are certain
about the purity of your drinking water, telling of the fatal germs that will probably be swimming
there, and intimating that probably the only dead-safe bet when you are thirsty is a pint of
their pure, wholesome beer, which never yet gave typhoid fever to any one. But, no; Julia just
thought all water ought to be analyzed on general principles, and wouldn't I have a sample
of ours sent off at once? She'd filled a bottle with some and suggested it with her pleasantest
platform smile.

"'Yes,' I says; 'and suppose the report comes back that this water is fatal to man and beast?
And it's the only water round here. What then? I'd be in a hell of a fix--wouldn't I?'

"I don't deny I used to fall back on words now and then when her smile got to me. And we went
right on using water that might or might not make spicy reading in a chemist's report; I only
been here thirty years and it's too soon to tell. Anyway, it was then I see she was gifted
with a prowling mind, which is all I can think of to call it. It went with her accusing face.
She didn't think anything in this world was as near right as it could be made by some good woman.

"Of course she had other things besides the water to worry about. She was a writer, too. She
would write about how friction in the home life may be avoided by one of the parties giving
in to the other and letting the wife say how the money shall be spent, and pieces about what
the young girl should do next, and what the young wife should do if necessary, and so on. For
some reason she was paid money for these pieces.

"However, she was taking longer rides and getting her pep back, which was what she had come
here for. And having failed to reform anything on the Arrowhead, she looked abroad for more
plastic corruption as you might say. She rode in one night and said she was amazed that this
here community didn't do something about Dave Pickens. That's the place we stopped this morning.
She said his children were neglected and starving, his wife worked to the bone, and Dave doing
nothing but play on a cheap fiddle! How did they get their bread from day to day?

"I told her no one in the wide world had ever been able to answer this puzzle. There was Dave
and his wife and five children, all healthy, and eating somehow, and Dave never doing a stroke
of work he could side-step. I told her it was such a familiar puzzle we'd quit being puzzled by it.

"She said someone ought to smash his fiddle and make him work. She said she would do something
about it. I applauded. I said we needed new blood up here and she seemed to of fetched it.

"She come back the next day with a flush of triumph on her severely simple face. And guess
the first thing she asked me to do! She asked me to take chances in a raffle for Dave's fiddle.
Yes, sir; with her kind words and pleasant smile she had got Dave to consent to raffle off
his fiddle, and she was going to sell twenty-four chances at fifty cents a chance, which would
bring twelve dollars cash to the squalid home. I had to respect the woman at that moment.

"'There they are, penniless,' says she, 'and in want for the barest necessities; and this man
fiddling his time away! I had a struggle persuading him to give up his wretched toy; but I've
handled harder cases. You should of seen the light in the mother's wan face when he consented!
The twelve dollars won't be much, though it will do something for her and those starving children;
and then he will no longer have the instrument to tempt him.'

"I handed over a dollar for two chances right quick, and Julia went out to the bunk-house and
wormed two dollars out of the boys there. And next day she was out selling off the other chances.
She didn't dislike the work. It give her a chance to enter our homes and see if they needed
reforming, and if the children was subjected to refining influences, and so on. The first day
she scared parties into taking fifteen tickets, and the second day she got rid of the rest;
and the next Sunday she held the drawing over at Dave's house. The fiddle was won by a nester
from over in Surprise Valley, who had always believed he could play one if he only had a fair
chance.

"So this good deed was now completed, there being no music, and twelve dollars in the Pickens
home that night. And Mrs. Julia now felt that she was ready for the next big feat of uplift,
which was a lot more important because it involved the very sanctity of the marriage tie. Yes,
sir; she'd come back from her prowling one night and told me in a hushed voice, behind a closed
door, about a couple that had been for years living in a state of open immorality.

"I didn't get her, at first, not thinking of Uncle Henry and Aunt Mollie. But she meant just
them two. I give her a good hearty laugh, at first; but it pained her so much I let her talk.
It seems she'd gone there to sell raffle tickets, and they'd taken four, and cooked food for
her, and give her some cherry cordial, which she took on account of being far from a strong
woman; and then Aunt Mollie had told all her past life, with this horrid scandal about the
notary public sticking innocently out of it.

"Mrs. Julia hadn't been able to see anything but the scandal, she being an expert in that line.
So she had started in to persuade Aunt Mollie that it was her sacred duty to be married decently
to her companion in crime for forty years. And Aunt Mollie had been right taken with the idea;
in fact, she had entered into it with a social enthusiasm that didn't seem to Mrs. Julia to
have quite enough womanly shame for her dark past in it. Still, anything to get the guilty
couple lawful wedded; and before she left it was all fixed. Uncle Henry was to make an honest
woman of Aunt Mollie as soon as she could get her trousseau ready.

"Me? I didn't know whether to laugh or get mad. I said the original marriage had satisfied
the peace and dignity of the state of Washington; and it had done more--it had even satisfied
the neighbours. So why not let it rest? But, no, indeedy! It had never been a marriage in the
sight of God and couldn't be one now. Facts was facts! And she talked some more about Aunt
Mollie not taking her false position in the proper way.

"It had been Mrs. Julia's idea to have the preacher come up and commit this ceremony quite
furtively, with mebbe a couple of legal witnesses, keeping everything quiet, so as not to have
a public scandal. But nothing like that for the guilty woman! She was going to have a trousseau
and a wedding, with guests and gayety. She wasn't taking it the right way at all. It seemed
like she wanted all the scandal there was going.

"'Really, I can't understand the creature,' says Mrs. Julia. 'She even speaks of a wedding
breakfast! Can you imagine her wishing to flaunt such a thing?'

"It was then I decided to laugh instead of telling this lady a few things she couldn't of put
in an article. I said Aunt Mollie's taking it this way showed how depraved people could get
after forty years of it; and we must try to humour the old trollop, the main thing being to
get her and her debased old Don Juan into a legal married state, even if they did insist on
going in with a brass band. Julia said she was glad I took it this way.

"She came back to my room again that night, after her hair was down. The only really human
thing this lady ever did, so far as I could discover, was to put some of this magic remedy
on her hair that restores the natural colour if the natural colour happened to be what this
remedy restores it to. Any way, she now wanted to know if I thought it was right for Aunt Mollie
to continue to reside there in that house between now and the time when they would be lawful
man and wife. I said no; I didn't think it was right. I thought it was a monstrous infamy and
an affront to public morals; but mebbe we better resolve to ignore it and plow a straight furrow,
without stopping to pull weeds. She sadly said she supposed I was right.

"So Uncle Henry hitched up his fat white horse to the buggy, and him and Aunt Mollie drove
round the country for three days, inviting folks to their wedding. Aunt Mollie had the time
of her life. It seemed as if there wasn't no way whatever to get a sense of shame into that
brazen old hussy. And when this job was done she got busy with her trousseau, which consisted
of a bridge gown in blue organdie, and a pair of high white shoes. She didn't know what a bridge
gown was for, but she liked the looks of one in a pattern book and sent down to Red Gap for
Miss Gunslaugh to bring up the stuff and make it. And she'd always had this secret yearning
for a pair of high white shoes; so they come up, too.

"Furthermore, Aunt Mollie had read the city paper for years and knew about wedding breakfasts;
so she was bound to have one of those. It looked like a good time was going to be had by all
present except the lady who started it. Mrs. Julia was more malignantly scandalized by these
festal preparations than she had been by the original crime; but she had to go through with it now.

"The date had been set and we was within three days of it when Aunt Mollie postponed it three
days more because Dave Pickens couldn't be there until this later day. Mrs. Julia made a violent
protest, because she had made her plans to leave for larger fields of crime; but Aunt Mollie
was stubborn. She said Dave Pickens was one of the oldest neighbours and she wouldn't have
a wedding he couldn't attend; and besides, marriage was a serious step and she wasn't going
to be hurried into it.

"So Mrs. Julia went to a lot of trouble about her ticket and reservations, and stayed over.
She was game enough not to run out before Uncle Henry had made Aunt Mollie a lady. I was a
good deal puzzled about this postponement. Dave Pickens was nothing to postpone anything for.
There never was any date that he couldn't be anywhere--at least, unless he had gone to work
after losing his fiddle, which was highly ridiculous.

"The date held this time. We get word the wedding is to be held in the evening and that everyone
must stay there overnight. This was surprising, but simple after Aunt Mollie explained it.
The guests, of course, had to stay over for the wedding breakfast. Aunt Mollie had figured
it all out. A breakfast is something you eat in the morning, about six-thirty or seven; so
a wedding breakfast must be held the morning after the wedding. You couldn't fool Aunt Mollie
on social niceties.

"Anyway, there we all was at the wedding; Uncle Henry in his black suit and his shiny new teeth,
and Aunt Mollie in her bridge gown and white shoes, and this young minister that wore a puzzled
look from start to finish. I guess he never did know what kind of a game he was helping out
in. But he got through with the ceremony. There proved to be not a soul present knowing any
reason why this pair shouldn't be joined together in holy wedlock, though Mrs. Julia looked
more severe than usual at this part of the ceremony. Uncle Henry and Aunt Mollie was firm in
their responses and promised to cling to each other till death did them part. They really sounded
as if they meant it.

"Mrs. Julia looked highly noble and sweet when all was over, like she had rescued an erring
sister from the depths. You could see she felt that the world would indeed be a better place
if she could only give a little more time to it.

"We stood round and talked some after the ceremony; but not for long. Aunt Mollie wound the
clock and set the mouse-trap, and hustled us all off to bed so we could be up bright and early
for the wedding breakfast. You'd think she'd been handling these affairs in metropolitan society
for years. The women slept on beds and sofas, and different places, and the men slept out in
the barn and in a tent Uncle Henry had put up or took their blanket rolls and bunked under a tree.

"Then ho! for the merry wedding breakfast at six-thirty A.M.! The wedding breakfast consisted
of ham and eggs and champagne. Yes, sir; don't think Aunt Mollie had overlooked the fashionable
drink. Hadn't she been reading all her life about champagne being served at wedding breakfasts?
So there it was in a new wash boiler, buried in cracked ice. And while the women was serving
the ham and eggs and hot biscuits at the long table built out in the side yard, Uncle Henry
exploded several bottles of this wine and passed it to one and all, and a toast was drunk to
the legal bride and groom; after which eating was indulged in heartily.

"It was a merry feast, even without the lobster salad, which Aunt Mollie apologized for not
having. She said she knew lobster salad went with a wedding breakfast, the same as champagne;
but the canned lobster she had ordered hadn't come, so we'd have to make out with the home-cured
ham and some pork sausage that now come along. Nobody seemed downhearted about the missing
lobster salad. Uncle Henry passed up and down the table filling cups and glasses, and Aunt
Mollie, in her wedding finery, kept the food coming with some buckwheat cakes at the finish.

"It was a very satisfactory wedding breakfast, if any one should ever make inquiries of you.
By the time Uncle Henry had the ends out of half the champagne bottles I guess everyone there
was glad he had decided to drag Aunt Mollie back from the primrose path.

"It all passed off beautifully, except for one tragedy. Oh, yes; there's always something to
mar these affairs. But this hellish incident didn't come till the very last. After the guests
had pretty well et themselves to a standstill, Dave Pickens got up and come back with a fiddle,
and stood at the end of the grape arbour and played a piece.

"'Someone must have supplied that wretch with another fiddle!' says Mrs. Julia, who was kind
of cross, anyway, having been bedded down on a short sofa and not liking champagne for breakfast--and,
therefore, not liking to see others drink it.

"'Oh, he's probably borrowed one for your celebration,' I says.

"Dave played a couple more lively pieces; and pretty soon, when we got up from the table, he
come over to Mrs. Julia and me.

"'It's a peach of a fiddle,' says Dave. 'It says in the catalogue it's a genuine Cremonika--looks
like a Cremona and plays just as good. I bet it's the best fiddle in the world to be had for
twelve dollars!'

"'What's that?' says Mrs. Julia, erecting herself like an alarmed rattlesnake.

"'Sure! It's a genuine twelve-dollar one,' says Dave proudly. 'My old one, that you so kindly
raffled off, cost only five. I always wanted a better one, but I never had the money to spare
till you come along. It's awful hard to save up money round here.'

"'Do you mean to tell me--' says Mrs. Julia. She was so mad she couldn't get any farther. Dave
thought she was merely enthusiastic about his new fiddle.

"'Sure! Only twelve dollars for this beauty,' he says, fondling the instrument. 'We got down
the mail-order catalogue the minute you left that money with us, and had a postal order on
the way to Chicago that very night. I must say, lady, you brought a great pleasure into our life.'

"'What about your poor wife?' snaps Mrs. Julia.

"His poor wife comes up just then and looks affectionately at Dave and the new fiddle.

"'He spent that money for another fiddle!' says Mrs. Julia to her in low tones of horror.

"'Sure! What did you think he was going to do with it?' says Mrs. Dave. 'I must say we had
two mighty dull weeks while Dave was waiting for this new one. He just mopes round the house
when he ain't got anything to play on. But this is a lot better than the old fiddle; it was
worth waiting for. Did you thank the lady, Dave?'

"Mrs. Julia was now plumb speechless and kind of weak. And on top of these blows up comes Aunt
Mollie the new-wed, and beams fondly on her.

"'There!' says she. 'Ain't that a fine new fiddle that Dave bought with his twelve dollars?
And wasn't it worth postponing my wedding for, so we could have some music?'

"'What's that?' says Mrs. Julia again. 'Why did you postpone it?'

"'Because the fiddle didn't get here till last night,' says Aunt Mollie, 'and I wasn't going
to have a wedding without music. It wouldn't seem right. And don't you think, yourself, it's
a lot better fiddle than Dave's old one?'

"So this poor Mrs. Julia woman was now stricken for fair, thinking of all the trouble she'd
been to about her tickets, and all to see this new fiddle.

"She went weakly into the house and lay down, with a headache, till I was ready to leave the
gay throng. And the next day she left us to our fate. Still, she'd done us good. Dave has a
new fiddle and Aunt Mollie has her high white shoes. So now you know all about it."

We neared the Arrowhead gate. Presently its bell would peal a sweet message to those who laboured.
Ma Pettengill turned in her saddle to scan the western horizon.

"A red sun has water in his eye," said she. "Well, a good soak won't hurt us."

And a moment later:

"Curious thing about reformers: They don't seem to get a lot of pleasure out of their labours
unless the ones they reform resist and suffer, and show a proper sense of their degradation.
I bet a lot of reformers would quit to-morrow if they knew their work wasn't going to bother
people any."

VI

THE PORCH WREN

So it befell, in a shining and memorable interlude that there was talk of the oldest living
boy scout, who was said to have rats in his wainscoting; of the oldest living débutante, who
was also a porch wren; and of the body snatcher. Little of the talk was mine; a query now and
again. It was Ma Pettengill's talk, and I put it here for what it may be worth, hoping I may
close-knit and harmonize its themes, so diverse as that of the wardrobe trunk, the age of the
earth, what every woman thinks she knows, and the Upper Silurian trilobites.

It might be well to start with the concrete, and baby's picture seems to be an acceptable springboard
from which to dive into the recital. It came in the evening's mail and was extended to me by
Mrs. Lysander John Pettengill, with poorly suppressed emotion. The thing excited no emotion
in me that I could not easily suppress. It was the most banal of all snapshots--a young woman
bending Madonna-wise above something carefully swathed, flanked by a youngish man who revealed
a self-conscious smirk through his carefully pointed beard. The light did harshly by the bent
faces of the couple and the disclosed fragment of the swathed thing was a weakish white blob.

I need not say that there must be millions of these pathetic revealments burdening our mails
day by day. I myself must have looked coldly upon over a thousand.

"Well, what of it?" I demanded shortly.

"I bet you can't guess what's in that bundle!" said my hostess in a large playful manner.

I said what I could see of it looked like a half portion of plain boiled cauliflower, but that
in all probability the object was an infant, a human infant--or, to use a common expression,
a baby. Whereupon the lady drew herself up and remarked in the clipped accent of a parrot:

"No, sir; it's a carboniferous trilobite of the Upper Silurian."

This, indeed, piqued me. It made a difference. I said was it possible? Mrs. Pettengill said
it was worse than possible; it was inevitable. She seemed about to rest there; so I accused
her of ill-natured jesting and took up the previous day's issue of the Red Gap Recorder, meaning
to appear bored. It worked.

"Well, if Professor Oswald Pennypacker don't call his infant that, you can bet your new trout
rod he calls it something just as good. Mebbe I better read what the proud mother says."

"It would be the kind thing before you spread evil reports," I murmured in a tone of gentle rebuke.

So the woman polished her nose glasses and read a double sheet of long up-and-down calligraphy--that
is, she read until she exploded in triumphant retort:

"Ha! There now! Don't I know a thing or two? Listen: 'Oswald is so enraptured with the mite;
you would never guess what he calls it--"My little flower with bones and a voice!"' Now! Don't
tell me I didn't have Oswald's number. I knew he wouldn't be satisfied to call it a baby; he'd
be bound to name it something animal, vegetable, or mineral. Ain't it the truth? 'Little flower
with bones and a voice!' What do you know about that? That's a scientist trying to be poetic.

"And here--get this: She says that one hour after the thing was born the happy father was caught
by the doctor and nurse seeing if it could hold its own weight up on a broomstick, like a monkey.
She says he was acutely distressed when these authorities deprived him of the custody of his
child. Wouldn't that fade you? Trying to see if a baby one hour old could chin itself! Quite
all you would wish to know about Oswald."

I hastily said no; it was not nearly all I wanted to know about Oswald. I wanted to know much
more. Almost any one would. The lady once more studied the hairy face with its bone-rimmed glasses.

"Shucks!" said she. "He don't look near as proud in this as he does in that one he sent me
himself--here, where is that thing?"

From the far end of the big table she brought under the lamp a basket of Indian weave and excavated
from its trove of playing cards, tobacco sacks, cigarette papers, letters, and odd photographs
another snapshot of Oswald. It was a far different scene. How far Du Bois-Reymond is from discerning
this, and how deeply he is still entangled in neuro-psychological views is shown most clearly
in the astonishing sentence which he has thought good to append to
his above-quoted, erroneous assertion.

"And what could we reply to the naturalist if, before he could agree to the assumption of
a World-soul he required that we should show him--bedded in neuroglia
and nourished by warm arterial blood--anywhere in the world a convolution
of ganglionic centres co-extensive with the psychic capacity of such
a Soul"

(!)

In other respects we will not deny that Du Bois-Reymond stands far nearer to our recent evolution-theory
than Virchow; nay, that from year to year he has always pronounced more and more emphatically in
favour of the theory of descent as the one possible explanation of
morphological phenomena; indeed, Du Bois-Reymond has lately counted
himself as one of those naturalists who were convinced of the truth
of evolution even before Darwin!

Then it is only to be wondered why so acute and gifted an inquirer, who is certainly not lacking
in scientific ambition, left it to Charles Darwin to place the egg of Columbus on the ring
and to point out to biological science a new method of unlimited capacity by giving the theory
of descent a definite and reliable basis!

It is clear from some remarks in his discourse bearing the title "Darwin versus Galiani" (1876),
that Du Bois-Reymond is still far from understanding the full significance of transmutation as
affording a mechanical explanation of morphological problems. In this paper the "History of
Creation" is treated simply as a romance, and the genealogies of
phylogenesis are in his eyes "of about as much value as the pedigrees
of the Homeric heroes are in the eyes of historical critics."

Geologists may be extremely grateful for this estimate of their science, for undoubtedly geology,
as a structure of hypotheses, is neither more nor less justifiable than phylogenesis, as I have
already pointed out in my Munich address: "Our phylogenetic hypotheses may claim to have equal
value with the universally-admitted hypotheses of geology; the only difference is this, that the
mighty structure of hypotheses called geology is incomparably more complete, simpler, and easier
to grasp than that more youthful one called phylogenesis." But as to the much-talked-of "genealogies,"
though they are nothing more than the simplest, barest, and most
superficial expression of the hypotheses of phylogenesis, as provisional
hypotheses they are just as indispensable to specific phylogenesis
as the theoretical section-tables of the strata of the earth's crust
are to geology.

If Du Bois-Reymond is so convinced of the truth of transmutation as he has lately given himself
out to be, why does not he make at least one earnest attempt to test the interpreting power of
the theory of descent in physiology--his own most special province
of inquiry?

Why does he not labour at that hitherto quite unworked-out branch, physiogenesis, at the history
of the evolution of functions, at the ontogenesis and phylogenesis of vital processes? The one
idea which has lately been often spoken of as an important discovery of Du Bois-Reymond's--[the
idea which had already been anticipated by Leibnitz, that the "innate
ideas,"--intuitions à priori--have originated by transmission from
primordial experience, i.e., empirical, à posteriori convictions],
was distinctly enunciated by me long before Du Bois-Reymond (as he
omits to mention), in 1866, in my "General Morphology"

(vol. ii. p. 446), and in 1868 in the "History of Creation" (vol. i. p. 31, vol. ii. p. 344). If
Du Bois-Reymond had practically busied himself with these problems he would certainly have thought
a little about the development of consciousness, and not have set down as an eternally insoluble
problem, "How is it possible that matter can think?"--a form of words, be it observed, which
has about as much sense as "how matter runs," or "how matter strikes the hours." Surely he would
have guarded himself in that case from uttering the ponderous "Ignorabimus."

The question has been repeatedly asked why two such prominent Berlin
biologists as Virchow and Du Bois-Reymond availed themselves of the
particularly solemn occasions of the fiftieth anniversary and of the
fiftieth meeting of the German naturalists and physicians to lay lance
in rest against the progress and freedom of science.

The eager approbation which they both promptly met with from the party of the clergy and of all
other enemies of free thought--Virchow, indeed, in much greater measure than Du Bois-Reymond--appears
to justify this inquiry. I believe I can contribute something towards answering it, and as I
am not fettered by any reverence for the Berlin tribunal of science or by any anxiety as to
vexing influential Berlin connections, as most of my colleagues are who think as I do, I do not
hesitate, here as elsewhere, to express my honest conviction in the freest and frankest manner,
not troubling myself about the wrath which may be roused in many actual--and not actual--officials
in Berlin at this exposition of the unvarnished truth.

The primary cause of their "misunderstanding," and the best excuse that can be offered for it,
in Virchow and Du Bois-Reymond alike, lies in their unacquaintance with the advance of modern morphology.
As has been repeatedly stated, no natural science is so directly to be referred to the doctrine
of evolution--and more particularly to the theory of descent--as morphology. It is because we
morphologists can neither explain nor comprehend all the manifold
and infinitely complex form-phenomena of the animal and plant worlds
without this theory, because to us transmutation contains the only
possible, rational explanation of organic types, that we all regard
it as the indispensable basis of the scientific doctrine of form,
and as demanding no further proofs of its certainty than those which
now lie in abundance before us.

Du Bois-Reymond, and still more Virchow, ignore these proofs, because they are to a great extent
ignorant alike of the inquiries and results, of the methods and the aims of our modern morphology,
and this ignorance may be accounted for partly by the one-sided direction which their biological
studies have taken, partly by the fact that there are few universities
where the study of morphology is so behindhand as at the University
of Berlin.

Fully twenty years have now elapsed since the great Johannes Müller died, the last naturalist
who could command all the departments of biology. The three great provinces of science which
had been reunited into a triune kingdom under his powerful sceptre, were then divided among
three professors' chairs: Du Bois-Reymond took that of physiology, Virchow, theoretical pathology
(pathological anatomy and physiology), and the third, and most important
chair, that of morphology (human and comparative anatomy, including
the history of evolution) fell to Boguslaus Reichert.

This choice was, as is now universally admitted, an incomprehensible mistake. Instead of calling
Carl Gegenbaur, or Max Schultze, or some one else of youthful capacity and vigour to the chair
of morphology--a science which is the first foundation of zoology as well as of medicine--in
Reichert they selected an elderly school anatomist cramped by strong old-fashioned notions,
who had done some good and useful specialist work, but whose general views had developed all
awry, and who for the unexampled obscurity of his conceptions and the confusion of his ideas,
was outdone by none save only Adolf Bastian.

For twenty years this man has represented animal morphology in the second university of Germany,
and in these twenty years hardly any work worth mentioning has been done there in the whole of this
vast department--neither by the master nor by his pupils. We have only to compare the many worthless
anatomical productions of Berlin during these two decades (for instance,
the recent confused work by Fritsch on the brain of fishes) with the
rich mine of invaluable work produced during the preceding twenty
years by Johannes Müller and his crowd of disciples.

But, as if this were not enough, Reichert took advantage of his influential position to hinder
as far as possible all scientific study of morphology. For example, he, with the co-operation
of his colleagues, carried through that pretended "reform" of medical
examination which puts the so-called Tentamen physicum in the place
of the philosophicum; philosophy was entirely eliminated.

Zoology and botany, which for centuries have been very justly regarded as the indispensable
foundation of all instruction in natural science for the young medical student, disappeared from
the curriculum. Only, as if in scorn of these sciences, in each examination a small place was
reserved for comparative anatomy--for that most difficult and philosophical part of animal morphology
which cannot be at all understood without some previous knowledge of the other branches of
zoology. And yet comparative anatomy and the history of development are the indispensable preliminary
steps to a true scientific comprehension of human anatomy, that most
essential foundation of all medical knowledge.

Without the vivifying idea of development, mere anatomical knowledge is an empty and lifeless
cramming of the memory.

In the place of morphology, thus degraded from its office, a detailed study of physiology was
introduced, but always in a one-sided direction.

Now these two great branches of biology, which are equally important and have an equal claim
on our attention, are so dependent the one on the other, that a real scientific understanding
of organic life can never be obtained without due relative study of both. The masterly and incomparable
teaching of Johannes Müller owed a great part of its captivating charm to his equitable regard
for morphology and physiology, as well as to his comprehensive treatment, from the broadest
point of view, of the enormous mass of details to be dealt with.

I therefore have not the smallest doubt that the morphological training of medical students,
as at present conducted at Berlin under the influence of Reichert and his colleagues, is as
far behind that of Müller's day, twenty or thirty years ago, in all general comprehension of
the typical organism, as it is in advance of it in specialist acquirements.

In medical, as in all other scientific learning, the highest aim does
not consist in seeking to accumulate a vast chaotic mass of isolated
items of knowledge, but in a general comprehension of the science,
its aims and problems.

The teacher should, above everything, guide the pupil to this general knowledge, and then it
will be easy to him, by the aid of proper methods, to acquire mastery in each individual and special
branch. Thus in medicine, as in every other science, he is not the best qualified who, on Bastian's
method, has loaded his memory with a confused mass of undigested facts, and has flung them
all together into his brain without any order; but, on the contrary, he who has practically
digested a considerable number of the most important facts, and has critically co-ordinated
them to a harmonious whole.

It is precisely under this aspect that transmutation is of such inestimable value to morphology;
it enables us to rise from the bare empirical knowledge of numberless
isolated facts to a philosophical conception of their efficient causes.

The

aversion and contempt which the theories of descent and selection have met with at Berlin, more
than in any other place, is in great measure to be explained by the circumstance that, during
the last two decades, morphological studies have been more neglected in that university than
any others.

In no other city of Germany has evolution in general, as well as Darwinism in particular, been
so little valued, so utterly misunderstood, and treated with such sovereign disdain as in Berlin.
Nay, Adolf Bastian, the most zealous of all the Berlin opponents of our doctrines, has insisted
on these facts with peculiar satisfaction. Of all the conspicuous naturalists of Berlin only
one accepted the doctrine of transmutation from the beginning with sincere warmth and full
conviction, being, indeed, persuaded of its truth even before Darwin himself. This was the
gifted botanist Alexander Braun, who is lately dead--a morphologist who was equally distinguished
by the extent of his comprehensive knowledge of details, as by his philosophical mastery over them.
His firm conviction of the truth of the theory of descent is all
the more remarkable because he was at the same time a spotless character,
a pious Christian in the best sense of the word, and an extremely
conservative politician; a striking example that these convictions
can dwell side by side with the principles of the recent doctrines
of evolution in one and the same person.

But in comparison with the powerful influence of the rest of the Berlin naturalists who, for
the most part, are decided opponents of transmutation, and who have only lately--a few of them,
to follow the fashion--become converts to it, a man like Alexander Braun could have no effect
in procuring that it should be taught.

However, this is not the first time that this very Berlin society of learned men has set itself
with remarkable firmness against the most important advances of science. Virchow's former
colleague, the deceased Stahl, with a similar purpose and with great
success, preached this principle: "Science must turn back again."

Just as at the present day the Berlin biologists have opposed the most obstinate and pertinacious
resistance to the greatest scientific stride of this century, so
did it happen in former times with regard to other doctrines of progress.

We have only to recall Caspar Friedrich Wolff, the great inquirer, who in 1759 first detected
the nature of the individual processes of development in the animal ovum, and founded on it
his observations in his "Theoria Generationes," which marked an epoch in biological science. The
Berlin savants, full of the prevailing prejudices, so contrived at that time that Wolff never once
could obtain the permission which he craved, to lecture publicly, and in consequence found
himself compelled to retire to St. Petersburg for the sake of peace.

And yet in that instance there was no question of a "theory" properly so-called. For the fundamental
theory of generation--the "theory of epigenesis"--as propounded by Wolff was nothing more than a
simple, general exposition of embryological facts which he had been the first to recognise, and
of whose truth every one might convince himself by direct observation.

In spite of this, for another half century, the predominant error of the "Preformation-theory"
continued to be universally accepted--the ludicrous and nonsensical doctrine, supported by the
authority of Haller, that all the successive generations of animals exist preconceived and enclosed
one within the other, and that no individual development ever takes place! Nulla est epigenesis!
 Philosophers
have dug into these matters and made 'em simple for us. It took thousands of books to do it;
but it's done at last. Everything is nothing. Ask any scientist; he'll make it just as clear
to you as a mist in a fog.

And even nothing itself ain't real. They go to that extreme. Not even empty space is real.
And the human mind can't comprehend infinite space. I got kind of hot when one of 'em said
that. I asked 'em right off whether the human mind could comprehend space that had an end to
it. Of course it can't comprehend anything else but infinite space. I had 'em, all right; they
had to change the subject. So they switched over to free will. None of us has it.

That made me hot again. I told 'em to try for even five minutes and see if they could act as
if they didn't have the power of choice. Of course I had 'em again. Mebbe there ain't free
will, but we can't act as if there wasn't. Those two would certainly make the game of poker
impossible if folks believed 'em.

I nearly broke up the party that night. I said it was a shame young men was being taught such
stuff when they could just as well go to some good agricultural college and learn about soils
and crops and what to do in case of a sick bull. Furthermore, I wanted to know what they would
do to earn their daily bread when they'd got everything dug up and labelled. Pretty soon they'd
have every last organic remains put into a catalogue, the whole set complete and unbroken--and
then what? They'd be out of a job.

The Prof laughed and said let the future take care of itself. He said we couldn't tell what
might happen, because, as yet, we was nothing really but supermonkeys. That's what he called
our noble race--supermonkeys! So I said yes; and these here philosophers that talked about
subject and object and the nothingness of nothing reminded me of monkeys that get hold of a
looking-glass and hold it up and look into it, and then sneak one paw round behind the glass
to catch the other monkey. So he laughed again and said "Not bad, that!"

You could kid the Prof, which is more than I can say for Oswald. Oswald always took a joke
as if you'd made it beside the casket holding all that was mortal of his dear mother. In the
presence of lightsome talk poor Oswald was just a chill. He was an eater of spoon-meat, and
finicking. He could talk like Half Hours With the World's Best Authors, and yet had nothing
to say but words.

Still, I enjoyed them evenings. I learned to be interested in vital questions and to keep up
with the world's best thought, in company with these gents that was a few laps ahead of it.
But not so with the motherless chit. This here Lydia made no effort whatever to keep up with
the world's best thought. She didn't seem to care if she never perfected her intellect. It
would of been plain to any eye that she was spreading a golden mesh for the Oswald party; yet
she never made the least clumsy effort to pander to his high ideals.

She was a wonder, that girl! All day she would set round the house, with her hair down, fixing
over a lace waist or making fudge, and not appearing to care much about life. Come night, when
the party was due to return, she would spry up, trick herself out in something squashy, with
the fashionable streamlike effect and a pretty pair of hammock stockings with white slippers,
and become an animated porch wren. That seemed to be the limit of her science.

Most motherless chits would of pretended a feverish interest in the day's hunt for fossil cockroaches,
and would even of gone out to chip off rocks with a hammer; but not Lydia. She would never
pretend to the least infatuation for organic remains, and would, like as not, strike up something
frivolous on her ukulele while Oswald was right in the middle of telling all about the secret
of life. She was confident all the time, though, like she already had him stuffed and mounted.
She reminded me of that girl in the play What Every Woman Thinks She Knows.

Lydia had great ideas of cooking, which is an art to ensnare males. She said she was a dandy
cook and could make Saratoga chips that was all to the Kenosha--whatever that meant. Think
of it--Saratoga chips! Over eight hundred ways to cook potatoes, and all good but one; and,
of course, she'd have to hit on this only possible way to absolutely ruin potatoes. She could
cook other things, too--fudge and stuffed eggs and cheese straws, the latter being less than
no food at all. It gives you a line on her.

I suppose it was all you could expect from a born debutante that had been brought up to be
nice to college boys on a moonlit porch, allowing them to put another sofa pillow back of her,
and wearing their class pins, and so forth. And here she was come to thirty, with fudge and
cheese straws and the ukulele still bounding her mental horizon, yet looking far above her
station to one of Oswald's serious magnitude.

I never have made out what she saw in him. But then we never do. She used to kid about him--and
kid him, for that matter. She'd say to me: "He does care frightfully about himself, doesn't
he?" And she said to me and said to him that he had mice in his wainscoting. Mice or rats,
I forget which. Any wise bookmaker would of posted her up in this race as a hundred-to-one
shot. She had plenty of blandishment for Oswald, but not his kind. She'd try to lure him with
furtive femininity and plaintive melodies when she ought to have been putting on a feverish
interest in organic fauna. Oswald generally looked through or past her. He give a whole lot
more worry to whether his fountain pen would clog up on him. They was both set in their ways,
and they was different ways; it looked to me like they never could meet. They was like a couple
of trained seals that have learned two different lines of tricks.

Of course Oswald was sunk at last, sunk by a chance shot; and there was no doubt about his
being destroyed, quantities of oil marking the surface where he went down. But it seemed like
pure chance. Yet, if you believe Oswald and scientific diagnosis, he'd been up against it since
the world was first started, twenty million or five hundred million years ago--I don't really
know how many; but what's a few million years between scientists? I don't know that I really
care. It's never kept me wakeful a night yet. I'd sooner know how to get eighty-five per cent.
of calves.

Anyway, it was Oswald's grand new wardrobe trunk that had been predestined from the world's
beginning to set him talkative about his little flower with bones and a voice; this same new
wardrobe trunk that was the pride of his barren life and his one real worry because he might
sometime lose the keys to it.

It's an affecting tale. It begun the night Oswald wanted the extra table put in his room. They'd
come in that day with a good haul of the oldest inhabitants round here that had passed to their
long rest three million years ago--petrified fishworms and potato bugs, and so forth, and rocks
with bird tracks on 'em. Oswald was as near human as I'd seen him, on account of having found
a stone caterpillar or something--I know it had a name longer than it was; it seemed to be
one like no one else had, and would therefore get him talked about, even if it had passed away
three million years before the Oregon Short Line was built.

And Oswald went on to ask if he could have this extra table in his room, because these specimens
of the disturbed dead was piling up on him and he wanted to keep 'em in order. He had lighted
one of his terrible cigars; so I said I would quickly go and see about a table. I said that
with his venomous cigar going I would quickly have to go and see about something or else have
my olfactory nerve resected, which was a grand scientific phrase I had brightly picked out
and could play with one finger. It means having something done so you can't smell any more.

The Prof laughed heartily, but Oswald only said he hadn't supposed I would feel that way, considering
the kind of tobacco my own cigarettes was made of, though he was sorry and would hereafter
smoke out of doors. He took a joke like a child taking castor oil. Anyway, I went out and found
a spare table in the storeroom, and the Chink took it to Oswald's room.

The fateful moment was at hand for which Nature had been conspiring all these ages. The Chink
held the table up against him, with the legs sticking out, and Oswald went ahead to show him
where to put it. Close by the door, inside his room, was the lovely, yawning new trunk. Oswald
must of been afraid one of the table legs would spear it and mar its fair varnish. He raised
one hand to halt the table, then closed the trunk tenderly, snapped the lock, and moved it
over into the corner, beyond chance of desecration.

Then he give careful directions for placing the table, which had to be carried round the foot
of the bed and past another table, which held marine fossils and other fishbones. It was placed
between this table and still another, which held Oswald's compass and microscope and his kill-kare
kamp stove and his first-aid kit and his sportsman's belt safe--all neatly arranged in line.
I had followed to see if there was anything more he needed, and he said no, thank you. So I
come out here to look over my mail that had just come.

Ten minutes later I felt the presence of a human being and looked up to see that Oswald, the
oldest living boy scout, was dying on his feet in the doorway there. His face looked like he
had been in jail three years. I thought he had seen a ghost or had a heart shock. He looked
as if he was going to keel over. He had me scared. Finally he dragged himself over to the table
here and says faintly:

"I believe I should like a severe drink of whisky!"

I didn't ask any questions. I saw it must be some private grief; so I got the whisky. It happened
I had just one bottle in the house, and that was some perfectly terrible whisky that had been
sent me by mistake. It was liquid barbed wire. Even a little drink of it would of been severe.
Two drinks would make you climb a tree like a monkey. But the stricken Oswald seemed able to
outfight it. He poured out half a tumblerful, drunk it neat and refused water. He strangled
some, for he was only human after all. Then he sagged down on the couch and looked up at me
with a feeble and pathetic grin and says:

"I'm afraid I've done something. I'm really afraid I have."

He had me in a fine state by this time. The only thing I could think of was that he had killed
the Prof by accident. I waited for the horrible details, being too scared to ask questions.

"I'm afraid," he says, "that I've locked the keys of my new trunk inside of it. I'm afraid
I really have! And what does one do in such a case?"

I nearly broke down then. I was in grave danger of fatal hysterics. I suffered from the reaction.
I couldn't trust myself; so I got over to the door, where my face wouldn't show, and called
to the Prof and Lydia. I now heard them out on the porch. Then I edged outside the door, where
people wouldn't be quite so scared if I lost control of myself and yelled.

Then these two went in and listened to Oswald's solemn words. The Prof helped me out a lot.
He yelled good. He yelled his head off; and under cover of his tumult I managed to get in a
few whoops of my own, so that I could once more act something like a lady when I went in.

Lydia, the porch wren, was the only one to take Oswald's bereavement at all decent. The chit
was sucking a stick of candy she had shoved down into a lemon. Having run out of town candy,
one of the boys had fetched her some of the old-fashioned stick kind, with pink stripes; she
would ram one of these down to the bottom of a lemon and suck up the juice through the candy.
She looked entirely useless while she was doing this, and yet she was the only one to show
any human sympathy.

She asked the stricken man how it happened, and he told the whole horrible story--how he always
kept the keys hanging on this little brass hook inside the trunk so he would know where they
was, and how he had shut the trunk in a hurry to get it out of the way of the table legs, and
the spring lock had snapped. And what did one do now--if anything?

"Why, it's perfectly simple! You open it some other way," says Lydia.

"Ah, but how?" says Oswald. "Those trunks are superbly built. How can one?"

"Oh, it must be easy," says Lydia, still clinging to her candy sour. "I'll open it for you
to-morrow if you will remind me."

"Remind you?" says Oswald in low, tragic tones. You could see he was never going to think of
anything else the rest of his life.

By this time the Prof and I had controlled our heartless merriment; so we all traipsed in to
the scene of this here calamity and looked at the shut trunk. It was shut good; no doubt about
that. There was also no doubt about the keys being inside.

"You can hear them rattle!" says the awed Oswald, teetering the trunk on one corner. So each
one of us took a turn and teetered the trunk back and forth and heard the imprisoned keys jingle
against the side where they was hung.

"But what's to be done?" says Oswald. "Of course something must be done." That seemed to be
about where Oswald got off.

"Why, simply open it some other way," says Lydia, which seemed to be about where she got off, too.

"But how?" moans the despairing man. And she again says:

"Oh, it must be too simple!"

At that she was sounding the only note of hope Oswald could hear; and right then I believe
he looked at her fair and square for the first time in his life. He was finding a woman his
only comforter in his darkest hour.

The Prof took it lightly indeed. He teetered the trunk jauntily and says:

"Your device was admirable; you will always know where those keys are." Then he teetered it
again and says, like he was lecturing on a platform: "This is an ideal problem for the metaphysical
mind. Here, veritably, is life itself. We pick it up, we shake it, and we hear the tantalizing
key to existence rattle plainly just inside. We know the key to be there; we hear it in every
manifestation of life. Our problem is to think it out. It is simple, as my child has again
and again pointed out. Sit there before your trunk and think effectively, with precision. You
will then think the key out. I would take it in hand myself, but I have had a hard day."

Then Lydia releases her candy long enough to say how about finding some other trunk keys that
will unlock it. Oswald is both hurt and made hopeful by this. He don't like to think his beautiful
trunk could respond to any but its rightful key; it would seem kind of a slur against its integrity.
Still, he says it may be tried. Lydia says try it, of course; and if no other key unlocks it
she will pick the lock with a hairpin. Oswald is again bruised by this suggestion; but he bears
up like a man. And so we dig up all the trunk keys and other small keys we can find and try
to fool that trunk. And nothing doing!

"I was confident of it," says Oswald; he's really disappointed, yet proud as Punch because
his trunk refuses coldly to recognize these strange keys.

Then Lydia brings a bunch of hairpins and starts to be a burglar. She says in clear tones that
it is perfectly simple; and she keeps on saying exactly this after she's bent the whole pack
out of shape and not won a trick. Yet she cheered Oswald a lot, in spite of her failures. She
never for one instant give in that it wasn't simple to open a trunk without the key.

But it was getting pretty late for one night, so Oswald and Lydia knocked off and set out on
the porch a while. Oswald seemed to be awakening to her true woman's character, which comes
out clad in glory at times when things happen. She told him she would sure have that trunk
opened to-morrow with some more hairpins--or something.

But in the morning she rushed to Oswald and said they would have the blacksmith up to open
it. He would be sure to open it in one minute with a few tools; and how stupid of her not to
of thought of it before! I liked that way she left Oswald out of any brain work that had to
be done. So they sent out to Abner to do the job, telling him what was wanted.

Abner is a simple soul. He come over with a hammer and a cold chisel to cut the lock off. He
said there wasn't any other way. Oswald listened with horror to this cold-blooded plan of murder
and sent Abner sternly away. Lydia was indignant, too, at the painful suggestion. She said
Abner was a shocking old bounder.

Then Oswald had to go out to his field work; but his heart couldn't of been in it that day.
I'll bet he could of found the carcass of a petrified zebra with seven legs and not been elated
by it. He had only the sweet encouragement of Lydia to brace him. He was depending pathetically
on that young woman.

He got back that night to find that Lydia had used up another pack of hairpins and a number
of the tools from my sewing machine. All had been black failure, but she still said it was
perfectly simple. She never lost the note of hope out of her voice. Oswald was distressed,
but he had to regard her more and more like an object of human interest.

She now said it was a simple matter of more keys. So the next day I sent one of the boys down
to Red Gap; and he rode a good horse to its finish and come back with about five dozen nice
little trunk keys with sawed edges. They looked cheerful and adequate, and we spent a long,
jolly evening trying 'em out. Not one come anywhere near getting results.

Oswald's trunk was still haughty, in spite of all these overtures. Oswald was again puffed
up with pride, it having been shown that his trunk was no common trunk. He said right out that
probably the only two keys in all the world that would open that lock was the two hanging inside.
He never passed the trunk without rocking it to hear their sad tinkle.

Lydia again said, nonsense! It was perfectly simple to open a trunk without the right key.
Oswald didn't believe her, and yet he couldn't help taking comfort from her. I guess that was
this girl's particular genius--not giving up when everyone else could see that she was talking
half-witted. Anyway, she was as certain as ever, and I guess Oswald believed her in spite of
himself. His ponderous scientific brain told him one thing in plain terms, and yet he was leaning
on the words of a chit that wouldn't know a carboniferous vertebra from an Upper Silurian gerumpsus.

The keys had gone back, hairpins was proved to be no good, and scientific analysis had fell
down flat. There was the trunk and there was the keys inside; and Oswald was taking on a year
in age every day of his life. He was pretty soon going to be as old as the world if something
didn't happen. He'd got so that every time he rocked the trunk to hear the keys rattle he'd
shake his head like the doctor shakes it at a moving-picture deathbed to show that all is over.
He was in a pitch-black cavern miles underground, with one tiny candle beam from a possible
rescuer faintly showing from afar, which was the childish certainty of this oldest living débutante
that it was perfectly simple for a woman to do something impossible. She was just blue-eyed
confidence.

After the men left one morning on their hunt for long-defunct wood ticks and such, Lydia confided
to me that she was really going to open that trunk. She was going to put her mind on it. She
hadn't done this yet, it seemed, but to-day she would.

"The poor boy has been rudely jarred in his academic serenity," says she. "He can't bear up
much longer; he has rats in his wainscoting right now. It makes me perfectly furious to see
a man so helpless without a woman. Today I'll open his silly old trunk for him."

"It will be the best day's work you ever done," I says, and she nearly blushed.

"I'm not thinking of that," she says.

The little liar! As if she hadn't seen as well as I had how Oswald was regarding her with new
eyes. So I wished her good luck and started out myself, having some field work of my own to
do that day in measuring a lot of haystacks down at the lower end of the ranch.

She said there would be no luck in it--nothing but cool determination and a woman's intuition.
I let it go at that and went off to see that I didn't get none of the worst of it when this
new hay was measured. I had a busy day, forgetting all scientific problems and the uphill fight
our sex sometimes has in bringing a man to his just mating sense.

I got back about five that night. Here was Miss Lydia, cool and negligent on the porch, like
she'd never had a care in the world; fresh dressed in something white and blue, with her niftiest
hammock stockings, and tinkling the ukulele in a bored and petulant manner.

"Did you open it?" I says as I went in.

"Open it?" she says, kind of blank. "Oh, you mean that silly old trunk! Yes, I believe I did.
At least I think I did."

It was good stage acting; an audience would of thought she had forgotten. So I took it as calm
as she did and went in to change.

By the time I got out the men was just coming in, the Prof being enthusiastic about some clamshells
of the year six million B. C. and Oswald bearing his great sorrow with an effort to do it bravely.

Lydia nodded distantly and then ignored the men in a pointed way, breaking out into rapid chatter
to me about the lack of society up here--didn't I weary of the solitude, never meeting people
of the right sort? It was a new line with her and done for effect, but I couldn't see what effect.

Supper was ready and we hurried in to it; so I guess Oswald must of forgot for one time to
shake his trunk and listen to the pretty little keys. And all through the meal Lydia confined
her attentions entirely to me. She ignored Oswald mostly, but if she did notice him she patronized
him. She was painfully superior to him, and severe and short, like he was a little boy that
had been let to come to the table with the grown-ups for this once. She rattled along to me
about the club dances at home, and how they was going to have better music this year, and how
the assembly hall had been done over in a perfectly dandy colour scheme by the committee she
was on, and a lot of girlish babble that took up much room but weighed little.

Oswald would give her side looks of dumb appeal from time to time, for she had not once referred
to anything so common as a trunk. He must of felt that her moral support had been withdrawn
and he was left to face the dread future alone. He probably figured that she'd had to give
up about the trunk and was diverting attention from her surrender. He hardly spoke a word and
disappeared with a look of yearning when we left the table. The rest of us went out on the
porch. Lydia was teasing the ukulele when Oswald appeared a few minutes later, with great excitement
showing in his worn face.

"I can hear the keys no longer," says he; "not a sound of them! Mustn't they have fallen from
the hook?"

Lydia went on stripping little chords from the strings while she answered him in lofty accents.

"Keys?" she says. "What keys? What is the man talking of? Oh, you mean that silly old trunk!
Are you really still maundering about that? Of course the keys aren't there! I took them out
when I opened it to-day. I thought you wanted them taken out. Wasn't that what you wanted the
trunk open for--to get the keys? Have I done something stupid? Of course I can put them back
and shut it again if you only want to listen to them."

Oswald had been glaring at her with his mouth open like an Upper Triassic catfish. He tried
to speak, but couldn't move his face, which seemed to be frozen. Lydia goes on dealing off
little tinkles of string music in a tired, bored way and turns confidentially to me to say
she supposes there is really almost no society up here in the true sense of the word.

"You opened that trunk?" says Oswald at last in tones like a tragedian at his big scene.

Lydia turned to him quite prettily impatient, as if he was something she'd have to brush off
in a minute.

"Dear, dear!" she says. "Of course I opened it. I told you again and again it was perfectly
simple. I don't see why you made so much fuss about it."

Oswald turned and galloped off to his room with a glad shout. That showed the male of him,
didn't it?--not staying for words of gratitude to his saviour, but beating it straight to the
trunk.

Lydia got up and swaggered after him. She had been swaggering all the evening. She acted like
a duchess at a slumming party. The Prof and I followed her.

Oswald was teetering the trunk in the old familiar way, with one ear fastened to its shiny side.

"It's true! It's true!" he says in hushed tones. "The keys are gone."

"Naughty, naughty!" says Lydia. "Haven't I told you I took them out?"

Oswald went over and set limply down on his bed, while we stood in the doorway.

"How did you ever do it?" says he with shining eyes.

"It was perfectly simple," says Lydia. But I am wrong! for with regard to petrifactions, Virchow is in the
highest degree speculative, and accepts without any hesitation the
rash hypothesis that fossils are actually the remains of extinct organisms,
although no "certain proof" whatever can be offered in its favour,
and although experiment, the "highest means of proof," has never yet
produced a single fossil.

According to him these are actual "objective, material evidences," only here we must go no
further than certain experience teaches us, and base no subjective
conclusions on these objective facts.

Thus, for instance, in the long series of the mesozoic formations,
in the different strata of the Trias, Jurassic, and Chalk formations,
for the deposition of which a lapse of many millions of years has
been required, we find absolutely no remains of fossil mammalia beyond
lower jaws; seek where we will, nothing is anywhere to be found but
lower jaws, and no other bones whatever.

The simple reasons of this striking imperfection of the palæontological record have been clearly
expounded by Lyell, Huxley, and others. (Comp. my "History of Creation," vol. ii. p. 32.) These
great investigators, in accordance with all other palæontologists, have demonstrated that these
jaw-bones of the mesozoic period are the remains of mammalia, accurately
speaking of marsupials, on the simple ground that the nether jaws
of the extant recent marsupials show a similar characteristic form
with the fossil ones.

They therefore unhesitatingly assume that the rest of the bones in
the bodies of these extinct animals corresponded to those of living
mammals.

But this is a quite inadmissible hypothesis devoid of any "certain proof!" Where, then, are
the other bones? Let us see them! till then we decline to believe in them. According to Virchow,
we ought rather to assume that the lower jaw was the only bone in
the body of these extraordinary beasts.

Are there not, in fact, snails, in which an upper jaw is the only representation of a skeleton.

We
cannot omit taking this opportunity of casting a side glance at the
very hazardous position which Virchow, in total opposition to his
boasted cool scepticism, has taken up in anthropology as it is called,
now his favourite branch of science.

In his Munich address he tells us that he is pursuing the study of
anthropology with delight, and then asserts that "the quarternary
man" is an universally-accepted fact.

Quite apart from this statement, we have seen that Virchow can never
attain to a profound and really scientific study of anthropology simply
for this reason, that he is lacking in that comprehensive knowledge
of comparative morphology which is indispensable to it; nay, comparative
anatomy and ontogenesis must be, according to him, unpermitted speculations
and the phylogenesis of man, the key to all the most important questions
of anthropology, being based upon these, is devoid of all certain
proof.

 His fingers trembled horrible, but he had a key in the lock and turned it and threw
the sides of the grand old monument wide open. He just hung there a minute in ecstasy, fondling
the keys and getting his nerve back. Then he turns again on Lydia the look of a proud man who
is ready to surrender his whole future life to her keeping.

Lydia had now become more superior than ever. She swaggered round the room, and when she didn't
swagger she strutted. And she says to Oswald:

"I'm going to make one little suggestion, because you seem so utterly helpless: You must get
a nice doormat to lay directly in front of your trunk, and you must always keep the key under
this mat. Lock the trunk and hide the key there. It's what people always do, and it will be
quite safe, because no one would ever think of looking under a doormat for a key. Now isn't
that a perfectly darling plan?"

Oswald had looked serious and attentive when she begun this talk, but he finally got suspicious
that she was making some silly kind of a joke. He grinned at her very foolish and again says:
"You wonderful woman!" It was a caressing tone--if you know what I mean.

Lydia says "Oh, dear, won't he ever stop his silly chatter about his stupid old trunk?" It
seems to her that nothing but trunk has been talked of in this house for untold ages. She's
tired to death of the very word. Then she links her arm in mine in a sweet girlish fashion
and leads me outside, where she becomes a mere twittering porch wren once more.

Oswald followed, you can bet. And every five minutes he'd ask her how did she ever--really
now--open the trunk. But whenever he'd ask she would put the loud pedal on the ukulele and
burst into some beachy song about You and I Together in the Moonlight, Love. Even the Prof
got curious and demanded how she had done what real brains had failed to pull off--and got
the same noisy answer. Later he said he had been wrong to ask. He said the answer would prove
to be too brutally simple, and he always wanted to keep it in his thought life as a mystery.
It looked like he'd have to. I was dying to know myself, but had sense enough not to ask.

The girl hardly spoke to Oswald again that night, merely giving him these cold showers of superiority
when he would thrust himself on her notice. And she kept me out there with her till bedtime,
not giving the happy trunk owner a chance at her alone. That girl had certainly learned a few
things beyond fudge and cheese straws in her time. She knew when she had the game won.

Sure, it was all over with Oswald. He had only one more night when he could call himself a
free man; he tried hard enough not to have even that. He looked like he wanted to put a fence
round the girl, elk-high and bull-tight. Of course it's possible he was landed by the earnest
wish to find out how she had opened his trunk; but she never will tell him that. She discussed
it calmly with me after all was over. She said poor Oswald had been the victim of scientific
curiosity, but really it was time for her to settle down.

We was in her room at the time and she was looking at the tiny lines round her eyes when she
said it. She said, further, that she was about to plan her going-away gown. I asked what it
would be, and she said she hadn't decided yet, but it would be something youth-giving. Pretty
game, that was! And now Oswald has someone to guard his trunk keys for him--to say nothing
of this here new specimen of organic fauna.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then I talked. I said I was unable to reach the lofty altitude of the Prof when even a fair
mystery was concerned. I was more like Oswald with his childish curiosity. How, then, did the
young woman open the trunk? Of course, I could guess the answer. She had found she could really
do it with a hairpin, and had held off for effect. Still, I wanted to be told.

"Nothing easy like that," said Ma Pettengill. "She'd been honest with the hairpins. She didn't
tell me till the day before they were leaving. 'It was a perfectly simple problem, requiring
only a bit of thought,' she says. 'It was the simple thing people do when they find their front
door locked. They go round to the back of the house and pry up a kitchen window, or something.'
She pledged me to secrecy, but I guess you won't let it go any farther.

"Anyway, this is what she done: It was a time for brutal measures, so she'd had Abner wheel
that trunk over to the blacksmith shop and take the hinges off. Abner just loves to do any
work he don't have to do, and he had entered cordially into the spirit of this adventure. It
used up his whole day, for which he was drawing three dollars from me. He took off one side
of four pair of hinges, opened the trunk at the back far enough to reach in for the keys, unlocked
it and fastened the hinges back on again.

"It was some job. These hinges was riveted on and didn't come loose easy. The rear of that
trunk must of been one sad mutilation. It probably won't ever again be the trunk it once was.
Abner had to hustle to get through in one day. I wish I could get the old hound to work for
me that way. They'd just got the trunk back when I rode in that night. It was nervy, all right!
I asked her if she wasn't afraid he would see the many traces of this rough work she had done.

"'Not a chance on earth!' says Lydia. 'I knew he would never look at any place but the front.
He has the mind of a true scientist. It wouldn't occur to him in a million years that there
is any other way but the front way to get into a trunk. I painted over the rivets and the bruises
as well as I could, but I'm sure he will never look there. He may notice it by accident in
the years to come, but the poor chap will then have other worries, I hope.'

"Such was the chit. I don't know. Mebbe woman has her place in the great world after all. Anyway,
she'll be a help to Oswald. Whatever he ain't she is." 

Each initial "s" is of the long form; each "w" has a side loop; the
"g's" are flat-topped; and the "h's" come below the line, etc. Tresham's
dying statement (No. 3) appears to be in a similar but smaller[29]
and less carefully written hand.

 We breathed the pointed smell of the sage and we
breathed the thick, hot dust that hung lazily about us; a dust like powdered chocolate, that
cloyed and choked.

As recreation it was blighting; and I said almost as much. Ma Pettengill was deaf to it, her
gray head in its broad-brimmed hat sternly bowed in meditation as she wove to her horse's motion.
Then I became aware that she talked to another; one who was not there. She said things I was
sure he would not have liked to hear. She hung choice insults upon his name and blistered his
fair repute with calumnies. She was a geyser of invective, quiet perhaps for fifty yards, then
grandly in action.

"Call yourself a cowman, hey? What you ought to be is matron of a foundling asylum. Yes, sir!"

This was among the least fearful of her dusty scornings. And I knew she would be addressing
one Homer Gale, temporary riding boss of the Arrowhead. Indeed, Homer's slightly pleading accents
were now very colourably imitated by his embittered employer:

"Yes'm, Mis' Pettengill, it's a matter of life and death; no less. I got to git off for two
days--a matter of life and death. Yes'm; I just got to!"

On the completion of this a hoarse hoot of scorn boomed through the haze and Homer was told
that men like himself often caused perfectly decent people to be tried for murder. And again
Homer's rightful job was echoed as "Matron of a foundling asylum!"

I felt the embarrassment of one unwittingly come upon the adjustment of a private grievance.
I dropped delicately a few paces behind, unnoticed, I thought; but Ma Pettengill waited for
me to overtake her again. If it wasn't one thing it was another. What she'd like--she'd like
to wake up in a strange place and find she'd clean forgot her name and address, like these
here parties you read about in the papers. And why wouldn't she? A dry year; feed short on
the range; water holes dusty that never did go dry before; half a hay crop and winter threatening
right spang in the summertime! Think of having to gather cattle off the range in the middle
of August when other times you could let 'em run till the middle of October! In fact, this
was the kind of a year that cattle raisers had a technical term for. It was known technically
as one hell of a year, if I wanted to be told.

And having to do the work with mental defectives and cripples and Bolsheviki, because every
able-bodied puncher in the country had gone over to create a disturbance in Europe! Hadn't
she combed out the county hospital and poor farm to get a haying crew? Didn't the best cowboy
now on the pay roll wear a derby hat and ride a motorcycle by preference? And paying seventy-five
dollars to these imitation punchers to fight her gentle saddle horses, no colt, it seemed,
having been ridden on the place in the memory of man.

She didn't know; taking one thing with another, sometimes she almost wished that the world
was going to stay unsafe for democracy.

Of course this technically described bad year wasn't so bad one way, because the sheepmen would
sure get a tasty wallop, sheep being mighty informal about dying with the weather below zero
and scant feed. When cattle wasn't hardly feeling annoyed sheep would lie down and quit intruding
on honest cattle raisers for all time. Just a little attention from a party with a skinning
knife was all they needed after that. And so on, back to Homer Gale, who had gone to Red Gap
for two days on a matter of life and death--and of this the less repeated here the better.

Now our narrow way spread to a valley where the sun's rays were more widely diffused and the
dust less pervasive. We could see a mile ahead to a vaster cloud of dust. (No. 655) in the Bodleian
Library, and was published in 1851. A small "s" is invariably used in commencing a word with
that letter; the "t's " are quite different; the "w" finishes with
an inner, not an outer loop; the "g's" have no flat tops; and the
"hangers" of the "h's" do not descend below the line.

The writing is evidently an educated hand for the time, and cannot readily be imagined as using
small "i's" for the first person, such as are used in, and seem to accord so well with, the
much less educated handwriting of the warning letter.

* * * * *

WILLIAM VAVASOUR, the Tresham family serving-man, is thus not only conclusively proved to have
written the anonymous letter to Lord Monteagle, but most probably was also the "unknown man
of a reasonable tall personage" who is so quaintly described in the Government story as having
delivered the letter.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 46: Calendared by the Historical MSS. Commission. "Report
on MSS. in various Collections, vol. iii., 1904. The MSS. of T.B.
Clarke-Thornhill, Esq., of Rushton Hall, by Mrs. R.C. Lomas." These
important family papers were preserved and discovered in a curious
manner. In 1828, when making alterations at Rushton Hall, on removing
a partition wall, they were found with some theological books in a
large bundle wrapped in a sheet, which had been built into a recess
in the wall.

And then there was nothing to do but ride ahead of the toiling beasts and again down the narrow
way that would bring us to the lowlands of the Arrowhead, where the dust no longer choked and
one could see green and smell water. From the last mesa we looked out over the Arrowhead's
flat fields, six thousand acres under fence, with the ranch house and outbuildings hazy in
the distance.

It was a pleasant prospect and warmed Ma Pettengill from her mood of chill negation. She remarked
upon the goodliness of the scene, quite as if the present were not a technical year for cattle
raisers. Then, as we jogged the six miles home by peaceful thoroughfares, the lady, being questioned
persistently and suitably, spoke with utter freedom of Homer Gale, who had shamefully deserted
his job for two days at the busiest end of the season, when a white man wouldn't of thought
of leaving, even on a matter of life and death.

Had Homer the shadow of an excuse? We shall see.

Well, then, this here celluloid imitation of a cowman that I been using violent words about
come into the valley three years ago and rapidly got a lot of fame by reason of being a confirmed
bachelor and hating the young of the human species with bitterness and constancy. I was the
one that brought him in; I admit that. First time I seen him he was being a roistering blade
in the Fashion Waffle Kitchen down at Red Gap. He was with Sandy Sawtelle and a couple other
boys from the ranch here, and Sandy tells me later that he is looking for work, being a good
cowhand. I said he looked like something else, being dressed in an uproarious check suit of
clothes that would instantly of collected a crowd in most city streets. But Sandy says that's
all right; he's a regler cowman and had to wear these startling garments for a disguise to
get him safe out of Idaho.

It seems he'd been crowded out of that thriving state by a yearning and determined milliner
that had witnesses a-plenty and intended to do something about it. Defendant claimed he hadn't
even meant anything of the sort and was just being a good pal; but it looked like the cruel
teeth of the law was going to bite right into his savings if this breach-of-promise suit ever
come to trial, the lady having letters from him in black and white. So Homer had made a strategic
retreat, avoiding contact with the enemy, and here he was. And how about taking him on at the
Arrowhead, where he could begin a new life?

Needing another hand just then, I fussed none at all about Homer's scandalous past. I said
he could throw in with us; and he did. When he got dressed in a legal manner he looked like
he couldn't be anything else but a cowhand. About forty and reliable, he looked. So I sent
him to a summer camp over on the Madeline plains, where I had a bunch of cattle on government
range. Bert Glasgow lived in a shack with his wife and family there and had general charge,
and Homer was to begin his new life by helping Bert.

His new life threatened to be short. He showed up here late the third night after he went over,
looking sad and desperate and hunted. He did look that way more or less at all times, having
one of these long, sad moustaches and a kind of a bit-into face. This night he looked worse
than usual. I thought the hellhounds of the law from Idaho might of took up his winding trail;
but no. It was the rosy-cheeked tots of Mr. and Mrs. Bert Glasgow that had sent him out into
the night.

"Say," he says, "I wouldn't have you think I was a quitter, but if you want to suicide me just
send me back to that horrible place. Children!" he says. "That's all; just children! Dozens
of 'em! Running all over the place, into everything, under everything, climbing up on you,
sticking their fingers into your eyes--making life unbearable for man and beast. You never
once let on to me," he says reproachfully, "that this Bert had children."

"No," I says; "and I never let on to you that he's got a mole on his chin either. What of that?"

Then the poor lollop tries to tell me what of it. I saw he really had been under a nervous
strain, all right. Suffering had put its hot iron on him. First, he just naturally loathed
children anyway. Hadn't he run away from a good home in Iowa when he was sixteen, account of
being the oldest of seven? He said some things in general about children that would of got
him no applause at a mothers' meeting. He was simply afraid to look a child in the eye; and,
from what he'd like to do to 'em all, it seemed like his real middle name was Molech. Wasn't
that the party with hostile views about children? Anyway, you could see that Homer's idea of
a real swell festivity would be to hide out by an orphan asylum some night until the little
ones had said their prayers and was tucked all peaceful into their trundle beds and then set
fire to the edifice in eight places after disconnecting the fire alarm. That was Homer, and
he was honest; he just couldn't help it.

And Bert's tikes had drove him mad with their playful antics. He said he'd be set down for
a bite of dinner and one of 'em would climb up his back and feel his hair--not saying a word,
just taking hold of it; then it would jump down and another would climb up and do the same
thing, and him not daring to defend himself. He'd got so worked up he was afraid to stay on
the place.

"And you know," he says--"what I can't understand--danged if Bert don't seem to kind of like
'em. You may think I'm a liar, but he waited for one the other morning when it squealed at
him and kept a hold of its hand clean down to the hay barn. What do you think of that? And
besides these that go round infesting the place outside he's got a short yearling and a long
two-year-old that have to be night-herded. I listened to 'em every night. One yelled and strangled
all last night, till I s'posed, of course, it was going to perish everlastingly; but here this
morning it was acting like nothing at all had happened.

"All I can say is, Bert don't have much luck. And that littlest yeller always unswallowing
its meals with no effort whatever! It's horrible! And the mother, with no strength of character--feeble-minded,
I reckon--coddles 'em! She never did cuss 'em out proper or act human toward 'em. Kids like
them, what they need--upside down and three quick hard ones. I know!"

I was fool enough to argue with him a bit, trying to see if he didn't have a lick of sense.
I told him to look how happy Bert was; and how his family had made a man of him, him getting
more money and saving more than ever in his past life. Homer said what good would all that
money do him? He'd only fool it away on his wife and children.

"He regrets it, all right," says Homer. "I says to myself the other day: 'I bet a cookie he'd
like to be carefree and happy like me!'"

Homer was a piker, even when he made bets with himself. And the short of it was I sent a man
that didn't hate children over to Bert's and kept Homer on the place here.

He stayed three months and said it was heaven, account of not having them unnecessary evils
on the place that would squirm round a man's legs and feel of his hair and hide round corners
and peek at him and whisper about him. Then I changed foremen and Scott Humphrey, the new one,
brought three towheads with him of an age to cause Homer the anguish of the damned, which they
done on the first day they got here by playing that he was a horse and other wild animals,
and trying to pull the rest of his hair out.

He come in and cut himself out of my life the day after, shaking his head and saying he couldn't
think what the world was coming to. As near as I could make him, his idea was that the world
was going to be swamped with young ones if something wasn't done about it, like using squirrel
poison or gopher traps.

I felt like I wanted to cuff him up to a peak and knock the peak off; but I merely joked and
said it was too bad his own folks hadn't come to think that way while he could still be handled
easy. I also warned him it was going to be hard to find a job without more or less children
on the outskirts, because ours was a growing state. He said there must be a few sane people
left in the world. And, sure enough, he gets a job over to the Mortimers'--Uncle Henry and
Aunt Mollie being past seventy and having nothing to distress Homer.

Of course the secret of this scoundrel's get-away from Idaho had got round the valley, making
him a marked man. It was seen that he was a born flirt, but one who retained his native caution
even at the most trying moments. Here and there in the valley was a hard-working widow that
the right man could of consoled, and a few singles that would of listened to reason if properly
approached; and by them it was said that Homer was a fiend for caution. He would act like one
of them that simply won't take no for an answer--up to a certain point. He would seem to be
going fur in merry banter, but never to words that the law could put any expensive construction
on. He would ride round to different ranches and mingle at dances and picnics, and giggle and
conduct himself like one doomed from the cradle to be woman's prey--but that was all.

Funny how he'd escaped through the years, him having apparently the weak and pliant nature
that makes the ideal husband, and having reached the time of life when he was putting sheep
dip on his hair where the lining shone through on top. But so it was. And his views on children
had also become widely known. Mothers used to grab up their youngest ones when he'd go into
the post office down at Kulanch or meet one on the road. He made no hit at all with such views
among them that had learned better. Still there was hopeful ones that thought he might be made
to take a joke sooner or later, and the fact that he was known to save his wages and had a
nice little stake laid by didn't work against him any with such parties as might have a chance
to be swept off their feet by him in a mad moment.

Then over at the Mortimers' place he meets Mrs. Judson Tolliver, a plausible widow lady who
come into the valley every once in a while to do sewing round at different ranches. She was
a good-built, impressive person, with a persuading manner; one of these competent ones that
can take charge of affairs and conduct them unassisted, and will do so if not stopped. Uncle
Henry Mortimer brought her to the house in his light wagon one morning, with her sewing machine
in the back. And Homer was there to help her out and help out with the machine and see it was
placed right in the sitting room; and then help out with her satchel and ask in a gentlemanly
manner if everything was all right--and everything was: Thank you so much, Mr. Gale!

This party was no simpering schoolgirl. She was thirty-five or so and square-jawed, and did
her hair plain, and had a managing voice that would go good at club meetings. She read library
books and was a good conversationalist. And what did she do the first evening, when Homer was
mending one of his shirts by the kitchen lamp, but wrench it away from him roguishly and do
the job herself, while she entertained him with conversation. It was bound to be entertaining,
for she started in about what trials children was to their tormented parents and how the world
would be brighter and better if it consisted entirely of adults.

Any one might of thought she'd been hearing gossip about Homer's likes and dislikes. I know
that's what I thought afterward, when he opened his soul to me. She said what a mercy it was
that half a dozen yelling demons wasn't in this house at that moment to make life an evil thing
for all. And Homer sunned right up and took the talk away from her. While she done his mending
he spoke heatedly of little children in his well-known happy vein, relating many incidents
in his blasted career that had brought him to these views. The lady listened with deep attention,
saying "Ah, yes, Mr. Gale!" from time to time, and letting on there must be a strong bond of
sympathy between them because he expressed in choice words what she had so often felt.

Homer must of been kind of swept off his feet at that very moment, and the rapids just below
him. "The experiments are for the most part new, and have the merit of combining precision in
the methods with extreme simplicity and elegance of design. The value of the book is further
enhanced by the numerous carefully-drawn cuts, which add greatly to its beauty."--American Journal
of Science and Arts.

"It would be difficult to find a better example of a series which is excellent throughout. This
little work is accurate in detail, popular in style, and lucid in arrangement. Every statement
is accompanied with ample illustrations. We can heartily recommend it, either as an introduction
to the subject or as a satisfactory manual for those who have no time for perusing a larger
work. It contains an excellent description, with diagrams, of Faber's Talking Machine and of
Edison's Talking Phonograph, which can not fail to be interesting to any reader who takes an interest
in the marvelous progress of natural science."--British Quarterly.

"The style of the book is very clear, and the experiments interesting. It can not fail to have
an important educational influence."--Westminster Review.

"It would really be difficult to exaggerate the merit, in the sense
of consummate adaptation to its modest end, of this little treatise
on 'Sound.' It teaches the youthful student how to make experiments
for himself, without the help of a trained operator, and at very little
expense.

These hand-books of Professor Mayer should be in the hands of every teacher of the young."--New
York Sun.

"An admirably clear and interesting collection of experiments, described with just the right
amount of abstract information and no more, and placed in progressive order. The recent inventions
of the phonograph and microphone lend an extraordinary interest to this whole field of experiment,
which makes Professor Mayer's manual especially opportune."--Boston Courier.

* * * * *

The Works of Professor E. L. YOUMANS, M. D.

Class-book of Chemistry.

New edition. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50. 12mo. Illustrated. Cloth, $1.75.

The Culture demanded by Modern Life.

A Series of Addresses and Arguments on the Claims of Scientific Education. Edited, with an Introduction
on Mental Discipline in Education. 1 vol., 12mo. Cloth, $2.00.

Correlation and Conservation of Forces.

A Series of Expositions by Professor Grove, Professor Helmholtz, Dr. Mayer, Dr. Faraday, Professor
Liebig, and Dr. Carpenter.

Edited, with an Introduction and Brief Biographical Notices of the Chief Promoters of the
New Views, by EDWARD L. YOUMANS, M. D. 1 vol., 12mo. Cloth, $2.00.
* * * * *

The Popular Science Monthly.

Conducted by E. L. and W.
J. YOUMANS.

Containing instructive and interesting articles and abstracts
of articles, original, selected, and illustrated, from the pens of
the leading scientific men of different countries;

Accounts of important
scientific discoveries;

The application of science to the practical
arts;

The latest views put forth concerning natural phenomena, by
savants of the highest authority.

TERMS: Five dollars per annum;
or fifty cents per number. A Club of five will be sent to any address
for $20.00 per annum.

The volumes begin May and November of each
year. Subscriptions may begin at any time.

THE POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY
and APPLETONS' JOURNAL, together, for $7.00 per annum, postage prepaid.

*
* * * *

A New and Valuable Work for the Practical Mechanic and Engineer.

APPLETONS'
CYCLOPÆDIA OF APPLIED MECHANICS.

A DICTIONARY OF

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
AND THE MECHANICAL ARTS.

ILLUSTRATED BY 5,000 ENGRAVINGS.

Edited
by PARK BENJAMIN, Ph. D.

CONTRIBUTORS.

T. A. EDISON, PH. D. RICHARD
H. BULL, C. E. SAMUEL WEBBER, C. E. PROF. DE VOLSON WOOD. Homer listened with glistening eyes that got
quite moist at the last. Minna went on to say that children's mothers was almost as bad, raging
in to pick a fuss with her every time a child had been disciplined for some piece of deviltry.
She said mothers give her pretty near as much trouble as the kids themselves.

It was a joyous and painful narrative to Homer. He said why didn't Minna take up something
else? And Minna said she was going to. She'd been working two summers in Judge Ballard's office,
down to Red Gap, and was going to again this summer, soon as she regained a little vitality;
and she hoped now she'd have a steady job there and never have to go back to the old life of
degradation. Homer sympathized warmly; his heart had really been touched. He hoped she'd rise
out of the depths to something tolerable; and then he told her about Bert's five horrible children
that drove him out into the brush--and so forth.

I listened in a while; and then I says to Homer ain't it nice for him to meet someone else
that thinks as he does on this great vital topic, Minna seeming to find young ones as repulsive
as Mrs. Judson Tolliver? And how about that lady anyway? And how is his affair coming on? I
never dreamed of starting anything. I was being friendly.

Homer gets vivacious and smirks something horrible, and says, well, he don't see why people
make a secret of such things; and the fact is that that lady and him have about decided that
Fate has flung 'em together for a lofty purpose. Of course nothing was settled definite yet--no
dates nor anything; but probably before long there'd be a nice little home adorning a certain
place he'd kept his eye on, and someone there keeping a light in the window for him--and so
on. It sounded almost too good to be true that this old shellback had been harpooned at last.

Then Minna spoke up, when Homer had babbled to a finish, and smirked and looked highly offensive.
She says brightly:

"Oh, yes; Mrs. Judson Tolliver. I know her well; and I'm sure, Mr. Gale, I wish you all the
happiness in the world with the woman of your choice. She's a very sterling character indeed--and
such a good mother!"

"How's that?" says Homer. "I didn't hear you just right. Such a good what?"

"I said she's such a good mother," Minna answers him.

Homer's smirk kind of froze on his face.

"Mother to what?" he says in a low, passionate tone, like an actor.

"Mother to her three little ones," says Minna. Then she says again quick: "Why, what's the
matter, Mr. Gale?" For Homer seemed to have been took bad.

"Great Godfrey!" he says, hardly able to get his voice.

"And, of course, you won't mind my saying it," Minna goes on, "because you seem so broad-minded
about children, but when I taught primary in Red Gap last year those three little boys of hers
gave me more trouble than any other two dozen of the pests in the whole room."

Homer couldn't say anything this time. He looked like a doctor was knifing him without anesthetics.

"And to make it worse," says Minna, "the mother is so crazy about them, and so sensitive about
any little thing done to them in the way of discipline--really, she has very little control
of her language where those children are concerned. Still, of course, that's how any good mother
will act, to be sure; and especially when they have no father.

"I'm glad indeed the poor woman is to have someone like you that will take the responsibility
off her shoulders, because those boys are now at an age where discipline counts. Of course
she'll expect you to be gentle with them, even though firm. Oswald--he's eleven now, I believe--will
soon be old enough to send to reform school; but the younger ones, seven and nine--My! such
spirits as they have! They'll really need someone with strength."

Homer was looking as if this bright chatter would add twenty years to his age. He'd slumped
down on the stoop, where he'd been setting, like he'd had a stroke.

"So she's that kind, is she?" he kind of mutters. "A good thing I found it out on her!"

"The children live with their grandmother in Red Gap while their mother is away," says Minna.
"They really need a strong hand."

"Not mine!" says Homer. Then he got slowly up and staggered down a few steps toward the gate.
"It's a good thing I found out this scandal on her in time," says he. "Talk about underhandedness!
Talk about a woman hiding her guilty secret! Talk about infamy! I'll expose her, all right.
I'm going straight to her and tell her I know all. I'll make her cower in shame!" He's out
on his horse with his reckless threat.

"Now you've sunk the ship," I says to Minna. "I knew the woman was leading a double life as
fur as Homer was concerned, but I wasn't going to let on to the poor zany. It's time he was
speared, and this would of been a judgment on him that his best friends would of relished keenly.
Lots of us was looking forward to the tragedy with great pleasure. You spoiled a lot of fun
for the valley."

"But it would not have been right," says Minna. "It would truly have been the blackest of tragedies
to a man of Mr. Gale's sensitive fibres. You can't enter into his feelings because you never
taught primary. Also, I think he is very far from being a poor zany, as you have chosen to
call him." The poor thing was warm and valiant when she finished this, looking like Joan of
Arc or someone just before the battle.

And Homer never went back and made the lady cower like he said he meant to. Mebbe it occurred
to him on the way that she was not one of them that cower easy. Mebbe he felt he was dealing
with a desperate adventuress, as cunning as she was false-hearted. Anyway, he weakened like
so many folks that start off brave to tell someone so-and-so right to their faces. He didn't
go back at all till the middle of the night, when he pussyfooted in and got his things out,
and disappeared like he had stumbled down a well.

Uncle Henry had to feed his own stock next morning, while Mrs. Tolliver took on in great alarm
and wanted a posse formed to rescue Homer from wherever he was. Her first idea was that he
had been kidnapped and was being held for ransom; but someway she couldn't get any one else
very hearty about this notion. So then she said he had been murdered, or was lying off in the
brush somewhere with a broken leg.

It was pointed out to her that Homer wouldn't be likely to come and collect all his things
in the night in order to keep a date with an assassin, or even to have his leg broke. About
the third day she guessed pretty close to the awful truth and spoke a few calm words about
putting her case in the hands of some good lawyer.

The valley was interested. It looked like a chance for the laugh of the year. It looked like
the lightnings of a just heaven had struck where they was long overdue. Then it was discovered
that Homer was hiding out over in the hills with a man after coyotes with traps and poison.
His job must of appealed to Homer's cynical nature at that moment--anything with traps and
poison in it.

Dave Pickens was the man that found him, he not having much else to do. And he let Homer know
the worst he could think of without mincing words. He said the deserted fiancée was going to
bring suit against Homer for one hundred thousand dollars--that being the biggest sum Dave
could think of--for breach of promise, and Homer might as well come out and face the music.

Homer did come out, bold as brass. He'd been afraid the lady might gun him or act violent with
something; but if she wasn't threatening anything but legal violence he didn't care. He just
couldn't conceive that a lady with three children could make a suit like that stick against
any man--especially three children that was known to be hellions. He didn't even believe the
lady would start a suit--not with the facts of her shame known far and wide. He was jaunty
and defiant about this, and come right out of hiding and agreed to work for me again, Scott
Humphrey having sent his wife and children on a visit to Grandma Humphrey.

But, lands. He didn't earn his salt. Friends and well-wishers took the jauntiness all out of
him in no time. Parties rode from far and near to put him wise. Ranchers from ten miles up
and down the creek would drop important work just to ride over and tell him harsh facts about
the law, and how, as man to man, it looked dark indeed for him. These parties told him that
the possession of three children by a lawful widow was not regarded as criminal by our best
courts. It wasn't even considered shameful. And it was further pointed out by many of the same
comforters that the children would really be a help to the lady in her suit, cinching the sympathy
of a jury.

Also, they didn't neglect to tell him that probably half the jury would be women--wives and
mothers. And what chance would he have with women when they was told how he regarded children?
He spent a good half of the time I paid him for in listening to these friendly words. They
give Homer an entirely new slant on our boasted civilization and lowered it a whole lot in
his esteem.

About the only person in the whole valley that wasn't laughing at him and giving him false
sympathy with a sting in its tail was Minna Humphrey. Homer told her all about the foul conspiracy
against his fortune, and how his life would be blasted by marrying into a family with three
outcasts like he'd been told these was. And what was our courts coming to if their records
could be stained by blackmailers.

And Minna give him the honest sympathy of a woman who had taught school twelve years, loathed
the sight of any human under twenty, and even considered that the institution of marriage had
been greatly overpraised. Certainly she felt it was not for her; and she could understand Homer's
wanting to escape. She and him would set out and discuss his chances long after he had ought
to of been in bed if he was going to earn his pay.

Minna admitted that things looked dark for him on account of the insane prejudice that would
be against him for his views on children. She said he couldn't expect anything like a fair
trial where these was known even with a jury of his peers; and it was quite true that probably
only five or six of the jury would be his peers, the rest being women.

Homer told me about these talks--out of working hours, you can bet! How Minna was the only
person round that would stand by anyone in trouble; how she loathed kids, and even loathed
the thought of human marriage.

"Minna is a nice girl," I told him; "but I should think you'd learn not to pay attention to
a woman that talks about children that way. Remember this other lady talked the same way about
'em before the scandal come out."

But he was indignant that any one could suspect Minna's child hating wasn't honest.

"That little girl is pure as a prism!" he says. "When she says she hates 'em, she hates 'em.
The other depraved creature was only working on my better nature."

"Well," I says, "the case does look black; but mebbe you could settle for a mere five thousand
dollars."

"It wouldn't be a mere five thousand dollars," says Homer; "it would be the savings of a lifetime
of honest toil and watching the pennies. That's all I got."

"Serves you right, then," I says, "for not having got married years ago and having little ones
of your own about your knee!" 

Virchow's politics as a pedagogue reach their highest pitch in this demand: "that in all schools,
from the poor schools to the universities, nothing shall be taught
that is not absolutely certain.

None but objective and absolutely ascertained knowledge is to be imparted by the teacher to
the learner; nothing subjective, no knowledge that is open to correction, only facts, no hypotheses."
The investigation of such problems as the whole nation may be interested in must not be restricted;
that is liberty of inquiry; but the problem ought not, without anything farther, to be the subject
of teaching.

"When we teach we must restrict ourselves to the smaller, and yet how great, departments which
we are actually masters of."


He'd of gone, I guess, if Minna hadn't kept cheering him up with sympathy and hating children
with him. Homer was one desperate man, but still he couldn't tear himself away from Minna.

Then one morning he gets a letter from the Red Gap lawyer. It says his client, Mrs. Judson
Tolliver, has directed him to bring suit against Homer for five thousand dollars; and would
Homer mebbe like to save the additional cost--which would be heavy, of course--by settling
the matter out of court and avoiding pain for all?

Homer was in a state where he almost fell for this offer. It was that or facing a jury that
would have it in for him, anyway, or disappearing like he had done in Idaho; only this lady
was highly determined, and reports had already come to him that he would be watched and nailed
if he tried to leave. It would mean being hounded from pillar to post, even if he did get away.
He went down and put it up to Minna, as I heard later.

"I'm a desperate man," he says, "being hounded by this here catamount; and mebbe it's best
to give in."

"It's outrageous!" says Minna. "Of course you don't care about the money; but it's the principle
of the thing."

"Well, yes and no," says Homer. "You might say I care some about the money. That's plain nature,
and I never denied I was human."

So they went on to discuss it back and forth warmly, when a misunderstanding arose that I was
very careful to get the rights of a couple of weeks later.

Minna went over the old ground that Homer could never get a fair trial; then she brightened
up all at once and says:

"Don't you pay it. Don't you do it; because you won't have to if you do what I say."

Homer gets excited and says:

"Yes, yes; go on!"

And Minna goes on.

"When people can't get fair trials in a place," she says, "they always take change of venues."

"Change of venues?" says Homer, kind of uneasy, it seemed.

"Certainly," says Minna: "they take change of venues. I've worked in Judge Ballard's office
long enough to know that much. Why didn't I think of it before? It's your one chance to escape
this creature's snare."

"Change of venues?" says Homer again, kind of aghast.

"It's your only way out," says Minna; "and I'll do everything I can--"

"You will?" says Homer.

"Why, of course!" says Minna. "Any thing--"

"All right, then," says Homer. "You get your things on, and I'll saddle your horse and bring
him round."

"What for?" demands Minna.

"I'm a desperate man!" says Homer. "You say it's the only way out, and you know the law; so
come along to Kulanche with me." And he beat if off to the barn.

Well, Minna had said she'd do anything she could, thinking she'd write herself to Judge Ballard
and find out all the details; but if Homer wanted her to go to Kulanche with him and try to
start the thing there--why, all right. She was ready when Homer come with her horse and off
they rode on the twelve-mile trip.

I gather that not much was said on the way by Homer who only muttered like a fever patient
from time to time, with Minna saying once in a while how glad she was she had thought up this
one sure way out of his trouble.

At Kulanche they rode up in front of Old Man Geiger's office, who is justice of the peace.

"Wait here a minute," says Homer, and went inside. Pretty soon he come out and got her. "Come
on, now," he says, "I got it all fixed."

And Minna goes in, thinking mebbe she's got to swear to an affidavit or something that Homer
couldn't get a fair trial among people knowing he regarded little ones as so many cockroaches
or something to step on.

She got some shock when Homer took her inside and held her tight by the wrist while Old Man
Geiger married 'em. That's about the way it was. She says she was so weak she could hardly
stand up, and she hadn't hardly any voice at all left. But she kept on saying "Why, Homer!"
and "Oh, Homer!" and "No, no, Homer!" as soon as she discovered that she had been dragged off
to a fate she had always regarded as worse than death; but a lot of good it done her to say
them things in a voice not much better than a whisper.

And the dreadful thing was over before she could get strength to say anything more powerful.
There she was, married to a man she thought highly of, it's true, and had a great sympathy
for in the foul wrong one of her sex had tried to slip over on him; but a man she had never
thought of marrying. I'm telling you what she told me. And after sentence had been pronounced
she kept on saying "Why, Homer!" and "Oh, Homer!" and "No, no, Homer!" till there was nothing
to do but get some clothes out of her trunk that she'd left down there in time to take the
narrow gauge for their wedding tour to Spokane.

The news spread over the valley next day like a brush fire in August. It was startling! Like
the newspapers say of a suicide, "No cause could be assigned for the rash act." They was away
ten days and come back to find the whole country was again giving Homer the laugh because Mrs.
Tolliver had up and married a prosperous widower from over in Surprise Valley, and had never
brought any suit against him. It was said that even the late Mrs. Tolliver was laughing heartily
at him.

Homer didn't seem to care, and Minna certainly didn't. She was the old-fashioned kind of wife,
a kind you don't hear much of nowadays; the kind that regards her husband as perfect, and looks
up to him. She told me about the tumultuous wedding. Neither of 'em had had time for any talk
till they got on the train. Then it come out. She says why ever did Homer do such a monstrous
thing? And Homer says:

"Well, you told me a change of Venus was the only way out for me--"

"I said a change of venue," says Minna.

"It sounded like change of Venus," says Homer, "and I knew Venus was the god of love. And you
said you was willing and I knew we was congenial, and I was a desperate man; and so here we are!"

So she cried on his shoulder for twenty miles while he ate a box of figs.

Homer is now a solid citizen, with his money put into a place down at the lower end of the
valley, instead of lying in the bank at the mercy of some unscrupulous woman with little ones.
And here this summer, with his own work light, he's been helping me out as riding boss; or,
at least I been lavishing money on him for that.

A fine, dependable hand, too! Here was this bunch of stock to be got in from Madeline--them
Bolshevik ain't gathered more'n two thirds of 'em; and there's more to come in from over Horse
Fly Mountain way, and still another bunch from out of the Sheep Creek country--the busiest
month in a bad year, when I needed every man, woman, and child to be had, and here comes Homer,
the mush-head, taking two days off!

"Yes'm, Mis' Pettengill; I just got to take time off to go down to Red Gap. It's a matter of
life and death. Yes'm; it is. ("State Papers, Domestic," James I., ccxvi. 211).]

[Footnote 25: Examination of Mrs. Tresham (ibid., ccxvi. 209).]

[Footnote 26: Examination of William Vavasour (ibid., ccxvi.

207).]

[Footnote 27: Vavasour, in his authentic and ordinary writing, used
flat-topped "g's," as seen in the anonymous letter, as well as in
No. 2, ascribed to him.]

[Footnote 28: The deed of Robert Catesby's
marriage settlement with Katherine, eldest daughter of Sir Thomas
Leigh, of Stoneleigh (1592), in the possession of T.W. Whitmore-Jones;
Esq., of Chastleton House, Oxon, is in a similar legal hand, with
precisely the same peculiarities of "s," "g," "w," "h," etc. A law-writer's
hand to-day is in a "copper-plate" style, which, although most suitable
for the purpose, is not the kind of hand that an educated person would
write whose business was not copying, and there was then a similar
distinction between them.]

[Footnote 29: Apparently owing to restrictions
of space and paper.]

[Footnote 30: The original letter is framed
and exhibited upon a pedestal in the Museum of the Public Record Office.

The facsimile has, therefore, had to be made from a negative taken
of the letter as seen through glass, while the other facsimiles have
the advantage of being made from negatives taken of documents unglazed.]

IV

THE
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S OPINION OF VAVASOUR'S GUILT

The Attorney-General
in his speech for the prosecution at Father Garnet's trial (March
28, 1606), as given in the official report, alluding to Tresham's
dying statement, said: "Upon his death-bed he commanded Vavasour his
man, whom I think deeply guilty in this treason, to write a letter
to the Earl of Salisbury."

Henry Garnet's trial was purposely held at the City Guildhall, instead of Westminster Hall,
the usual trial place where the conspirators had been tried, in order to make the occasion as
imposing, and his case as exemplary, as possible, on account of his position as Superior of the
Jesuits in England.[31] The King was privately present, and there was a most distinguished
assembly of ambassadors, nobility, and others

.
 He did so!'

"Calls himself a cowman, does he? He might of been--once. Now he ain't no more than a woman's
home companion!"

VIII

CAN HAPPEN!

Lew Wee, prized Chinese chef of the Arrowhead Ranch, had butchered, cooked, and served two
young roosters for the evening meal with a finesse that cried for tribute. As he replaced the
evening lamp on the cleared table in the big living room he listened to my fulsome praise of
his artistry as Marshal Foch might hear me say that I considered him a rather good strategist.
Lew Wee heard but gave no sign, as one set above the petty adulation of compelled worshipers.
Yet I knew his secret soul made festival of my words and would have been hurt by their withholding.
This is his way. Not the least furtive lightening of his subtle eyes hinted that I had pleased him.

He presently withdrew to his tiny room off the kitchen, where, as was his evening custom for
half an hour, he coaxed an amazing number of squealing or whining notes from his two-stringed
fiddle. I pictured him as he played. He would be seated in his wicker armchair beside a little
table on which a lamp glowed, the room tightly closed, window down, door shut, a fast-burning
brown-paper cigarette to make the atmosphere more noxious. After many more of the cigarettes
had made it all but impossible, Lew Wee, with the lamp brightly burning, as it would burn the
night through--for devils of an injurious sort and in great numbers will fearlessly enter a
dark room--he would lie down to refreshing sleep. That fantasy of ventilation! Lew Wee always
sleeps in an air-tight room packed with cigarette smoke, and a lamp turned high at his couchside;
and Lew Wee is hardy.

He played over and over now a plaintive little air of minors that put a gentle appeal through
two closed doors. It is one he plays a great deal. He has told me its meaning. He says--speaking
with a not unpleasant condescension--that this little tune will mean: "Life comes like a bird-song
through the open windows of the heart." It sounds quite like that and is a very satisfying
little song, with no beginning or end.

He played it now, over and over, wanderingly and at leisure, and I pictured his rapt face above
the whining fiddle; the face, say, of the Philosopher Mang, sage of the second degree and disciple
of Confucius, who was lifted from earth by the gods in a time we call B.C. but which was then
thought to be a fresh, new, late time; the face of subtle eyes and guarded dignity. And where in the
whole history of science is there one single scientific inquirer to be found who would not
have felt himself quite justified in teaching his own subjective convictions with as much right
as he had to construct them from inquiry into objective facts. True, he had the compensation
of believing invincibly that the Arrowhead Ranch and all its concerns lay upon his own slightly
bowed shoulders; that the thing would fast crumble upon his severance from it. But I questioned
whether this were adequate. I felt him to be a man of sorrow if not of tragedy. Vaguely he
reached me as one who had survived some colossal buffeting.

As I mused upon this Ma Pettengill sorted the evening mail and to Lew Wee she now took his
San Francisco newspaper, Young China, and a letter. Half an hour later Lew Wee brought wood
to replenish the fire. He disposed of this and absently brushed the hearth with a turkey wing.
Then he straightened the rug, crossed the room, and straightened on the farther wall a framed
portrait in colour of Majestic Folly, a prize bull of the Hereford strain. Then he drew a curtain,
flicked dust from a corner of the table, and made a slow way to the kitchen door, pausing to
alter slightly the angle of a chair against the wall.

