The United States have been by no means barren in the production of literature.  The truth
is so far from this that their literary triumphs are perhaps those which of all their triumphs
are the most honorable to them, and which, considering their position as a young nation, are
the most permanently satisfactory.  But though they have done much in writing, they have done
much more in reading.  As producers they are more than respectable, but as consumers they are
the most conspicuous people on the earth.  It is impossible to speak of the subject of literature
in America without thinking of the readers rather than of the writers.  In this matter their
position is different from that of any other great people, seeing that they share the advantages
of our language.  An American will perhaps consider himself to be as little like an Englishman
as he is like a Frenchman.  But he reads Shakspeare through the medium of his own vernacular,
and has to undergo the penance of a foreign tongue before he can understand Moliere.  He separates
himself from England in politics and perhaps in affection; but he cannot separate himself from
England in mental culture.  It may be suggested that an Englishman has the same advantages
as regards America; and it is true that he is obtaining much of such advantage.  Irving, Prescott,
and Longfellow are the same to England as though she herself had produced them.  But the balance
of advantage must be greatly in favor of America.  We gave her the work of four hundred years,
and received back in return the work of fifty.

And of this advantage the Americans have not been slow to avail themselves.  As consumers of
literature they are certainly the most conspicuous people on the earth.  Where an English publisher
contents himself with thousands of copies, an American publisher deals with ten thousand. 
The sale of a new book, which in numbers would amount to a considerable success with us, would
with them be a lamentable failure.  This of course is accounted for, as regards the author
and the publisher, by the difference of price at which the book is produced.  One thousand
in England will give perhaps as good a return as the ten thousand in America.  But as regards
the readers there can be no such equalization: the thousand copies cannot spread themselves
as do the ten thousand.  The one book at a guinea cannot multiply itself, let Mr. Mudie do
what he will, as do the ten books at a dollar.  Ultimately there remain the ten books against
the one; and if there be not the ten readers against the one, there are five, or four, or three.
Everybody in the States has books about his house.  "And so has everybody in England," will
say my English reader, mindful of the libraries, or book-rooms, or book-crowded drawing-rooms
of his friends and acquaintances.  But has my English reader who so replies examined the libraries
of many English cabmen, of ticket porters, of warehousemen, and of agricultural laborers? 
I cannot take upon myself to say that I have done so with any close search in the States; but
when it has been in my power I have done so, and I have always found books in such houses as
I have entered. The amount or printed matter which is poured forth in streams from the printing
presses of the great American publishers is, however, a better proof of the truth of what I
say than anything that I can have seen myself.

But of what class are the books that are so read?  There are many who think that reading in
itself is not good unless the matter read is excellent.  I do not myself quite agree with this,
thinking that almost any reading is better than none; but I will of course admit that good
matter is better than bad matter.  The bulk of the literature consumed in the States is no
doubt composed of novels--as it is also, now-a-days, in this country.  Whether or no an unlimited
supply of novels for young people is or is not advantageous, I will not here pretend to say.
The general opinion with ourselves, I take it, is that novels are bad reading if they be bad
of their kind. Novels that are not bad are now-a-days accepted generally as indispensable to
our households.  Whatever may be the weakness of the American literary taste in this respect,
it is I think a weakness which we share.  There are more novel readers among them than with
us, but only I think in the proportion that there are more readers.

I have no hesitation in saying that works by English authors are more popular in the States
than those written by Americans; and, among English authors of the present day, readers by
no means confine themselves to the novelists.  The English names of whom I heard most during
my sojourn in the States were perhaps those of Dickens, Tennyson, Buckle, Tom Hughes, Martin
Tupper, and Thackeray. As the owners of all these names are still living, I am not going to
take upon myself the delicate task of criticising the American taste.  I may not perhaps coincide
with them in every respect.  But if I be right as to the names which I have given, such a selection
shows that they do get beyond novels.  I have little doubt but that many more copies of Dickens's
novels have been sold, during the last three years, than of the works either of Tennyson or
Buckle; but such also has been the case in England.  It will probably be admitted that one
copy of the "Civilization" should be held as being equal to five and twenty of "Nicholas Nickleby,"
and that a single "In Memoriam" may fairly weigh down half a dozen "Pickwicks."  Men and women
after their day's work are not always up to the "Civilization."  As a rule, they are generally
up to "Proverbial Philosophy," and this, perhaps, may have had something to do with the great
popularity of that very popular work.

I would not have it supposed that American readers despise their own authors.  The Americans
are very proud of having a literature of their own, and among the literary names which they
honor, there are none more honorable than those of Cooper and Irving.  They like to know that
their modern historians are acknowledged as great authors, and as regards their own poets,
will sometimes demand your admiration for strains with which you hardly find yourself to be
familiar.  But English books are, I think, the better loved: even the English books of the
present day.  And even beyond this--with those who choose to indulge in the luxuries of literature--books
printed in England are more popular than those which are printed in their own country; and
yet the manner in which the American publishers put out their work is very good.  The book
sold there at a dollar, or a dollar and a quarter, quite equals our ordinary five shilling
volume.  Nevertheless, English books are preferred, almost as strongly as are French bonnets.
Of books absolutely printed and produced in England, the supply in the States is of course
small. They must necessarily be costly, and as regards new books, are always subjected to the
rivalry of a cheaper American copy.  But of the reprinted works of English authors the supply
is unlimited, and the sale very great.  Almost everything is reprinted: certainly everything
which can be said to attain any home popularity.  I do not know how far English authors may
be aware of the fact; but it is undoubtedly a fact that their influence as authors is greater
on the other side of the Atlantic than on this one.  It is there that they have their most
numerous school of pupils.  It is there that they are recognized as teachers by hundreds of
thousands.  It is of these thirty millions that they should think, at any rate in part, when
they discuss within their own hearts that question which all authors do discuss, whether that
which they write shall in itself be good or bad, be true or false.  A writer in England may
not, perhaps, think very much of this with reference to some trifle of which his English publisher
proposes to sell some seven or eight hundred copies.  But he begins to feel that he should
have thought of it when he learns that twenty or thirty thousand copies of the same have been
scattered through the length and breadth of the United States.  The English author should feel
that he writes for the widest circle of readers ever yet obtained by the literature of any
country.  He provides not only for his own country and for the States, but for the readers
who are rising by millions in the British colonies. Canada is supplied chiefly from the presses
of Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, but she is supplied with the works of the mother country.
India, as I take it, gets all her books direct from London, as do the West Indies.  Whether
or no the Australian colonies have as yet learned to reprint our books I have never learned,
but I presume that they cannot do so as cheaply as they can import them.  London with us, and
the three cities which I have named on the other side of the Atlantic, are the places at which
this literature is manufactured; but the demand in the Western hemisphere is becoming more
brisk than that which the Old World creates.  There are, I have no doubt, more books printed
in London than in all America put together.  A greater extent of letter-press is put up in
London than in the three publishing cities of the States; but the number of copies issued by
the American publishers is so much greater than those which ours put forth that the greater
bulk of literature is with them.  If this be so, the demand with them is of course greater
than it is with us.

I have spoken here of the privilege which an English author enjoys by reason of the ever-widening
circle of readers to whom he writes. I should have said the writers of English literature,
seeing that the privilege is of course shared by the American writer.  I profess my belief
that in the States an English author has an advantage over one of that country merely in the
fact of his being English, as a French milliner has undoubtedly an advantage in her nationality,
let her merits or demerits as a milliner be what they may.  I think that English books are
better liked because they are English.  But I do not know that there is any feeling with us
either for or against an author because he is American.  I believe that Longfellow stands in
our judgment exactly where he would have stood had he been a tutor at a college in Oxford instead
of a Professor at Cambridge in Massachusetts.  Prescott is read among us as a historian without
any reference as to his nationality, and by many, as I take it, in absolute ignorance of his
nationality.  Hawthorne, the novelist, is quite as well known in England as he is in his own
country.  But I do not know that to either of these three is awarded any favor or is denied
any justice because he is an American.  Washington Irving published many of his works in this
country, receiving very large sums for them from Mr. Murray, and I fancy that in dealing with
his publisher he found neither advantage nor disadvantage in his nationality; that is, of course,
advantage or disadvantage as respected the light in which his works would be regarded.  It
must be admitted that there is no jealousy in the States against English authors.  I think
that there is a feeling in their favor, but no one can at any rate allege that there is a feeling
against them: I think I may also assert on the part of my own country that there is no jealousy
here against American authors.  As regards the tastes of the people, the works of each country
flow freely through the other. That is as it should be.  But when we come to the mode of supply,
things are not exactly as they should be; and I do not believe that any one will contradict
me when I say that the fault is with the Americans.

I presume that all my readers know the meaning of the word copyright.  A man's copyright is
right in his copy; is that amount of legal possession in the production of his brains which
has been secured to him by the law of his own country and of others.  Unless an author were
secured by such law, his writings would be of but little pecuniary value to him, as the right
of printing and selling them would be open to all the world.  In England and in America, and
as I conceive in all countries possessing a literature, there is such a law, securing to authors
and to their heirs, for a term of years, the exclusive right over their own productions.  That
this should be so in England, as regards English authors, appears to be so much a matter of
course that the copyright of an author seems to be as naturally his own as a gentleman's deposit
at his bank, or his little investment in the three per cents.  The right of an author to the
value of his own productions in other countries than his own is not so much a matter of course;
but nevertheless, if such productions have any value in other countries, that value should
belong to him.  This has been felt to be the case between England and France, and an international
copyright now exists.  The fact that the languages of England and France are different, makes
the matter one of comparatively small moment.  But it has been found to be for the honor and
profit of the two countries that there should be such a law, and an international copyright
does exist.  But if such an arrangement be needed between two such countries as France and
England--between two countries which do not speak the same language, or share the same literature--how
much more necessary must it be between England and the United States!  The literature of the
one country is the literature of the other.  The poem that is popular in London will certainly
be popular in New York.  The novel that is effective among American ladies will be equally
so with those of England.  There can be no doubt as to the importance of having or of not having
a law of copyright between the two countries.  The only question can be as to the expediency
and the justice.  At present there is no international copyright between England and the United
States, and there is none because the States have declined to sanction any such law.  It is
known by all who are concerned in the matter on either side of the water that as far as Great
Britain is concerned such a law would meet with no impediment.

Therefore it is to be presumed that the legislators of the States think it expedient and just
to dispense with any such law.  I have said that there can be no doubt as to the importance
of the question, seeing that the price of English literature in the States must be most materially
affected by it.  Without such law the Americans are enabled to import English literature without
paying for it.  It is open to any American publisher to reprint any work from an English copy,
and to sell his reprints without any permission obtained from the English author or from the
English publisher.  The absolute material which the American publisher sells, he takes, or
can take, for nothing.  The paper, ink, and composition he supplies in the ordinary way of
business; but the very matter which he professes to sell--of the book which is the object of
his trade--he is enabled to possess himself of for nothing.  If you, my reader, be a popular
author, an American publisher will take the choicest work of your brain, and make dollars out
of it, selling thousands of copies of it in his country, whereas you can perhaps only sell
hundreds of it in your own; and will either give you nothing for that he takes, or else will
explain to you that he need give you nothing, and that in paying you he subjects himself to
the danger of seeing the property which he has bought taken again from him by other persons.
If this be so, that question whether or no there shall be a law of international copyright
between the two countries cannot be unimportant.

But it may be inexpedient that there shall be such a law.  It may be considered well that,
as the influx of English books into America is much greater than the influx of American books
back to England, the right of obtaining such books for nothing should be reserved, although
the country in doing so robs its own authors of the advantage which should accrue to them from
the English market.  It might perhaps be thought anything but smart to surrender such an advantage
by the passing of an international copyright bill.  There are not many trades in which the
tradesman can get the chief of his goods for nothing; and it may be thought that the advantage
arising to the States from such an arrangement of circumstances should not be abandoned.  But
how then about the justice?  It would seem that the less said upon that subject the better.
I have heard no one say that an author's property in his own works should not, in accordance
with justice, be insured to him in the one country as well as in the other.  I have seen no
defense of the present position of affairs, on the score of justice.  The price of books would
be enhanced by an international copyright law, and it is well that books should be cheap. 
That is the only argument used.  So would mutton be cheap if it could be taken out of a butcher's
shop for nothing.

But I absolutely deny the expediency of the present position of the subject, looking simply
to the material advantage of the American people in the matter, and throwing aside altogether
that question of justice.  I must here, however, explain that I bring no charge whatsoever
against the American publishers.  The English author is a victim in their hands, but it is
by no means their fault that he is so.  As a rule, they are willing to pay something for the
works of popular English writers; but in arranging as to what payments they can make, they
must of course bear in mind the fact that they have no exclusive right whatsoever in the things
which they purchase.  It is natural also that they should bear in mind, when making their purchases
and arranging their prices, that they can have the very thing they are buying without any payment
at all, if the price asked do not suit them.  It is not of the publishers that I complain,
or of any advantage which they take, but of the legislators of the country, and of the advantage
which accrues, or is thought by them to accrue, to the American people from the absence of
an international copyright law.  It is mean on their part to take such advantage if it existed;
and it is foolish in them to suppose that any such advantage can accrue.  The absence of any
law of copyright no doubt gives to the American publisher the power of reprinting the works
of English authors without paying for them, seeing that the English author is undefended. 
But the American publisher who brings out such a reprint is equally undefended in his property;
when he shall have produced his book, his rival in the next street may immediately reprint
it from him, and destroy the value of his property by underselling him.  It is probable that
the first American publisher will have made some payment to the English author for the privilege
of publishing the book honestly, of publishing it without recurrence to piracy; and in arranging
his price with his customers he will be of course obliged to debit the book with the amount
so paid.  If the author receive ten cents a copy on every copy sold, the publisher must add
that ten cents to the price he charges.  But he cannot do this with security, because the book
can be immediately reprinted and sold without any such addition to the price.  The only security
which the American publisher has against the injury which may be so done to him is the power
of doing other injury in return.  The men who stand high in the trade, and who are powerful
because of the largeness of their dealings, can, in a certain measure, secure themselves in
this way.  Such a firm would have the power of crushing a small tradesman who should interfere
with him.  But if the large firm commits any such act of injustice, the little men in the trade
have no power of setting themselves right by counter-injustice.  I need hardly point out what
must be the effect of such a state of things upon the whole publishing trade; nor need I say
more to prove that some law which shall regulate property in foreign copyrights would be as
expedient with reference to America as it would be just toward England.  But the wrong done
by America to herself does not rest here.  It is true that more English books are read in the
States than American books in England, but it is equally true that the literature of America
is daily gaining readers among us.  That injury to which English authors are subjected from
the want of protection in the States, American authors suffer from the want of protection here.
One can hardly believe that the legislators of the States would willingly place the brightest
of their own fellow-countrymen in this position, because, in the event of a copyright bill
being passed, the balance of advantage would seem to accrue to England.

Of the literature of the United States, speaking of literature in its ordinary sense, I do
not know that I need say much more.  I regard the literature of a country as its highest produce,
believing it to be more powerful in its general effect, and more beneficial in its results,
than either statesmanship, professional ability, religious teaching, or commerce.  And in no
part of its national career have the United States been so successful as in this.  I need hardly
explain that I should commit a monstrous injustice were I to make a comparison in this matter
between England and America. Literature is the child of leisure and wealth.  It is the produce
of minds which by a happy combination of circumstances have been enabled to dispense with the
ordinary cares of the world.  It can hardly be expected to come from a young country, or from
a new and still struggling people.  Looking around at our own magnificent colonies, I hardly
remember a considerable name which they have produced, except that of my excellent old friend
Sam Slick. Nothing, therefore, I think, shows the settled greatness of the people of the States
more significantly than their firm establishment of a national literature.  This literature
runs over all subjects: American authors have excelled in poetry, in science, in history, in
metaphysics, in law, in theology, and in fiction. They have attempted all, and failed in none.
What Englishman has devoted a room to books, and devoted no portion of that room to the productions
of America?

But I must say a word of literature in which I shall not speak of it in its ordinary sense,
and shall yet speak of it in that sense which of all, perhaps, in the present day should be
considered the most ordinary; I mean the every-day periodical literature of the press. Most
of those who can read, it is to be hoped, read books; but all who can read do read newspapers.
Newspapers in this country are so general that men cannot well live without them; but to men
and to women also in the United States they may be said to be the one chief necessary of life;
and yet in the whole length and breadth of the United States there is not published a single
newspaper which seems to me to be worthy of praise.

A really good newspaper--one excellent at all points--would indeed be a triumph of honesty
and of art.  Not only is such a publication much to be desired in America, but it is still
to be desired in Great Britain also.  I used, in my younger days, to think of such a newspaper
as a possible publication, and in a certain degree to look for it; now I expect it only in
my dreams.  It should be powerful without tyranny, popular without triumph, political without
party passion, critical without personal feeling, right in its statements and just in its judgments,
but right and just without pride; it should be all but omniscient, but not conscious of its
omnipotence; it should be moral, but never strait-laced; it should be well assured but yet
modest; though never humble, it should be free from boastings.  Above all these things it should
be readable, and above that again it should be true.  I used to think that such a newspaper
might be produced, but I now sadly acknowledge to myself the fact that humanity is not capable
of any work so divine.

The newspapers of the States generally may not only be said to have reached none of the virtues
here named, but to have fallen into all the opposite vices.  In the first place, they are never
true.  In requiring truth from a newspaper the public should not be anxious to strain at gnats.
A statement setting forth that a certain gooseberry was five inches in circumference, whereas
in truth its girth was only two and a half, would give me no offense.  Nor would I be offended
at being told that Lord Derby was appointed to the premiership, while in truth the Queen had
only sent to his lordship, having as yet come to no definite arrangement.  The demand for truth
which may reasonably be made upon a newspaper amounts to this, that nothing should be stated
not believed to be true, and that nothing should be stated as to which the truth is important
without adequate ground for such belief.  If a newspaper accuse me of swindling, it is not
sufficient that the writer believe me to be a swindler.  He should have ample and sufficient
ground for such belief, or else in making such a statement he will write falsely.  In our private
life we all recognize the fact that this is so.  It is understood that a man is not a whit
the less a slanderer because he believes the slander which he promulgates.  But it seems to
me that this is not sufficiently recognized by many who write for the public press. Evil things
are said, and are probably believed by the writers; they are said with that special skill for
which newspaper writers have in our days become so conspicuous, defying alike redress by law
or redress by argument; but they are said too often falsely.  The words are not measured when
they are written, and they are allowed to go forth without any sufficient inquiry into their
truth.  But if there is any ground for such complaint here in England, that ground is multiplied
ten times--twenty times--in the States.  This is not only shown in the abuse of individuals,
in abuse which is as violent as it is perpetual, but in the treatment of every subject which
is handled.  All idea of truth has been thrown overboard.  It seems to be admitted that the
only object is to produce a sensation, and that it is admitted by both writer and reader that
sensation and veracity are incompatible.  Falsehood has become so much a matter of course with
American newspapers that it has almost ceased to be falsehood. Nobody thinks me a liar because
I deny that I am at home when I am in my study.  The nature of the arrangement is generally
understood. So also is it with the American newspapers.

But American newspapers are also unreadable.  It is very bad that they should be false, but
it is very surprising that they should be dull.  Looking at the general intelligence of the
people, one would have thought that a readable newspaper, put out with all pleasant appurtenances
of clear type, good paper, and good internal arrangement, would have been a thing specially
within their reach. But they have failed in every detail.  Though their papers are always loaded
with sensation headings, there are seldom sensation paragraphs to follow.  The paragraphs do
not fit the headings. Either they cannot be found, or if found, they seem to have escaped from
their proper column to some distant and remote portion of the sheet.  One is led to presume
that no American editor has any plan in the composition of his newspaper.  I never know whether
I have as yet got to the very heart's core of the daily journal, or whether I am still to go
on searching for that heart's core.  Alas! it too often happens that there is no heart's core.
The whole thing seems to have been put out at hap-hazard.  And then the very writing is in
itself below mediocrity; as though a power of expression in properly arranged language was
not required by a newspaper editor, either as regards himself or as regards his subordinates.
One is driven to suppose that the writers for the daily press are not chosen with any view
to such capability.  A man ambitious of being on the staff of an American newspaper should
be capable of much work, should be satisfied with small pay, should be indifferent to the world's
good usage, should be rough, ready, and of long sufferance; but, above all, he should be smart.
The type of almost all American newspapers is wretched--I think I may say of all--so wretched
that that alone forbids one to hope for pleasure in reading them.  They are ill written, ill
printed, and ill arranged, and in fact are not readable.  They are bought, glanced at, and
thrown away.

They are full of boastings, not boastings simply as to their country, their town, or their
party, but of boastings as to themselves.  And yet they possess no self-assurance.  It is always
evident that they neither trust themselves, nor expect to be trusted.  They have made no approach
to that omniscience which constitutes the great marvel of our own daily press; but finding
it necessary to write as though they possessed it, they fall into blunders which are almost
as marvelous.  Justice and right judgment are out of the question with them.  A political party
end is always in view, and political party warfare in America admits of any weapons.  No newspaper
in America is really powerful or popular; and yet they are tyrannical and overbearing.  The
New York Herald has, I believe, the largest sale of any daily newspaper; but it is absolutely
without political power, and in these times of war has truckled to the government more basely
than any other paper.  It has an enormous sale, but so far is it from having achieved popularity
that no man on any side ever speaks a good word for it.  All American newspapers deal in politics
as a matter of course; but their politics have ever regard to men and not to measures. Vituperation
is their natural political weapon; but since the President's ministers have assumed the power
of stopping newspapers which are offensive to them, they have shown that they can descend below
vituperation to eulogy.

I shall be accused of using very strong language against the newspaper press of America.  I
can only say that I do not know how to make that language too strong.  Of course there are
newspapers as to which the editors and writers may justly feel that my remarks, if applied
to them, are unmerited.  In writing on such a subject, I can only deal with the whole as a
whole.  During my stay in the country, I did my best to make myself acquainted with the nature
of its newspapers, knowing in how great a degree its population depends on them for its daily
store of information; for newspapers in the States of America have a much wider, or rather
closer circulation, than they do with us.  Every man and almost every woman sees a newspaper
daily.  They are very cheap, and are brought to every man's hand, without trouble to himself,
at every turn that he takes in his day's work.  It would be much for the advantage of the country
that they should be good of their kind; but, if I am able to form any judgment on the matter,
they are not good.

CHAPTER XVI.

CONCLUSION.

In one of the earlier chapters of this volume--now some seven or eight chapters past--I brought
myself on my travels back to Boston. It was not that my way homeward lay by that route, seeing
that my fate required me to sail from New York; but I could not leave the country without revisiting
my friends in Massachusetts.  I have told how I was there in the sleighing time, and how pleasant
were the mingled slush and frost of the snowy winter.  In the morning the streets would be
hard and crisp and the stranger would surely fall if he were not prepared to walk on glaciers.
In the afternoon he would be wading through rivers, and, if properly armed at all points with
India-rubber, would enjoy the rivers as he waded.  But the air would be always kindly, and
the east wind there, if it was east as I was told, had none of that power of dominion which
makes us all so submissive to its behests in London.  For myself, I do not believe that the
real east wind blows elsewhere.

And when the snow went in Boston I went with it.  The evening before I left I watched them
as they carted away the dirty uncouth blocks which had been broken up with pickaxes in Washington
Street, and was melancholy as I reflected that I too should no longer be known in the streets.
My weeks in Boston had not been very many, but nevertheless there were haunts there which I
knew as though my feet had trodden them for years.  There were houses to which I could have
gone with my eyes blindfold; doors of which the latches were familiar to my hands; faces which
I knew so well that they had ceased to put on for me the fictitious smiles of courtesy.  Faces,
houses, doors, and haunts,--where are they now?  For me they are as though they had never been.
They are among the things which one would fain remember as one remembers a dream.  Look back
on it as a vision and it is all pleasant; but if you realize your vision and believe your dream
to be a fact, all your pleasure is obliterated by regret.

I know that I shall never again be at Boston, and that I have said that about the Americans
which would make me unwelcome as a guest if I were there.  It is in this that my regret consists;
for this reason that I would wish to remember so many social hours as though they had been
passed in sleep.  They who will expect blessings from me, will say among themselves that I
have cursed them.  As I read the pages which I have written, I feel that words which I intended
for blessings when I prepared to utter them have gone nigh to turn themselves into curses.

I have ever admired the United States as a nation.  I have loved their liberty, their prowess,
their intelligence, and their progress.  I have sympathized with a people who themselves have
had no sympathy with passive security and inaction.  I have felt confidence in them, and have
known, as it were, that their industry must enable them to succeed as a people while their
freedom would insure to them success as a nation.  With these convictions I went among them
wishing to write of them good words--words which might be pleasant for them to read, while
they might assist perhaps in producing a true impression of them here at home.  But among my
good words there are so many which are bitter, that I fear I shall have failed in my object
as regards them.  And it seems to me, as I read once more my own pages, that in saying evil
things of my friends I have used language stronger than I intended; whereas I have omitted
to express myself with emphasis when I have attempted to say good things.  Why need I have
told of the mud of Washington, or have exposed the nakedness of Cairo?  Why did I speak with
such eager enmity of those poor women in the New York cars, who never injured me, now that
I think of it?  Ladies of New York, as I write this, the words which were written among you
are printed and cannot be expunged; but I tender to you my apologies from my home in England.
And that Van Wyck Committee--might I not have left those contractors to be dealt with by their
own Congress, seeing that that Congress committee was by no means inclined to spare them? 
I might have kept my pages free from gall, and have sent my sheets to the press unhurt by the
conviction that I was hurting those who had dealt kindly by me!  But what then?  Was any people
ever truly served by eulogy; or an honest cause furthered by undue praise?

O my friends with thin skins--and here I protest that a thick skin is a fault not to be forgiven
in a man or a nation, whereas a thin skin is in itself a merit, if only the wearer of it will
be the master and not the slave of his skin--O my friends with thin skins, ye whom I call my
cousins and love as brethren, will ye not forgive me these harsh words that I have spoken?
They have been spoken in love--with a true love, a brotherly love, a love that has never been
absent from the heart while the brain was coining them.  I had my task to do, and I could not
take the pleasant and ignore the painful.  It may perhaps be that as a friend I had better
not have written either good or bad.  But no!  To say that would indeed be to speak calumny
of your country.  A man may write of you truly, and yet write that which you would read with
pleasure; only that your skins are so thin.  The streets of Washington are muddy and her ways
are desolate.  The nakedness of Cairo is very naked.  And those ladies of New York--is it not
to be confessed that they are somewhat imperious in their demands?  As for the Van Wyck Committee,
have I not repeated the tale which you have told yourselves?  And is it not well that such
tales should be told?

And yet ye will not forgive me; because your skins are thin, and because the praise of others
is the breath of your nostrils.

I do not know that an American as an individual is more thin skinned than an Englishman; but
as the representative of a nation it may almost be said of him that he has no skin at all.
Any touch comes at once upon the net-work of his nerves and puts in operation all his organs
of feeling with the violence of a blow.  And for this peculiarity he has been made the mark
of much ridicule.  It shows itself in two ways: either by extreme displeasure when anything
is said disrespectful of his country, or by the strong eulogy with which he is accustomed to
speak of his own institutions and of those of his countrymen whom at the moment he may chance
to hold in high esteem.  The manner in which this is done is often ridiculous. "Sir, what do
you think of Mr. Jefferson Brick?  Mr. Jefferson Brick, sir, is one of our most remarkable
men."  And again: "Do you like our institutions, sir?  Do you find that philanthropy, religion,
philosophy and the social virtues are cultivated on a scale commensurate with the unequaled
liberty and political advancement of the nation?"  There is something absurd in such a mode
of address when it is repeated often.  But hero worship and love of country are not absurd;
and do not these addresses show capacity for hero worship and an aptitude for the love of country?
Jefferson Brick may not be a hero; but a capacity for such worship is something.  Indeed the
capacity is everything, for the need of a hero will produce a hero.  And it is the same with
that love of country.  A people that are proud of their country will see that there is something
in their country to justify their pride.  Do we not all of us feel assured by the intense nationality
of an American that he will not desert his nation in the hour of her need?  I feel that assurance
respecting them; and at those moments in which I am moved to laughter by the absurdities of
their addresses to me I feel it the strongest.

I left Boston with the snow, and returning to New York found that the streets there were dry
and that the winter was nearly over.  As I had passed through New York to Boston the streets
had been by no means dry.  The snow had lain in small mountains over which the omnibuses made
their way down Broadway, till at the bottom of that thoroughfare, between Trinity Church and
Bowling Green, alp became piled upon alp, and all traffic was full of danger.  The cursed love
of gain still took men to Wall Street, but they had to fight their way thither through physical
difficulties which must have made even the state of the money market a matter of indifference
to them. They do not seem to me to manage the winter in New York so well as they do in Boston.
But now, on my last return thither, the alps were gone, the roads were clear, and one could
travel through the city with no other impediment than those of treading on women's dresses
if one walked, or having to look after women's band-boxes and pay their fares and take their
change if one used the omnibuses.

And now had come the end of my adventure, and as I set my foot once more upon the deck of the
Cunard steamer, I felt that my work was done; whether it were done ill or well, or whether
indeed any approach to the doing of it had been attained, all had been done that I could accomplish.
No further opportunity remained to me of seeing, hearing, or of speaking.  I had come out thither,
having resolved to learn a little that I might if possible teach that little to others; and
now the lesson was learned, or must remain unlearned.  But in carrying out my resolution I
had gradually risen in my ambition, and had mounted from one stage of inquiry to another, till
at last I had found myself burdened with the task of ascertaining whether or no the Americans
were doing their work as a nation well or ill; and now, if ever, I must be prepared to put
forth the result of my inquiry.  As I walked up and down the deck of the steamboat I confess
I felt that I had been somewhat arrogant.

I had been a few days over six months in the States, and I was engaged in writing a book of
such a nature that a man might well engage himself for six years, or perhaps for sixty, in
obtaining the materials for it.  There was nothing in the form of government, or legislature,
or manners of the people as to which I had not taken upon myself to say something.  I was professing
to understand their strength and their weakness; and was daring to censure their faults and
to eulogize their virtues.  "Who is he," an American would say, "that he comes and judges us?
His judgment is nothing."  "Who is he," an Englishman would say, "that he comes and teaches
us?  His teaching is of no value."

In answer to this I have but a small plea to make--I have done my best.  I have nothing "extenuated,
and have set down naught in malice."  I do feel that my volumes have blown themselves out into
proportions greater than I had intended; greater not in mass of pages, but in the matter handled.
I am frequently addressing my own muse, who I am well aware is not Clio, and asking her whither
she is wending.  "Cease, thou wrong-headed one, to meddle with these mysteries."  I appeal
to her frequently, but ever in vain.  One cannot drive one's muse, nor yet always lead her.
Of the various women with which a man is blessed, his muse is by no means the least difficult
to manage.

But again I put in my slight plea.  In doing as I have done, I have at least done my best.
I have endeavored to judge without prejudice, and to hear with honest ears and to see with
honest eyes. The subject, moreover, on which I have written is one which, though great, is
so universal in its bearings that it may be said to admit, without impropriety, of being handled
by the unlearned as well as the learned; by those who have grown gray in the study of constitutional
lore, and by those who have simply looked on at the government of men as we all look on at
those matters which daily surround us.  There are matters as to which a man should never take
a pen in hand unless he has given to them much labor.  The botanist must have learned to trace
the herbs and flowers before he can presume to tell us how God has formed them.  But the death
of Hector is a fit subject for a boy's verses, though Homer also sang of it. I feel that there
is scope for a book on the United States form of government as it was founded, and as it has
since framed itself, which might do honor to the life-long studies of some one of those great
constitutional pundits whom we have among us; but, nevertheless, the plain words of a man who
is no pundit need not disgrace the subject, if they be honestly written, and if he who writes
them has in his heart an honest love of liberty.  Such were my thoughts as I walked the deck
of the Cunard steamer.  Then I descended to my cabin, settled my luggage, and prepared a table
for the continuance of my work.  It was fourteen days from that time before I reached London,
but the fourteen days to me were not unpleasant.  The demon of sea-sickness spares me always,
and if I can find on board one or two who are equally fortunate--who can eat with me, drink
with me, and talk with me--I do not know that a passage across the Atlantic is by any means
a terrible evil to me.

In finishing these volumes after the fashion in which they have been written throughout, I
feel that I am bound to express a fixed opinion on two or three points, and that if I have
not enabled myself to do so, I have traveled through the country in vain.  I am bound by the
very nature of my undertaking to say whether, according to such view as I have enabled myself
to take of them, the Americans have succeeded as a nation politically and socially; and in
doing this I ought to be able to explain how far slavery has interfered with such success.
I am bound also, writing at the present moment, to express some opinion as to the result of
this war, and to declare whether the North or the South may be expected to be victorious--
explaining in some rough way what may be the results of such victory, and how such results
will affect the question of slavery; and I shall leave my task unfinished if I do not say what
may be the possible chances of future quarrel between England and the States. That there has
been and is much hot blood and angry feeling, no man doubts; but such angry feeling has existed
among many nations without any probability of war.  In this case, with reference to this ill
will that has certainly established itself between us and that other people, is there any need
that it should be satisfied by war and allayed by blood?

No one, I think, can doubt that the founders of the great American Commonwealth made an error
in omitting to provide some means for the gradual extinction of slavery throughout the States.
That error did not consist in any liking for slavery.  There was no feeling in favor of slavery
on the part of those who made themselves prominent at the political birth of the nation.  I
think I shall be justified in saying that at that time the opinion that slavery is itself a
good thing, that it is an institution of divine origin and fit to be perpetuated among men
as in itself excellent, had not found that favor in the Southern States in which it is now
held.  Jefferson, who has been regarded as the leader of the Southern or Democratic party,
has left ample testimony that he regarded slavery as an evil. It is, I think, true that he
gave such testimony much more freely when he was speaking or writing as a private individual
than he ever allowed himself to do when his words were armed with the weight of public authority.
But it is clear that on the whole he was opposed to slavery, and I think there can be little
doubt that he and his party looked forward to a natural death for that evil.  Calculation was
made that slavery when not recruited afresh from Africa could not maintain its numbers, and
that gradually the negro population would become extinct.  This was the error made.  It was
easier to look forward to such a result and hope for such an end of the difficulty, than to
extinguish slavery by a great political movement, which must doubtless have been difficult
and costly.  The Northern States got rid of slavery by the operation of their separate legislatures,
some at one date and some at others.  The slaves were less numerous in the North than in the
South, and the feeling adverse to slaves was stronger in the North than in the South.  Mason
and Dixon's line, which now separates slave soil from free soil, merely indicates the position
in the country at which the balance turned.  Maryland and Virginia were not inclined to make
great immediate sacrifices for the manumission of their slaves; but the gentlemen of those
States did not think that slavery was a divine institution destined to flourish forever as
a blessing in their land.

The maintenance of slavery was, I think, a political mistake--a political mistake, not because
slavery is politically wrong, but because the politicians of the day made erroneous calculations
as to the probability of its termination.  So the income tax may be a political blunder with
us--not because it is in itself a bad tax, but because those who imposed it conceived that
they were imposing it for a year or two, whereas, now, men do not expect to see the end of
it.  The maintenance of slavery was a political mistake; and I cannot think that the Americans
in any way lessen the weight of their own error by protesting, as they occasionally do, that
slavery was a legacy made over to them from England.  They might as well say that traveling
in carts without springs, at the rate of three miles an hour, was a legacy made over to them
by England.  On that matter of traveling they have not been contented with the old habits left
to them, but have gone ahead and made railroads.  In creating those railways the merit is due
to them; and so also is the demerit of maintaining those slaves.

That demerit and that mistake have doubtless brought upon the Americans the grievances of their
present position; and will, as I think, so far be accompanied by ultimate punishment that they
will be the immediate means of causing the first disintegration of their nation.  I will leave
it to the Americans themselves to say whether such disintegration must necessarily imply that
they have failed in their political undertaking.  The most loyal citizens of the Northern States
would have declared a month or two since--and for aught I know would declare now--that any
disintegration of the States implied absolute failure.  One stripe erased from the banner,
one star lost from the firmament, would entail upon them all the disgrace of national defeat!
It had been their boast that they would always advance, never retreat.  They had looked forward
to add ever State upon State, and Territory to Territory, till the whole continent should be
bound together in the same union.  To go back from that now, to fall into pieces and be divided,
to become smaller in the eyes of the nations, to be absolutely halfed, as some would say of
such division, would be national disgrace, and would amount to political failure.  "Let us
fight for the whole," such men said, and probably do say.  "To lose anything is to lose all!"

But the citizens of the States who speak and think thus, though they may be the most loyal,
are perhaps not politically the most wise. And I am inclined to think that that defiant claim
of every star, that resolve to possess every stripe upon the banner, had become somewhat less
general when I was leaving the country than I had found it to be at the time of my arrival
there.  While things were going badly with the North, while there was no tale of any battle
to be told except of those at Bull's Run and Springfield, no Northern man would admit a hint
that secession might ultimately prevail in Georgia or Alabama.  But the rebels had been driven
out of Missouri when I was leaving the States, they had retreated altogether from Kentucky,
having been beaten in one engagement there, and from a great portion of Tennessee, having been
twice beaten in that State. The coast of North Carolina, and many points of the Southern coast,
were in the hands of the Northern army, while the army of the South was retreating from all
points into the center of their country. Whatever may have been the strategetical merits or
demerits of the Northern generals, it is at any rate certain that their apparent successes
were greedily welcomed by the people, and created an idea that things were going well with
the cause.  And as all this took place, it seemed to me that I heard less about the necessary
integrity of the old flag.  While as yet they were altogether unsuccessful, they were minded
to make no surrender.  But with their successes came the feeling, that in taking much they
might perhaps allow themselves to yield something.  This was clearly indicated by the message
sent to Congress by the President, in February, 1862, in which he suggested that Congress should
make arrangements for the purchase of the slaves in the border States; so that in the event
of secession--accomplished secession--in the Gulf States, the course of those border States
might be made clear for them.  They might hesitate as to going willingly with the North, while
possessing slaves, as to sitting themselves peaceably down as a small slave adjunct to a vast
free-soil nation, seeing that their property would always be in peril.  Under such circumstances
a slave adjunct to the free-soil nation would not long be possible.  But if it could be shown
to them that in the event of their adhering to the North compensation would be forthcoming,
then, indeed, the difficulty in arranging an advantageous line between the two future nations
might be considerably modified.  This message of the President's was intended to signify that
secession on favorable terms might be regarded by the North as not undesirable.  Moderate men
were beginning to whisper that, after all, the Gulf States were no source either of national
wealth or of national honor.  Had there not been enough at Washington of cotton lords and cotton
laws?  When I have suggested that no Senator from Georgia would ever again sit in the United
States Senate, American gentlemen have received my remark with a slight demur, and have then
proceeded to argue the case.  Six months before they would have declared against me and not
have argued.

I will leave it to Americans themselves to say whether that disintegration of the States will,
should it ever be realized, imply that they have failed in their political undertaking.  If
they do not protest that it argues failure, I do not think that their feelings will be hurt
by such protestations on the part of others. I have said that the blunder made by the founders
of the nation with regard to slavery has brought with it this secession as its punishment.
But such punishments come generally upon nations as great mercies.  Ireland's famine was the
punishment of her imprudence and idleness, but it has given to her prosperity and progress.
And indeed, to speak with more logical correctness, the famine was no punishment to Ireland,
nor will secession be a punishment to the Northern States.  In the long result, step will have
gone on after step, and effect will have followed cause, till the American people will at last
acknowledge that all these matters have been arranged for their advantage and promotion.  It
may be that a nation now and then goes to the wall, and that things go from bad to worse with
a large people.  It has been so with various nations, and with many people since history was
first written.  But when it has been so, the people thus punished have been idle and bad. 
They have not only done evil in their generation, but have done more evil than good, and have
contributed their power to the injury rather than to the improvement of mankind.  It may be
that this or that national fault may produce or seem to produce some consequent calamity. 
But the balance of good or evil things which fall to a people's share will indicate with certainty
their average conduct as a nation.  The one will be the certain sequence of the other.  If
it be that the Americans of the Northern States have done well in their time, that they have
assisted in the progress of the world, and made things better for mankind rather than worse,
then they will come out of this trouble without eventual injury.  That which came in the guise
of punishment for a special fault, will be a part of the reward resulting from good conduct
in the general.  And as to this matter of slavery, in which I think that they have blundered
both politically and morally, has it not been found impossible hitherto for them to cleanse
their hands of that taint? But that which they could not do for themselves the course of events
is doing for them.  If secession establish herself, though it be only secession of the Gulf
States, the people of the United States will soon be free from slavery.

In judging of the success or want of success of any political institutions or of any form of
government, we should be guided, I think, by the general results, and not by any abstract rules
as to the right or wrong of those institutions or of that form.  It might be easy for a German
lawyer to show that our system of trial by jury is open to the gravest objections, and that
it sins against common sense.  But if that system gives us substantial justice, and protects
us from the tyranny of men in office, the German will not succeed in making us believe that
it is a bad system.  When looking into the matter of the schools at Boston, I observed to one
of the committee of management that the statements with which I was supplied, though they told
me how many of the children went to school, did not tell me how long they remained at school.
The gentleman replied that that information was to be obtained from the result of the schooling
of the population generally.  Every boy and girl around him could read and write, and could
enjoy reading and writing.  There was therefore evidence to show that they remained at school
sufficiently long for the required purposes.  It was fair that I should judge of the system
from the results.  Here, in England, we generally object to much that the Americans have adopted
into their form of government, and think that many of their political theories are wrong. 
We do not like universal suffrage. We do not like a periodical change in the first magistrate;
and we like quite as little a periodical permanence in the political officers immediately under
the chief magistrate; we are, in short, wedded to our own forms, and therefore opposed by judgment
to forms differing from our own.  But I think we all acknowledge that the United States, burdened
as they are with these political evils--as we think them--have grown in strength and material
prosperity with a celerity of growth hitherto unknown among nations.  We may dislike Americans
personally, we may find ourselves uncomfortable when there, and unable to sympathize with them
when away.  We may believe them to be ambitious, unjust, self-idolatrous, or irreligious; but
unless we throw our judgment altogether overboard, we cannot believe them to be a weak people,
a poor people, a people with low spirits or with idle hands.  Now to what is it that the government
of a country should chiefly look?  What special advantages do we expect from our own government?
Is it not that we should be safe at home and respected abroad--that laws should be maintained,
but that they should be so maintained that they should not be oppressive?  There are, doubtless,
countries in which the government professes to do much more than this for its people--countries
in which the government is paternal; in which it regulates the religion of the people, and
professes to enforce on all the national children respect for the governors, teachers, spiritual
pastors, and masters. But that is not our idea of a government.  That is not what we desire
to see established among ourselves or established among others.  Safety from foreign foes,
respect from foreign foes and friends, security under the law and security from the law, this
is what we expect from our government; and if I add to this that we expect to have these good
things provided at a fairly moderate cost, I think I have exhausted the list of our requirements.
I hardly think that we even yet expect the government to take the first steps in the rudimentary
education of the people.  We certainly do not expect it to make the people religious, or to
keep them honest.

And if the Americans with their form of government have done for themselves all that we expect
our government to do for us; if they have with some fair approach to general excellence obtained
respect abroad and security at home from foreign foes; if they have made life, liberty, and
property safe under their laws, and have also so written and executed their laws as to secure
their people from legal oppression,--I maintain that they are entitled to a verdict in their
favor, let us object as we may to universal suffrage, to four years' Presidents and four years'
presidential cabinets.  What, after all, matters the theory or the system, whether it be king
or president, universal suffrage or ten-pound voter, so long as the people be free and prosperous?
King and president, suffrage by poll and suffrage by property, are but the means.  If the end
be there, if the thing has been done, king and president, open suffrage and close suffrage,
may alike be declared to have been successful.  The Americans have been in existence as a nation
for seventy-five years, and have achieved an amount of foreign respect during that period greater
than any other nation ever obtained in double the time.  And this has been given to them, not
in deference to the statesmanlike craft of their diplomatic and other officers, but on grounds
the very opposite of those.  It has been given to them because they form a numerous, wealthy,
brave, and self-asserting nation.  It is, I think, unnecessary to prove that such foreign respect
has been given to them; but were it necessary, nothing would prove it more strongly than the
regard which has been universally paid by European governments to the blockade placed during
this war on the Southern ports by the government of the United States.  Had the nation been
placed by general consent in any class of nations below the first, England, France, and perhaps
Russia would have taken the matter into their own hands, and have settled for the States, either
united or disunited, at any rate that question of the blockade.  And the Americans have been
safe at home from foreign foes; so safe, that no other strong people but ourselves have enjoyed
anything approaching to their security since their foundation.  Nor has our security been at
all equal to theirs, if we are to count our nationality as extending beyond the British Isles.
Then as to security under their laws and from their laws!  Those laws and the system of their
management have been taken almost entirely from us, and have so been administered that life
and property have been safe, and the subject also has been free, under the law.  I think that
this may be taken for granted, seeing that they who have been most opposed to American forms
of government have never asserted the reverse.  I may be told of a man being lynched in one
State, or tarred and feathered in another, or of a duel in a third being "fought at sight."
So I may be told also of men garroted in London, and of tithe proctors buried in a bog without
their ears in Ireland.  Neither will seventy years of continuance, nor will seven hundred,
secure such an observance of laws as will prevent temporary ebullition of popular feeling,
or save a people from the chance disgrace of occasional outrage. Taking the general, life and
limb and property have been as safe in the States as in other civilized countries with which
we are acquainted.

As to their personal liberty under their laws, I know it will be said that they have surrendered
all claim to any such precious possession by the facility with which they have now surrendered
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus.  It has been taken from them, as I have endeavored
to show, illegally, and they have submitted to the loss and to the illegality without a murmur!
But in such a matter I do not think it fair to judge them by their conduct in such a moment
as the present.  That this is the very moment in which to judge of the efficiency of their
institutions generally, of the aptitude of those institutions for the security of the nation,
I readily acknowledge; but when a ship is at sea in a storm, riding out through all that the
winds and waves can do to her, one does not condemn her because a yard-arm gives way, nor even
though the mainmast should go by the board.  If she can make her port, saving life and cargo,
she is a good ship, let her losses in spars and rigging be what they may.  In this affair of
the habeas corpus we will wait awhile before we come to any final judgment.  If it be that
the people, when the war is over, shall consent to live under a military or other dictatorship,
that they shall quietly continue their course as a nation without recovery of their rights
of freedom, then we shall have to say that their institutions were not founded in a soil of
sufficient depth, and that they gave way before the first high wind that blew on them.  I myself
do not expect such a result.

I think we must admit that the Americans have received from their government, or rather from
their system of policy, that aid and furtherance which they required from it; and, moreover,
such aid and furtherance as we expect from our system of government.  We must admit that they
have been great, and free, and prosperous, as we also have become.  And we must admit also
that in some matters they have gone forward in advance of us.  They have educated their people,
as we have not educated ours.  They have given to their millions a personal respect, and a
standing above the abjectness of poverty, which with us are much less general than with them.
These things, I grant, have not come of their government, and have not been produced by their
written Constitution.  They are the happy results of their happy circumstances.  But so also
are not those evil attributes which we sometimes assign to them the creatures of their government
or of their Constitution.  We acknowledge them to be well educated, intelligent, philanthropic,
and industrious; but we say that they are ambitious, unjust, self-idolatrous, and irreligious.
If so, let us at any rate balance the virtues against the vices.  As to their ambition, it
is a vice that leans so to virtue's side that it hardly needs an apology.  As to their injustice,
or rather dishonesty, I have said what I have to say on that matter.  I am not going to flinch
from the accusation I have brought, though I am aware that in bringing it I have thrown away
any hope that I might have had of carrying with me the good-will of the Americans for my book.
The love of money--or rather of making money--carried to an extreme, has lessened that instinctive
respect for the rights of meum and tuum, which all men feel more or less, and which, when encouraged
within the human breast, finds its result in perfect honesty.  Other nations, of which I will
not now stop to name even one, have had their periods of natural dishonesty.  It may be that
others are even now to be placed in the same category.  But it is a fault which industry and
intelligence combined will after awhile serve to lessen and to banish.  The industrious man
desires to keep the fruit of his own industry, and the intelligent man will ultimately be able
to do so.  That the Americans are self-idolaters is perhaps true--with a difference.  An American
desires you to worship his country, or his brother; but he does not often, by any of the usual
signs of conceit, call upon you to worship himself; as an American, treating of America, he
is self-idolatrous; that is a self-idolatry which I can endure.  Then, as to his want of religion--
and it is a very sad want--I can only say of him that I, as an Englishman, do not feel myself
justified in flinging the first stone at him.  In that matter of religion, as in the matter
of education, the American, I think, stands on a level higher than ours.  There is not in the
States so absolute an ignorance of religion as is to be found in some of our manufacturing
and mining districts, and also, alas! in some of our agricultural districts; but also, I think,
there is less of respect and veneration for God's word among their educated classes than there
is with us; and, perhaps, also less knowledge as to God's word.  The general religious level
is, I think, higher with them; but there is, if I am right in my supposition, with us a higher
eminence in religion, as there is also a deeper depth of ungodliness.

I think, then, that we are bound to acknowledge that the Americans have succeeded as a nation,
politically and socially.  When I speak of social success, I do not mean to say that their
manners are correct according to this or that standard; I will not say that they are correct
or are not correct.  In that matter of manners I have found those with whom it seemed to me
natural that I should associate very pleasant according to my standard.  I do not know that
I am a good critic on such a subject, or that I have ever thought much of it with the view
of criticising; I have been happy and comfortable with them, and for me that has been sufficient.
In speaking of social success I allude to their success in private life as distinguished from
that which they have achieved in public life; to their successes in commerce, in mechanics,
in the comforts and luxuries of life, in physic and all that leads to the solace of affliction,
in literature, and I may add also, considering the youth of the nation, in the arts.  We are,
I think, bound to acknowledge that they have succeeded.  And if they have succeeded, it is
vain for us to say that a system is wrong which has, at any rate, admitted of such success.
That which was wanted from some form of government, has been obtained with much more than average
excellence; and therefore the form adopted has approved itself as good.  You may explain to
a farmer's wife, with indisputable logic, that her churn is a bad churn; but as long as she
turns out butter in greater quantity, in better quality, and with more profit than her neighbors,
you will hardly induce her to change it.  It may be that with some other churn she might have
done even better; but, under such circumstances, she will have a right to think well of the
churn she uses.

The American Constitution is now, I think, at the crisis of its severest trial.  I conceive
it to be by no means perfect, even for the wants of the people who use it; and I have already
endeavored to explain what changes it seems to need.  And it has had this defect-- that it
has permitted a falling away from its intended modes of action, while its letter has been kept
sacred.  As I have endeavored to show, universal suffrage and democratic action in the Senate
were not intended by the framers of the Constitution.  In this respect the Constitution has,
as it were, fallen through, and it is needed that its very beams should be restrengthened.
There are also other matters as to which it seems that some change is indispensable.  So much
I have admitted.  But, not the less, judging of it by the entirety of the work that it has
done, I think that we are bound to own that it has been successful.

And now, with regard to this tedious war, of which from day to day we are still, in this month
of May, 1862, hearing details which teach us to think that it can hardly as yet be near its
end.  To what may we rationally look as its result?  Of one thing I myself feel tolerably certain,
that its result will not be nothing, as some among us have seemed to suppose may be probable.
I cannot believe that all this energy on the part of the North will be of no avail, more than
I suppose that Southern perseverance will be of no avail. There are those among us who say
that a secession will at last be accomplished; the North should have yielded to the South at
once, and that nothing will be gained by their great expenditure of life and treasure.  I can
by no means bring myself to agree with these. I also look to the establishment of secession.
Seeing how essential and thorough are the points of variance between the North and the South,
how unlike the one people is to the other, and how necessary it is that their policies should
be different; seeing how deep are their antipathies, and how fixed is each side in the belief
of its own rectitude and in the belief also of the other's political baseness, I can not believe
that the really Southern States will ever again be joined in amicable union with those of the
North. They, the States of the Gulf, may be utterly subjugated, and the North may hold over
them military power.  Georgia and her sisters may for awhile belong to the Union, as one conquered
country belongs to another.  But I do not think that they will ever act with the Union; and,
as I imagine, the Union before long will agree to a separation.  I do not mean to prophesy
that the result will be thus accomplished.  It may be that the South will effect their own
independence before they lay down their arms.  I think, however, that we may look forward to
such independence, whether it be achieved in that way, or in this, or in some other.

But not on that account will the war have been of no avail to the North.  I think it must be
already evident to all those who have looked into the matter, that had the North yielded to
the first call made by the South for secession all the slave States must have gone. Maryland
would have gone, carrying Delaware in its arms; and if Maryland, all south of Maryland.  If
Maryland had gone, the capital would have gone.  If the government had resolved to yield, Virginia
to the east would assuredly have gone, and I think there can be no doubt that Missouri, to
the west, would have gone also.  The feeling for the Union in Kentucky was very strong, but
I do not think that even Kentucky could have saved itself.  To have yielded to the Southern
demands would have been to have yielded everything.  But no man now presumes, let the contest
go as it will, that Maryland and Delaware will go with the South.  The secessionists of Baltimore
do not think so, nor the gentlemen and ladies of Washington, whose whole hearts are in the
Southern cause.  No man thinks that Maryland will go, and few, I believe, imagine that either
Missouri or Kentucky will be divided from the North.  I will not pretend what may be the exact
line, but I myself feel confident that it will run south both of Virginia and of Kentucky.

If the North do conquer the South, and so arrange their matters that the Southern States shall
again become members of the Union, it will be admitted that they have done all that they ought
to do.  If they do not do this--if instead of doing this, which would be all that they desire,
they were in truth to do nothing; to win finally not one foot of ground from the South--a supposition
which I regard as impossible--I think that we should still admit after awhile that they had
done their duty in endeavoring to maintain the integrity of the empire.  But if, as a third
and more probable alternative, they succeed in rescuing from the South and from slavery four
or five of the finest States of the old Union--and a vast portion of the continent to be beaten
by none other in salubrity, fertility, beauty, and political importance--will it not then be
admitted that the war has done some good, and that the life and treasure have not been spent
in vain?

That is the termination of the contest to which I look forward.  I think that there will be
secession, but that the terms of secession will be dictated by the North, not by the South;
and among these terms I expect to see an escape from slavery for those border States to which
I have alluded.  In that proposition which in February last (1862) was made by the President,
and which has since been sanctioned by the Senate, I think we may see the first step toward
this measure.  It may probably be the case that many of the slaves will be driven South; that
as the owners of those slaves are driven from their holdings in Virginia they will take their
slaves with them, or send them before them.  The manumission, when it reaches Virginia, will
not probably enfranchise the half million of slaves who, in 1860, were counted among its population.
But as to that I confess myself to be comparatively careless; it is not the concern which I
have now at heart.  For myself, I shall feel satisfied if that manumission shall reach the
million of whites by whom Virginia is populated; or if not that million in its integrity, then
that other million by which its rich soil would soon be tenanted.  There are now about four
million of white men and women inhabiting the slave States which I have described, and I think
it will be acknowledged that the Northern States will have done something with their armies
if they succeed in rescuing those four millions from the stain and evil of slavery.

There is a third question which I have asked myself, and to which I have undertaken to give
some answer.  When this war be over between the Northern and Southern States, will there come
upon us a necessity of fighting with the Americans?  If there do come such necessity, arising
out of our conduct to the States during the period of their civil war, it will indeed be hard
upon us, as a nation, seeing the struggle that we as a nation have made to be just in our dealings
toward the States generally, whether they be North or South.  To be just in such a period,
and under such circumstances, is very difficult.  In that contest between Sardinia and Austria
it was all but impossible to be just to the Italians without being unjust to the Emperor of
Austria.  To have been strictly just at the moment one should have begun by confessing the
injustice of so much that had gone before!  But in this American contest such justice, though
difficult, was easier.  Affairs of trade rather than of treaties chiefly interfered; and these
affairs, by a total disregard of our own pecuniary interests, could be so managed that justice
might be done.  This I think was effected.  It may be, of course, that I am prejudiced on the
side of my own nation; but striving to judge of the matter as best I may without prejudice,
I cannot see that we, as a nation, have in aught offended against the strictest justice in
our dealings with America during this contest.  But justice has not sufficed.  I do not know
that our bitterest foes in the Northern States have accused us of acting unjustly.  It is not
justice which they have looked for at our hands, and looked for in vain--not justice, but generosity!
We have not, as they say, sympathized with them in their trouble.  It seems to me that such
a complaint is unworthy of them as a nation, as a people, or as individuals.  In such a matter
generosity is another name for injustice, as it too often is in all matters.  A generous sympathy
with the North would have been an ostensible and crushing enmity to the South.  We could not
have sympathized with the North without condemning the South, and telling to the world that
the South were our enemies.  In ordering his own household a man should not want generosity
or sympathy from the outside; and if not a man, then certainly not a nation.  Generosity between
nations must in its very nature be wrong.  One nation may be just to another, courteous to
another, even considerate to another with propriety.  But no nation can be generous to another
without injustice either to some third nation or to itself.

But though no accusation of unfairness has, as far as I am aware, ever been made by the government
of Washington against the government of England, there can be no doubt that a very strong feeling
of antipathy to England has sprung up in America during this war, and that it is even yet so
intense in its bitterness that, were the North to become speedily victorious in their present
contest, very many Americans would be anxious to turn their arms at once against Canada.  And
I fear that that fight between the Monitor and the Merrimac has strengthened this wish by giving
to the Americans an unwarranted confidence in their capability of defending themselves against
any injury from British shipping.  It may be said by them, and probably would be said by many
of them, that this feeling of enmity had not been engendered by any idea of national injustice
on our side; that it might reasonably exist, though no suspicion of such injustice had arisen
in the minds of any.  They would argue that the hatred on their part had been engendered by
scorn on ours--by scorn and ill words heaped upon them in their distress.

They would say that slander, scorn, and uncharitable judgments create deeper feuds than do
robbery and violence, and produce deeper enmity and worse rancor.  "It is because we have been
scorned by England, that we hate England.  We have been told from week to week, and from day
to day, that we were fools, cowards, knaves, and madmen.  We have been treated with disrespect,
and that disrespect we will avenge."  It is thus that they speak of England, and there can
be no doubt that the opinion so expressed is very general.  It is not my purpose here to say
whether in this respect England has given cause of offense to the States, or whether either
country has given cause of offense to the other.  On both sides have many hard words been spoken,
and on both sides also have good words been spoken.  It is unfortunately the case that hard
words are pregnant, and as such they are read, digested, and remembered; while good words are
generally so dull that nobody reads them willingly, and when read, they are forgotten.  For
many years there have been hard words bandied backward and forward between England and the
United States, showing mutual jealousies, and a disposition on the part of each nation to spare
no fault committed by the other.  This has grown of rivalry between the two, and in fact proves
the respect which each has for the other's power and wealth.  I will not now pretend to say
with which side has been the chiefest blame, if there has been chiefest blame on either side.
But I do say that it is monstrous in any people or in any person to suppose that such bickerings
can afford a proper ground for war.  I am not about to dilate on the horrors of war.  Horrid
as war may be, and full of evil, it is not so horrid to a nation, nor so full of evil, as national
insult unavenged or as national injury unredressed.  A blow taken by a nation and taken without
atonement is an acknowledgment of national inferiority, than which any war is preferable. 
Neither England nor the States are inclined to take such blows.  But such a blow, before it
can be regarded as a national insult, as a wrong done by one nation to another, must be inflicted
by the political entity of the one or the political entity of the other.  No angry clamors
of the press, no declamations of orators, no voices from the people, no studied criticisms
from the learned few, or unstudied censures from society at large, can have any fair weight
on such a creation or do aught toward justifying a national quarrel.  They cannot form a casus
belli.  Those two Latin words, which we all understand, explain this with the utmost accuracy.
Were it not so, the peace of the world would indeed rest upon sand.  Causes of national difference
will arise--for governments will be unjust as are individuals.  And causes of difference will
arise because governments are too blind to distinguish the just from the unjust. But in such
cases the government acts on some ground which it declares.  It either shows or pretends to
show some casus belli. But in this matter of threatened war between the States and England
it is declared openly that such war is to take place because the English have abused the Americans,
and because consequently the Americans hate the English.  There seems to exist an impression
that no other ostensible ground for fighting need be shown, although such an event as that
of war between the two nations would, as all men acknowledge, be terrible in its results. 
"Your newspapers insulted us when we were in our difficulties.  Your writers said evil things
of us.  Your legislators spoke of us with scorn.  You exacted from us a disagreeable duty of
retribution just when the performance of such a duty was most odious to us.  You have shown
symptoms of joy at our sorrow.  And, therefore, as soon as our hands are at liberty, we will
fight you."  I have known school-boys to argue in that way, and the arguments have been intelligible;
but I cannot understand that any government should admit such an argument.

Nor will the American government willingly admit it.  According to existing theories of government
the armies of nations are but the tools of the governing powers.  If at the close of the present
civil war the American government--the old civil government consisting of the President with
such checks as Congress constitutionally has over him--shall really hold the power to which
it pretends, I do not fear that there will be any war.  No President, and I think no Congress,
will desire such a war.  Nor will the people clamor for it, even should the idea of such a
war be popular.  The people of America are not clamorous against their government.  If there
be such a war it will be because the army shall have then become more powerful than the government.
If the President can hold his own, the people will support him in his desire for peace.  But
if the President do not hold his own--if some general, with two or three hundred thousand men
at his back, shall then have the upper hand in the nation--it is too probable that the people
may back him.  The old game will be played again that has so often been played in the history
of nations, and some wretched military aspirant will go forth to flood Canada with blood, in
order that the feathers of his cap may flaunt in men's eyes and that he may be talked of for
some years to come as one of the great curses let loose by the Almighty on mankind.

I must confess that there is danger of this.  To us the danger is very great.  It cannot be
good for us to send ships laden outside with iron shields instead of inside with soft goods
and hardware to these thickly thronged American ports.  It cannot be good for us to have to
throw millions into these harbors instead of taking millions out from them.  It cannot be good
for us to export thousands upon thousands of soldiers to Canada of whom only hundreds would
return. The whole turmoil, cost, and paraphernalia of such a course would be injurious to us
in the extreme, and the loss of our commerce would be nearly ruinous.  But the injury of such
a war to us would be as nothing to the injury which it would inflict upon the States.  To them
for many years it would be absolutely ruinous.  It would entail not only all those losses which
such a war must bring with it, but that greater loss which would arise to the nation from the
fact of its having been powerless to prevent it.  Such a war would prove that it had lost the
freedom for which it had struggled, and which for so many years it has enjoyed.  For the sake
of that people as well as for our own--and for their sakes rather than for our own-- let us,
as far as may be, abstain from words which are needlessly injurious.  They have done much that
is great and noble, ever since this war has begun, and we have been slow to acknowledge it.
They have made sacrifices for the sake of their country which we have ridiculed.  They have
struggled to maintain a good cause, and we have disbelieved in their earnestness.  They have
been anxious to abide by their Constitution, which to them has been as it were a second gospel,
and we have spoken of that Constitution as though it had been a thing of mere words in which
life had never existed. This has been done while their hands are very full and their back heavily
laden.  Such words coming from us, or from parties among us, cannot justify those threats of
war which we hear spoken; but that they should make the hearts of men sore and their thoughts
bitter against us, can hardly be matter of surprise.

As to the result of any such war between us and them, it would depend mainly, I think, on the
feelings of the Canadians.  Neither could they annex Canada without the good-will of the Canadians,
nor could we keep Canada without that good-will.  At present the feeling in Canada against
the Northern States is so strong and so universal that England has little to fear on that head.

I have now done my task, and may take leave of my readers on either side of the water with
a hearty hope that the existing war between the North and the South may soon be over, and that
none other may follow on its heels to exercise that new-fledged military skill which the existing
quarrel will have produced on the other side of the Atlantic.  I have written my book in obscure
language if I have not shown that to me social successes and commercial prosperity are much
dearer than any greatness that can be won by arms.  The Americans had fondly thought that they
were to be exempt from the curse of war--at any rate from the bitterness of the curse.  But
the days for such exemption have not come as yet.  While we are hurrying on to make twelve-inch
shield plates for our men-of-war, we can hardly dare to think of the days when the sword shall
be turned into the plowshare.  May it not be thought well for us if, with such work on our
hands, scraps of iron shall be left to us with which to pursue any of the purposes of peace?
But at least let us not have war with these children of our own.  If we must fight, let us
fight the French "for King George upon the throne."  The doing so will be disagreeable, but
it will not be antipathetic to the nature of an Englishman.  For my part, when an American
tells me that he wants to fight with me, I regard his offense, as compared with that of a Frenchman
under the same circumstances, as I would compare the offense of a parricide or a fratricide
with that of a mere commonplace murderer.  Such a war would be plus quam civile bellum. Which
of us two could take a thrashing from the other and afterward go about our business with contentment?

On our return to Liverpool, we stayed for a few hours at Queenstown, taking in coal, and the
passengers landed that they might stretch their legs and look about them.  I also went ashore
at the dear old place which I had known well in other days, when the people were not too grand
to call it Cove, and were contented to run down from Cork in river steamers, before the Passage
railway was built.  I spent a pleasant summer there once in those times: God be with the good
old days!  And now I went ashore at Queenstown, happy to feel that I should be again in a British
isle, and happy also to know that I was once more in Ireland.  And when the people came around
me as they did, I seemed to know every face and to be familiar with every voice.  It has been
my fate to have so close an intimacy with Ireland, that when I meet an Irishman abroad I always
recognize in him more of a kinsman than I do in your Englishman.  I never ask an Englishman
from what county he comes, or what was his town.  To Irishmen I usually put such questions,
and I am generally familiar with the old haunts which they name.  I was happy therefore to
feel myself again in Ireland, and to walk round, from Queenstown to the river at Passage, by
the old way that had once been familiar to my feet.

Or rather I should have been happy if I had not found myself instantly disgraced by the importunities
of my friends.  A legion of women surrounded me, imploring alms, begging my honor to bestow
my charity on them for the love of the Virgin, using the most holy names in their adjurations
for half-pence, clinging to me with that half-joking, half-lachrymose air of importunity which
an Irish beggar has assumed as peculiarly her own.  There were men, too, who begged as well
as women.  And the women were sturdy and fat, and, not knowing me as well as I knew them, seemed
resolved that their importunities should be successful.  After all, I had an old world liking
for them in their rags.  They were endeared to me by certain memories and associations which
I cannot define.  But then what would those Americans think of them--of them and of the country
which produced them?  That was the reflection which troubled me.  A legion of women in rags
clamorous for bread, protesting to heaven that they are starving, importunate with voices and
with hands, surrounding the stranger when he puts his foot on the soil, so that he cannot escape,
does not afford to the cynical American who then first visits us--and they all are cynical
when they visit us--a bad opportunity for his sarcasm.  He can at any rate boast that he sees
nothing of that at home.  I myself am fond of Irish beggars.  It is an acquired taste, which
comes upon one as does that for smoked whisky or Limerick tobacco.  But I certainly did wish
that there were not so many of them at Queenstown.

I tell all this here not to the disgrace of Ireland--not for the triumph of America.  The Irishman
or American who thinks rightly on the subject will know that the state of each country has
arisen from its opportunities.  Beggary does not prevail in new countries, and but few old
countries have managed to exist without it.  As to Ireland, we may rejoice to say that there
is less of it now than there was twenty years since.  Things are mending there.  But though
such excuses may be truly made--although an Englishman, when he sees this squalor and poverty
on the quays at Queenstown, consoles himself with reflecting that the evil has been unavoidable,
but will perhaps soon be avoided--nevertheless he cannot but remember that there is no such
squalor and no such poverty in the land from which he has returned.  I claim no credit for
the new country.  I impute no blame to the old country.  But there is the fact.  The Irishman
when he expatriates himself to one of those American States loses much of that affectionate,
confiding, master-worshiping nature which makes him so good a fellow when at home.  But he
becomes more of a man.  He assumes a dignity which he never has known before.  He learns to
regard his labor as his own property.  That which he earns he takes without thanks, but he
desires to take no more than he earns.  To me personally, he has, perhaps, become less pleasant
than he was;--but to himself!  It seems to me that such a man must feel himself half a god,
if he has the power of comparing what he is with what he was.

It is right that all this should be acknowledged by us.  When we speak of America and of her
institutions, we should remember that she has given to our increasing population rights and
privileges which we could not give--which as an old country we probably can never give.  That
self-asserting, obtrusive independence which so often wounds us is, if viewed aright, but an
outward sign of those good things which a new country has produced for its people.  Men and
women do not beg in the States; they do not offend you with tattered rags; they do not complain
to heaven of starvation; they do not crouch to the ground for half-pence.  If poor, they are
not abject in their poverty.  They read and write.  They walk like human beings made in God's
form.  They know that they are men and women, owing it to themselves and to the world that
they should earn their bread by their labor, but feeling that when earned it is their own.
If this be so, if it be acknowledged that it is so, should not such knowledge in itself be
sufficient testimony of the success of the country and of her institutions?

END OF VOL. II.