DARNLEY.
  I say that looking with this face of yours
  None shall believe you holy; what, you talk,
  Take mercy in your mouth, eat holiness,
  Put God under your tongue and feed on heaven,
  With fear and faith and-faith, I know not what--
  And look as though you stood and saw men slain
  To make you game and laughter; nay, your eyes
  Threaten as unto blood.  What will you do
  To make men take your sweet word? pitiful--
  You are pitiful as he that's hired for death
  And loves the slaying yet better than the hire.

QUEEN.
  You are wise that live to threat and tell me so;
  Do you love life too much?

DARNLEY.
  O, now you are sweet,
  Right tender now:  you love not blood nor death,
  You are too tender.

QUEEN.
  Yea, too weak, too soft:
  Sweet, do not mock me, for my love's sake; see
  How soft a thing I am.  Will you be hard?
  The heart you have, has it no sort of fear?

DARNLEY.
  Take off your hand and let me go my way
  And do the deed, and when the doing is past
  I will come home and teach you tender things
  Out of my love till you forget my wrath.
  I will be angry when I see good need,
  And will grow gentle after, fear not that:
  You shall get no wrong of my wrongdoing. 'What
  took others months of practice to achieve came to him as a gift of
God,' his father used to say; and truly there seems to have been something
of the miraculous about Wolfgang's powers.

His violin
  lessons had hardly begun when
  one evening, as Leopold Mozart, Herr Schachtner,
  and Herr Wentzl were about to play a set of
  six trios composed by the last-named musician, Wolfgang
  put in a plea that he might be allowed to
  play second violin! Needless to say, his request
  was refused as a matter of course.
  
  So fare I as your lover, but not well.--
  Ah sweet, if God be ever good to me
  To put you in my hand!  I am come to shame;
  Let me think now, and let my wits not go;
  God, for dear mercy, let me not forget
  Why I should be so angry; the dull blood
  Beats at my face and blinds me-I am chafted to death,
  And I am shamed; I shall go mad and die.
  Truly I think I did kneel down, did pray,
  Yea, weep (who knows?) it may be-all for that.
  Yea, if I wept not, this was blood brake forth
  And burnt mine eyelids; I will have blood back,
  And wash them cool in the hottest of his heart,
  Or I will slay myself:  I cannot tell:
  I have given gold for brass, and lo the pay
  Cleaves to my fingers:  there's no way to mend--
  Not while life stays:  would God that it were gone!
  The fool will feed upon my fame and laugh;
  Till one seal up his tongue and lips with blood,
  He carries half my honor and good name
  Between his teeth.  Lord God, mine head will fail!
  When have I done thus since I was alive?
  And these ill times will deal but ill with me--
  My old love slain, and never a new to help,
  And my wits gone, and my blithe use of life,
  And all the grace was with me.  Love-perchance
  If I save love I shall well save myself.
  I could find heart to bid him take such fellows
  And kill them to my hand.  I was the fool
  To sue to these and shame myself:  God knows
  I was a queen born, I will hold their heads
  Here in my hands for this.  Which of you waits?

[Enter MARY BEATON and MARY CARMICHAEL.]

  No maiden of them?-what, no more than this?

MARY CARMICHAEL.
  Madam, the lady Seyton is gone forth;
  She is ill at heart with watching.

QUEEN.
  Ay, at heart--
  All girls must have such tender sides to the heart
  They break for one night's watching, ache to death
  For an hour's pity, for a half-hour's love--
  Wear out before the watches, die by dawn,
  And ride at noon to burial.  God's my pity!
  Where's Hamilton? doth she ail too? at heart,
  I warrant her at heart.

MARY BEATON.
  I know not, madam.

