The Conducteur--with the usual frogged, tagged, embroidered jacket, and fur-bound cap--having
hoisted their luggage on high, the passengers who had turned out of their respective compartments
to stretch their legs after their cramping from Calais, proceeded to resume their places. There
were only two seats vacant in the interior, or, as Mr. Jorrocks called it, the "middle house,"
consequently the Yorkshireman and he crossed legs. The other four passengers had corner-seats,
things much coveted by French travellers. On Mr. Stubbs's right sat an immense Englishman,
enveloped in a dark blue camlet cloak, fastened with bronze lionhead clasps, a red neckcloth,
and a shabby, napless, broad-brimmed, brown hat. His face was large, round, and red, without
an atom of expression, and his little pig eyes twinkled over a sort of a mark that denoted
where his nose should have been; in short, his head was more like a barber's wig block than
anything else, and his outline would have formed a model of the dome of St. Paul's. On the
Yorkshireman's left was a chattering young red-trousered dragoon, in a frock-coat and flat
foraging cap with a flying tassel. Mr. Jorrocks was more fortunate than his friend, and rubbed
sides with two women; one was English, either an upper nursery-maid or an under governess,
but who might be safely trusted to travel by herself. She was dressed in a black beaver bonnet
lined with scarlet silk, a nankeen pelisse with a blue ribbon, and pea-green boots, and she
carried a sort of small fish-basket on her knee, with a "plain Christian's prayer book" on
the top. The other was French, approaching to middle age, with a nice smart plump figure, good
hazel-coloured eyes, a beautiful foot and ankle, and very well dressed. Indeed, her dress very
materially reduced the appearance of her age, and she was what the milliners would call remarkably
well "got up." Her bonnet was a pink satin, with a white blonde ruche surmounted by a rich
blonde veil, with a white rose placed elegantly on one side, and her glossy auburn hair pressed
down the sides of a milk-white forehead, in the Madonna style.--Her pelisse was of "violet-des-bois"
figured silk, worn with a black velvet pelerine and a handsomely embroidered collar. Her boots
were of a colour to match the pelisse; and a massive gold chain round her neck, and a solitary
pearl ring on a middle finger, were all the jewellery she displayed. Mr. Jorrocks caught a
glimpse of her foot and ankle as she mounted the steps to resume her place in the diligence,
and pushing the Yorkshireman aside, he bundled in directly after her, and took up the place
we have described.

The vehicle was soon in motion, and its ponderous roll enchanted the heart of the grocer. Independently
of the novelty, he was in a humour to be pleased, and everything with him was couleur de rose.
Not so the Yorkshireman's right-hand neighbour, who lounged in the corner, muffled up in his
cloak, muttering and cursing at every jolt of the diligence, as it bumped across the gutters
and jolted along the streets of Boulogne. At length having got off the pavement, after crushing
along at a trot through the soft road that immediately succeeds, they reached the little hill
near Mr. Gooseman's farm, and the horses gradually relaxed into a walk, when he burst forth
with a tremendous oath, swearing that he had "travelled three hundred thousand miles, and never
saw horses walk up such a bit of a bank before." He looked round the diligence in the expectation
of someone joining him, but no one deigned a reply, so, with a growl and a jerk of his shoulders,
he again threw himself into his corner. The dragoon and the French lady then began narrating
the histories of their lives, as the French people always do, and Mr. Jorrocks and the Yorkshireman
sat looking at each other. At length Mr. Jorrocks, pulling his dictionary and Madame de Genlis
out of his pocket, observed, "I quite forgot to ask the guard at what time we dine--most important
consideration, for I hold it unfair to takes one's stomach by surprise, and a man should have
due notice, that he may tune his appetite accordingly. I have always thought, that there's
as much dexterity required to bring an appetite to table in the full bloom of perfection, as
there is in training an 'oss to run on a particular day.--Let me see," added he, turning over
the pages of de Genlis--"it will be under the head of eating and drinking, I suppose.--Here
it is--(opens and reads)--'I have a good appetite--I am hungry--I am werry hungry--I am almost
starved'--that won't do--'I have eaten enough'--that won't do either--'To breakfast'--no.--But
here it is, by Jingo--'Dialogue before dinner'--capital book for us travellers, this Mrs. de
Genlis--(reads) 'Pray, take dinner with us to-day, I shall give you plain fare.'--That means
rough and enough, I suppose," observed Mr. Jorrocks to the Yorkshireman.--"'What time do we
dine to-day? French: A quelle heure dinons-nous aujourd'hui?--Italian: A che hora (ora) si
prancey (pranza) oggi?'" "Ah, Monsieur, vous parlez Français à merveille," said the French
lady, smiling with the greatest good nature upon him. "A marble!" said Mr. Jorrocks, "wot does
that mean?" preparing to look it out in the dictionary. "Ah, Monsieur, I shall you explain--you
speak French like a natif." "Indeed!" said Mr. Jorrocks, with a bow, "I feel werry proud of
your praise; and your English is quite delightful.--By Jove," said he to the Yorkshireman,
with a most self-satisfied grin, "you were right in what you told me about the gals calling
me Monsieur.--I declare she's driven right home to my 'art--transfixed me at once, in fact."

Everyone who has done a little "voyaging," as they call it in France, knows that a few miles
to the south of Samer rises a very steep hill, across which the route lies, and that diligence
travellers are generally invited to walk up it. A path which strikes off near the foot of the
hill, across the open, cuts off the angle, and--diligences being anything but what the name
would imply,--the passengers, by availing themselves of the short cut, have ample time for
striking up confabs, and inquiring into the comforts of the occupiers of the various compartments.
Our friends of the "interior" were all busy jabbering and talking--some with their tongues,
others with their hands and tongues--with the exception of the monster in the cloak, who sat
like a sack in the corner, until the horses, having reached the well-known breathing place,
made a dead halt, and the conducteur proceeded to invite the party to descend and "promenade"
up the hill. "What's happened now?" cried the monster, jumping up as the door opened; "surely,
they don't expect us to walk up this mountain! I've travelled three hundred thousand miles,
and was never asked to do such a thing in all my life before. I won't do it; I paid for riding,
and ride I will. You are all a set of infamous cheats," said he to the conducteur in good plain
English; but the conducteur, not understanding the language, shut the door as soon as all the
rest were out, and let him roll on by himself. Jorrocks stuck to his woman, who had a negro
boy in the rotonde, dressed in baggy slate-coloured trousers, with a green waistcoat and a
blue coat, with a coronet on the button, who came to hand her out, and was addressed by the
heroic name of "Agamemnon." Jorrocks got a glimpse of the button, but, not understanding foreign
coronets, thought it was a crest; nevertheless, he thought he might as well inquire who his
friend was, so, slinking back as they reached the foot of the hill he got hold of the nigger,
and asked what they called his missis. Massa did not understand, and Mr. Jorrocks, sorely puzzled
how to explain, again had recourse to the Manuel du Voyageur; but Madame de Genlis had not
anticipated such an occurrence, and there was no dialogue adapted to his situation. There was
a conversation with a lacquey, however, commencing with--"Are you disposed to enter into my
service?" and, in the hopes of hitting upon something that would convey his wishes, he "hark'd
forward," and passing by--"Are you married?" arrived at--"What is your wife's occupation?"
"Que fait votre femme?" said he, suiting the action to the word, and pointing to Madame. Agamemnon
showed his ivories, as he laughed at the idea of Jorrocks calling his mistress his wife, and
by signs and words conveyed to him some idea of the importance of the personage to whom he
alluded. This he did most completely, for before the diligence came up, Jorrocks pulled the
Yorkshireman aside, and asked if he was aware that they were travelling with a real live Countess;
"Madame la Countess Benwolio, the nigger informs me," said he; "a werry grande femme, though
what that means I don't know." "Oh, Countesses are common enough here," replied the Yorkshireman.
"I dare say she's a stay-maker. I remember a paint-maker who had a German Baron for a colour-grinder
once." "Oh," said Jorrocks, "you are jealous--you always try to run down my friends; but that
won't do, I'm wide awake to your tricks"; so saying, he shuffled off, and getting hold of the
Countess, helped Agamemnon to hoist her into the diligence. He was most insinuating for the
next two hours, and jabbered about love and fox-hunting, admiring the fine, flat, open country,
and the absence of hedges and flints; but as neither youth nor age can subsist on love alone,
his confounded appetite began to trouble him, and got quite the better of him before they reached
Abbeville. Every mile seemed a league, and he had his head out of the window at least twenty
times before they came in sight of the town. At length the diligence got its slow length dragged
not only to Abbeville, but to the sign of the "Fidèle Berger"--or "Fiddle Burgur," as Mr. Jorrocks
pronounced it--where they were to dine. The door being opened, out he jumped, and with his
Manuel du Voyageur in one hand, and the Countess Benvolio in the other, he pushed his way through
the crowd of "pauvres misérables" congregated under the gateway, who exhibited every species
of disease and infirmity that poor human nature is liable or heir to, and entered the hotel.
The "Sally manger," as he called it, was a long brick-floored room on the basement, with a
white stove at one end, and the walls plentifully decorated with a panoramic view of the Grand
Nation wallopping the Spaniards at the siege of Saragossa. The diligence being a leetle behind
time as usual, the soup was on the table when they entered. The passengers quickly ranged themselves
round, and, with his mouth watering as the female garçon lifted the cover from the tureen,
Mr. Jorrocks sat in the expectation of seeing the rich contents ladled into the plates. His
countenance fell fifty per cent as the first spoonful passed before his eyes.--"My vig, why
it's water!" exclaimed he--"water, I do declare, with worms[21] in it--I can't eat such stuff
as that--it's not man's meat--oh dear, oh dear, I fear I've made a terrible mistake in coming
to France! Never saw such stuff as this at Bleaden's or Birch's, or anywhere in the city."
"I've travelled three hundred thousand miles," said the fat man, sending his plate from him
in disgust, "and never tasted such a mess as this before." "I'll show them up in The Times,"
cried Mr. Jorrocks; "and, look, what stuff is here--beef boiled to rags!--well, I never, no
never, saw anything like this before.