They grew more and more tender--two put their arms around me and pinioned me, while the other
fifteen drew large shears from their pockets, and, under pretence of getting a lock of hair
for each, they left me as bare as a goose-egg.  Indians couldn't have scalped me closer.  I
made Samson-like my escape from these Delilahs by stratagem.  I assured them that I was sickening
for the measles, which, like love, is always the more fatal the later it comes in life.  I
also told them that my friend Hingston was a much better looking man than I was; also that
he was an Englishman, and that, according to that nation's creed, every Englishman is equal
to five Americans and five hundred Frenchmen:  consequently there would be some to spare of
him.  This happy thought saved me.  I was let off upon solemnly promising to deliver Hingston
into their arms, bound, Laocoon-like, by the serpent spells of their charms, or, like Regulus,
potted and preserved in a barrel of fingernails, for their especial scratching. 

Twopence more and up goes the donkey, up, up, up to be a satellite to an undiscovered star. Brave Donkey!
I follow."--R.S.]

CHAPTER I.
The iceberg was moving. There was no doubt of it. Moving with a terrible
sinuous motion. Occasionally an incautious ironclad approached like
a foolish hen, and pecked at the moving mass. Then there was a slight
crash, followed by a mild convulsion of masts, and spars, and iron-plates,
and 100-ton guns, then two or three gurgles and all was still.  (Here Artemus holds his head over
a barrel, and the distinct dripping of a copious shower is heard.)

As I feel a little better, I will recommence my lecture--I don't mean to defend Mormonism--indeed,
I have no hesitation in affirming, and I affirm it boldly, and I would repeat the observation
to my own wife's face, if I had one, but as I haven't one, I'll say it boldly to every other
man's wife, that I don't think it wise to marry more than one wife at a time, without it is
done to oblige the ladies, and then it should be done sparingly, and not oftener than three
times a day, for the marriage ceremony isn't lightly to be repeated.  But I want to tell you
what Brigham Young observed to me.

"Artemus, my boy," said he, "you don't know how often a man marries against his will.  Let
me recite one case out of a hundred that has happened to myself.  About three months ago a
family arrived here-- they were from Hoboken--everybody knows how beautiful the Jersey girls
are--with the exception of applejack, they are the nicest things Jersey produces.  Well, this
family consisted of four daughters, a mother and two grandmothers, one with teeth, the other
without.  I took a fancy to the youngest of the girls, and proposed. John, who was in familiar habits
with the philosopher, had undertaken to play Antonio. Great expectations
were formed.

A philosopher's first play was a new era. The night arrived. I was favoured with a seat in an
advantageous box, between the author and his friend M----. G. sate cheerful and confident.
In his friend M.'s looks, who had perused the manuscript, I read some terror. Antonio in the person
of John Philip Kemble at length appeared, starched out in a ruff
which no one could dispute, and in most irreproachable mustachios.  We cannot think of separating
the family.'  After a little cosy hesitation on my part, I finally agreed to swallow the two
old venerable antiquities as a sort of sauce to the other five." 

"Are you sure?"

"Certain. I have taken in a supply of Matinées, and a stock of Five-act
Tragedies."

"Good. But how to raise the wind?"

Scarcely, had the
question been asked, when a frightful explosion shook the iceberg
to its foundations.

As I see my esteemed friend Joe Whitton, of Niblo's Garden, sitting right before me, I will
give him an anecdote which he will appreciate.  There is considerable barter in Salt Lake City--horses
and cows are good for hundred-dollar greenbacks, while pigs, dogs, cats, babies, and pickaxes
are the fractional currency.  I dare say my friend Joe Whitton would be as much astonished
as I was after my first lecture.  Seeing a splendid house I naturally began to reckon my spondulics.
Full of this Pactolean vision, I went into my treasurer's room.

"Now, Hingston, my boy, let us see what the proceeds are!  We shall soon make a fortune at
this rate."

Hingston with the solemnity of a cashier, then read the proceeds of the lecture:

"Three cows, one with horns, and two without, but not a stumptail; fourteen pigs, alive and
grunting; seventeen hams, sugar cured; three babies in arms, two of them cutting their teeth,
and the other sickening with the chicken-coop, or some such disease." G., satiate with visions
of political justice (possibly not to be realized in our time), or willing to let the sceptical
worldlings see, that his anticipations of the future did not preclude a warm sympathy for men
as they are and have been--wrote a tragedy.
  If I could find the legs belonging to them--well, I won't say what
I'd do now--but leave all ladies in that pleasing state of expectation which is true happiness.
Ladies and gentlemen, my lecture is done--if you refuse to leave the hall, you'll be forcibly
ejected.