"Our house" may be in any style of architecture, low or high. It may be the brown old farmhouse,
with its tall wellsweep, or the one-story gambrel-roofed cottage, or the large, square, white
house, with green blinds, under the wind-swung elms of a century; or it may be the log-cabin
of the wilderness, with its one room,--still there is a spell in the memory of it beyond all
conjurations. Its stone and brick and mortar are like no other; its very clapboards and shingles
are dear to us, powerful to bring back the memories of early days and all that is sacred in
home love.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Papa is getting quite sentimental," whispered Jenny, loud enough for me to hear. I shook my
head at her impressively, and went on undaunted.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no one fact of our human existence that has a stronger influence upon us than the
house we dwell in, especially that in which our earlier and more impressible years are spent.
The building and arrangement of a house influence the health, the comfort, the morals, the
religion. There have been houses built so devoid of all consideration for the occupants, so
rambling and haphazard in the disposal of rooms, so sunless and cheerless and wholly without
snugness or privacy, as to make it seem impossible to live a joyous, generous, rational, religious
family life in them.

There are, we shame to say, in our cities things called houses, built and rented by people
who walk erect and have the general air and manner of civilized and Christianized men, which
are so inhuman in their building that they can only be called snares and traps for souls,--places
where children cannot well escape growing up filthy and impure; places where to form a home
is impossible, and to live a decent, Christian life would require miraculous strength.

A celebrated British philanthropist, who had devoted much study to the dwellings of the poor,
gave it as his opinion that the temperance societies were a hopeless undertaking in London
unless these dwellings underwent a transformation. They were so squalid, so dark, so comfortless,
so constantly pressing upon the senses foulness, pain, and inconvenience, that it was only
by being drugged with gin and opium that their miserable inhabitants could find heart to drag
on life from day to day. He had himself tried the experiment of reforming a drunkard by taking
him from one of these loathsome dens, and enabling him to rent a tenement in a block of model
lodging-houses which had been built under his supervision. The young man had been a designer
of figures for prints; he was of a delicate frame, and a nervous, susceptible temperament.
Shut in one miserable room with his wife and little children, without the possibility of pure
air, with only filthy, fetid water to drink, with the noise of other miserable families resounding
through the thin partitions, what possibility was there of doing anything except by the help
of stimulants, which for a brief hour lifted him above the perception of these miseries? Changed
at once to a neat flat, where, for the same rent as his former den, he had three good rooms,
with water for drinking, house-service, and bathing freely supplied, and the blessed sunshine
and air coming in through windows well arranged for ventilation, he became in a few weeks a
new man. In the charms of the little spot which he could call home, its quiet, its order, his
former talent came back to him, and he found strength, in pure air and pure water and those
purer thoughts of which they are the emblems, to abandon burning and stupefying stimulants.

The influence of dwelling-houses for good or for evil--their influence on the brain, the nerves,
and, through these, on the heart and life--is one of those things that cannot be enough pondered
by those who build houses to sell or rent.

Something more generous ought to inspire a man than merely the percentage which he can get
for his money. He who would build houses should think a little on the subject. He should reflect
what houses are for, what they may be made to do for human beings. The great majority of houses
in cities are not built by the indwellers themselves; they are built for them by those who
invest their money in this way, with little other thought than the percentage which the investment
will return.

For persons of ample fortune there are, indeed, palatial residences, with all that wealth can
do to render life delightful. But in that class of houses which must be the lot of the large
majority, those which must be chosen by young men in the beginning of life, when means are
comparatively restricted, there is yet wide room for thought and the judicious application
of money.

In looking over houses to be rented by persons of moderate means, one cannot help longing to
build,--one sees so many ways in which the same sum which built an inconvenient and unpleasant
house might have been made to build a delightful one.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's so!" said Bob with emphasis. "Don't you remember, Marianne, how many dismal, commonplace,
shabby houses we trailed through?"

"Yes," said Marianne. "You remember those houses with such little squeezed rooms and that flourishing
staircase, with the colored-glass china-closet window, and no butler's sink?"

"Yes," said Bob; "and those astonishing, abominable stone abortions that adorned the doorsteps.
People do lay out a deal of money to make houses look ugly, it must be confessed."

"One would willingly," said Marianne, "dispense with frightful stone ornaments in front, and
with heavy mouldings inside, which are of no possible use or beauty, and with showy plaster
cornices and centrepieces in the parlor ceilings, and even with marble mantels, for the luxury
of hot and cold water in each chamber, and a couple of comfortable bath-rooms. Then, the disposition
of windows and doors is so wholly without regard to convenience! How often we find rooms, meant
for bedrooms, where really there is no good place for either bed or dressing-table!"

Here my wife looked up, having just finished redrawing the plans to the latest alteration.

"One of the greatest reforms that could be, in these reforming days," she observed, "would
be to have women architects. The mischief with houses built to rent is that they are all mere
male contrivances. No woman would ever plan chambers where there is no earthly place to set
a bed except against a window or door, or waste the room in entries that might be made into
closets. I don't see, for my part, apropos to the modern movement for opening new professions
to the female sex, why there should not be well-educated female architects. The planning and
arrangement of houses, and the laying-out of grounds, are a fair subject of womanly knowledge
and taste. It is the teaching of Nature. What would anybody think of a bluebird's nest that
had been built entirely by Mr. Blue, without the help of his wife?"

"My dear," said I, "you must positively send a paper on this subject to the next Woman's Rights
Convention."

"I am of Sojourner Truth's opinion," said my wife,--"that the best way to prove the propriety
of one's doing anything is to go and do it. A woman who should have energy to grow through
the preparatory studies and set to work in this field would, I am sure, soon find employment."

"If she did as well as you would do, my dear," said I. "There are plenty of young women in
our Boston high schools who are going through higher fields of mathematics than are required
by the architect, and the schools for design show the flexibility and fertility of the female
pencil. The thing appears to me altogether more feasible than many other openings which have
been suggested to woman."

"Well," said Jenny, "isn't papa ever to go on with his paper?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I continued:--

       *       *       *       *       *

What ought "our house" to be? Could any other question be asked admitting in its details of
such varied answers,--answers various as the means, the character, and situation of different
individuals? But there are great wants, pertaining to every human being, into which all lesser
ones run. There are things in a house that every one, high or low, rich or poor, ought, according
to his means, to seek. I think I shall class them according to the elemental division of the
old philosophers: Fire, Air, Earth, and Water. These form the groundwork of this need-be,--the
sine-qua-nons of a house.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Fire, air, earth, and water! I don't understand," said Jenny.

"Wait a little till you do, then," said I. "I will try to make my meaning plain."

       *       *       *       *       *

The first object of a house is shelter from the elements. This object is effected by a tent
or wigwam which keeps off rain and wind. The first disadvantage of this shelter is, that the
vital air which you take into your lungs, and on the purity of which depends the purity of
blood and brain and nerves, is vitiated. In the wigwam or tent you are constantly taking in
poison, more or less active, with every inspiration. Napoleon had his army sleep without tents.
He stated that from experience he found it more healthy, and wonderful have been the instances
of delicate persons gaining constantly in rigor from being obliged, in the midst of hardships,
to sleep constantly in the open air. Now the first problem in housebuilding is to combine the
advantage of shelter with the fresh elasticity of outdoor air. I am not going to give here
a treatise on ventilation, but merely to say, in general terms, that the first object of a
house builder or contriver should be to make a healthy house; and the first requisite of a
healthy house is a pure, sweet, elastic air.

I am in favor, therefore, of those plans of housebuilding which have wide central spaces, whether
halls or courts, into which all the rooms open, and which necessarily preserve a body of fresh
air for the use of them all. In hot climates this is the object of the central court which
cuts into the body of the house, with its fountain and flowers, and its galleries, into which
the various apartments open. When people are restricted for space, and cannot afford to give
up wide central portions of the house for the mere purposes of passage, this central hall can
be made a pleasant sitting-room. With tables, chairs, bookcases, and sofas comfortably disposed,
this ample central room above and below is, in many respects, the most agreeable lounging room
of the house; while the parlors below and the chambers above, opening upon it, form agreeable
withdrawing rooms for purposes of greater privacy.

It is customary with many persons to sleep with bedroom windows open,--a very imperfect and
often dangerous mode of procuring that supply of fresh air which a sleeping-room requires.
In a house constructed in the manner indicated, windows might be freely left open in these
central halls, producing there a constant movement of air, and the doors of the bedrooms placed
ajar, when a very slight opening in the windows would create a free circulation through the
apartments.

In the planning of a house, thought should be had as to the general disposition of the windows,
and the quarters from which favoring breezes may be expected should be carefully considered.
Windows should be so arranged that draughts of air can be thrown quite through and across the
house. How often have we seen pale mothers and drooping babes fanning and panting during some
of our hot days on the sunny side of a house, while the breeze that should have cooled them
beat in vain against a dead wall! One longs sometimes to knock holes through partitions, and
let in the air of heaven.

No other gift of God so precious, so inspiring, is treated with such utter irreverence and
contempt in the calculations of us mortals as this same air of heaven. A sermon on oxygen,
if one had a preacher who understood the subject, might do more to repress sin than the most
orthodox discourse to show when and how and why sin came. A minister gets up in a crowded lecture-room,
where the mephitic air almost makes the candles burn blue, and bewails the deadness of the
church,--the church the while, drugged by the poisoned air, growing sleepier and sleepier,
though they feel dreadfully wicked for being so.

Little Jim, who, fresh from his afternoon's ramble in the fields, last evening said his prayers
dutifully, and lay down to sleep in a most Christian frame, this morning sits up in bed with
his hair bristling with crossness, strikes at his nurse, and declares he won't say his prayers,--that
he don't want to be good. The simple difference is, that the child, having slept in a close
box of a room, his brain all night fed by poison, is in a mild state of moral insanity. Delicate
women remark that it takes them till eleven or twelve o'clock to get up their strength in the
morning. Query: Do they sleep with closed windows and doors, and with heavy bed-curtains?

The houses built by our ancestors were better ventilated in certain respects than modern ones,
with all their improvements. The great central chimney, with its open fireplaces in the different
rooms, created a constant current which carried off foul and vitiated air. In these days, how
common is it to provide rooms with only a flue for a stove! This flue is kept shut in summer,
and in winter opened only to admit a close stove, which burns away the vital portion of the
air quite as fast as the occupants breathe it away. The sealing up of fireplaces and introduction
of air-tight stoves may, doubtless, be a saving of fuel; it saves, too, more than that,--in
thousands and thousands of cases it has saved people from all further human wants, and put
an end forever to any needs short of the six feet of narrow earth which are man's only inalienable
property. In other words, since the invention of air-tight stoves, thousands have died of slow
poison. It is a terrible thing to reflect upon, that our Northern winters last from November
to May, six long months, in which many families confine themselves to one room, of which every
window-crack has been carefully calked to make it air-tight, where an air-tight stove keeps
the atmosphere at a temperature between eighty and ninety, and the inmates sitting there, with
all their winter clothes on, become enervated both by the heat and by the poisoned air, for
which there is no escape but the occasional opening of a door.

It is no wonder that the first result of all this is such a delicacy of skin and lungs that
about half the inmates are obliged to give up going into the open air during the six cold months,
because they invariably catch cold if they do so. It is no wonder that the cold caught about
the first of December has by the first of March become a fixed consumption, and that the opening
of the spring, which ought to bring life and health, in so many cases brings death.

We hear of the lean condition in which the poor bears emerge from their six months' wintering,
during which they subsist on the fat which they have acquired the previous summer. Even so,
in our long winters, multitudes of delicate people subsist on the daily waning strength which
they acquired in the season when windows and doors were open, and fresh air was a constant
luxury. No wonder we hear of spring fever and spring biliousness, and have thousands of nostrums
for clearing the blood in the spring. All these things are the pantings and palpitations of
a system run down under slow poison, unable to get a step farther. Better, far better, the
old houses of the olden time, with their great roaring fires, and their bedrooms where the
snow came in and the wintry winds whistled. Then, to be sure, you froze your back while you
burned your face; your water froze nightly in your pitcher; your breath congealed in ice-wreaths
on the blankets; and you could write your name on the pretty snow-wreath that had sifted in
through the window-cracks. But you woke full of life and vigor,--you looked out into the whirling
snowstorms without a shiver, and thought nothing of plunging through drifts as high as your
head on your daily way to school. You jingled in sleighs, you snowballed, you lived in snow
like a snowbird, and your blood coursed and tingled, in full tide of good, merry, real life,
through your veins,--none of the slow-creeping, black blood which clogs the brain and lies
like a weight on the vital wheels!

"Mercy upon us, papa!" said Jenny, "I hope we need not go back to such houses?"

"No, my dear," I replied. "I only said that such houses were better than those which are all
winter closed by double windows and burnt-out air-tight stoves."

       *       *       *       *       *

The perfect house is one in which there is a constant escape of every foul and vitiated particle
of air through one opening, while a constant supply of fresh outdoor air is admitted by another.
In winter, this outdoor air must pass through some process by which it is brought up to a temperate
warmth.

Take a single room, and suppose on one side a current of outdoor air which has been warmed
by passing through the air chamber of a modern furnace. Its temperature need not be above sixty-five,--it
answers breathing purposes better at that. On the other side of the room let there be an open
wood or coal fire. One cannot conceive the purposes of warmth and ventilation more perfectly
combined.

Suppose a house with a great central hall, into which a current of fresh, temperately warmed
air is continually pouring. Each chamber opening upon this hall has a chimney up whose flue
the rarefied air is constantly passing, drawing up with it all the foul and poisonous gases.
That house is well ventilated, and in a way that need bring no dangerous draughts upon the
most delicate invalid. For the better securing of privacy in sleeping-rooms, we have seen two
doors employed, one of which is made with slats, like a window-blind, so that air is freely
transmitted without exposing the interior.

When we speak of fresh air, we insist on the full rigor of the term. It must not be the air
of a cellar, heavily laden with the poisonous nitrogen of turnips and cabbages, but good, fresh,
outdoor air from a cold-air pipe, so placed as not to get the lower stratum near the ground,
where heavy damps and exhalations collect, but high up, in just the clearest and most elastic
region.

The conclusion of the whole matter is, that as all of man's and woman's peace and comfort,
all their love, all their amiability, all their religion, have got to come to them, while they
live in this world, through the medium of the brain,--and as black, uncleansed blood acts on
the brain as a poison, and as no other than black, uncleansed blood can be got by the lungs
out of impure air,--the first object of the man who builds a house is to secure a pure and
healthy atmosphere therein.

Therefore, in allotting expenses, set this down as a must-be: "Our house must have fresh air,--everywhere,
at all times, winter and summer." Whether we have stone facings or no; whether our parlor has
cornices or marble mantles or no; whether our doors are machine-made or hand-made. All our
fixtures shall be of the plainest and simplest, but we will have fresh air. We will open our
door with a latch and string, if we cannot afford lock and knob and fresh air too; but in our
house we will live cleanly and Christianly. We will no more breathe the foul air rejected from
a neighbor's lungs than we will use a neighbor's tooth-brush and hair-brush. Such is the first
essential of "our house,"--the first great element of human health and happiness,--AIR.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I say, Marianne," said Bob, "have we got fireplaces in our chambers?"

"Mamma took care of that," said Marianne.

"You may be quite sure," said I, "if your mother has had a hand in planning your house, that
the ventilation is cared for."

It must be confessed that Bob's principal idea in a house had been a Gothic library, and his
mind had labored more on the possibility of adapting some favorite bits from the baronial antiquities
to modern needs than on anything so terrestrial as air. Therefore he awoke as from a dream,
and taking two or three monstrous inhalations, he seized the plans and began looking over them
with new energy. Meanwhile I went on with my prelection.

The second great vital element for which provision must be made in "our house" is FIRE. By
which I do not mean merely artificial fire, but fire in all its extent and branches,--the heavenly
fire which God sends us daily on the bright wings of sunbeams, as well as the mimic fires by
which we warm our dwellings, cook our food, and light our nightly darkness.

To begin, then, with heavenly fire or sunshine. If God's gift of vital air is neglected and
undervalued, His gift of sunshine appears to be hated. There are many houses where not a cent
has been expended on ventilation, but where hundreds of dollars have been freely lavished to
keep out the sunshine. The chamber, truly, is tight as a box; it has no fireplace, not even
a ventilator opening into the stove-flue; but, oh, joy and gladness! it has outside blinds
and inside folding-shutters, so that in the brightest of days we may create there a darkness
that may be felt. To observe the generality of New England houses, a spectator might imagine
they were planned for the torrid zone, where the great object is to keep out a furnace draught
of burning air.

But let us look over the months of our calendar. In which of them do we not need fires on our
hearths? We will venture to say that from October to June all families, whether they actually
have it or not, would be the more comfortable for a morning and evening fire. For eight months
in the year the weather varies on the scale of cool, cold, colder, and freezing; and for all
the four other months what is the number of days that really require the torrid-zone system
of shutting up houses? We all know that extreme heat is the exception, and not the rule.

Yet let anybody travel, as I did last year, through the valley of the Connecticut, and observe
the houses. All clean and white and neat and well-to-do, with their turfy yards and their breezy
great elms, but all shut up from basement to attic, as if the inmates had all sold out and
gone to China. Not a window-blind open above or below. Is the house inhabited? No,--yes,--there
is a faint stream of blue smoke from the kitchen chimney, and half a window-blind open in some
distant back part of the house. They are living there in the dim shadows, bleaching like potato-sprouts
in the cellar.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can tell you why they do it, papa," said Jenny. "It's the flies, and flies are certainly
worthy to be one of the plagues of Egypt. I can't myself blame people that shut up their rooms
and darken their houses in fly-time,--do you, mamma?"

"Not in extreme cases; though I think there is but a short season when this is necessary; yet
the habit of shutting up lasts the year round, and gives to New England villages that dead,
silent, cold, uninhabited look which is so peculiar."

"The one fact that a traveler would gather in passing through our villages would be this,"
said I, "that the people live in their houses and in the dark. Barely do you see doors and
windows open, people sitting at them, chairs in the yard, and signs that the inhabitants are
living out-of-doors."

"Well," said Jenny, "I have told you why, for I have been at Uncle Peter's in summer, and aunt
does her spring-cleaning in May, and then she shuts all the blinds and drops all the curtains,
and the house stays clean till October. That's the whole of it. If she had all her windows
open, there would be paint and windows to be cleaned every week; and who is to do it? For my
part, I can't much blame her."

"Well," said I, "I have my doubts about the sovereign efficacy of living in the dark, even
if the great object of existence were to be rid of flies. I remember, during this same journey,
stopping for a day or two at a country boarding-house, which was dark as Egypt from cellar
to garret. The long, dim, gloomy dining-room was first closed by outside blinds, and then by
impenetrable paper curtains, notwithstanding which it swarmed and buzzed like a beehive. You
found where the cake plate was by the buzz which your hand made, if you chanced to reach in
that direction. It was disagreeable, because in the darkness flies could not always be distinguished
from huckleberries; and I couldn't help wishing, that, since we must have the flies, we might
at last have the light and air to console us under them. People darken their rooms and shut
up every avenue of outdoor enjoyment, and sit and think of nothing but flies; in fact, flies
are all they have left. No wonder they become morbid on the subject."

"Well now, papa talks just like a man, doesn't he?" said Jenny. "He hasn't the responsibility
of keeping things clean. I wonder what he would do, if he were a housekeeper."

"Do? I will tell you. I would do the best I could. Th---- was a tall, dark, saturnine youth,
sparing of speech, with raven locks.--Thomas Fanshaw Middleton followed him (now Bishop of Calcutta)
a scholar and a gentleman in his teens. He has the reputation of an excellent critic; and is
author (besides the Country Spectator) of a Treatise on the Greek Article, against Sharpe.--M.
is said to bear his mitre high in India, where the regni novitas (I dare say) sufficiently justifies
the bearing. A humility quite as primitive as that of Jewel or Hooker might not be exactly fitted
to impress the minds of those Anglo-Asiatic diocesans with a reverence for home institutions, and
the church which those fathers watered.

Finding some of Edward's race Unhappy, pass their annals by.

Nor shall thou, their compeer, be quickly forgotten, Allen, with the cordial smile, and still
more cordial laugh, with which thou wert wont to make the old Cloisters shake, in thy cognition
of some poignant jest of theirs; or the anticipation of some more material, and, peradventure,
practical one, of thine own. Extinct are those smiles, with that beautiful countenance, with which
(for thou wert the Nircus formosus of the school), in the days of thy maturer waggery, thou
didst disarm the wrath of infuriated town-damsel, who, incensed by provoking pinch, turning
tigress-like round, suddenly converted by thy angel-look, exchanged the half-formed terrible "bl----,"
for a gentler greeting--"bless thy handsome face!"

Next follow two, who ought to be now alive, and the friends of Elia--the junior Le G---- and F----;
who impelled, the former by a roving temper, the latter by too quick
a sense of neglect--ill capable of enduring the slights poor Sizars
are sometimes subject to in our seats of learning--exchanged their
Alma Mater for the camp; perishing, one by climate, and one on the
plains of Salamanca:--Le G----, sanguine, volatile, sweet-natured;
F----, dogged, faithful, anticipative of insult, warm-hearted, with
something of the old Roman height about him.

Fine, frank-hearted Fr----, the present master of Hertford, with Marmaduke T----, mildest of Missionaries--and
both my good friends still--close the catalogue of Grecians in my
time. If I did not know Him,
I should certainly adore and worship the sun, the most blessed and beautiful image of Him among
things visible! In the land of Egypt, in the day of God's wrath, there was darkness, but in
the land of Goshen there was light. I am a Goshenite, and mean to walk in the light, and forswear
the works of darkness. But to proceed with our reading."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our house" shall be set on a southeast line, so that there shall not be a sunless room in
it, and windows shall be so arranged that it can be traversed and transpierced through and
through with those bright shafts of light which come straight from God.

"Our house" shall not be blockaded with a dank, dripping mass of shrubbery set plumb against
the windows, keeping out light and air. There shall be room all round it for breezes to sweep,
and sunshine to sweeten and dry and vivify; and I would warn all good souls who begin life
by setting out two little evergreen-trees within a foot of each of their front-windows, that
these trees will grow and increase till their front-rooms will be brooded over by a sombre,
stifling shadow fit only for ravens to croak in.

One would think, by the way some people hasten to convert a very narrow front-yard into a dismal
jungle, that the only danger of our New England climate was sunstroke. Ah, in those drizzling
months which form at least one half of our life here, what sullen, censorious, uncomfortable,
unhealthy thoughts are bred of living in dark, chilly rooms, behind such dripping thickets?
Our neighbors' faults assume a deeper hue, life seems a dismal thing, our very religion grows
mouldy.

My idea of a house is, that, as far as is consistent with shelter and reasonable privacy, it
should give you on first entering an open, breezy, outdoor freshness of sensation. Every window
should be a picture--sun and trees and clouds and green grass should seem never to be far from
us. "Our house" may shade but not darken us. "Our house" shall have bow-windows, many, sunny,
and airy,--not for the purpose of being cleaned and shut up, but to be open and enjoyed. There
shall be long verandas above and below, where invalids may walk dry-shod, and enjoy open-air
recreation in wettest weather. In short, I will try to have "our house" combine as far as possible
the sunny, joyous, fresh life of a gypsy in the fields and woods with the quiet and neatness
and comfort and shelter of a roof, rooms, floors, and carpets.

After heavenly fire, I have a word to say of earthly, artificial fires. Furnaces, whether of
hot water, steam, or hot air, are all healthy and admirable provisions for warming our houses
during the eight or nine months of our year that we must have artificial heat, if only, as
I have said, fireplaces keep up a current of ventilation.

The kitchen-range with its water-back I humbly salute. It is a great throbbing heart, and sends
its warm tides of cleansing, comforting fluid all through the house. One could wish that this
friendly dragon could be in some way moderated in his appetite for coal,--he does consume without
mercy, it must be confessed,--but then great is the work he has to do. At any hour of day or
night, in the most distant part of your house, you have but to turn a stop-cock and your red
dragon sends you hot water for your need; your washing-day becomes a mere play-day; your pantry
has its ever-ready supply; and then, by a little judicious care in arranging apartments and
economizing heat, a range may make two or three chambers comfortable in winter weather. A range
with a water-back is among the must-be's in "our house."

Then, as to the evening light,--I know nothing as yet better than gas, where it can be had.
I would certainly not have a house without it. The great objection to it is the danger of its
escape through imperfect fixtures. But it must not do this: a fluid that kills a tree or a
plant with one breath must certainly be a dangerous ingredient in the atmosphere, and if admitted
into houses, must be introduced with every safeguard.

There are families living in the country who make their own gas by a very simple process. This
is worth an inquiry from those who build. There are also contrivances now advertised, with
good testimonials, of domestic machines for generating gas, said to be perfectly safe, simple
to be managed, and producing a light superior to that of the city gas works. This also is worth
an inquiry when "our house" is to be in the country.

And now I come to the next great vital element for which "our house" must provide,--WATER.
"Water, water, everywhere,"--it must be plentiful, it must be easy to get at, it must be pure.
Our ancestors had some excellent ideas in home living and housebuilding. Their houses were,
generally speaking, very sensibly contrived,--roomy, airy, and comfortable; but in their water
arrangements they had little mercy on womankind. The well was out in the yard; and in winter
one must flounder through snow and bring up the ice-bound bucket, before one could fill the
tea-kettle for breakfast. For a sovereign princess of the republic, this was hardly respectful
or respectable. Wells have come somewhat nearer in modern times; but the idea of a constant
supply of fresh water by the simple turning of a stop-cock has not yet visited the great body
of our houses. Were we free to build "our house" just as we wish it, there should be a bath-room
to every two or three inmates, and the hot and cold water should circulate to every chamber.

Among our must-be's, we would lay by a generous sum for plumbing. Let us have our bath-rooms,
and our arrangements for cleanliness and health in kitchen and pantry; and afterwards let the
quality of our lumber and the style of our finishing be according to the sum we have left.
The power to command a warm bath in a house at any hour of day or night is better in bringing
up a family of children than any amount of ready medicine. In three quarters of childish ailments
the warm bath is an almost immediate remedy. Bad colds, incipient fevers, rheumatisms, convulsions,
neuralgias innumerable, are washed off in their first beginnings, and run down the lead pipes
into oblivion. Have, then, O friend, all the water in your house that you can afford, and enlarge
your ideas of the worth of it, that you may afford a great deal. A bathing-room is nothing
to you that requires an hour of lifting and fire-making to prepare it for use. The apparatus
is too cumbrous,--you do not turn to it. But when your chamber opens upon a neat, quiet little
nook, and you have only to turn your stop-cocks and all is ready, your remedy is at hand, you
use it constantly. You are waked in the night by a scream, and find little Tom sitting up,
wild with burning fever. In three minutes he is in the bath, quieted and comfortable; you get
him back, cooled and tranquil, to his little crib, and in the morning he wakes as if nothing
had happened.

Why should not so invaluable and simple a remedy for disease, such a preservative of health,
such a comfort, such a stimulus, be considered as much a matter-of-course in a house as a kitchen-chimney?
At least there should be one bath-room always in order, so arranged that all the family can
have access to it, if one cannot afford the luxury of many.

A house in which water is universally and skillfully distributed is so much easier to take
care of as almost to verify the saying of a friend, that his house was so contrived that it
did its own work: one had better do without carpets on the floors, without stuffed sofas and
rocking-chairs, and secure this.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, papa," said Marianne, "you have made out all your four elements in your house, except
one. I can't imagine what you want of earth."

"I thought," said Jenny, "that the less of our common mother we had in our houses, the better
housekeepers we were."

"My dears," said I, "we philosophers must give an occasional dip into the mystical, and say
something apparently absurd for the purpose of explaining that we mean nothing in particular
by it. It gives common people an idea of our sagacity, to find how clear we come out of our
apparent contradictions and absurdities. Listen."

       *       *       *       *       *

For the fourth requisite of "our house," EARTH, let me point you to your mother's plant-window,
and beg you to remember the fact that through our long, dreary winters we are never a month
without flowers, and the vivid interest which always attaches to growing things. The perfect
house, as I conceive it, is to combine as many of the advantages of living out of doors as
may be consistent with warmth and shelter, and one of these is the sympathy with green and
growing things. Plants are nearer in their relations to human health and vigor than is often
imagined. The cheerfulness that well-kept plants impart to a room comes not merely from gratification
of the eye,--there is a healthful exhalation from them, they are a corrective of the impurities
of the atmosphere. Plants, too, are valuable as tests of the vitality of the atmosphere; their
drooping and failure convey to us information that something is amiss with it. A lady once
told me that she could never raise plants in her parlors on account of the gas and anthracite
coal. I answered, "Are you not afraid to live and bring up your children in an atmosphere which
blights your plants?" If the gas escape from the pipes, and the red-hot anthracite coal or
the red-hot air-tight stove burns out all the vital part of the air, so that healthy plants
in a few days wither and begin to drop their leaves, it is sign that the air must be looked
to and reformed. It is a fatal augury for a room that plants cannot be made to thrive in it.
Plants should not turn pale, be long-jointed, long-leaved, and spindling; and where they grow
in this way, we may be certain that there is a want of vitality for human beings. But where
plants appear as they do in the open air, with vigorous, stocky growth, and short-stemmed,
deep-green leaves, we may believe the conditions of that atmosphere are healthy for human lungs.

It is pleasant to see how the custom of plant growing has spread through our country. In how
many farmhouse windows do we see petunias and nasturtiums vivid with bloom, while snows are
whirling without, and how much brightness have those cheap enjoyments shed on the lives of
those who cared for them! We do not believe there is a human being who would not become a passionate
lover of plants, if circumstances once made it imperative to tend upon and watch the growth
of one. The history of Picciola for substance has been lived over and over by many a man and
woman who once did not know that there was a particle of plant-love in their souls. But to
the proper care of plants in pots there are many hindrances and drawbacks. The dust chokes
the little pores of their green lungs, and they require constant showering; and to carry all
one's plants to a sink or porch for this purpose is a labor which many will not endure. Consequently
plants often do not get a showering once a month! We should try to imitate more closely the
action of Mother Nature, who washes every green child of hers nightly with dews, which lie
glittering on its leaves till morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, there it is!" said Jenny. "I think I could manage with plants, if it were not for this
eternal showering and washing they seem to require to keep them fresh. They are always tempting
one to spatter the carpet and surrounding furniture, which are not equally benefited by the
libation."

"It is partly for that very reason," I replied, "that the plan of 'our house' provides for
the introduction of Mother Earth, as you will see."

       *       *       *       *       *

A perfect house, according to my idea, should always include in it a little compartment where
plants can be kept, can be watered, can be defended from the dust, and have the sunshine and
all the conditions of growth.

People have generally supposed a conservatory to be one of the last trappings of wealth,--something
not to be thought of for those in modest circumstances. But is this so? You have a bow-window
in your parlor. Leave out the flooring, fill the space with rich earth, close it from the parlor
by glass doors, and you have room for enough plants and flowers to keep you gay and happy all
winter. If on the south side, where the sunbeams have power, it requires no heat but that which
warms the parlor; and the comfort of it is incalculable, and the expense a mere trifle greater
than that of the bow-window alone.

In larger houses a larger space might be appropriated in this way. We will not call it a conservatory,
because that name suggests ideas of gardeners, and mysteries of culture and rare plants, which
bring all sorts of care and expense in their train. We would rather call it a greenery, a room
floored with earth, with glass sides to admit the sun,--and let it open on as many other rooms
of the house as possible.

Why should not the dining-room and parlor be all winter connected by a spot of green and flowers,
with plants, mosses, and ferns for the shadowy portions, and such simple blooms as petunias
and nasturtiums garlanding the sunny portion near the windows? If near the water-works, this
greenery might be enlivened by the play of a fountain, whose constant spray would give that
softness to the air which is so often burned away by the dry heat of the furnace.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And do you really think, papa, that houses built in this way are a practical result to be
aimed at?" said Jenny. "To me it seems like a dream of the Alhambra."

"Yet I happen to have seen real people in our day living in just such a house," said I. "I
could point you, this very hour, to a cottage, which in style of building is the plainest possible,
which unites many of the best ideas of a true house. My dear, can you sketch the ground plan
of that house we saw in Brighton?"

"Here it is," said my wife, after a few dashes with her pencil, "an inexpensive house, yet
one of the pleasantest I ever saw."

"This cottage, which might, at the rate of prices before the war, have been built for five
thousand dollars, has many of the requirements which I seek for a house. It has two stories,
and a tier of very pleasant attic-rooms, two bathing-rooms, and the water carried into each
story. The parlor and dining-room both look into a little bower, where a fountain is ever playing
into a little marble basin, and which all the year through has its green and bloom. It is heated
simply from the furnace by a register, like any other room of the house, and requires no more
care than a delicate woman could easily give. The brightness and cheerfulness it brings during
our long, dreary winters is incredible."

       *       *       *       *       *

But one caution is necessary in all such appendages. The earth must be thoroughly underdrained
to prevent the vapors of stagnant water, and have a large admixture of broken charcoal to obviate
the consequences of vegetable decomposition. Great care must be taken that there be no leaves
left to fall and decay on the ground, since vegetable exhalations poison the air. With these
precautions such a plot will soften and purify the air of a house.

Where the means do not allow even so small a conservatory, a recessed window might be fitted
with a deep box, which should have a drain-pipe at the bottom, and a thick layer of broken
charcoal and gravel, with a mixture of fine wood-soil and sand, for the top stratum. Here ivies
may be planted, which will run and twine and strike their little tendrils here and there, and
give the room in time the aspect of a bower; the various greenhouse nasturtiums will make winter
gorgeous with blossoms. In windows unblessed by sunshine--and, alas! such are many--one can
cultivate ferns and mosses; the winter-growing ferns, of which there are many varieties, can
be mixed with mosses and woodland flowers.

Early in February, when the cheerless frosts of winter seem most wearisome, the common blue
violet, wood anemone, hepatica, or rock-columbine, if planted in this way, will begin to bloom.
The common partridge-berry, with its brilliant scarlet fruit and dark-green leaves, will also
grow finely in such situations, and have a beautiful effect. These things require daily showering
to keep them fresh, and the moisture arising from them will soften and freshen the too dry
air of heated winter rooms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus I have been through my four essential elements in housebuilding,--air, fire, water, and
earth. I would provide for these before anything else. After they are secured, I would gratify
my taste and fancy as far as possible in other ways. I quite agree with Bob in hating commonplace
houses, and longing for some little bit of architectural effect! and I grieve profoundly that
every step in that direction must cost so much. I have also a taste for niceness of finish.
I have no objection to silver-plated door-locks and hinges, none to windows which are an entire
plate of clear glass. I congratulate neighbors who are so fortunate as to be able to get them;
and after I have put all the essentials into a house, I would have these too, if I had the means.

But if all my wood work were to be without groove or moulding, if my mantels were to be of
simple wood, if my doors were all to be machine-made, and my lumber of the second quality,
I would have my bath-rooms, my conservatory, my sunny bow-windows, and my perfect ventilation;
and my house would then be so pleasant, and every one in it in such a cheerful mood, that it
would verily seem to be ceiled with cedar.

Speaking of ceiling with cedar, I have one thing more to say. We Americans have a country abounding
in beautiful timber, of whose beauties we know nothing, on account of the pernicious and stupid
habit of covering it with white paint.

The celebrated zebra wood with its golden stripes cannot exceed in quaint beauty the grain
of unpainted chestnut, prepared simply with a coat or two of oil. The butternut has a rich
golden brown, the very darling color of painters, a shade so rich, and grain so beautiful,
that it is of itself as charming to look at as a rich picture. The black-walnut, with its heavy
depth of tone, works in well as an adjunct; and as to oak, what can we say enough of its quaint
and many shadings? Even common pine, which has been considered not decent to look upon till
hastily shrouded in a friendly blanket of white paint, has, when oiled and varnished, the beauty
of satin-wood. The second quality of pine, which has what are called shakes in it, under this
mode of treatment often shows clouds and veins equal in beauty to the choicest woods. The cost
of such a finish is greatly less than that of the old method; and it saves those days and weeks
of cleaning which are demanded by white paint, while its general tone is softer and more harmonious.
Experiments in color may be tried in the combinations of these woods, which at small expense
produce the most charming effects.

As to paper hangings, we are proud to say that our American manufacturers now furnish all that
can be desired. There are some branches of design where artistic, ingenious France must still
excel us; but whoso has a house to fit up, let him first look at what his own country has to
show, and he will be astonished.

There is one topic in housebuilding on which I would add a few words. The difficulty of procuring
and keeping good servants, which must long be one of our chief domestic troubles, warns us
so to arrange our houses that we shall need as few as possible. There is the greatest conceivable
difference in the planning and building of houses as to the amount of work which will be necessary
to keep them in respectable condition. Some houses require a perfect staff of housemaids: there
are plated hinges to be rubbed, paint to be cleaned, with intricacies of moulding and carving
which daily consume hours of dusting to preserve them from a slovenly look. Simple finish,
unpainted wood, a general distribution of water through the dwelling, will enable a very large
house to be cared for by one pair of hands, and yet maintain a creditable appearance.

In kitchens one servant may perform the work of two by a close packing of all the conveniences
for cooking and such arrangements as shall save time and steps. Washing-day may be divested
of its terrors by suitable provisions for water, hot and cold; by wringers, which save at once
the strength of the linen and of the laundress; and by drying-closets connected with ranges,
where articles can in a few moments be perfectly dried. These, with the use of a small mangle,
such as is now common in America, reduce the labors of the laundry one half.

There are many more things which might be said of "our house," and Christopher may, perhaps,
find some other opportunity to say them. For the present his pen is tired and ceaseth.

XII

HOME RELIGION

It was Sunday evening, and our little circle were convened by my study fireside, where a crackling
hickory fire proclaimed the fall of the year to be coming on, and cold weather impending. Sunday
evenings, my married boys and girls are fond of coming home and gathering round the old hearthstone,
and "making believe" that they are children again. We get out the old-fashioned music-books,
and sing old hymns to very old tunes, and my wife and her matron daughters talk about the babies
in the intervals; and we discourse of the sermon, and of the choir, and all the general outworks
of good pious things which Sunday suggests.

"Papa," said Marianne, "you are closing up your 'House and Home Papers,' are you not?"

"Yes,--I am come to the last one, for this year at least."

"My dear," said my wife, "there is one subject you haven't touched on yet; you ought not to
close the year without it; no house and home can be complete without Religion: you should write
a paper on Home Religion."

My wife, as you may have seen in these papers, is an old-fashioned woman, something of a conservative.
I am, I confess, rather given to progress and speculation; but I feel always as if I were going
on in these ways with a string round my waist, and my wife's hand steadily pulling me back
into the old paths. My wife is a steady, Bible-reading, Sabbath-keeping woman, cherishing the
memory of her fathers, and loving to do as they did,--believing, for the most part, that the
paths well beaten by righteous feet are safest, even though much walking therein has worn away
the grass and flowers. Nevertheless, she has an indulgent ear for all that gives promise of
bettering anybody or anything, and therefore is not severe on any new methods that may arise
in our progressive days of accomplishing old good objects.

"There must be a home religion," said my wife.

"I believe in home religion," said Bob Stephens,--"but not in the outward show of it. The best
sort of religion is that which one keeps at the bottom of his heart, and which goes up thence
quietly through all his actions, and not the kind that comes through a certain routine of forms
and ceremonies. Do you suppose family prayers, now, and a blessing at meals, make people any
better?"

"Depend upon it, Robert," said my wife,--she always calls him Robert on Sunday evenings,--"depend
upon it, we are not so very much wiser than our fathers were, that we need depart from their
good old ways. Of course I would have religion in the heart, and spreading quietly through
the life; but does this interfere with those outward, daily acts of respect and duty which
we owe to our Creator? It is too much the slang of our day to decry forms, and to exalt the
excellency of the spirit in opposition to them; but tell me, are you satisfied with friendship
that has none of the outward forms of friendship, or love that has none of the outward forms
of love? Are you satisfied of the existence of a sentiment that has no outward mode of expression?
Even the old heathen had their pieties; they would not begin a feast without a libation to
their divinities, and there was a shrine in every well-regulated house for household gods."

"The trouble with all these things," said Bob, "is that they get to be mere forms. I never
could see that family worship amounted to much more in most families."

"The outward expression of all good things is apt to degenerate into mere form," said I. "The
outward expression of social good feeling becomes a mere form; but for that reason must we
meet each other like oxen? not say, 'Good morning,' or 'Good evening,' or 'I am happy to see
you'? Must we never use any of the forms of mutual good will, except in those moments when
we are excited by a real, present emotion? What would become of society? Forms are, so to speak,
a daguerreotype of a past good feeling, meant to take and keep the impression of it when it
is gone. Our best and most inspired moments are crystallized in them; and even when the spirit
that created them is gone, they help to bring it back. Every one must be conscious that the
use of the forms of social benevolence, even towards those who are personally unpleasant to
us, tends to ameliorate prejudices. We see a man entering our door who is a weary bore, but
we use with him those forms of civility which society prescribes, and feel far kinder to him
than if we had shut the door in his face and said, 'Go along, you tiresome fellow!' Now why
does not this very obvious philosophy apply to better and higher feelings? The forms of religion
are as much more necessary than the forms of politeness and social good will as religion is
more important than all other things."

"Besides," said my wife, "a form of worship kept up from year to year in a family--the assembling
of parents and children for a few sacred moments each day, though it may be a form many times,
especially in the gay and thoughtless hours of life--often becomes invested with deep sacredness
in times of trouble, or in those crises that rouse our deeper feelings. In sickness, in bereavement,
in separation, the daily prayer at home has a sacred and healing power. Then we remember the
scattered and wandering ones; and the scattered and wandering think tenderly of that hour when
they know they are remembered. If I know aught of myself, no one whose mind is introspective--and
mine is painfully so--can have a less respect for his present identity, than I have for the
man Elia. I know him to be light, and vain, and humorsome; a notorious ***; addicted to ****:
averse from counsel, neither taking it, nor offering it;--*** besides; a stammering buffoon; what
you will; lay it on, and spare not; I subscribe to it all, and much more, than thou canst be willing
to lay at his door--but for the child Elia--that "other me," there, in the back-ground--I must
take leave to cherish the remembrance of that young master--with as little reference, I protest,
to this stupid changeling of five-and-forty, as if it had been a child of some other house,
and not of my parents.

I can cry over its patient small-pox at five, and rougher medicaments I can lay its poor fevered
head upon the sick pillow at Christ's and wake with it in surprise at the gentle posture of
maternal tenderness hanging over it, that unknown had watched its sleep. I know how it shrank from
any the least colour of falsehood.--God help thee, Elia, how art
thou changed!

Thou art sophisticated.--I know how honest, how courageous (for a weakling) it was--how religious,
how imaginative, how hopeful!

From what have I not fallen, if the child I remember was indeed myself--and not some dissembling
guardian presenting a false identity, to give the rule to my unpractised steps, and regulate
the tone of my moral being!

That I am fond of indulging, beyond a hope of sympathy, in such retrospection,
may be the symptom of some sickly idiosyncrasy.

Or is it owing to another cause; simply, that being without wife or family, I have not learned
to project myself enough out of myself; and having no offspring of
my own to dally with, I turn back upon memory and adopt my own early
idea, as my heir and favourite?

If these speculations seem fantastical to thee, reader--(a busy man, perchance), if I tread
out of the way of thy sympathy, and am singularly-conceited only, I retire, impenetrable to ridicule,
under the phantom cloud of Elia.

The elders, with whom I was brought up, were of a character not likely to let slip the sacred
observance of any old institution; and the ringing out of the Old Year was kept by them with
circumstances of peculiar ceremony.--In those days the sound of those midnight chimes, though
it seemed to raise hilarity in all around me, never failed to bring a train of pensive imagery
into my fancy. Yet I then scarce conceived what it meant, or thought of it as a reckoning that
concerned me. Not childhood alone, but the young man till thirty, never feels practically
that he is mortal. He knows it indeed, and, if need were, he could preach a homily on the fragility
of life; but he brings it not home to himself, any more than in a hot June we can appropriate
to our imagination the freezing days of December. But now, shall I confess a truth?--I feel these
audits but too powerfully. I begin to count the probabilities of my duration, and to grudge at
the expenditure of moments and shortest periods, like miser's farthings. In proportion as
the years both lessen and shorten, I set more count upon their periods, and would fain lay my
ineffectual finger upon the spoke of the great wheel. They do not willingly seek Lavinian shores.
A new state of being staggers me.

Can a ghost laugh, or shake his gaunt sides, when you are pleasant with him?

And you, my midnight darlings, my Folios! must I part with the intense delight of having you (huge
armfuls) in my embraces?

Shall I enjoy friendships there, wanting the smiling indications which
point me to them here,--the recognisable face--the "sweet assurance
of a look"--?

In winter this intolerable disinclination to dying--to give it its mildest name--does more especially
haunt and beset me. In a genial August noon, beneath a sweltering sky, death is almost problematic.
At those times do such poor snakes as myself enjoy an immortality. Then we expand and burgeon.
Then are we as strong again, as valiant again, as wise again, and
a great deal taller.

The blast that nips and shrinks me, puts me in thoughts of death. All things allied to the insubstantial,
wait upon that master feeling; cold, numbness, dreams, perplexity; moonlight itself, with its
shadowy and spectral appearances,--that cold ghost of the sun, or
Phoebus' sickly sister, like that innutritious one denounced in the
Canticles:--I am none of her minions--I hold with the Persian. For
what satisfaction hath a man, that he shall "lie down with kings and
emperors in death," who in his life-time never greatly coveted the
society of such bed-fellows?--or, forsooth, that "so shall the fairest
face appear?"--why, to comfort me, must Alice W----n be a goblin? The Puritan Sabbath had great and very obvious evils. Its
wearisome restraints and over-strictness cast a gloom on religion, and arrayed against the
day itself the active prejudices that now are undermining it and threatening its extinction.
But it had great merits and virtues, and produced effects on society that we cannot well afford
to dispense with. The clearing of a whole day from all possibilities of labor and amusement
necessarily produced a grave and thoughtful people, and a democratic republic can be carried
on by no other. In lands which have Sabbaths of mere amusement, mere gala days, republics rise
and fall as quick as children's card-houses; and the reason is, they are built by those whose
political and religious education has been childish. The common people of Europe have been
sedulously nursed on amusements by the reigning powers, to keep them from meddling with serious
matters; their religion has been sensuous and sentimental, and their Sabbaths thoughtless holidays.
The common people of New England are educated to think, to reason, to examine all questions
of politics and religion for themselves; and one deeply thoughtful day every week baptizes
and strengthens their reflective and reasoning faculties. The Sunday-schools of Paris are whirligigs
where Young France rides round and round on little hobby-horses till his brain spins even faster
than Nature made it to spin; and when he grows up, his political experiments are as whirligig
as his Sunday education. If I were to choose between the Sabbath of France and the old Puritan
Sabbath, I should hold up both hands for the latter, with all its objectionable features."

"Well," said my wife, "cannot we contrive to retain all that is really valuable of the Sabbath,
and to ameliorate and smooth away what is forbidding?"

"That is the problem of our day," said I. "We do not want the Sabbath of Continental Europe:
it does not suit democratic institutions; it cannot be made even a quiet or a safe day, except
by means of that ever-present armed police that exists there. If the Sabbath of America is
simply to be a universal loafing, picnicking, dining-out day, as it is now with all our foreign
population, we shall need what they have in Europe, the gendarmes at every turn, to protect
the fruit on our trees and the melons in our fields. People who live a little out from great
cities see enough, and more than enough, of this sort of Sabbath-keeping, with our loose American
police.

"The fact is, our system of government was organized to go by moral influences as much as mills
by water, and Sunday was the great day for concentrating these influences and bringing them
to bear; and we might just as well break down all the dams and let out all the water of the
Lowell mills, and expect still to work the looms, as to expect to work our laws and constitution
with European notions of religion.

"It is true the Puritan Sabbath had its disagreeable points. So have the laws of Nature. They
are of a most uncomfortable sternness and rigidity; yet for all that, we would hardly join
in a petition to have them repealed, or made wavering and uncertain for human convenience.
We can bend to them in a thousand ways, and live very comfortably under them."

"But," said Bob, "Sabbath-keeping is the iron rod of bigots; they don't allow a man any liberty
of his own. One says it's wicked to write a letter Sunday; another holds that you must read
no book but the Bible; and a third is scandalized if you take a walk, ever so quietly, in the
fields. There are all sorts of quips and turns. We may fasten things with pins of a Sunday,
but it's wicked to fasten with needle and thread, and so on, and so on; and each one, planting
himself on his own individual mode of keeping Sunday, points his guns and frowns severely over
the battlements on his neighbors whose opinions and practice are different from his."

"Yet," said I, "Sabbath days are expressly mentioned by Saint Paul as among those things concerning
which no man should judge another. It seems to me that the error as regards the Puritan Sabbath
was in representing it, not as a gift from God to man, but as a tribute of man to God. Hence
all these hagglings and nice questions and exactions to the uttermost farthing. The holy time
must be weighed and measured. It must begin at twelve o'clock of one night, and end at twelve
o'clock of another; and from beginning to end, the mind must be kept in a state of tension
by the effort not to think any of its usual thoughts or do any of its usual works. The fact
is, that the metaphysical, defining, hair-splitting mind of New England, turning its whole
powers on this one bit of ritual, this one only day of divine service, which was left of all
the feasts and fasts of the old churches, made of it a thing straiter and stricter than ever
the old Jews dreamed of.

"The old Jewish Sabbath entered only into the physical region, merely enjoining cessation from
physical toil. 'Thou shalt not labor nor do any work,' covered the whole ground. In other respects
than this it was a joyful festival, resembling, in the mode of keeping it, the Christmas of
the modern church. It was a day of social hilarity,--the Jewish law strictly forbidding mourning
and gloom during festivals. The people were commanded on feast days to rejoice before the Lord
their God with all their might. We fancy there were no houses where children were afraid to
laugh, where the voice of social cheerfulness quavered away in terror lest it should awake
a wrathful God. The Jewish Sabbath was instituted, in the absence of printing, of books, and
of all the advantages of literature, to be the great means of preserving sacred history,--a
day cleared from all possibility of other employment than social and family communion, when
the heads of families and the elders of tribes might instruct the young in those religious
traditions which have thus come down to us.

"The Christian Sabbath is meant to supply the same moral need in that improved and higher state
of society which Christianity introduced. Thus it was changed from the day representing the
creation of the world to the resurrection day of Him who came to make all things new. The Jewish
Sabbath was buried with Christ in the sepulchre, and arose with Him, not a Jewish, but a Christian
festival, still holding in itself that provision for man's needs which the old institution
possessed, but with a wider and more generous freedom of application. It was given to the Christian
world as a day of rest, of refreshment, of hope and joy, and of worship. The manner of making
it such a day was left open and free to the needs and convenience of the varying circumstances
and characters of those for whose benefit it was instituted."

"Well," said Bob, "don't you think there is a deal of nonsense about Sabbath-keeping?"

"There is a deal of nonsense about everything human beings have to deal with," I said.

"And," said Marianne, "how to find out what is nonsense?"--

"By clear conceptions," said I, "of what the day is for. I should define the Sabbath as a divine
and fatherly gift to man,--a day expressly set apart for the cultivation of his moral nature.
Its object is not merely physical rest and recreation, but moral improvement. The former are
proper to the day only so far as they are subservient to the latter. The whole human race have
the conscious need of being made better, purer, and more spiritual; the whole human race have
one common danger of sinking to a mere animal life under the pressure of labor or in the dissipations
of pleasure; and of the whole human race the proverb holds good, that what may be done any
time is done at no time. Hence the Heavenly Father appoints one day as a special season for
the culture of man's highest faculties. Accordingly, whatever ways and practices interfere
with the purpose of the Sabbath as a day of worship and moral culture should be avoided, and
all family arrangements for the day should be made with reference thereto."

"Cold dinners on Sunday, for example," said Bob. "Marianne holds these as prime articles of faith."

"Yes,--they doubtless are most worthy and merciful, in giving to the poor cook one day she
may call her own, and rest from the heat of range and cooking-stove. For the same reason, I
would suspend as far as possible all traveling, and all public labor, on Sunday. The hundreds
of hands that these things require to carry them on are the hands of human beings, whose right
to this merciful pause of rest is as clear as their humanity. Let them have their day to look
upward."

"But the little ones," said my oldest matron daughter, who had not as yet spoken,--"they are
the problem. Oh, this weary labor of making children keep Sunday! If I try it, I have no rest
at all myself. If I must talk to them or read to them to keep them from play, my Sabbath becomes
my hardest working day."

"And, pray, what commandment of the Bible ever said children should not play on Sunday?" said
I. "We are forbidden to work, and we see the reason why; but lambs frisk and robins sing on
Sunday; and little children, who are as yet more than half animals, must not be made to keep
the day in the manner proper to our more developed faculties. As much cheerful, attractive
religious instruction as they can bear without weariness may be given, and then they may simply
be restrained from disturbing others. Say to the little one, 'This day we have noble and beautiful
things to think of that interest us deeply: you are a child; you cannot read and think and
enjoy such things as much as we can; you may play softly and quietly, and remember not to make
a disturbance.' I would take a child to public worship at least once of a Sunday; it forms
a good habit in him. If the sermon be long and unintelligible, there are the little Sabbath-school
books in every child's hands; and while the grown people are getting what they understand,
who shall forbid a child's getting what is suited to him in a way that interests him and disturbs
nobody? The Sabbath-school is the child's church and happily it is yearly becoming a more and
more attractive institution. I approve the custom of those who beautify the Sabbath school-room
with plants, flowers, and pictures, thus making it an attractive place to the childish eye.
The more this custom prevails, the more charming in after years will be the memories of Sunday.

"It is most especially to be desired that the whole air and aspect of the day should be one
of cheerfulness. Even the new dresses, new bonnets, and new shoes, in which children delight
of a Sunday, should not be despised. They have their value in marking the day as a festival;
and it is better for the child to long for Sunday, for the sake of his little new shoes, than
that he should hate and dread it as a period of wearisome restraint. All the latitude should
be given to children that can be, consistently with fixing in their minds the idea of a sacred
season. I would rather that the atmosphere of the day should resemble that of a weekly Thanksgiving
than that it should make its mark on the tender mind only by the memory of deprivations and
restrictions."

"Well," said Bob, "here's Marianne always breaking her heart about my reading on Sunday. Now
I hold that what is bad on Sunday is bad on Monday,--and what is good on Monday is good on Sunday."

"We cannot abridge other people's liberty," said I. "The generous, confiding spirit of Christianity
has imposed not a single restriction upon us in reference to Sunday. The day is put at our
disposal as a good Father hands a piece of money to his child,--'There it is; take it and spend
it well.' The child knows from his father's character what he means by spending it well, but
he is left free to use his own judgment as to the mode.

"If a man conscientiously feels that reading of this or that description is the best for him
as regards his moral training and improvement, let him pursue it, and let no man judge him.
It is difficult, with the varying temperaments of men, to decide what are or are not religious
books. One man is more religiously impressed by the reading of history or astronomy than he
would be by reading a sermon. There may be overwrought and wearied states of the brain and
nerves which require and make proper the diversions of light literature; and if so, let it
be used. The mind must have its recreations as well as the body."

"But for children and young people," said my daughter,--"would you let them read novels on Sunday?"

"That is exactly like asking, Would you let them talk with people on Sunday? Now people are
different; it depends, therefore, on who they are. Some are trifling and flighty, some are
positively bad-principled, some are altogether good in their influence. So of the class of
books called novels. Some are merely frivolous, some are absolutely noxious and dangerous,
others again are written with a strong moral and religious purpose, and, being vivid and interesting,
produce far more religious effect on the mind than dull treatises and sermons. The parables
of Christ sufficiently establish the point that there is no inherent objection to the use of
fiction in teaching religious truth. Good religious fiction, thoughtfully read, may be quite
as profitable as any other reading."

"But don't you think," said Marianne, "that there is danger in too much fiction?"

"Yes," said I. "But the chief danger of all that class of reading is its easiness, and the
indolent, careless mental habits it induces. A great deal of the reading of young people on
all days is really reading to no purpose, its object being merely present amusement. It is
a listless yielding of the mind to be washed over by a stream which leaves no fertilizing properties,
and carries away by constant wear the good soil of thought. I should try to establish a barrier
against this kind of reading, not only on Sunday, but on Monday, on Tuesday, and on all days.
Instead, therefore, of objecting to any particular class of books for Sunday reading, I should
say in general that reading merely for pastime, without any moral aim, is the thing to be guarded
against. That which inspires no thought, no purpose, which steals away all our strength and
energy, and makes the Sabbath a day of dreams, is the reading I would object to.

"So of music. I do not see the propriety of confining one's self to technical sacred music.
Any grave, solemn, thoughtful, or pathetic music has a proper relation to our higher spiritual
nature, whether it be printed in a church service-book or on secular sheets. On me, for example,
Beethoven's Sonatas have a far more deeply religious influence than much that has religious
names and words. Music is to be judged of by its effects."

"Well," said Bob, "if Sunday is given for our own individual improvement, I for one should
not go to church. I think I get a great deal more good in staying at home and reading."

"There are two considerations to be taken into account in reference to this matter of church-going,"
I replied. "One relates to our duty as members of society in keeping up the influence of the
Sabbath, and causing it to be respected in the community; the other, to the proper disposition
of our time for our own moral improvement. As members of the community, we should go to church,
and do all in our power to support the outward ordinances of religion. If a conscientious man
makes up his mind that Sunday is a day for outward acts of worship and reverence, he should
do his own part as an individual towards sustaining these observances. Even though he may have
such mental and moral resources that as an individual he could gain much more in solitude than
in a congregation, still he owes to the congregation the influence of his presence and sympathy.
But I have never yet seen the man, however finely gifted morally and intellectually, whom I
thought in the long run a gainer in either of these respects by the neglect of public worship.
I have seen many who in their pride kept aloof from the sympathies and communion of their brethren,
who lost strength morally, and deteriorated in ways that made themselves painfully felt. Sunday
is apt in such cases to degenerate into a day of mere mental idleness and reverie, or to become
a sort of waste-paper box for scraps, odds and ends of secular affairs.

"As to those very good people--and many such there are--who go straight on with the work of
life on Sunday, on the plea that 'to labor is to pray,' I simply think they are mistaken. In
the first place, to labor is not the same thing as to pray. It may sometimes be as good a thing
to do, and in some cases even a better thing; but it is not the same thing. A man might as
well never write a letter to his wife, on the plea that making money for her is writing to
her. It may possibly be quite as great a proof of love to work for a wife as to write to her,
but few wives would not say that both were not better than either alone. Furthermore, there
is no doubt that the intervention of one day of spiritual rest and aspiration so refreshes
a man's whole nature, and oils the many wheels of existence, that he who allows himself a weekly
Sabbath does more work in the course of his life for the omission of work on that day.

"A young student in a French college, where the examinations are rigidly severe, found by experience
that he succeeded best in his examination by allowing one day of entire rest just before it.
His brain and nervous system refreshed in this way carried him through the work better than
if taxed to the last moment. There are men transacting a large and complicated business who
can testify to the same influence from the repose of the Sabbath.

"I believe those Christian people who from conscience and principle turn their thoughts most
entirely out of the current of worldly cares on Sunday fulfill unconsciously a great law of
health; and that, whether their moral nature be thereby advanced or not, their brain will work
more healthfully and actively for it, even in physical and worldly matters. It is because the
Sabbath thus harmonizes the physical and moral laws of our being that the injunction concerning
it is placed among the ten great commandments, each of which represents some one of the immutable
needs of humanity."

"There is yet another point of family religion that ought to be thought of," said my wife:
"I mean the customs of mourning. If there is anything that ought to distinguish Christian families
from Pagans, it should be their way of looking at and meeting those inevitable events that
must from time to time break the family chain. It seems to be the peculiarity of Christianity
to shed hope on such events. And yet it seems to me as if it were the very intention of many
of the customs of society to add tenfold to their gloom and horror,--such swathings of black
crape, such funereal mufflings of every pleasant object, such darkening of rooms, and such
seclusion from society and giving up to bitter thoughts and lamentation. How can little children
that look on such things believe that there is a particle of truth in all they hear about the
joyous and comforting doctrines which the Bible holds forth for such times?"

"That subject is a difficult one," I rejoined. "Nature seems to indicate a propriety in some
outward expressions of grief when we lose our friends. All nations agree in these demonstrations.
In a certain degree they are soothing to sorrow; they are the language of external life made
to correspond to the internal. Wearing mourning has its advantages. It is a protection to the
feelings of the wearer, for whom it procures sympathetic and tender consideration; it saves
grief from many a hard jostle in the ways of life; it prevents the necessity of many a trying
explanation, and is the ready apology for many an omission of those tasks to which sorrow is
unequal. For all these reasons I never could join the crusade which some seem disposed to wage
against it. Mourning, however, ought not to be continued for years. Its uses are more for the
first few months of sorrow, when it serves the mourner as a safeguard from intrusion, insuring
quiet and leisure in which to reunite the broken threads of life, and to gather strength for
a return to its duties. But to wear mourning garments and forego society for two or three years
after the loss of any friend, however dear, I cannot but regard as a morbid, unhealthy nursing
of sorrow, unworthy of a Christian."

"And yet," said my wife, "to such an unhealthy degree does this custom prevail, that I have
actually known young girls who have never worn any other dress than mourning, and consequently
never been into society, during the entire period of their girlhood. First, the death of a
father necessitated three years of funereal garments and abandonment of social relations; then
the death of a brother added two years more; and before that mourning was well ended, another
of a wide circle of relatives being taken, the habitual seclusion was still protracted. What
must a child think of the Christian doctrine of life and death who has never seen life except
through black crape? We profess to believe in a better life to which the departed good are
called,--to believe in the shortness of our separation, the certainty of reunion, and that
all these events are arranged in all their relations by an infinite tenderness which cannot
err. Surely, Christian funerals too often seem to say that affliction 'cometh of the dust,'
and not from above."

"But," said Bob, "after all, death is a horror; you can make nothing less of it. You can't
smooth it over, nor dress it with flowers; it is what Nature shudders at."

"It is precisely for this reason," said I, "that Christians should avoid those customs which
aggravate and intensify this natural dread. Why overpower the senses with doleful and funereal
images in the hour of weakness and bereavement, when the soul needs all her force to rise above
the gloom of earth, and to realize the mysteries of faith? Why shut the friendly sunshine from
the mourner's room? Why muffle in a white shroud every picture that speaks a cheerful household
word to the eye? Why make a house look stiff and ghastly and cold as a corpse? In some of our
cities, on the occurrence of a death in the family, all the shutters on the street are closed
and tied with black crape, and so remain for months. What an oppressive gloom must this bring
on a house! how like the very shadow of death! It is enlisting the nerves and the senses against
our religion, and making more difficult the great duty of returning to life and its interests.
I would have flowers and sunshine in the deserted rooms, and make them symbolical of the cheerful
mansions above, to which our beloved ones are gone. Home ought to be so religiously cheerful,
so penetrated by the life of love and hope and Christian faith, that the other world may be
made real by it. Our home life should be a type of the higher life. Our home should be so sanctified,
its joys and its sorrows so baptized and hallowed, that it shall not be sacrilegious to think
of heaven as a higher form of the same thing,--a Father's house in the better country, whose
mansions are many, whose love is perfect, whose joy is eternal."

THE CHIMNEY-CORNER

I

WHAT WILL YOU DO WITH HER? OR, THE WOMAN QUESTION

"Well, what will you do with her?" said I to my wife.

My wife had just come down from an interview with a pale, faded-looking young woman in rusty
black attire, who had called upon me on the very common supposition that I was an editor of
the "Atlantic Monthly."

By the by, this is a mistake that brings me, Christopher Crowfield, many letters that do not
belong to me, and which might with equal pertinency be addressed, "To the Man in the Moon."
Yet these letters often make my heart ache,--they speak so of people who strive and sorrow
and want help; and it is hard to be called on in plaintive tones for help which you know it
is perfectly impossible for you to give.

For instance, you get a letter in a delicate hand, setting forth the old distress,--she is
poor, and she has looking to her for support those that are poorer and more helpless than herself:
she has tried sewing, but can make little at it; tried teaching, but cannot now get a school,--all
places being filled, and more than filled; at last has tried literature, and written some little
things, of which she sends you a modest specimen, and wants your opinion whether she can gain
her living by writing. You run over the articles, and perceive at a glance that there is no
kind of hope or use in her trying to do anything at literature; and then you ask yourself mentally,
"What is to be done with her? What can she do?"

Such was the application that had come to me this morning,--only, instead of by note, it came,
as I have said, in the person of the applicant, a thin, delicate, consumptive-looking being,
wearing that rusty mourning which speaks sadly at once of heart bereavement and material poverty.

My usual course is to turn such cases over to Mrs. Crowfield; and it is to be confessed that
this worthy woman spends a large portion of her time, and wears out an extraordinary amount
of shoe-leather, in performing the duties of a self-constituted intelligence office. Talk of
giving money to the poor! what is that, compared to giving sympathy, thought, time, taking
their burdens upon you, sharing their perplexities? They who are able to buy off every application
at the door of their heart with a five or ten dollar bill are those who free themselves at
least expense.

My wife had communicated to our friend, in the gentlest tones and in the blandest manner, that
her poor little pieces, however interesting to her own household circle, had nothing in them
wherewith to enable her to make her way in the thronged and crowded thoroughfare of letters,--that
they had no more strength or adaptation to win bread for her than a broken-winged butterfly
to draw a plough; and it took some resolution in the background of her tenderness to make the
poor applicant entirely certain of this. In cases like this, absolute certainty is the very
greatest, the only true kindness.

It was grievous, my wife said, to see the discouraged shade which passed over her thin, tremulous
features when this certainty forced itself upon her. It is hard, when sinking in the waves,
to see the frail bush at which the hand clutches uprooted; hard, when alone in the crowded
thoroughfare of travel, to have one's last bank-note declared a counterfeit. I knew I should
not be able to see her face, under the shade of this disappointment; and so, coward that I
was, I turned this trouble, where I have turned so many others, upon my wife.

"Well, what shall we do with her?" said I.

"I really don't know," said my wife musingly.

"Do you think we could get that school in Taunton for her?"

"Impossible; Mr. Herbert told me he had already twelve applicants for it."

"Couldn't you get her plain sewing? Is she handy with her needle?"

"She has tried that, but it brings on a pain in her side, and cough; and the doctor has told
her it will not do for her to confine herself."

"How is her handwriting? Does she write a good hand?"

"Only passable."

"Because," said I, "I was thinking if I could get Steele and Simpson to give her law papers
to copy."

"They have more copyists than they need now; and, in fact, this woman does not write the sort
of hand at all that would enable her to get on as a copyist."

"Well," said I, turning uneasily in my chair, and at last hitting on a bright masculine expedient,
"I'll tell you what must be done. She must get married."

"My dear," said my wife, "marrying for a living is the very hardest way a woman can take to
get it. Even marrying for love often turns out badly enough. Witness poor Jane."

Jane was one of the large number of people whom it seemed my wife's fortune to carry through
life on her back. She was a pretty, smiling, pleasing daughter of Erin, who had been in our
family originally as nursery-maid. I had been greatly pleased in watching a little idyllic
affair growing up between her and a joyous, good-natured young Irishman, to whom at last we
married her. Mike soon after, however, took to drinking and unsteady courses; and the result
has been to Jane only a yearly baby, with poor health and no money.

"In fact," said my wife, "if Jane had only kept single, she could have made her own way well
enough, and might have now been in good health and had a pretty sum in the savings bank. As
it is, I must carry not only her, but her three children, on my back."

"You ought to drop her, my dear. You really ought not to burden yourself with other people's
affairs as you do," said I inconsistently.

"How can I drop her? Can I help knowing that she is poor and suffering? And if I drop her,
who will take her up?"

Now there is a way of getting rid of cases of this kind, spoken of in a quaint old book, which
occurred strongly to me at this moment:--

"If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
'Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled,' notwithstanding ye give them not those things which
are needful to the body, what doth it profit?"

I must confess, notwithstanding the strong point of the closing question, I looked with an
evil eye of longing on this very easy way of disposing of such cases. A few sympathizing words,
a few expressions of hope that I did not feel, a line written to turn the case into somebody
else's hands,--any expedient, in fact, to hide the longing eyes and imploring hands from my
sight,--was what my carnal nature at this moment greatly craved.

"Besides," said my wife, resuming the thread of her thoughts in regard to the subject just
now before us, "as to marriage, it's out of the question at present for this poor child; for
the man she loved and would have married lies low in one of the graves before Richmond. It's
a sad story,--one of a thousand like it. She brightened for a few moments, and looked almost
handsome, when she spoke of his bravery and goodness. Her father and lover have both died in
this war. Her only brother has returned from it a broken-down cripple, and she has him and
her poor old mother to care for, and so she seeks work. I told her to come again to-morrow,
and I would look about for her a little to-day."

"Let me see, how many are now down on your list to be looked about for, Mrs. Crowfield?--some
twelve or thirteen, are there not? You've got Tom's sister disposed of finally, I hope,--that's
a comfort!"

"Well, I'm sorry to say she came back on my hands yesterday," said my wife patiently. "She
is a foolish young thing, and said she didn't like living out in the country. I'm sorry, because
the Morrises are an excellent family, and she might have had a life home there, if she had
only been steady, and chosen to behave herself properly. But yesterday I found her back on
her mother's hands again; and the poor woman told me that the dear child never could bear to
be separated from her, and that she hadn't the heart to send her back."

"And in short," said I, "she gave you notice that you must provide for Miss O'Connor in some
more agreeable way. Cross that name off your list, at any rate. That woman and girl need a
few hard raps in the school of experience before you can do anything for them."

"I think I shall," said my long-suffering wife; "but it's a pity to see a young thing put in
the direct road to ruin."

"It is one of the inevitables," said I, "and we must save our strength for those that are willing
to help themselves."

"What's all this talk about?" said Bob, coming in upon us rather brusquely.

"Oh, as usual, the old question," said I,--"'What's to be done with her?'"

"Well," said Bob, "it's exactly what I've come to talk with mother about. Since she keeps a
distressed women's agency office, I've come to consult her about Marianne. That woman will
die before six months are out, a victim to high civilization and the Paddies. There we are,
twelve miles out from Boston, in a country villa so convenient that every part of it might
almost do its own work,--everything arranged in the most convenient, contiguous, self-adjusting,
self-acting, patent-right, perfective manner,--and yet I tell you Marianne will die of that
house. It will yet be recorded on her tombstone, 'Died of conveniences.' For myself, what I
languish for is a log-cabin, with a bed in one corner, a trundle-bed underneath for the children,
a fireplace only six feet off, a table, four chairs, one kettle, a coffee-pot, and a tin baker,--that's
all. I lived deliciously in an establishment of this kind last summer, when I was up at Lake
Superior; and I am convinced, if I could move Marianne into it at once, that she would become
a healthy and a happy woman.

"The fact is," continued Bob, "that since our cook married, and Alice went to California, there
seems to be no possibility of putting our domestic cabinet upon any permanent basis. The number
of female persons that have been through our house, and the ravages they have wrought on it
for the last six months, pass belief. I had yesterday a bill of sixty dollars' plumbing to
pay for damages of various kinds which had had to be repaired in our very convenient water-works;
and the blame of each particular one had been bandied like a shuttlecock among our three household
divinities. Biddy privately assured my wife that Kate was in the habit of emptying dustpans
of rubbish into the main drain from the chambers, and washing any little extra bits down through
the bowls; and, in fact, when one of the bathing-room bowls had overflowed so as to damage
the frescoes below, my wife, with great delicacy and precaution, interrogated Kate as to whether
she had followed her instructions in the care of the water-pipes. Of course she protested the
most immaculate care and circumspection. 'Sure, and she knew how careful one ought to be, and
wasn't of the likes of thim as wouldn't mind what throuble they made,--like Biddy, who would
throw trash and hair in the pipes, and niver listen to her tellin'; sure, and hadn't she broken
the pipes in the kitchen, and lost the stoppers, as it was a shame to see in a Christian house?'
Ann, the third girl, being privately questioned, blamed Biddy on Monday, and Kate on Tuesday;
on Wednesday, however, she exonerated both; but on Thursday, being in a high quarrel with both,
she departed, accusing them severally, not only of all the evil practices aforesaid, but of
lying and stealing, and all other miscellaneous wickednesses that came to hand. Whereat the
two thus accused rushed in, bewailing themselves and cursing Ann in alternate strophes, averring
that she had given the baby laudanum, and, taking it out riding, had stopped for hours with
it in a filthy lane where the scarlet fever was said to be rife,--in short, made so fearful
a picture that Marianne gave up the child's life at once, and has taken to her bed. I have
endeavored all I could to quiet her, by telling her that the scarlet fever story was probably
an extemporaneous work of fiction, got up to gratify the Hibernian anger at Ann; and that it
wasn't in the least worth while to believe one thing more than another from the fact that any
of the tribe said it. But she refuses to be comforted, and is so Utopian as to lie there crying,
'Oh, if I only could get one that I could trust,--one that would really speak the truth to
me,--one that I might know really went where she said she went, and really did as she said
she did!' To have to live so, she says, and bring up little children with those she can't trust
out of her sight, whose word is good for nothing,--to feel that her beautiful house and her
lovely things are all going to rack and ruin, and she can't take care of them, and can't see
where or when or how the mischief is done,--in short, the poor child talks as women do who
are violently attacked with housekeeping fever tending to congestion of the brain. She actually
yesterday told me that she wished, on the whole, she never had got married, which I take to
be the most positive indication of mental alienation."

"Here," said I, "we behold at this moment two women dying for the want of what they can mutually
give one another,--each having a supply of what the other needs, but held back by certain invisible
cobwebs, slight but strong, from coming to each other's assistance. Marianne has money enough,
but she wants a helper in her family, such as all her money has been hitherto unable to buy;
and here, close at hand, is a woman who wants home shelter, healthy, varied, active, cheerful
labor, with nourishing food, kind care, and good wages. What hinders these women from rushing
to the help of one another, just as two drops of water on a leaf rush together and make one?
Nothing but a miserable prejudice,--but a prejudice so strong that women will starve in any
other mode of life rather than accept competency and comfort in this."

"You don't mean," said my wife, "to propose that our protégée should go to Marianne as a servant?"

"I do say it would be the best thing for her to do,--the only opening that I see, and a very
good one, too, it is. Just look at it. Her bare living at this moment cannot cost her less
than five or six dollars a week,--everything at the present time is so very dear in the city.
Now by what possible calling open to her capacity can she pay her board and washing, fuel and
lights, and clear a hundred and some odd dollars a year? She could not do it as a district
school teacher; she certainly cannot, with her feeble health, do it by plain sewing; she could
not do it as a copyist. A robust woman might go into a factory and earn more; but factory work
is unintermitted, twelve hours daily, week in and out, in the same movement, in close air,
amid the clatter of machinery; and a person delicately organized soon sinks under it. It takes
a stolid, enduring temperament to bear factory labor. Now look at Marianne's house and family,
and see what is insured to your protégée there.

"In the first place, a home,--a neat, quiet chamber, quite as good as she has probably been
accustomed to,--the very best of food, served in a pleasant, light, airy kitchen, which is
one of the most agreeable rooms in the house, and the table and table service quite equal to
those of most farmers and mechanics. Then her daily tasks would be light and varied,--some
sweeping, some dusting, the washing and dressing of children, the care of their rooms and the
nursery,--all of it the most healthful, the most natural work of a woman,--work alternating
with rest, and diverting thought from painful subjects by its variety, and, what is more, a
kind of work in which a good Christian woman might have satisfaction, as feeling herself useful
in the highest and best way; for the child's nurse, if she be a pious, well-educated woman,
may make the whole course of nursery life an education in goodness. Then, what is far different
from any other modes of gaining a livelihood, a woman in this capacity can make and feel herself
really and truly beloved. The hearts of little children are easily gained, and their love is
real and warm, and no true woman can become the object of it without feeling her own life made
brighter. Again, she would have in Marianne a sincere, warm-hearted friend, who would care
for her tenderly, respect her sorrows, shelter her feelings, be considerate of her wants, and
in every way aid her in the cause she has most at heart,--the succor of her family. There are
many ways besides her wages in which she would infallibly be assisted by Marianne, so that
the probability would be that she could send her little salary almost untouched to those for
whose support she was toiling,--all this on her part."

"But," added my wife, "on the other hand, she would be obliged to associate and be ranked with
common Irish servants."

"Well," I answered, "is there any occupation, by which any of us gain our living, which has
not its disagreeable side? Does not the lawyer spend all his days either in a dusty office
or in the foul air of a court-room? Is he not brought into much disagreeable contact with the
lowest class of society? Are not his labors dry and hard and exhausting? Does not the blacksmith
spend half his life in soot and grime, that he may gain a competence for the other half? If
this woman were to work in a factory, would she not often be brought into associations distasteful
to her? Might it not be the same in any of the arts and trades in which a living is to be got?
There must be unpleasant circumstances about earning a living in any way, only I maintain that
those which a woman would be likely to meet with as a servant in a refined, well-bred Christian
family would be less than in almost any other calling. Are there no trials to a woman, I beg
to know, in teaching a district school, where all the boys, big and little, of a neighborhood
congregate? For my part, were it my daughter or sister who was in necessitous circumstances,
I would choose for her a position such as I name, in a kind, intelligent, Christian family,
before many of those to which women do devote themselves."

"Well," said Bob, "all this has a good sound enough, but it's quite impossible. It's true,
I verily believe, that such a kind of servant in our family would really prolong Marianne's
life years,--that it would improve her health, and be an unspeakable blessing to her, to me,
and the children,--and I would almost go down on my knees to a really well-educated, good American
woman who would come into our family and take that place; but I know it's perfectly vain and
useless to expect it. You know we have tried the experiment two or three times of having a
person in our family who should be on the footing of a friend, yet do the duties of a servant,
and that we never could make it work well. These half-and-half people are so sensitive, so
exacting in their demands, so hard to please, that we have come to the firm determination that
we will have no sliding-scale in our family, and that whoever we are to depend on must come
with bona fide willingness to take the position of a servant, such as that position is in our
house; and that, I suppose, your protégée would never do, even if she could thereby live easier,
have less hard work, better health, and quite as much money as she could earn in any other way."

"She would consider it a personal degradation, I suppose," said my wife.

"And yet, if she only knew it," said Bob, "I should respect her far more profoundly for her
willingness to take that position, when adverse fortune has shut other doors."

"Well, now," said I, "this woman is, as I understand, the daughter of a respectable stone-mason,
and the domestic habits of her early life have probably been economical and simple. Like most
of our mechanics' daughters, she has received in one of our high schools an education which
has cultivated and developed her mind far beyond those of her parents and the associates of
her childhood. This is a common fact in our American life. By our high schools the daughters
of plain workingmen are raised to a state of intellectual culture which seems to make the disposition
of them in any kind of industrial calling a difficult one. They all want to teach school,--and
schoolteaching, consequently, is an overcrowded profession,--and, failing that, there is only
millinery and dressmaking. Of late, it is true, efforts have been made in various directions
to widen their sphere. Typesetting and bookkeeping are in some instances beginning to be open
to them.

"All this time there is lying, neglected and despised, a calling to which womanly talents and
instincts are peculiarly fitted,--a calling full of opportunities of the most lasting usefulness;
a calling which insures a settled home, respectable protection, healthful exercise, good air,
good food, and good wages; a calling in which a woman may make real friends, and secure to
herself warm affection: and yet this calling is the one always refused, shunned, contemned,
left to the alien and the stranger, and that simply and solely because it bears the name of
servant. A Christian woman, who holds the name of Christ in her heart in true devotion, would
think it the greatest possible misfortune and degradation to become like him in taking upon
her 'the form of a servant.' The founder of Christianity says: 'Whether is greater, he that
sitteth at meat or he that serveth? But I am among you as he that serveth.' But notwithstanding
these so plain declarations of Jesus, we find that scarce any one in a Christian land will
accept real advantages of position and employment that come with that name and condition."

"I suppose," said my wife, "I could prevail upon this woman to do all the duties of the situation,
if she could be, as they phrase it, 'treated as one of the family.'"

"That is to say," said Bob, "if she could sit with us at the same table, be introduced to our
friends, and be in all respects as one of us. Now, as to this, I am free to say that I have
no false aristocratic scruples. I consider every well-educated woman as fully my equal, not
to say my superior; but it does not follow from this that she would be one whom I should wish
to make a third party with me and my wife at meal-times. Our meals are often our seasons of
privacy,--the times when we wish in perfect unreserve to speak of matters that concern ourselves
and our family alone. Even invited guests and family friends would not be always welcome, however
agreeable at times. Now a woman may be perfectly worthy of respect, and we may be perfectly
respectful to her, whom nevertheless we do not wish to take into the circle of intimate friendship.
I regard the position of a woman who comes to perform domestic service as I do any other business
relation. We have a very respectable young lady in our employ who does legal copying for us,
and all is perfectly pleasant and agreeable in our mutual relations; but the case would be
far otherwise were she to take it into her head that we treated her with contempt, because
my wife did not call on her, and because she was not occasionally invited to tea. Besides,
I apprehend that a woman of quick sensibilities, employed in domestic service, and who was
so far treated as a member of the family as to share our table, would find her position even
more painful and embarrassing than if she took once for all the position of a servant. We could
not control the feelings of our friends; we could not always insure that they would be free
from aristocratic prejudice, even were we so ourselves. We could not force her upon their acquaintance,
and she might feel far more slighted than she would in a position where no attentions of any
kind were to be expected. Besides which, I have always noticed that persons standing in this
uncertain position are objects of peculiar antipathy to the servants in full; that they are
the cause of constant and secret cabals and discontents; and that a family where the two orders
exist has always raked up in it the smouldering embers of a quarrel ready at any time to burst
out into open feud."

"Well," said I, "here lies the problem of American life. Half our women, like Marianne, are
being faded and made old before their time by exhausting endeavors to lead a life of high civilization
and refinement with only such untrained help as is washed up on our shores by the tide of emigration.
Our houses are built upon a plan that precludes the necessity of much hard labor, but requires
rather careful and nice handling. A well-trained, intelligent woman, who had vitalized her
finger-ends by means of a well-developed brain, could do all the work of such a house with
comparatively little physical fatigue. So stands the case as regards our houses. Now, over
against the women that are perishing in them from too much care, there is another class of
American women that are wandering up and down, perishing for lack of some remunerating employment.
That class of women, whose developed brains and less developed muscles mark them as peculiarly
fitted for the performance of the labors of a high civilization, stand utterly aloof from paid
domestic service. Sooner beg, sooner starve, sooner marry for money, sooner hang on as dependents
in families where they know they are not wanted, than accept of a quiet home, easy, healthful
work, and certain wages, in these refined and pleasant modern dwellings of ours."

"What is the reason of this?" said Bob.

"The reason is, that we have not yet come to the full development of Christian democracy. The
taint of old aristocracies is yet pervading all parts of our society. We have not yet realized
fully the true dignity of labor, and the surpassing dignity of domestic labor. And I must say
that the valuable and courageous women who have agitated the doctrines of Woman's Rights among
us have not in all things seen their way clear in this matter."

"Don't talk to me of those creatures," said Bob, "those men-women, those anomalies, neither
flesh nor fish, with their conventions, and their cracked woman-voices strained in what they
call public speaking, but which I call public squeaking! No man reverences true women more
than I do. I hold a real, true, thoroughly good woman, whether in my parlor or my kitchen,
as my superior. She can always teach me something that I need to know. She has always in her
somewhat of the divine gift of prophecy; but in order to keep it, she must remain a woman.
When she crops her hair, puts on pantaloons, and strides about in conventions, she is an abortion,
and not a woman."

"Come! come!" said I, "after all, speak with deference. We that choose to wear soft clothing
and dwell in kings' houses must respect the Baptists, who wear leathern girdles, and eat locusts
and wild honey. They are the voices crying in the wilderness, preparing the way for a coming
good. They go down on their knees in the mire of life to lift up and brighten and restore a
neglected truth; and we that have not the energy to share their struggle should at least refrain
from criticising their soiled garments and ungraceful action. There have been excrescences,
eccentricities, peculiarities, about the camp of these reformers; but the body of them have
been true and noble women, and worthy of all the reverence due to such. They have already in
many of our States reformed the laws relating to woman's position, and placed her on a more
just and Christian basis. It is through their movements that in many of our States a woman
can hold the fruits of her own earnings, if it be her ill luck to have a worthless, drunken
spendthrift for a husband. It is owing to their exertions that new trades and professions are
opening to woman; and all that I have to say to them is, that in the suddenness of their zeal
for opening new paths for her feet, they have not sufficiently considered the propriety of
straightening, widening, and mending the one broad, good old path of domestic labor, established
by God himself. It does appear to me, that, if at least a portion of their zeal could be spent
in removing the stones out of this highway of domestic life, and making it pleasant and honorable,
they would effect even more. I would not have them leave undone what they are doing; but I
would, were I worthy to be considered, humbly suggest to their prophetic wisdom and enthusiasm,
whether, in this new future of women which they wish to introduce, women's natural, God-given
employment of domestic service is not to receive a new character, and rise in a new form.

"'To love and serve' is a motto worn with pride on some aristocratic family shields in England.
It ought to be graven on the Christian shield. Servant is the name which Christ gives to the
Christian; and in speaking of his kingdom as distinguished from earthly kingdoms, he distinctly
said, that rank there should be conditioned, not upon desire to command, but on willingness
to serve.

"'Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great
exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great
among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your
servant.'

"Why is it, that this name of servant, which Christ says is the highest in the kingdom of heaven,
is so dishonored among us professing Christians, that good women will beg or starve, will suffer
almost any extreme of poverty and privation, rather than accept home, competence, security,
with this honored name?"

"The fault with many of our friends of the Woman's Rights order," said my wife, "is the depreciatory
tone in which they have spoken of the domestic labors of a family as being altogether below
the scope of the faculties of woman. 'Domestic drudgery' they call it,--an expression that
has done more harm than any two words that ever were put together.

"Think of a woman's calling clear-starching and ironing domestic drudgery, and to better the
matter turning to typesetting in a grimy printing office! Call the care of china and silver,
the sweeping of carpets, the arrangement of parlors and sitting-rooms, drudgery; and go into
a factory and spend the day amid the whir and clatter and thunder of machinery, inhaling an
atmosphere loaded with wool and machine grease, and keeping on the feet for twelve hours, nearly
continuously! Think of its being called drudgery to take care of a clean, light, airy nursery,
to wash and dress and care for two or three children, to mend their clothes, tell them stories,
make them playthings, take them out walking or driving; and rather than this, to wear out the
whole livelong day, extending often deep into the night, in endless sewing, in a close room
of a dressmaking establishment! Is it any less drudgery to stand all day behind a counter,
serving customers, than to tend a doorbell and wait on a table? For my part," said my wife,
"I have often thought the matter over, and concluded, that, if I were left in straitened circumstances,
as many are in a great city, I would seek a position as a servant in one of our good families."

"I envy the family that you even think of in that connection," said I. "I fancy the amazement
which would take possession of them as you began to develop among them."

"I have always held," said my wife, "that family work, in many of its branches, can be better
performed by an educated woman than an uneducated one. Just as an army where even the bayonets
think is superior to one of mere brute force and mechanical training, so, I have heard it said,
some of our distinguished modern female reformers show an equal superiority in the domestic
sphere,--and I do not doubt it. Family work was never meant to be the special province of untaught
brains. I have sometimes thought I should like to show what I could do as a servant."

"Well," said Bob, "to return from all this to the question, What's to be done with her? Are
you going to my distressed woman? If you are, suppose you take your distressed woman along,
and ask her to try it. I can promise her a pleasant house, a quiet room by herself, healthful
and not too hard work, a kind friend, and some leisure for reading, writing, or whatever other
pursuit of her own she may choose for her recreation. We are always quite willing to lend books
to any who appreciate them. Our house is surrounded by pleasant grounds, which are open to
our servants as to ourselves. So let her come and try us. I am quite sure that country air,
quiet security, and moderate exercise in a good home, will bring up her health; and if she
is willing to take the one or two disagreeables which may come with all this, let her try us."

"Well," said I, "so be it; and would that all the women seeking homes and employment could
thus fall in with women who have homes and are perishing in them for want of educated helpers!"

On this question of woman's work I have yet more to say, but must defer it till another time.

II

WOMAN'S SPHERE

"What do you think of this Woman's Rights question?" said Bob Stephens. "From some of your
remarks, I apprehend that you think there is something in it. I may be wrong, but I must confess
that I have looked with disgust on the whole movement. No man reverences women as I do; but
I reverence them as women. I reverence them for those very things in which their sex differs
from ours; but when they come upon our ground, and begin to work and fight after our manner
and with our weapons, I regard them as fearful anomalies, neither men nor women. These Woman's
Rights Conventions appear to me to have ventilated crudities, absurdities, and blasphemies.
To hear them talk about men, one would suppose that the two sexes were natural-born enemies,
and wonder whether they ever had fathers and brothers. One would think, upon their showing,
that all men were a set of ruffians, in league against women,--they seeming, at the same time,
to forget how on their very platforms the most constant and gallant defenders of their rights
are men. Wendell Phillips and Wentworth Higginson have put at the service of the cause masculine
training and manly vehemence, and complacently accepted the wholesale abuse of their own sex
at the hands of their warrior sisters. One would think, were all they say of female powers
true, that our Joan-of-Arcs ought to have disdained to fight under male captains."

"I think," said my wife, "that, in all this talk about the rights of men, and the rights of
women, and the rights of children, the world seems to be forgetting what is quite as important,
the duties of men and women and children. We all hear of our rights till we forget our duties;
and even theology is beginning to concern itself more with what man has a right to expect of
his Creator than what the Creator has a right to expect of man."

"You say the truth," said I; "there is danger of just this overaction; and yet rights must
be discussed; because, in order to understand the duties we owe to any class, we must understand
their rights. To know our duties to men, women, and children, we must know what the rights
of men, women, and children justly are. As to the 'Woman's Rights movement,' it is not peculiar
to America, it is part of a great wave in the incoming tide of modern civilization; the swell
is felt no less in Europe, but it combs over and breaks on our American shore, because our
great wide beach affords the best play for its waters; and as the ocean waves bring with them
kelp, seaweed, mud, sand, gravel, and even putrefying débris, which lie unsightly on the shore,
and yet, on the whole, are healthful and refreshing,--so the Woman's Rights movement, with
its conventions, its speech-makings, its crudities, and eccentricities, is nevertheless a part
of a healthful and necessary movement of the human race towards progress. This question of
Woman and her Sphere is now, perhaps, the greatest of the age. We have put Slavery under foot,
and with the downfall of Slavery the only obstacle to the success of our great democratic experiment
is overthrown, and there seems no limit to the splendid possibilities which it may open before
the human race.

"In the reconstruction that is now coming there lies more than the reconstruction of States
and the arrangement of the machinery of government. We need to know and feel, all of us, that,
from the moment of the death of Slavery, we parted finally from the régime and control of all
the old ideas formed under old oppressive systems of society, and came upon a new plane of life.

"In this new life we must never forget that we are a peculiar people, that we have to walk
in paths unknown to the Old World,--paths where its wisdom cannot guide us, where its precedents
can be of little use to us, and its criticisms, in most cases, must be wholly irrelevant. The
history of our war has shown us of how little service to us in any important crisis the opinions
and advice of the Old World can be. We have been hurt at what seemed to us the want of sympathy,
the direct antagonism, of England. We might have been less hurt if we had properly understood
that Providence had placed us in a position so far ahead of her ideas or power of comprehension
that just judgment or sympathy was not to be expected from her.

"As we went through our great war with no help but that of God, obliged to disregard the misconceptions
and impertinences which the foreign press rained down upon us, so, if we are wise, we shall
continue to do. Our object must now be to make the principles on which our government is founded
permeate consistently the mass of society, and to purge out the leaven of aristocratic and
Old World ideas. So long as there is an illogical working in our actual life, so long as there
is any class denied equal rights with other classes, so long will there be agitation and trouble."

"Then," said my wife, "you believe that women ought to vote?"

"If the principle on which we founded our government is true, that taxation must not exist
without representation, and if women hold property and are taxed, it follows that women should
be represented in the State by their votes, or there is an illogical working of our government."

"But, my dear, don't you think that this will have a bad effect on the female character?"

"Yes," said Bob, "it will make women caucus holders, political candidates."

"It may make this of some women, just as of some men," said I. "But all men do not take any
great interest in politics; it is very difficult to get some of the best of them to do their
duty in voting, and the same will be found true among women."

"But, after all," said Bob, "what do you gain? What will a woman's vote be but a duplicate
of that of her husband or father, or whatever man happens to be her adviser?"

"That may be true on a variety of questions; but there are subjects on which the vote of women
would, I think, be essentially different from that of men. On the subjects of temperance, public
morals, and education, I have no doubt that the introduction of the female vote into legislation,
in States, counties, and cities, would produce results very different from that of men alone.
There are thousands of women who would close grog-shops, and stop the traffic in spirits, if
they had the legislative power; and it would be well for society if they had. In fact, I think
that a State can no more afford to dispense with the vote of women in its affairs than a family.
Imagine a family where the female has no voice in the housekeeping! A State is but a larger
family, and there are many of its concerns which, equally with those of a private household,
would be bettered by female supervision."

"But fancy women going to those horrible voting-places! It is more than I can do myself," said Bob.

"But you forget," said I, "that they are horrible and disgusting principally because women
never go to them. All places where women are excluded tend downward to barbarism; but the moment
she is introduced, there come in with her courtesy, cleanliness, sobriety, and order. When
a man can walk up to the ballot-box with his wife or his sister on his arm, voting-places will
be far more agreeable than now, and the polls will not be such bear-gardens that refined men
will be constantly tempted to omit their political duties there.

"If for nothing else, I would have women vote, that the business of voting may not be so disagreeable
and intolerable to men of refinement as it now is; and I sincerely believe that the cause of
good morals, good order, cleanliness, and public health would be a gainer not merely by the
added feminine vote, but by the added vote of a great many excellent but too fastidious men,
who are now kept from the polls by the disagreeables they meet there.

"Do you suppose that, if women had equal representation with men in the municipal laws of New
York, its reputation for filth during the last year would have gone so far beyond that of Cologne,
or any other city renowned for bad smells? I trow not. I believe a lady mayoress would have
brought in a dispensation of brooms and whitewash, and made a terrible searching into dark
holes and vile corners, before now. Female New York, I have faith to believe, has yet left
in her enough of the primary instincts of womanhood to give us a clean, healthy city, if female
votes had any power to do it."

"But," said Bob, "you forget that voting would bring together all the women of the lower classes."

"Yes; but, thanks to the instincts of their sex, they would come in their Sunday clothes; for
where is the woman that hasn't her finery, and will not embrace every chance to show it? Biddy's
parasol, and hat with pink ribbons, would necessitate a clean shirt in Pat as much as on Sunday.
Voting would become a fête, and we should have a population at the polls as well-dressed as
at church. Such is my belief."

"I do not see," said Bob, "but you go to the full extent with our modern female reformers."

"There are certain neglected truths, which have been held up by these reformers, that are gradually
being accepted and infused into the life of modern society; and their recognition will help
to solidify and purify democratic institutions. They are:--

"1. The right of every woman to hold independent property.

"2. The right of every woman to receive equal pay with man for work which she does equally well.

"3. The right of any woman to do any work for which, by her natural organization and talent,
she is peculiarly adapted.

"Under the first head, our energetic sisters have already, by the help of their gallant male
adjutants, reformed the laws of several of our States, so that a married woman is no longer
left the unprotected legal slave of any unprincipled, drunken spendthrift who may be her husband,--but,
in case of the imbecility or improvidence of the natural head of the family, the wife, if she
have the ability, can conduct business, make contracts, earn and retain money for the good
of the household; and I am sure no one can say that immense injustice and cruelty are not thereby
prevented.

"It is quite easy for women who have the good fortune to have just and magnanimous husbands
to say that they feel no interest in such reforms, and that they would willingly trust their
property to the man to whom they give themselves; but they should remember that laws are not
made for the restraint of the generous and just, but of the dishonest and base. The law which
enables a married woman to hold her own property does not forbid her to give it to the man
of her heart, if she so pleases; and it does protect many women who otherwise would be reduced
to the extremest misery. I once knew an energetic milliner who had her shop attached four times,
and a flourishing business broken up in four different cities, because she was tracked from
city to city by a worthless spendthrift, who only waited till she had amassed a little property
in a new place to swoop down upon and carry it off. It is to be hoped that the time is not
distant when every State will give to woman a fair chance to the ownership and use of her own
earnings and her own property.

"Under the head of the right of every woman to do any work for which by natural organization
and talent she is especially adapted, there is a word or two to be said.

"The talents and tastes of the majority of women are naturally domestic. The family is evidently
their sphere, because in all ways their organization fits them for that more than for anything
else.

"But there are occasionally women who are exceptions to the common law, gifted with peculiar
genius and adaptations. With regard to such women, there has never seemed to be any doubt in
the verdict of mankind that they ought to follow their nature, and that their particular sphere
was the one to which they are called. Did anybody ever think that Mrs. Siddons and Mrs. Kemble
and Ristori had better have applied themselves sedulously to keeping house, because they were
women, and 'woman's noblest station is retreat'?

"The world has always shown a fair average of good sense in this matter, from the days of the
fair Hypatia in Alexandria, who, we are told, gave lectures on philosophy behind a curtain,
lest her charms should distract the attention of too impressible young men, down to those of
Anna Dickinson. Mankind are not, after all, quite fools, and seem in these cases to have a
reasonable idea that exceptional talents have exceptional laws, and make their own code of
proprieties.

"Now there is no doubt that Miss Dickinson, though as relating to her femininity she is quite
as pretty and modest a young woman as any to be found in the most sheltered circle, has yet
a most exceptional talent for public speaking, which draws crowds to hear her, and makes lecturing
for her a lucrative profession, as well as a means of advocating just and generous sentiments,
and of stimulating her own sex to nobler purposes; and the same law which relates to Siddons
and Kemble and Ristori relates also to her.

"The doctrine of vocations is a good one and a safe one. If a woman mistakes her vocation,
so much the worse for her; the world does not suffer, but she does, and the suffering speedily
puts her where she belongs. There is not near so much danger from attempts to imitate Anna
Dickinson as there is from the more common feminine attempts to rival the demi-monde of Paris
in fantastic extravagance and luxury.

"As to how a woman may determine whether she has any such vocation, there is a story quite
in point. A good Methodist elder was listening to an ardent young mechanic who thought he had
a call to throw up his shop and go to preaching.

"'I feel,' said the young ardent, 'that I have a call to preach.'

"'Hast thou noticed whether people seem to have a call to hear thee?' said the shrewd old man.
'I have always noticed that a true call of the Lord may be known by this, that people have
a call to hear.'"

"Well," said Bob, "the most interesting question still remains: What are to be the employments
of woman? What ways are there for her to use her talents, to earn her livelihood and support
those who are dear to her, when Providence throws that necessity upon her? This is becoming
more than ever one of the pressing questions of our age. The war has deprived so many thousands
of women of their natural protectors, that everything must be thought of that may possibly
open a way for their self-support."

"Well, let us look over the field," said my wife. "What is there for woman?"

"In the first place," said I, "come the professions requiring natural genius,--authorship,
painting, sculpture, with the subordinate arts of photographing, coloring, and finishing; but
when all is told, these furnish employment to a very limited number,--almost as nothing to
the whole. Then there is teaching, which is profitable in its higher branches, and perhaps
the very pleasantest of all the callings open to woman; but teaching is at present an overcrowded
profession, the applicants everywhere outnumbering the places. Architecture and landscape gardening
are arts every way suited to the genius of woman, and there are enough who have the requisite
mechanical skill and mathematical education; and, though never yet thought of for the sex,
that I know of, I do not despair of seeing those who shall find in this field a profession
at once useful and elegant. When women plan dwelling-houses, the vast body of tenements to
be let in our cities will wear a more domestic and comfortable air, and will be built more
with reference to the real wants of their inmates."

"I have thought," said Bob, "that agencies of various sorts, as canvassing the country for
the sale of books, maps, and engravings, might properly employ a great many women. There is
a large class whose health suffers from confinement and sedentary occupations, who might, I
think, be both usefully and agreeably employed in business of this sort, and be recruiting
their health at the same time."

"Then," said my wife, "there is the medical profession."

"Yes," said I. "The world is greatly obliged to Miss Blackwell and other noble pioneers who
faced and overcame the obstacles to the attainment of a thorough medical education by females.
Thanks to them, a new and lucrative profession is now open to educated women in relieving the
distresses of their own sex; and we may hope that in time, through their intervention, the
care of the sick may also become the vocation of cultivated, refined, intelligent women, instead
of being left, as heretofore, to the ignorant and vulgar. The experience of our late war has
shown us what women of a high class morally and intellectually can do in this capacity. Why
should not this experience inaugurate a new and sacred calling for refined and educated women?
Why should not NURSING become a vocation equal in dignity and in general esteem to the medical
profession, of which it is the right hand? Why should our dearest hopes, in the hour of their
greatest peril, be committed into the hands of Sairey Gamps, when the world has seen Florence
Nightingales?"

"Yes, indeed," said my wife; "I can testify, from my own experience, that the sufferings and
dangers of the sickbed, for the want of intelligent, educated nursing, have been dreadful.
A prejudiced, pig-headed, snuff-taking old woman, narrow-minded and vulgar, and more confident
in her own way than seven men that can render a reason, enters your house at just the hour
and moment when all your dearest earthly hopes are brought to a crisis. She becomes absolute
dictator over your delicate, helpless wife and your frail babe,--the absolute dictator of all
in the house. If it be her sovereign will and pleasure to enact all sorts of physiological
absurdities in the premises, who shall say her nay? 'She knows her business, she hopes!' And
if it be her edict, as it was of one of her class whom I knew, that each of her babies shall
eat four baked beans the day it is four days old, eat them it must; and if the baby die in
convulsions four days after, it is set down as the mysterious will of an overruling Providence.

"I know and have seen women lying upon laced pillows, under silken curtains, who have been
bullied and dominated over in the hour of their greatest helplessness by ignorant and vulgar
tyrants, in a way that would scarce be thought possible in civilized society, and children
that have been injured or done to death by the same means. A celebrated physician told me of
a babe whose eyesight was nearly ruined by its nurse taking a fancy to wash its eyes with camphor,--'to
keep it from catching cold,' she said. I knew another infant that was poisoned by the nurse
giving it laudanum in some of those patent nostrums which these ignorant creatures carry secretly
in their pockets, to secure quiet in their little charges. I knew one delicate woman who never
recovered from the effects of being left at her first confinement in the hands of an ill-tempered,
drinking nurse, and whose feeble infant was neglected and abused by this woman in a way to
cause lasting injury. In the first four weeks of infancy the constitution is peculiarly impressible;
and infants of a delicate organization may, if frightened and ill-treated, be the subjects
of just such a shock to the nervous system as in mature age comes from the sudden stroke of
a great affliction or terror. A bad nurse may affect nerves predisposed to weakness in a manner
they never will recover from. I solemnly believe that the constitutions of more women are broken
up by bad nursing in their first confinement than by any other cause whatever. And yet there
are at the same time hundreds and thousands of women, wanting the means of support, whose presence
in a sick-room would be a benediction. I do trust that Miss Blackwell's band of educated nurses
will not be long in coming, and that the number of such may increase till they effect a complete
revolution in this vocation. A class of cultivated, well-trained, intelligent nurses would
soon elevate the employment of attending on the sick into the noble calling it ought to be,
and secure for it its appropriate rewards."

"There is another opening for woman," said I,--"in the world of business. The system of commercial
colleges now spreading over our land is a new and most important development of our times.
There that large class of young men who have either no time or no inclination for an extended
classical education can learn what will fit them for that active material life which in our
broad country needs so many workers. But the most pleasing feature of these institutions is,
that the complete course is open to women no less than to men, and women there may acquire
that knowledge of bookkeeping and accounts, and of the forms and principles of business transactions,
which will qualify them for some of the lucrative situations hitherto monopolized by the other
sex. And the expenses of the course of instruction are so arranged as to come within the scope
of very moderate means. A fee of fifty dollars entitles a woman to the benefit of the whole
course, and she has the privilege of attending at any hours that may suit her own engagements
and convenience."

"Then, again," said my wife, "there are the departments of millinery and dressmaking, and the
various branches of needlework, which afford employment to thousands of women; there is typesetting,
by which many are beginning to get a living; there are the manufactures of cotton, woolen,
silk, and the numberless useful articles which employ female hands in their fabrication,--all
of them opening avenues by which, with more or less success, a subsistence can be gained."

"Well, really," said Bob, "it would appear, after all, that there are abundance of openings
for women. What is the cause of the outcry and distress? How is it that we hear of women starving,
driven to vice and crime by want, when so many doors of useful and profitable employment stand
open to them?"

"The question would easily be solved," said my wife, "if you could once see the kind and class
of women who thus suffer and starve. There may be exceptions, but too large a portion of them
are girls and women who can or will do no earthly thing well,--and, what is worse, are not
willing to take the pains to be taught to do anything well. I will describe to you one girl,
and you will find in every intelligence-office a hundred of her kind to five thoroughly trained
ones.

"Imprimis: she is rather delicate and genteel-looking, and you may know from the arrangement
of her hair just what the last mode is of disposing of rats or waterfalls. She has a lace bonnet
with roses, a silk mantilla, a silk dress trimmed with velvet, a white skirt with sixteen tucks
and an embroidered edge, a pair of cloth gaiters, underneath which are a pair of stockings
without feet, the only pair in her possession. She has no under-linen, and sleeps at night
in the working-clothes she wears in the day. She never seems to have in her outfit either comb,
brush, or tooth-brush of her own,--neither needles, thread, scissors, nor pins; her money,
when she has any, being spent on more important articles, such as the lace bonnet or silk mantilla,
or the rats and waterfalls that glorify her head. When she wishes to sew, she borrows what
is needful of a convenient next neighbor; and if she gets a place in a family as second girl,
she expects to subsist in these respects by borrowing of the better-appointed servants, or
helping herself from the family stores.

"She expects, of course, the very highest wages, if she condescends to live out; and by help
of a trim outside appearance, and the many vacancies that are continually occurring in households,
she gets places, where her object is to do just as little of any duty assigned to her as possible,
to hurry through her performances, put on her fine clothes, and go a-gadding. She is on free-and-easy
terms with all the men she meets, and ready at jests and repartee, sometimes far from seemly.
Her time of service in any one place lasts indifferently from a fortnight to two or three months,
when she takes her wages, buys her a new parasol in the latest style, and goes back to the
intelligence-office. In the different families where she has lived she has been told a hundred
times the proprieties of household life, how to make beds, arrange rooms, wash china, glass,
and silver, and set tables; but her habitual rule is to try in each place how small and how
poor services will be accepted. When she finds less will not do, she gives more. When the mistress
follows her constantly, and shows an energetic determination to be well served, she shows that
she can serve well; but the moment such attention relaxes, she slides back again. She is as
destructive to a house as a fire; the very spirit of wastefulness is in her; she cracks the
china, dents the silver, stops the water-pipes with rubbish, and, after she is gone, there
is generally a sum equal to half her wages to be expended in repairing the effects of her carelessness.
And yet there is one thing to be said for her: she is quite as careful of her employer's things
as of her own. The full amount of her mischiefs often does not appear at once, as she is glib
of tongue, adroit in apologies, and lies with as much alertness and as little thought of conscience
as a blackbird chatters. It is difficult for people who have been trained from childhood in
the school of verities,--who have been lectured for even the shadow of a prevarication, and
shut up in disgrace for a lie, till truth becomes a habit of their souls,--it is very difficult
for people so educated to understand how to get on with those who never speak the truth except
by mere accident, who assert any and every thing that comes into their heads with all the assurance
and all the energy of perfect verity.

"What becomes of this girl? She finds means, by begging, borrowing, living out, to keep herself
extremely trim and airy for a certain length of time, till the rats and waterfalls, the lace
hat and parasol, and the glib tongue, have done their work in making a fool of some honest
young mechanic who earns three dollars a day. She marries him with no higher object than to
have somebody to earn money for her to spend. And what comes of such marriages?

"That is one ending of her career; the other is on the street, in haunts of vice, in prison,
in drunkenness, and death.

"Whence come these girls? They are as numerous as yellow butterflies in autumn; they flutter
up to cities from the country; they grow up from mothers who ran the same sort of career before
them; and the reason why in the end they fall out of all reputable employment and starve on
poor wages is, that they become physically, mentally, and morally incapable of rendering any
service which society will think worth paying for."

"I remember," said I, "that the head of the most celebrated dressmaking establishment in New
York, in reply to the appeals of the needlewomen of the city for sympathy and wages, came out
with published statements to this effect: that the difficulty lay, not in unwillingness of
employers to pay what work was worth, but in finding any work worth paying for; that she had
many applicants, but among them few who could be of real use to her; that she, in common with
everybody in this country who has any kind of serious responsibilities to carry, was continually
embarrassed for want of skilled work-people who could take and go on with the labor of her
various departments without her constant supervision; that, out of a hundred girls, there would
not be more than five to whom she could give a dress to be made and dismiss it from her mind
as something certain to be properly done.

"Let people individually look around their own little sphere, and ask themselves if they know
any woman really excelling in any valuable calling or accomplishment who is suffering for want
of work. All of us know seamstresses, dressmakers, nurses, and laundresses who have made themselves
such a reputation, and are so beset and overcrowded with work, that the whole neighborhood
is constantly on its knees to them with uplifted hands. The fine seamstress, who can cut and
make trousseaus and layettes in elegant perfection, is always engaged six months in advance;
the pet dressmaker of a neighborhood must be engaged in May for September, and in September
for May; a laundress who sends your clothes home in nice order always has all the work that
she can do. Good work in any department is the rarest possible thing in our American life;
and it is a fact that the great majority of workers, both in the family and out, do only tolerably
well,--not so badly that it actually cannot be borne, yet not so well as to be a source of
real, thorough satisfaction. The exceptional worker in every neighborhood, who does things
really well, can always set her own price, and is always having more offering than she can
possibly do.

"The trouble, then, in finding employment for women lies deeper than the purses or consciences
of the employers: it lies in the want of education in women; the want of education, I say,--meaning
by education that which fits a woman for practical and profitable employment in life, and not
mere common-school learning."

"Yes," said my wife; "for it is a fact that the most troublesome and helpless persons to provide
for are often those who have a good medium education, but no feminine habits, no industry,
no practical calculation, no muscular strength, and no knowledge of any one of woman's peculiar
duties. In the earlier days of New England, women, as a class, had far fewer opportunities
for acquiring learning, yet were far better educated, physically and morally, than now. The
high school did not exist; at the common school they learned reading, writing, and arithmetic,
and practiced spelling; while at home they did the work of the household. They were cheerful,
bright, and active, ever on the alert, able to do anything, from the harnessing and driving
of a horse to the finest embroidery. The daughters of New England in those days looked the
world in the face without a fear. They shunned no labor; they were afraid of none; and they
could always find their way to a living."

"But although less instructed in school learning," said I, "they showed no deficiency in intellectual
acumen. I see no such women, nowadays, as some I remember of that olden time,--women whose
strong minds and ever-active industry carried on reading and study side by side with household
toils.

"I remember a young lady friend of mine, attending a celebrated boarding-school, boarded in
the family of a woman who had never been to school longer than was necessary to learn to read
and write, yet who was a perfect cyclopedia of general information. The young scholar used
to take her Chemistry and Natural Philosophy into the kitchen, where her friend was busy with
her household work, and read her lessons to her, that she might have the benefit of her explanations;
and so, while the good lady scoured her andirons or kneaded her bread, she lectured to her
protégée on mysteries of science far beyond the limits of the textbook. Many of the graduates
of our modern high schools would find it hard to shine in conversation on the subjects they
had studied, in the searching presence of some of these vigorous matrons of the olden time,
whose only school had been the leisure hours gained by energy and method from their family cares."

"And in those days," said my wife, "there lived in our families a class of American domestics,
women of good sense and good powers of reflection, who applied this sense and power of reflection
to household matters. In the early part of my married life, I myself had American 'help'; and
they were not only excellent servants, but trusty and invaluable friends. But now, all this
class of applicants for domestic service have disappeared, I scarce know why or how. All I
know is, there is no more a Betsey or a Lois, such as used to take domestic cares off my shoulders
so completely."

"Good heavens! where are they?" cried Bob. "Where do they hide? I would search through the
world after such a prodigy!"

"The fact is," said I, "there has been a slow and gradual reaction against household labor
in America. Mothers began to feel that it was a sort of curse, to be spared, if possible, to
their daughters; women began to feel that they were fortunate in proportion as they were able
to be entirely clear of family responsibilities. Then Irish labor began to come in, simultaneously
with a great advance in female education.

"For a long while nothing was talked of, written of, thought of, in teachers' meetings, conventions,
and assemblies, but the neglected state of female education; and the whole circle of the arts
and sciences was suddenly introduced into our free-school system, from which needlework as
gradually and quietly was suffered to drop out. The girl who attended the primary and high
school had so much study imposed on her that she had no time for sewing or housework; and the
delighted mother was only too happy to darn her stockings and do the housework alone, that
her daughter might rise to a higher plane than she herself had attained to. The daughter, thus
educated, had, on coming to womanhood, no solidity of muscle, no manual dexterity, no practice
or experience in domestic life; and if she were to seek a livelihood, there remained only teaching,
or some feminine trade, or the factory."

"These factories," said my wife, "have been the ruin of hundreds and hundreds of our once healthy
farmers' daughters and others from the country. They go there young and unprotected; they live
there in great boarding-houses, and associate with a promiscuous crowd, without even such restraints
of maternal supervision as they would have in great boarding-schools; their bodies are enfeebled
by labor often necessarily carried on in a foul and heated atmosphere; and at the hours when
off duty, they are exposed to all the dangers of unwatched intimacy with the other sex.

"Moreover, the factory girl learns and practices but one thing,--some one mechanical movement,
which gives no scope for invention, ingenuity, or any other of the powers called into play
by domestic labor; so that she is in reality unfitted in every way for family duties.

"Many times it has been my lot to try, in my family service, girls who have left factories;
and I have found them wholly useless for any of the things which a woman ought to be good for.
They knew nothing of a house, or what ought to be done in it; they had imbibed a thorough contempt
of household labor, and looked upon it but as a dernier ressort; and it was only the very lightest
of its tasks that they could even begin to think of. I remember I tried to persuade one of
these girls, the pretty daughter of a fisherman, to take some lessons in washing and ironing.
She was at that time engaged to be married to a young mechanic, who earned something like two
or three dollars a day.

"'My child,' said I, 'you will need to understand all kinds of housework if you are going to
be married.'

"She tossed her little head,--

"'Indeed, she wasn't going to trouble herself about that.'

"'But who will get up your husband's shirts?'

"'Oh, he must put them out. I'm not going to be married to make a slave of myself!'

"Another young factory girl, who came for table and parlor work, was so full of airs and fine
notions that it seemed as difficult to treat with her as with a princess. She could not sweep,
because it blistered her hands, which, in fact, were long and delicate; she could not think
of putting them into hot dish-water, and for that reason preferred washing the dishes in cold
water; she required a full hour in the morning to make her toilet; she was laced so tightly
that she could not stoop without vertigo; and her hoops were of dimensions which seemed to
render it impossible for her to wait upon table; she was quite exhausted with the effort of
ironing the table-napkins and chamber-towels: yet she could not think of 'living out' under
two dollars a week.

"Both these girls had had a good free-school education, and could read any amount of novels,
write a tolerable letter, but had not learned anything with sufficient accuracy to fit them
for teachers. They were pretty, and their destiny was to marry and lie a deadweight on the
hands of some honest man, and to increase, in their children, the number of incapables."

"Well," said Bob, "what would you have? What is to be done?"

"In the first place," said I, "I would have it felt, by those who are seeking to elevate woman,
that the work is to be done, not so much by creating for her new spheres of action as by elevating
her conceptions of that domestic vocation to which God and Nature have assigned her. It is
all very well to open to her avenues of profit and advancement in the great outer world; but,
after all, to make and keep a home is, and ever must be, a woman's first glory, her highest
aim. No work of art can compare with a perfect home; the training and guiding of a family must
be recognized as the highest work a woman can perform; and female education ought to be conducted
with special reference to this.

"Men are trained to be lawyers, to be physicians, to be mechanics, by long and self-denying
study and practice. A man cannot even make shoes merely by going to the high school and learning
reading, writing, and mathematics; he cannot be a bookkeeper or a printer simply from general
education.

"Now women have a sphere and profession of their own,--a profession for which they are fitted
by physical organization, by their own instincts, and to which they are directed by the pointing
and manifest finger of God,--and that sphere is family life. Duties to the state and to public
life they may have; but the public duties of women must bear to their family ones the same
relation that the family duties of men bear to their public ones. The defect in the late efforts
to push on female education is, that it has been for her merely general, and that it has left
out and excluded all that is professional; and she undertakes the essential duties of womanhood,
when they do devolve on her, without any adequate preparation."

"But is it possible for a girl to learn at school the things which fit for her family life?"
said Bob.

"Why not?" I replied. "Once it was thought impossible in school to teach girls geometry or
algebra, or the higher mathematics; it was thought impossible to put them through collegiate
courses; but it has been done, and we see it. Women study treatises on political economy in
schools, and why should not the study of domestic economy form a part of every school course?
A young girl will stand up at the blackboard, and draw and explain the compound blowpipe, and
describe all the processes of making oxygen and hydrogen. Why should she not draw and explain
a refrigerator as well as an air-pump? Both are to be explained on philosophical principles.
When a schoolgirl, in her chemistry, studies the reciprocal action of acids and alkalies, what
is there to hinder the teaching her its application to the various processes of cooking where
acids and alkalies are employed? Why should she not be led to see how effervescence and fermentation
can be made to perform their office in the preparation of light and digestible bread? Why should
she not be taught the chemical substances by which food is often adulterated, and the test
by which such adulterations are detected? Why should she not understand the processes of confectionery,
and know how to guard against the deleterious or poisonous elements that are introduced into
children's sugar-plums and candies? Why, when she learns the doctrine of mordants, the substances
by which different colors are set, should she not learn it with some practical view to future
life, so that she may know how to set the color of a fading calico or restore the color of
a spotted one? Why, in short, when a girl has labored through a profound chemical work, and
listened to courses of chemical lectures, should she come to domestic life, which presents
a constant series of chemical experiments and changes, and go blindly along as without chart
or compass, unable to tell what will take out a stain, or what will brighten a metal, what
are common poisons and what their antidotes, and not knowing enough of the laws of caloric
to understand how to warm a house, or of the laws of atmosphere to know how to ventilate one?
Why should the preparation of food, that subtile art on which life, health, cheerfulness, good
temper, and good looks so largely depend, forever be left in the hands of the illiterate and
vulgar?

"A benevolent gentleman has lately left a large fortune for the founding of a university for
women; and the object is stated to be to give to women who have already acquired a general
education the means of acquiring a professional one, to fit themselves for some employment
by which they may gain a livelihood.

"In this institution the women are to be instructed in bookkeeping, stenography, telegraphing,
photographing, drawing, modeling, and various other arts; but, so far as I remember, there
is no proposal to teach domestic economy as at least one of woman's professions.

"Why should there not be a professor of domestic economy in every large female school? Why
should not this professor give lectures, first on house planning and building, illustrated
by appropriate apparatus? Why should not the pupils have presented to their inspection models
of houses planned with reference to economy, to ease of domestic service, to warmth, to ventilation,
and to architectural appearance? Why should not the professor go on to lecture further on house-fixtures,
with models of the best mangles, washing-machines, clothes-wringers, ranges, furnaces, and
cooking-stoves, together with drawings and apparatus illustrative of domestic hydraulics, showing
the best contrivances for bathing-rooms and the obvious principles of plumbing, so that the
pupils may have some idea how to work the machinery of a convenient house when they have it,
and to have such conveniences introduced when wanting? If it is thought worth while to provide
at great expense apparatus for teaching the revolutions of Saturn's moons and the precession
of the equinoxes, why should there not be some also to teach what it may greatly concern a
woman's earthly happiness to know?

"Why should not the professor lecture on home chemistry, devoting his first lecture to bread-making?
and why might not a batch of bread be made and baked and exhibited to the class, together with
specimens of morbid anatomy in the bread line,--the sour cotton bread of the baker; the rough,
big-holed bread; the heavy, fossil bread; the bitter bread of too much yeast,--and the causes
of their defects pointed out? And so with regard to the various articles of food,--why might
not chemical lectures be given on all of them, one after another? In short, it would be easy
to trace out a course of lectures on common things to occupy a whole year, and for which the
pupils, whenever they come to have homes of their own, will thank the lecturer to the last
day of their life.

"Then there is no impossibility in teaching needlework, the cutting and fitting of dresses,
in female schools. The thing is done very perfectly in English schools for the working classes.
A girl trained at one of these schools came into a family I once knew. She brought with her
a sewing-book, in which the process of making various articles was exhibited in miniature.
The several parts of a shirt were first shown, each perfectly made, and fastened to a leaf
of the book by itself, and then the successive steps of uniting the parts, till finally appeared
a miniature model of the whole. The sewing was done with red thread, so that every stitch might
show, and any imperfections be at once remedied. The same process was pursued with regard to
other garments, and a good general idea of cutting and fitting them was thus given to an entire
class of girls.

"In the same manner the care and nursing of young children and the tending of the sick might
be made the subject of lectures. Every woman ought to have some general principles to guide
her with regard to what is to be done in case of the various accidents that may befall either
children or grown people, and of their lesser illnesses, and ought to know how to prepare comforts
and nourishment for the sick. Hawthorne's satirical remarks upon the contrast between the elegant
Zenobia's conversation, and the smoky porridge she made for him when he was an invalid, might
apply to the volunteer cookery of many charming women."

"I think," said Bob, "that your Professor of Domestic Economy would find enough to occupy his
pupils."

"In fact," said I, "were domestic economy properly honored and properly taught, in the manner
described, it would open a sphere of employment to so many women in the home life, that we
should not be obliged to send our women out to California or the Pacific to put an end to an
anxious and aimless life.

"When domestic work is sufficiently honored to be taught as an art and science in our boarding-schools
and high-schools, then possibly it may acquire also dignity in the eyes of our working classes,
and young girls who have to earn their own living may no longer feel degraded in engaging in
domestic service. The place of a domestic in a family may become as respectable in their eyes
as a place in a factory, in a printing-office, in a dressmaking or millinery establishment,
or behind the counter of a shop.

"In America there is no class which will confess itself the lower class, and a thing recommended
solely for the benefit of any such class finds no one to receive it.

"If the intelligent and cultivated look down on household work with disdain; if they consider
it as degrading, a thing to be shunned by every possible device,--they may depend upon it that
the influence of such contempt of woman's noble duties will flow downward, producing a like
contempt in every class in life.

"Our sovereign princesses learn the doctrine of equality very quickly, and are not going to
sacrifice themselves to what is not considered de bon ton by the upper classes; and the girl
with the laced hat and parasol, without underclothes, who does her best to 'shirk' her duties
as housemaid, and is looking for marriage as an escape from work, is a fair copy of her mistress,
who married for much the same reason, who hates housekeeping, and would rather board or do
anything else than have the care of a family. A little dramatic effusion of his, under the name of Vertumnus and
Pomona, is not yet forgotten by the chroniclers of that sort of literature.

All the dwellers upon earth, "Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites," flock hither, and do naturally
fall in with one or other of these primary distinctions. The infinite superiority of the former,
which I choose to designate as the great race, is discernible in their figure, port, and a certain
instinctive sovereignty.

The latter are born degraded.

"He shall serve his brethren."

There is something in the air of one of this cast, lean and suspicious; contrasting with the open,
trusting, generous manners of the other.

Observe who have been the greatest borrowers of all ages--Alcibiades--Falstaff--Sir Richard Steele--our
late incomparable Brinsley--what a family likeness in all four!

What a careless, even deportment hath your borrower! what rosy gills! what a beautiful reliance on
Providence doth he manifest,--taking no more thought than lilies! What contempt for money,--accounting
it (yours and mine especially) no better than dross! What a liberal confounding of those pedantic
distinctions of meum and tuum! or rather what a noble simplification of language (beyond Tooke),
resolving these supposed opposites into one clear, intelligible pronoun adjective!--What near
approaches doth he make to the primitive community,--to the extent
of one half of the principle at least!--

He is the true taxer who
"calleth all the world up to be taxed:" and the distance is as vast
between him and one of us, as subsisted betwixt the Augustan Majesty
and the poorest obolary Jew that paid it tribute-pittance at Jerusalem!--His
exactions, too, have such a cheerful, voluntary air!

So far removed from your sour parochial or state-gatherers,--those ink-horn varlets, who carry
their want of welcome in their faces! He cometh to you with a smile, and troubleth you with
no receipt; confining himself to no set season. Every day is his Candlemas, or his Feast of
Holy Michael.

He applieth the lene tormentum of a pleasant look to your purse,--which to that gentle warmth
expands her silken leaves, as naturally as the cloak of the traveller, for which sun and wind contended!
He is the true Propontic which never ebbeth! The sea which taketh handsomely at each man's
hand. In vain the victim, whom he delighteth to honour, struggles with destiny; he is in the
net. Lend therefore cheerfully, O man ordained to lend--that thou lose not in the end, with
thy worldly penny, the reversion promised. Combine not preposterously in thine own person the
penalties of Lazarus and of Dives!--but, when thou seest the proper
authority coming, meet it smilingly, as it were half-way.

Come, a handsome sacrifice! See how light he makes of it! Strain not courtesies with a noble
enemy.

Reflections like the foregoing were forced upon my mind by the death of my old friend, Ralph Bigod,
Esq., who departed this life on Wednesday evening; dying, as he had lived, without much trouble.
He boasted himself a descendant from mighty ancestors of that name, who heretofore held ducal
dignities in this realm. In his actions and sentiments he belied not the stock to which he pretended.
Early in life he found himself invested with ample revenues; which, with that noble disinterestedness
which I have noticed as inherent in men of the great race, he took almost immediate measures
entirely to dissipate and bring to nothing: for there is something revolting in the idea of a
king holding a private purse; and the thoughts of Bigod were all
regal.

Thus furnished, by the very act of disfurnishment; getting rid of the cumbersome luggage of riches,
more apt (as one sings)

To slacken virtue, and abate her edge, Than prompt her to do aught may merit praise,

he set forth, like some Alexander, upon his great enterprise, "borrowing
and to borrow!"

In his periegesis, or triumphant progress throughout this island, it has been calculated that
he laid a tythe part of the inhabitants under contribution. I reject
this estimate as greatly exaggerated:--but having had the honour of
accompanying my friend, divers times, in his perambulations about
this vast city, I own I was greatly struck at first with the prodigious
number of faces we met, who claimed a sort of respectful acquaintance
with us. I myself am somewhat sanguine, and prone rather to expect good than evil, and
with a vast stock of faith in the excellent things that may turn up in the future. The millennium
is one of the prime articles of my creed; and all the ups and downs of society I regard only
as so many jolts on a very rough road that is taking the world on, through many upsets and
disasters, to that final consummation.

Theophilus holds the same belief theoretically; but it is apt to sink so far out of sight in
the mire of present disaster as to be of very little comfort to him.

"Yes," he said, "we are going to ruin, in my view, about as fast as we can go. Miss Jenny,
I will trouble you for another small lump of sugar in my tea."

"You have been saying that, about our going to ruin, every time you have taken tea here for
four years past," said Jenny; "but I always noticed that your fears never spoiled your relish
either for tea or muffins. People talk about being on the brink of a volcano, and the country
going to destruction, and all that, just as they put pepper on their potatoes; it is an agreeable
stimulant in conversation,--that's all."

"For my part," said my wife, "I can speak in another vein. When had we ever in all our history
so bright prospects, so much to be thankful for? Slavery is abolished; the last stain of disgrace
is wiped from our national honor. We stand now before the world self-consistent with our principles.
We have come out of one of the severest struggles that ever tried a nation, purer and stronger
in morals and religion, as well as more prosperous in material things."

"My dear madam, excuse me," said Theophilus; "but I cannot help being reminded of what an English
reviewer once said,--that a lady's facts have as much poetry in them as Tom Moore's lyrics.
Of course poetry is always agreeable, even though of no statistical value."

"I see no poetry in my facts," said Mrs. Crowfield. "Is not slavery forever abolished, by the
confession of its best friends,--even of those who declare its abolition a misfortune, and
themselves ruined in consequence?"

"I confess, my dear madam, that we have succeeded, as we human creatures commonly do, in supposing
that we have destroyed an evil, when we have only changed its name. We have contrived to withdraw
from the slave just that fiction of property relation which made it for the interest of some
one to care for him a little, however imperfectly; and, having destroyed that, we turn him
out defenseless to shift for himself in a community every member of which is embittered against
him. The whole South resounds with the outcries of slaves suffering the vindictive wrath of
former masters; laws are being passed hunting them out of this State and out of that; the animosity
of race--at all times the most bitter and unreasonable of animosities--is being aroused all
over the land. And the free States take the lead in injustice to them. Witness a late vote
of Connecticut on the suffrage question. The efforts of government to protect the rights of
these poor defenseless creatures are about as energetic as such efforts always have been and
always will be while human nature remains what it is. For a while the obvious rights of the
weaker party will be confessed, with some show of consideration, in public speeches; they will
be paraded by philanthropic sentimentalists, to give point to their eloquence; they will be
here and there sustained in governmental measures, when there is no strong temptation to the
contrary, and nothing better to be done; but the moment that political combinations begin to
be formed, all the rights and interests of this helpless people will be bandied about as so
many make-weights in the political scale. Any troublesome lion will have a negro thrown to
him to keep him quiet. All their hopes will be dashed to the ground by the imperious Southern
white, no longer feeling for them even the interest of a master, and regarding them with a
mixture of hatred and loathing as the cause of all his reverses. Then if, driven to despair,
they seek to defend themselves by force, they will be crushed by the power of the government
and ground to powder, as the weak have always been under the heel of the strong.

"So much for our abolition of slavery. As to our material prosperity, it consists of an inflated
paper currency, an immense debt, a giddy, foolhardy spirit of speculation and stock-gambling,
and a perfect furor of extravagance, which is driving everybody to live beyond his means, and
casting contempt on the republican virtues of simplicity and economy.

"As to advancement in morals, there never was so much intemperance in our people before, and
the papers are full of accounts of frauds, defalcations, forgeries, robberies, assassinations,
and arsons. Against this tide of corruption the various organized denominations of religion
do nothing effectual. They are an army shut up within their own intrenchments, holding their
own with difficulty, and in no situation to turn back the furious assaults of the enemy."

"In short," said Jenny, "according to your showing, the whole country is going to destruction.
Now, if things really are so bad, if you really believe all you have been saying, you ought
not to be sitting drinking your tea as you are now, or to have spent the afternoon playing
croquet with us girls; you ought to gird yourself with sackcloth, and go up and down the land,
raising the alarm, and saying, 'Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.'"

"Well," said Theophilus, while a covert smile played about his lips, "you know the saying,
'Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow,' etc. Things are not yet gone to destruction, only going,--and
why not have a good time on deck before the ship goes to pieces? Your chimney-corner is a tranquil
island in the ocean of trouble, and your muffins are absolutely perfect. I'll take another,
if you'll please to pass them."

"I've a great mind not to pass them," said Jenny. "Are you in earnest in what you are saying,
or are you only saying it for sensation? How can people believe such things and be comfortable?
I could not. If I believed all you have been saying I could not sleep nights,--I should be
perfectly miserable; and you cannot really believe all this, or you would be."

"My dear child," said Mrs. Crowfield, "our friend's picture is the truth painted with all its
shadows and none of its lights. All the dangers he speaks of are real and great, but he omits
the counterbalancing good. Let me speak now. There never has been a time in our history when
so many honest and just men held power in our land as now,--never a government before in which
the public councils recognized with more respect the just and the right. There never was an
instance of a powerful government showing more tenderness in the protection of a weak and defenseless
race than ours has shown in the care of the freedmen hitherto. There never was a case in which
the people of a country were more willing to give money and time and disinterested labor to
raise and educate those who have thus been thrown on their care. Considering that we have had
a great, harassing, and expensive war on our hands, I think the amount done by government and
individuals for the freedmen unequaled in the history of nations; and I do not know why it
should be predicted from this past fact that, in the future, both government and people are
about to throw them to the lions, as Mr. Theophilus supposes. Let us wait, at least, and see.
So long as government maintains a freedmen's bureau, administered by men of such high moral
character, we must think, at all events, that there are strong indications in the right direction.
Just think of the immense advance of public opinion within four years, and of the grand successive
steps of this advance,--Emancipation in the District of Columbia, the Repeal of the Fugitive
Slave Law, the General Emancipation Act, the Amendment of the Constitution. All these do not
look as if the black were about to be ground to powder beneath the heel of the white. If the
negroes are oppressed in the South, they can emigrate; no laws hold them; active, industrious
laborers will soon find openings in any part of the Union."

"No," said Theophilus, "there will be black laws like those of Illinois and Tennessee; there
will be turbulent uprisings of the Irish, excited by political demagogues, that will bar them
out of Northern States. Besides, as a class, they will be idle and worthless. It will not be
their fault, but it will be the result of their slave education. All their past observation
of their masters has taught them that liberty means licensed laziness, that work means degradation;
and therefore they will loathe work, and cherish laziness as the sign of liberty. 'Am not I
free? Have I not as good a right to do nothing as you?' will be the cry.

"Already the lazy whites, who never lifted a hand in any useful employment, begin to raise
the cry that 'niggers won't work;' and I suspect the cry may not be without reason. Industrious
citizens can never be made in a community where the higher class think useful labor a disgrace.
The whites will oppose the negro in every effort to rise; they will debar him of every civil
and social right; they will set him the worst possible example, as they have been doing for
hundreds of years; and then they will hound and hiss at him for being what they made him. This
is the old track of the world,--the good, broad, reputable road on which all aristocracies
and privileged classes have been always traveling; and it's not likely that we shall have much
of a secession from it. The millennium isn't so near us as that, by a great deal."

"It's all very well arguing from human selfishness and human sin in that way," said I; "but
you can't take up a newspaper that doesn't contain abundant facts to the contrary. Here, now,"--and
I turned to the "Tribune,"--"is one item that fell under my eye accidentally, as you were speaking:--

"'The Superintendent of Freedmen's Affairs in Louisiana, in making up his last Annual Report,
says he has 1,952 blacks settled temporarily on 9,650 acres of land, who last year raised crops
to the value of $175,000, and that he had but few worthless blacks under his care; and that,
as a class, the blacks have fewer vagrants than can be found among any other class of persons.'

"Such testimonies gem the newspapers like stars."

"Newspapers of your way of thinking, very likely," said Theophilus; "but if it comes to statistics,
I can bring counter-statements, numerous and dire, from scores of Southern papers, of vagrancy,
laziness, improvidence, and wretchedness."

"Probably both are true," said I, "according to the greater or less care which has been taken
of the blacks in different regions. Left to themselves, they tend downward, pressed down by
the whole weight of semi-barbarous white society; but when the free North protects and guides,
the results are as you see."

"And do you think the free North has salt enough in it to save this whole Southern mass from
corruption? I wish I could think so; but all I can see in the free North at present is a raging,
tearing, headlong chase after money. Now money is of significance only as it gives people the
power of expressing their ideal of life. And what does this ideal prove to be among us? Is
it not to ape all the splendors and vices of old aristocratic society? Is it not to be able
to live in idleness, without useful employment, a life of glitter and flutter and show? What
do our New York dames of fashion seek after? To avoid family care, to find servants at any
price who will relieve them of home responsibilities, and take charge of their houses and children
while they shine at ball and opera, and drive in the park. And the servants who learn of these
mistresses,--what do they seek after? They seek also to get rid of care, to live as nearly
as possible without work, to dress and shine in their secondary sphere, as the mistresses do
in the primary one. High wages with little work and plenty of company express Biddy's ideal
of life, which is a little more respectable than that of her mistress, who wants high wages
with no work. The house and the children are not Biddy's; and why should she care more for
their well-being than the mistress and the mother?

"Hence come wranglings and moanings. Biddy uses a chest of tea in three months, and the amount
of the butcher's bill is fabulous; Jane gives the baby laudanum to quiet it, while she slips
out to her parties; and the upper classes are shocked at the demoralized state of the Irish,
their utter want of faithfulness and moral principle! How dreadful that there are no people
who enjoy the self-denials and the cares which they dislike, that there are no people who rejoice
in carrying that burden of duties which they do not wish to touch with one of their fingers!
The outcry about the badness of servants means just this: that everybody is tired of self-helpfulness,--the
servants as thoroughly as the masters and mistresses. All want the cream of life, without even
the trouble of skimming; and the great fight now is, who shall drink the skim-milk, which nobody
wants. Work,--honorable toil,--manly, womanly endeavor,--is just what nobody likes; and this
is as much a fact in the free North as in the slave South.

"What are all the young girls looking for in marriage? Some man with money enough to save them
from taking any care or having any trouble in domestic life, enabling them, like the lilies
of the field, to rival Solomon in all his glory, while they toil not, neither do they spin;
and when they find that even money cannot purchase freedom from care in family life, because
their servants are exactly of the same mind with themselves, and hate to do their duties as
cordially as they themselves do, then are they in anguish of spirit, and wish for slavery,
or aristocracy, or anything that would give them power over the lower classes."

"But surely, Mr. Theophilus," said Jenny, "there is no sin in disliking trouble, and wanting
to live easily and have a good time in one's life,--it's so very natural."

"No sin, my dear, I admit; but there is a certain amount of work and trouble that somebody
must take to carry on the family and the world; and the mischief is, that all are agreed in
wanting to get rid of it. Human nature is above all things lazy. I am lazy myself. Everybody
is. The whole struggle of society is as to who shall eat the hard bread-and-cheese of labor,
which must be eaten by somebody. Nobody wants it,--neither you in the parlor, nor Biddy in
the kitchen.

"'The mass ought to labor, and we lie on sofas,' is a sentence that would unite more subscribers
than any confession of faith that ever was presented, whether religious or political; and its
subscribers would be as numerous and sincere in the free States as in the slave States, or
I am much mistaken in my judgment. The negroes are men and women, like any of the rest of us,
and particularly apt in the imitation of the ways and ideas current in good society; and consequently
to learn to play on the piano and to have nothing in particular to do will be the goal of aspiration
among colored girls and woman, and to do housework will seem to them intolerable drudgery,
simply because it is so among the fair models to whom they look up in humble admiration. You
see, my dear, what it is to live in a democracy. It deprives us of the vantage-ground on which
we cultivated people can stand and say to our neighbor,--'The cream is for me, and the skim-milk
for you; the white bread for me, and the brown for you. I am born to amuse myself and have
a good time, and you are born to do everything that is tiresome and disagreeable to me.' The
'My Lady Ludlows' of the Old World can stand on their platform and lecture the lower classes
from the Church Catechism, to 'order themselves lowly and reverently to all their betters;'
and they can base their exhortations on the old established law of society by which some are
born to inherit the earth, and live a life of ease and pleasure, and others to toil without
pleasure or amusement, for their support and aggrandizement. An aristocracy, as I take it,
is a combination of human beings to divide life into two parts, one of which shall comprise
all social and moral advantages, refinement, elegance, leisure, ease, pleasure, and amusement,--and
the other, incessant toil, with the absence of every privilege and blessing of human existence.
Life thus divided, we aristocrats keep the good for ourselves and our children, and distribute
the evil as the lot of the general mass of mankind. The desire to monopolize and to dominate
is the most rooted form of human selfishness; it is the hydra with many heads, and, cut off
in one place, it puts out in another.

"Nominally, the great aristocratic arrangement of American society has just been destroyed;
but really, I take it, the essential animus of the slave system still exists, and pervades
the community, North as well as South. Everybody is wanting to get the work done by somebody
else, and to take the money himself; the grinding between employers and employed is going on
all the time, and the field of controversy has only been made wider by bringing in a whole
new class of laborers. The Irish have now the opportunity to sustain their aristocracy over
the negro. Shall they not have somebody to look down upon?

"All through free society, employers and employed are at incessant feud; and the more free
and enlightened the society, the more bitter the feud. The standing complaint of life in America
is the badness of servants; and England, which always follows at a certain rate behind us in
our social movements, is beginning to raise very loudly the same complaint. The condition of
service has been thought worthy of public attention in some of the leading British prints;
and Ruskin, in a summing-up article, speaks of it as a deep ulcer in society,--a thing hopeless
of remedy."

"My dear Mr. Theophilus," said my wife, "I cannot imagine whither you are rambling, or to what
purpose you are getting up these horrible shadows. You talk of the world as if there were no
God in it, overruling the selfishness of men, and educating it up to order and justice. I do
not deny that there is a vast deal of truth in what you say. Nobody doubts that, in general,
human nature is selfish, callous, unfeeling, willing to engross all good to itself, and to
trample on the rights of others. Nevertheless, thanks to God's teaching and fatherly care,
the world has worked along to the point of a great nation founded on the principles of strict
equality, forbidding all monopolies, aristocracies, privileged classes, by its very constitution;
and now, by God's wonderful providence, this nation has been brought, and forced, as it were,
to overturn and abolish the only aristocratic institution that interfered with its free development.
Does not this look as if a Mightier Power than ours were working in and for us, supplementing
our weakness and infirmity? and if we believe that man is always ready to drop everything and
let it run back to evil, shall we not have faith that God will not drop the noble work he has
so evidently taken in hand in this nation?"

"And I want to know," said Jenny, "why your illustrations of selfishness are all drawn from
the female sex. Why do you speak of girls that marry for money, any more than men? of mistresses
of families that want to be free from household duties and responsibilities, rather than of
masters?"

"My charming young lady," said Theophilus, "it is a fact that in America, except the slaveholders,
women have hitherto been the only aristocracy. Women have been the privileged class,--the only
one to which our rough democracy has always and everywhere given the precedence,--and consequently
the vices of aristocrats are more developed in them as a class than among men. The leading
principle of aristocracy, which is to take pay without work, to live on the toils and earnings
of others, is one which obtains more generally among women than among men in this country.
The men of our country, as a general thing, even in our uppermost classes, always propose to
themselves some work or business by which they may acquire a fortune, or enlarge that already
made for them by their fathers. The women of the same class propose to themselves nothing but
to live at their ease on the money made for them by the labors of fathers and husbands. As
a consequence, they become enervated and indolent,--averse to any bracing, wholesome effort,
either mental or physical. The unavoidable responsibilities and cares of a family, instead
of being viewed by them in the light of a noble life work, in which they do their part in the
general labors of the world, seem to them so many injuries and wrongs; they seek to turn them
upon servants, and find servants unwilling to take them; and so selfish are they, that I have
heard more than one lady declare that she didn't care if it was unjust, she should like to
have slaves, rather than be plagued with servants who had so much liberty. All the novels,
poetry, and light literature of the world, which form the general staple of female reading,
are based upon aristocratic institutions, and impregnated with aristocratic ideas; and women
among us are constantly aspiring to foreign and aristocratic modes of life rather than to those
of native republican simplicity. How many women are there, think you, that would not go in
for aristocracy and aristocratic prerogatives, if they were only sure that they themselves
should be of the privileged class? To be 'My Lady Duchess,' and to have a right by that simple
title to the prostrate deference of all the lower orders! How many would have firmness to vote
against such an establishment merely because it was bad for society? Tell the fair Mrs. Feathercap,
'In order that you may be a duchess, and have everything a paradise of elegance and luxury
around you and your children, a hundred poor families must have no chance for anything better
than black bread and muddy water all their lives, a hundred poor men must work all their lives
on such wages that a fortnight's sickness will send their families to the almshouse, and that
no amount of honesty and forethought can lay up any provision for old age.'"

"Come now, sir," said Jenny, "don't tell me that there are any girls or women so mean and selfish
as to want aristocracy or rank so purchased! You are too bad, Mr. Theophilus!"

"Perhaps they might not, were it stated in just these terms; yet I think, if the question of
the establishment of an order of aristocracy among us were put to vote, we should find more
women than men who would go for it; and they would flout at the consequences to society with
the lively wit and the musical laugh which make feminine selfishness so genteel and agreeable.

"No! It is a fact that in America, the women, in the wealthy classes, are like the noblemen
of aristocracies, and the men are the workers. And in all this outcry that has been raised
about women's wages being inferior to those of men there is one thing overlooked,--and that
is, that women's work is generally inferior to that of men, because in every rank they are
the pets of society and are excused from the laborious drill and training by which men are
fitted for their callings. Our fair friends come in generally by some royal road to knowledge,
which saves them the dire necessity of real work,--a sort of feminine hop-skip-and-jump into
science or mechanical skill,--nothing like the uncompromising hard labor to which the boy is
put who would be a mechanic or farmer, a lawyer or physician.

"I admit freely that we men are to blame for most of the faults of our fair nobility. There
is plenty of heroism, abundance of energy, and love of noble endeavor lying dormant in these
sheltered and petted daughters of the better classes; but we keep it down and smother it. Fathers
and brothers think it discreditable to themselves not to give their daughters and sisters the
means of living in idleness; and any adventurous fair one, who seeks to end the ennui of utter
aimlessness by applying herself to some occupation whereby she may earn her own living, infallibly
draws down on her the comments of her whole circle: 'Keeping school, is she? Isn't her father
rich enough to support her? What could possess her?'"

"I am glad, my dear Sir Oracle, that you are beginning to recollect yourself and temper your
severities on our sex," said my wife. "As usual, there is much truth lying about loosely in
the vicinity of your assertions; but they are as far from being in themselves the truth as
would be their exact opposites.

"The class of American women who travel, live abroad, and represent our country to the foreign
eye, have acquired the reputation of being Sybarites in luxury and extravagance, and there
is much in the modes of life that are creeping into our richer circles to justify this.

"Miss Murray, ex-maid-of-honor to the Queen of England, among other impressions which she received
from an extended tour through our country, states it as her conviction that young American
girls of the better classes are less helpful in nursing the sick and in the general duties
of family life than the daughters of the aristocracy of England; and I am inclined to believe
it, because even the Queen has taken special pains to cultivate habits of energy and self-helpfulness
in her children. One of the toys of the Princess Royal was said to be a cottage of her own,
furnished with every accommodation for cooking and housekeeping, where she from time to time
enacted the part of housekeeper, making bread and biscuit, boiling potatoes which she herself
had gathered from her own garden-patch, and inviting her royal parents to meals of her own
preparing; and report says, that the dignitaries of the German court have been horrified at
the energetic determination of the young royal housekeeper to overlook her own linen closets
and attend to her own affairs. But as an offset to what I have been saying, it must be admitted
that America is a country where a young woman can be self-supporting without forfeiting her
place in society. All our New England and Western towns show us female teachers who are as
well received and as much caressed in society, and as often contract advantageous marriages,
as any women whatever; and the productive labor of American women, in various arts, trades,
and callings, would be found, I think, not inferior to that of any women in the world.

"Furthermore, the history of the late war has shown them capable of every form of heroic endeavor.
We have had hundreds of Florence Nightingales, and an amount of real hard work has been done
by female hands not inferior to that performed by men in the camp and field, and enough to
make sure that American womanhood is not yet so enervated as seriously to interfere with the
prospects of free republican society."

"I wonder," said Jenny, "what it is in our country that spoils the working classes that come
into it. They say that the emigrants, as they land here, are often simple-hearted people, willing
to work, accustomed to early hours and plain living, decorous and respectful in their manners.
It would seem as if aristocratic drilling had done them good. In a few months they become brawling,
impertinent, grasping, want high wages, and are very unwilling to work. I went to several intelligence-offices
the other day to look for a girl for Marianne, and I thought, by the way the candidates catechized
the ladies, and the airs they took upon them, that they considered themselves the future mistresses
interrogating their subordinates.

"'Does ye expect me to do the washin' with the cookin'?'

"'Yes.'

"'Thin I'll niver go to that place!'

"'And does ye expect me to get the early breakfast for yer husband to be off in the train every
mornin'?'

"'Yes.'

"'I niver does that,--that ought to be a second girl's work.'

"'How many servants does ye keep, ma'am?'

"'Two.'

"'I niver lives with people that keeps but two servants.'

"'How many has ye in yer family?'

"'Seven.'

"'That's too large a family. Has ye much company?'

"'Yes, we have company occasionally.'

"'Thin I can't come to ye; it'll be too harrd a place.'

"In fact, the thing they were all in quest of seemed to be a very small family, with very high
wages, and many perquisites and privileges.

"This is the kind of work-people our manners and institutions make of people that come over
here. I remember one day seeing a coachman touch his cap to his mistress when she spoke to
him, as is the way in Europe, and hearing one or two others saying among themselves,--

"'That chap's a greenie; he'll get over that soon.'"

"All these things show," said I, "that the staff of power has passed from the hands of gentility
into those of labor. We may think the working classes somewhat unseemly in their assertion
of self-importance; but, after all, are they, considering their inferior advantages of breeding,
any more overbearing and impertinent than the upper classes have always been to them in all
ages and countries?

"When Biddy looks long, hedges in her work with many conditions, and is careful to get the
most she can for the least labor, is she, after all, doing any more than you or I or all the
rest of the world? I myself will not write articles for five dollars a page, when there are
those who will give me fifteen. I would not do double duty as an editor on a salary of seven
thousand, when I could get ten thousand for less work.

"Biddy and her mistress are two human beings, with the same human wants. Both want to escape
trouble, to make their life comfortable and easy, with the least outlay of expense. Biddy's
capital is her muscles and sinews; and she wants to get as many greenbacks in exchange for
them as her wit and shrewdness will enable her to do. You feel, when you bargain with her,
that she is nothing to you, except so far as her strength and knowledge may save you care and
trouble; and she feels that you are nothing to her, except so far as she can get your money
for her work. The free-and-easy airs of those seeking employment show one thing,--that the
country in general is prosperous, and that openings for profitable employment are so numerous
that it is not thought necessary to try to conciliate favor. If the community were at starvation-point,
and the loss of a situation brought fear of the almshouse, the laboring-class would be more
subservient. As it is, there is a little spice of the bitterness of a past age of servitude
in their present attitude,--a bristling, self-defensive impertinence, which will gradually
smooth away as society learns to accommodate itself to the new order of things."

"Well, but, papa," said Jenny, "don't you think all this a very severe test, if applied to
us women particularly, more than to the men? Mr. Theophilus seems to think women are aristocrats,
and go for enslaving the lower classes out of mere selfishness; but I say that we are a great
deal more strongly tempted than men, because all these annoyances and trials of domestic life
come upon us. It is very insidious, the aristocratic argument, as it appeals to us; there seems
much to be said in its favor. It does appear to me that it is better to have servants and work-people
tidy, industrious, respectful, and decorous, as they are in Europe, than domineering, impertinent,
and negligent, as they are here,--and it seems that there is something in our institutions
that produces these disagreeable traits; and I presume that the negroes will eventually be
traveling the same road as the Irish, and from the same influences.

"When people see all these things, and feel all the inconveniences of them, I don't wonder
that they are tempted not to like democracy, and to feel as if aristocratic institutions made
a more agreeable state of society. It is not such a blank, bald, downright piece of brutal
selfishness as Mr. Theophilus there seems to suppose, for us to wish there were some quiet,
submissive, laborious lower class, who would be content to work for kind treatment and moderate
wages."

"But, my little dear," said I, "the matter is not left to our choice. Wish it or not wish it,
it's what we evidently can't have. The day for that thing is past. The power is passing out
of the hands of the cultivated few into those of the strong, laborious many. Numbers is the
king of our era; and he will reign over us, whether we will hear or whether we will forbear.
The sighers for an obedient lower class and the mourners for slavery may get ready their crape
and have their pocket-handkerchiefs bordered with black; for they have much weeping to do,
and for many years to come. The good old feudal times, when two thirds of the population thought
themselves born only for the honor, glory, and profit of the other third, are gone, with all
their beautiful devotions, all their trappings of song and story. In the land where such institutions
were most deeply rooted and most firmly established, they are assailed every day by hard hands
and stout hearts; and their position resembles that of some of the picturesque ruins of Italy,
which are constantly being torn away to build prosaic modern shops and houses.

"This great democratic movement is coming down into modern society with a march as irresistible
as the glacier moves down from the mountains. Its front is in America,--and behind are England,
France, Italy, Prussia, and the Mohammedan countries. In all, the rights of the laboring masses
are a living force, bearing slowly and inevitably all before it. Our war has been a marshaling
of its armies, commanded by a hard-handed, inspired man of the working-class. An intelligent
American, recently resident in Egypt, says it was affecting to notice the interest with which
the working classes there were looking upon our late struggle in America, and the earnestness
of their wishes for the triumph of the Union. 'It is our cause, it is for us,' they said, as
said the cotton spinners of England and the silk weavers of Lyons. The forces of this mighty
movement are still directed by a man from the lower orders, the sworn foe of exclusive privileges
and landed aristocracies. If Andy Johnson is consistent with himself, with the principles which
raised him from a tailor's bench to the head of a mighty nation, he will see to it that the
work that Lincoln began is so thoroughly done, that every man and every woman in America, of
whatever race or complexion, shall have exactly equal rights before the law, and be free to
rise or fall according to their individual intelligence, industry, and moral worth. So long
as everything is not strictly in accordance with our principles of democracy, so long as there
is in any part of the country an aristocratic upper class who despise labor, and a laboring
lower class that is denied equal political rights, so long this grinding and discord between
the two will never cease in America. It will make trouble not only in the South, but in the
North,--trouble between all employers and employed,--trouble in every branch and department
of labor,--trouble in every parlor and every kitchen.

"What is it that has driven every American woman out of domestic service, when domestic service
is full as well paid, is easier, healthier, and in many cases far more agreeable, than shop
and factory work? It is, more than anything else, the influence of slavery in the South,--its
insensible influence on the minds of mistresses, giving them false ideas of what ought to be
the position and treatment of a female citizen in domestic service, and its very marked influence
on the minds of freedom-loving Americans, causing them to choose any position rather than one
which is regarded as assimilating them to slaves. It is difficult to say what are the very
worst results of a system so altogether bad as that of slavery; but one of the worst is certainly
the utter contempt it brings on useful labor, and the consequent utter physical and moral degradation
of a large body of the whites; and this contempt of useful labor has been constantly spreading
like an infection from the Southern to the Northern States, particularly among women, who,
as our friend here has truly said, are by our worship and exaltation of them made peculiarly
liable to take the malaria of aristocratic society. Let anybody observe the conversation in
good society for an hour or two, and hear the tone in which servant-girls, seamstresses, mechanics,
and all who work for their living, are sometimes mentioned, and he will see that, while every
one of the speakers professes to regard useful labor as respectable, she is yet deeply imbued
with the leaven of aristocratic ideas.

"In the South the contempt for labor bred of slavery has so permeated society, that we see
great, coarse, vulgar lazzaroni lying about in rags and vermin, and dependent on government
rations, maintaining, as their only source of self-respect, that they never have done and never
will do a stroke of useful work in all their lives. In the North there are, I believe, no men
who would make such a boast; but I think there are many women--beautiful, fascinating lazzaroni
of the parlor and boudoir--who make their boast of elegant helplessness and utter incompetence
for any of woman's duties with equal naïveté. The Spartans made their slaves drunk, to teach
their children the evils of intoxication; and it seems to be the policy of a large class in
the South now to keep down and degrade the only working class they have, for the sake of teaching
their children to despise work.

"We of the North, who know the dignity of labor, who know the value of free and equal institutions,
who have enjoyed advantages for seeing their operation, ought, in true brotherliness, to exercise
the power given us by the present position of the people of the Southern States, and put things
thoroughly right for them, well knowing, that, though they may not like it at the moment, they
will like it in the end, and that it will bring them peace, plenty, and settled prosperity,
such as they have long envied here in the North. It is no kindness to an invalid brother, half
recovered from delirium, to leave him a knife to cut his throat with, should he be so disposed.
We should rather appeal from Philip drunk to Philip sober, and do real kindness, trusting to
the future for our meed of gratitude.

"Giving equal political rights to all the inhabitants of the Southern States will be their
shortest way to quiet and to wealth. It will avert what is else almost certain,--a war of races;
since all experience shows that the ballot introduces the very politest relations between the
higher and lower classes. If the right be restricted, let it be by requirements of property
and education, applying to all the population equally.

"Meanwhile, we citizens and citizenesses of the North should remember that Reconstruction means
something more than setting things right in the Southern States. We have saved our government
and institutions, but we have paid a fearful price for their salvation; and we ought to prove
now that they are worth the price.

"The empty chair, never to be filled; the light gone out on its candlestick, never on earth
to be rekindled; gallant souls that have exhaled to heaven in slow torture and starvation;
the precious blood that has drenched a hundred battlefields,--all call to us with warning voices,
and tell us not to let such sacrifices be in vain. They call on us by our clear understanding
of the great principles of democratic equality, for which our martyred brethren suffered and
died, to show to all the world that their death was no mean and useless waste, but a glorious
investment for the future of mankind.

"This war, these sufferings, these sacrifices, ought to make every American man and woman look
on himself and herself as belonging to a royal priesthood, a peculiar people. The blood of
our slain ought to be a gulf, wide and deep as the Atlantic, dividing us from the opinions
and the practices of countries whose government and society are founded on other and antagonistic
ideas. Democratic republicanism has never yet been perfectly worked out either in this or any
other country. It is a splendid edifice, half built, deformed by rude scaffolding, noisy with
the clink of trowels, blinding the eyes with the dust of lime, and endangering our heads with
falling brick. We make our way over heaps of shavings and lumber to view the stately apartments,--we
endanger our necks in climbing ladders standing in the place of future staircases; but let
us not for all this cry out that the old rat-holed mansions of former ages, with their mould,
and moss, and cockroaches, are better than this new palace. There is no lime-dust, no clink
of trowels, no rough scaffolding there, to be sure, and life goes on very quietly; but there
is the foul air of slow and sure decay.

"Republican institutions in America are in a transition state; they have not yet separated
themselves from foreign and antagonistic ideas and traditions, derived from old countries;
and the labors necessary for the upbuilding of society are not yet so adjusted that there is
mutual pleasure and comfort in the relations of employer and employed. We still incline to
class distinctions and aristocracies. We incline to the scheme of dividing the world's work
into two orders: first, physical labor, which is held to be rude and vulgar, and the province
of a lower class; and second, brain labor, held to be refined and aristocratic, and the province
of a higher class. Meanwhile, the Creator, who is the greatest of levelers, has given to every
human being both a physical system, needing to be kept in order by physical labor, and an intellectual
or brain power, needing to be kept in order by brain labor. Work, use, employment, is the condition
of health in both; and he who works either to the neglect of the other lives but a half-life,
and is an imperfect human being.

"The aristocracies of the Old World claim that their only labor should be that of the brain;
and they keep their physical system in order by violent exercise, which is made genteel from
the fact only that it is not useful or productive. It would be losing caste to refresh the
muscles by handling the plough or the axe; and so foxes and hares must be kept to be hunted,
and whole counties turned into preserves, in order that the nobility and gentry may have physical
exercise in a way befitting their station,--that is to say, in a way that produces nothing,
and does good only to themselves.

"The model republican uses his brain for the highest purposes of brain work, and his muscles
in productive physical labor; and useful labor he respects above that which is merely agreeable.
When this equal respect for physical and mental labor shall have taken possession of every
American citizen, there will be no so-called laboring class; there will no more be a class
all muscle without brain power to guide it, and a class all brain without muscular power to
execute. The labors of society will be lighter, because each individual will take his part
in them; they will be performed better, because no one will be overburdened. In those days,
Miss Jenny, it will be an easier matter to keep house, because, housework being no longer regarded
as degrading drudgery, you will find a superior class of women ready to engage in it.

"Every young girl and woman, who in her sphere and by her example shows that she is not ashamed
of domestic labor, and that she considers the necessary work and duties of family life as dignified
and important, is helping to bring on this good day. Louis Philippe once jestingly remarked,
'I have this qualification for being a king in these days, that I have blacked my own boots,
and could black them again.'

"Every American ought to cultivate, as his pride and birthright, the habit of self-helpfulness.
Our command of the labors of good employees in any department is liable to such interruptions,
that he who has blacked his own boots, and can do it again, is, on the whole, likely to secure
the most comfort in life.

"As to that which Mr. Ruskin pronounces to be a deep, irremediable ulcer in society, namely,
domestic service, we hold that the last workings of pure democracy will cleanse and heal it.
When right ideas are sufficiently spread; when everybody is self-helpful and capable of being
self-supporting; when there is a fair start for every human being in the race of life, and
all its prizes are, without respect of persons, to be obtained by the best runner; when every
kind of useful labor is thoroughly respected,--then there will be a clear, just, wholesome
basis of intercourse on which employers and employed can move without wrangling or discord.

"Renouncing all claims to superiority on the one hand, and all thought of servility on the
other, service can be rendered by fair contracts and agreements, with that mutual respect and
benevolence which every human being owes to every other. But for this transition period, which
is wearing out the life of so many women, and making so many households uncomfortable, I have
some alleviating suggestions, which I shall give in my next chapter."

IV

IS WOMAN A WORKER

"Papa, do you see what the 'Evening Post' says of your New Year's article on Reconstruction?"
said Jenny, as we were all sitting in the library after tea.

"I have not seen it."

"Well, then, the charming writer, whoever he is, takes up for us girls and women, and maintains
that no work of any sort ought to be expected of us; that our only mission in life is to be
beautiful, and to refresh and elevate the spirits of men by being so. If I get a husband, my
mission is to be always becomingly dressed, to display most captivating toilettes, and to be
always in good spirits,--as, under the circumstances, I always should be,--and thus 'renew
his spirits' when he comes in weary with the toils of life. Household cares are to be far from
me: they destroy my cheerfulness and injure my beauty.

"He says that the New England standard of excellence as applied to woman has been a mistaken
one; and, in consequence, though the girls are beautiful, the matrons are faded, overworked,
and uninteresting; and that such a state of society tends to immorality, because, when wives
are no longer charming, men are open to the temptation to desert their firesides, and get into
mischief generally. He seems particularly to complain of your calling ladies who do nothing
the 'fascinating lazzaroni of the parlor and boudoir.'"

"There was too much truth back of that arrow not to wound," said Theophilus Thoro, who was
ensconced, as usual, in his dark corner, whence he supervises our discussions.

"Come, Mr. Thoro, we won't have any of your bitter moralities," said Jenny; "they are only
to be taken as the invariable bay-leaf which Professor Blot introduces into all his recipes
for soups and stews,--a little elegant bitterness, to be kept tastefully in the background.
You see now, papa, I should like the vocation of being beautiful. It would just suit me to
wear point-lace and jewelry, and to have life revolve round me, as some beautiful star, and
feel that I had nothing to do but shine and refresh the spirits of all gazers, and that in
this way I was truly useful, and fulfilling the great end of my being; but alas for this doctrine!
all women have not beauty. The most of us can only hope not to be called ill-looking, and,
when we get ourselves up with care, to look fresh and trim and agreeable; which fact interferes
with the theory."

"Well, for my part," said young Rudolph, "I go for the theory of the beautiful. If ever I marry,
it is to find an asylum for ideality. I don't want to make a culinary marriage or a business
partnership. I want a being whom I can keep in a sphere of poetry and beauty, out of the dust
and grime of every-lay life."

"Then," said Mr. Theophilus, "you must either be a rich man in your own right, or your fair
ideal must have a handsome fortune of her own."

"I never will marry a rich wife," quoth Rudolph. "My wife must be supported by me, not I by her."

Rudolph is another of the habitués of our chimney-corner, representing the order of young knighthood
in America, and his dreams and fancies, if impracticable, are always of a kind to make every
one think him a good fellow. He who has no romantic dreams at twenty-one will be a horribly
dry peascod at fifty; therefore it is that I gaze reverently at all Rudolph's chateaus in Spain,
which want nothing to complete them except solid earth to stand on.

"And pray," said Theophilus, "how long will it take a young lawyer or physician, starting with
no heritage but his own brain, to create a sphere of poetry and beauty in which to keep his
goddess? How much a year will be necessary, as the English say, to do this garden of Eden,
whereinto shall enter only the poetry of life?"

"I don't know. I haven't seen it near enough to consider. It is because I know the difficulty
of its attainment that I have no present thoughts of marriage. Marriage is to me in the bluest
of all blue distances,--far off, mysterious, and dreamy as the Mountains of the Moon or sources
of the Nile. It shall come only when I have secured a fortune that shall place my wife above
all necessity of work or care."

"I desire to hear from you," said Theophilus, "when you have found the sum that will keep a
woman from care. I know of women now inhabiting palaces, waited on at every turn by servants,
with carriages, horses, jewels, laces, Cashmeres, enough for princesses, who are eaten up by
care. One lies awake all night on account of a wrinkle in the waist of her dress; another is
dying because no silk of a certain inexpressible shade is to be found in New York; a third
has had a dress sent home, which has proved such a failure that life seems no longer worth
having. If it were not for the consolations of religion, one doesn't know what would become
of her. The fact is, that care and labor are as much correlated to human existence as shadow
is to light; there is no such thing as excluding them from any mortal lot. You may make a canary-bird
or a gold-fish live in absolute contentment without a care or labor, but a human being you
cannot. Human beings are restless and active in their very nature, and will do something, and
that something will prove a care, a labor, and a fatigue, arrange it how you will. As long
as there is anything to be desired and not yet attained, so long its attainment will be attempted;
so long as that attainment is doubtful or difficult, so long will there be care and anxiety.
When boundless wealth releases woman from every family care, she immediately makes herself
a new set of cares in another direction, and has just as many anxieties as the most toilful
housekeeper, only they are of a different kind. Talk of labor, and look at the upper classes
in London or in New York in the fashionable season. Do any women work harder? To rush from
crowd to crowd all night, night after night, seeing what they are tired of, making the agreeable
over an abyss of inward yawning, crowded, jostled, breathing hot air, and crushed in halls
and stairways, without a moment of leisure for months and months, till brain and nerve and
sense reel, and the country is longed for as a period of resuscitation and relief! Such is
the release from labor and fatigue brought by wealth. The only thing that makes all this labor
at all endurable is, that it is utterly and entirely useless, and does no good to any one in
creation; this alone makes it genteel, and distinguishes it from the vulgar toils of a housekeeper.
These delicate creatures, who can go to three or four parties a night for three months, would
be utterly desolate if they had to watch one night in a sick-room; and though they can exhibit
any amount of physical endurance and vigor in crowding into assembly rooms, and breathe tainted
air in an opera-house with the most martyr-like constancy, they could not sit one half-hour
in the close room where the sister of charity spends hours in consoling the sick or aged poor."

"Mr. Theophilus is quite at home now," said Jenny; "only start him on the track of fashionable
life, and he takes the course like a hound. But hear, now, our champion of the 'Evening Post':--

"'The instinct of women to seek a life of repose, their eagerness to attain the life of elegance,
does not mean contempt for labor, but it is a confession of unfitness for labor. Women were
not intended to work,--not because work is ignoble, but because it is as disastrous to the
beauty of a woman as is friction to the bloom and softness of a flower. Woman is to be kept
in the garden of life; she is to rest, to receive, to praise; she is to be kept from the workshop
world, where innocence is snatched with rude hands, and softness is blistered into unsightliness
or hardened into adamant. No social truth is more in need of exposition and illustration than
this one; and, above all, the people of New England need to know it, and, better, they need
to believe it.

"'It is therefore with regret that we discover Christopher Crowfield applying so harshly, and,
as we think so indiscriminatingly, the theory of work to women, and teaching a society made
up of women sacrificed in the workshops of the State, or to the dustpans and kitchens of the
house, that women must work, ought to work, and are dishonored if they do not work; and that
a woman committed to the drudgery of a household is more creditably employed than when she
is charming, fascinating, irresistible, in the parlor or boudoir. The consequence of this fatal
mistake is manifest throughout New England,--in New England where the girls are all beautiful
and the wives and mothers faded, disfigured, and without charm or attractiveness. The moment
a girl marries, in New England, she is apt to become a drudge or a lay figure on which to exhibit
the latest fashions. She never has beautiful hands, and she would not have a beautiful face
if a utilitarian society could "apply" her face to anything but the pleasure of the eye. Her
hands lose their shape and softness after childhood, and domestic drudgery destroys her beauty
of form and softness and bloom of complexion after marriage. To correct, or rather to break
up, this despotism of household cares, or of work, over woman, American society must be taught
that women will inevitably fade and deteriorate, unless it insures repose and comfort to them.
It must be taught that reverence for beauty is the normal condition, while the theory of work,
applied to women, is disastrous alike to beauty and morals. Work, when it is destructive to
men or women, is forced and unjust.

"'All the great masculine or creative epochs have been distinguished by spontaneous work on
the part of men, and universal reverence and care for beauty. The praise of work, and sacrifice
of women to this great heartless devil of work, belong only to, and are the social doctrine
of, a mechanical age and a utilitarian epoch. And if the New England idea of social life continues
to bear so cruelly on woman, we shall have a reaction somewhat unexpected and shocking.'"

"Well now, say what you will," said Rudolph, "you have expressed my idea of the conditions
of the sex. Woman was not made to work; she was made to be taken care of by man. All that is
severe and trying, whether in study or in practical life, is and ought to be in its very nature
essentially the work of the male sex. The value of woman is precisely the value of those priceless
works of art for which we build museums,--which we shelter and guard as the world's choicest
heritage; and a lovely, cultivated, refined woman, thus sheltered, and guarded, and developed,
has a worth that cannot be estimated by any gross, material standard. So I subscribe to the
sentiments of Miss Jenny's friend without scruple."

"The great trouble in settling all these society questions," said I, "lies in the gold-washing--the
cradling I think the miners call it. If all the quartz were in one stratum and all the gold
in another, it would save us a vast deal of trouble. In the ideas of Jenny's friend of the
'Evening Post' there is a line of truth and a line of falsehood so interwoven and threaded
together that it is impossible wholly to assent or dissent. So with your ideas, Rudolph, there
is a degree of truth in them, but there is also a fallacy.

"It is a truth, that woman as a sex ought not to do the hard work of the world, either social,
intellectual, or moral. These are evidences in her physiology that this was not intended for
her, and our friend of the 'Evening Post' is right in saying that any country will advance
more rapidly in civilization and refinement where woman is thus sheltered and protected. And
I think, furthermore, that there is no country in the world where women are so much considered
and cared for and sheltered, in every walk of life, as in America. In England and France,--all
over the continent of Europe, in fact,--the other sex are deferential to women only from some
presumption of their social standing, or from the fact of acquaintanceship; but among strangers,
and under circumstances where no particular rank or position can be inferred, a woman traveling
in England or France is jostled and pushed to the wall, and left to take her own chance, precisely
as if she were not a woman. Deference to delicacy and weakness, the instinct of protection,
does not appear to characterize the masculine population of any other quarter of the world
so much as that of America. In France, les Messieurs will form a circle round the fire in the
receiving-room of a railroad station, and sit, tranquilly smoking their cigars, while ladies
who do not happen to be of their acquaintance are standing shivering at the other side of the
room. In England, if a lady is incautiously booked for an outside place on a coach, in hope
of seeing the scenery, and the day turns out hopelessly rainy, no gentleman in the coach below
ever thinks of offering to change seats with her, though it pour torrents. In America, the
roughest backwoods steamboat or canal-boat captain always, as a matter of course, considers
himself charged with the protection of the ladies. 'Place aux dames' is written in the heart
of many a shaggy fellow who could not utter a French word any more than could a buffalo. It
is just as I have before said,--women are the recognized aristocracy, the only aristocracy,
of America; and, so far from regarding this fact as objectionable, it is an unceasing source
of pride in my country.

"That kind of knightly feeling towards woman which reverences her delicacy, her frailty, which
protects and cares for her, is, I think, the crown of manhood; and without it a man is only
a rough animal. But our fair aristocrats and their knightly defenders need to be cautioned
lest they lose their position, as many privileged orders have before done, by an arrogant and
selfish use of power.

"I have said that the vices of aristocracy are more developed among women in America than among
men, and that, while there are no men in the Northern States who are not ashamed of living
a merely idle life of pleasure, there are many women who make a boast of helplessness and ignorance
in woman's family duties which any man would be ashamed to make with regard to man's duties,
as if such helplessness and ignorance were a grace and a charm.

"There are women who contentedly live on, year after year, a life of idleness, while the husband
and father is straining every nerve, growing prematurely old and gray, abridged of almost every
form of recreation or pleasure,--all that he may keep them in a state of careless ease and
festivity. It may be very fine, very generous, very knightly, in the man who thus toils at
the oar that his princesses may enjoy their painted voyages; but what is it for the women?

"A woman is a moral being--an immortal soul--before she is a woman; and as such she is charged
by her Maker with some share of the great burden of work which lies on the world.

"Self-denial, the bearing of the cross, are stated by Christ as indispensable conditions to
the entrance into his kingdom, and no exception is made for man or woman. Some task, some burden,
some cross, each one must carry; and there must be something done in every true and worthy
life, not as amusement, but as duty,--not as play, but as earnest work,--and no human being
can attain to the Christian standard without this.

"When Jesus Christ took a towel and girded himself, poured water into a basin, and washed his
disciples' feet, he performed a significant and sacramental act, which no man or woman should
ever forget. If wealth and rank and power absolve from the services of life, then certainly
were Jesus Christ absolved, as he says: 'Ye call me Master, and Lord. If I then, your Lord
and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given
you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.'

"Let a man who seeks to make a terrestrial paradise for the woman of his heart,--to absolve
her from all care, from all labor, to teach her to accept and to receive the labor of others
without any attempt to offer labor in return,--consider whether he is not thus going directly
against the fundamental idea of Christianity; taking the direct way to make his idol selfish
and exacting, to rob her of the highest and noblest beauty of womanhood.

"In that chapter of the Bible where the relation between man and woman is stated, it is thus
said, with quaint simplicity: 'It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him
an help meet for him.' Woman the helper of man, not his toy,--not a picture, not a statue,
not a work of art, but a HELPER, a doer,--such is the view of the Bible and the Christian religion.

"It is not necessary that women should work physically or morally to an extent which impairs
beauty. In France, where woman is harnessed with an ass to the plough which her husband drives,--where
she digs, and wields the pick-axe,--she becomes prematurely hideous; but in America, where
woman reigns as queen in every household, she may surely be a good and thoughtful housekeeper,
she may have physical strength exercised in lighter domestic toils, not only without injuring
her beauty, but with manifest advantage to it. Almost every growing young girl would be the
better in health, and therefore handsomer, for two hours of active housework daily; and the
habit of usefulness thereby gained would be an equal advantage to her moral development. The
labors of modern, well-arranged houses are not in any sense severe; they are as gentle as any
kind of exercise that can be devised, and they bring into play muscles that ought to be exercised
to be healthily developed.

"The great danger to the beauty of American women does not lie, as the writer of the 'Post'
contends, in an overworking of the physical system which shall stunt and deform; on the contrary,
American women of the comfortable classes are in danger of a loss of physical beauty from the
entire deterioration of the muscular system for want of exercise. Take the life of any American
girl in one of our large towns, and see what it is. We have an educational system of public
schools which for intellectual culture is a just matter of pride to any country. From the time
that the girl is seven years old, her first thought, when she rises in the morning, is to eat
her breakfast and be off to her school. There really is no more time than enough to allow her
to make that complete toilet which every well-bred female ought to make, and to take her morning
meal before her school begins. She returns at noon with just time to eat her dinner, and the
afternoon session begins. She comes home at night with books, slate, and lessons enough to
occupy her evening. What time is there for teaching her any household work, for teaching her
to cut or fit or sew, or to inspire her with any taste for domestic duties? Her arms have no
exercise; her chest and lungs, and all the complex system of muscles which are to be perfected
by quick and active movement, are compressed while she bends over book and slate and drawing-board;
while the ever active brain is kept all the while going at the top of its speed. She grows
up spare, thin, and delicate; and while the Irish girl, who sweeps the parlors, rubs the silver,
and irons the muslins, is developing a finely rounded arm and bust, the American girl has a
pair of bones at her sides, and a bust composed of cotton padding, the work of a skillful dressmaker.
Nature, who is no respecter of persons, gives to Colleen Bawn, who uses her arms and chest,
a beauty which perishes in the gentle, languid Edith, who does nothing but study and read."

"But is it not a fact," said Rudolph, "as stated by our friend of the 'Post,' that American
matrons are perishing, and their beauty and grace all withered, from overwork?"

"It is," said my wife; "but why? It is because they are brought up without vigor or muscular
strength, without the least practical experience of household labor, or those means of saving
it which come by daily practice; and then, after marriage, when physically weakened by maternity,
embarrassed by the care of young children, they are often suddenly deserted by every efficient
servant, and the whole machinery of a complicated household left in their weak, inexperienced
hands. In the country, you see a household perhaps made void some fine morning by Biddy's sudden
departure, and nobody to make the bread, or cook the steak, or sweep the parlors, or do one
of the complicated offices of a family, and no bakery, cook-shop, or laundry to turn to for
alleviation. A lovely, refined home becomes in a few hours a howling desolation; and then ensues
a long season of breakage, waste, distraction, as one wild Irish immigrant after another introduces
the style of Irish cottage life into an elegant dwelling.

"Now suppose I grant to the 'Evening Post' that woman ought to rest, to be kept in the garden
of life, and all that, how is this to be done in a country where a state of things like this
is the commonest of occurrences? And is it any kindness or reverence to woman, to educate her
for such an inevitable destiny by a life of complete physical delicacy and incapacity? Many
a woman who has been brought into these cruel circumstances would willingly exchange all her
knowledge of German and Italian, and all her graceful accomplishments, for a good physical
development, and some respectable savoir faire in ordinary life.

"Moreover, American matrons are overworked because some unaccountable glamour leads them to
continue to bring up their girls in the same inefficient physical habits which resulted in
so much misery to themselves. Housework as they are obliged to do it, untrained, untaught,
exhausted, and in company with rude, dirty, unkempt foreigners, seems to them a degradation
which they will spare to their daughters. The daughter goes on with her schools and accomplishments,
and leads in the family the life of an elegant little visitor during all those years when a
young girl might be gradually developing and strengthening her muscles in healthy household
work. It never occurs to her that she can or ought to fill any of the domestic gaps into which
her mother always steps; and she comforts herself with the thought, 'I don't know how; I can't;
I haven't the strength. I can't sweep; it blisters my hands. If I should stand at the ironing-table
an hour, I should be ill for a week. As to cooking, I don't know anything about it.' And so,
when the cook, or the chambermaid, or nurse, or all together, vacate the premises, it is the
mamma who is successively cook, and chambermaid, and nurse; and this is the reason why matrons
fade and are overworked.

"Now, Mr. Rudolph, do you think a woman any less beautiful or interesting because she is a
fully developed physical being,--because her muscles have been rounded and matured into strength,
so that she can meet the inevitable emergencies of life without feeling them to be distressing
hardships? If there be a competent, well-trained servant to sweep and dust the parlor, and
keep all the machinery of the house in motion, she may very properly select her work out of
the family, in some form of benevolent helpfulness; but when the inevitable evil hour comes,
which is likely to come first or last in every American household, is a woman any less an elegant
woman because her love of neatness, order, and beauty leads her to make vigorous personal exertions
to keep her own home undefiled? For my part, I think a disorderly, ill-kept home, a sordid,
uninviting table, has driven more husbands from domestic life than the unattractiveness of
any overworked woman. So long as a woman makes her home harmonious and orderly, so long as
the hour of assembling around the family table is something to be looked forward to as a comfort
and a refreshment, a man cannot see that the good house fairy, who by some magic keeps everything
so delightfully, has either a wrinkle or a gray hair."

"Besides," said I, "I must tell you, Rudolph, what you fellows of twenty-one are slow to believe;
and that is, that the kind of ideal paradise you propose in marriage is, in the very nature
of things, an impossibility,--that the familiarities of every-day life between two people who
keep house together must and will destroy it. Suppose you are married to Cytherea herself,
and the next week attacked with a rheumatic fever. If the tie between you is that of true and
honest love, Cytherea will put on a gingham wrapper, and with her own sculptured hands wring
out the flannels which shall relieve your pains; and she will be no true woman if she do not
prefer to do this to employing any nurse that could be hired. True love ennobles and dignifies
the material labors of life; and homely services rendered for love's sake have in them a poetry
that is immortal.

"No true-hearted woman can find herself, in real, actual life, unskilled and unfit to minister
to the wants and sorrows of those dearest to her, without a secret sense of degradation. The
feeling of uselessness is an extremely unpleasant one. Tom Hood, in a very humorous paper,
describes a most accomplished schoolmistress, a teacher of all the arts and crafts which are
supposed to make up fine gentlewomen, who is stranded in a rude German inn, with her father
writhing in the anguish of a severe attack of gastric inflammation. The helpless lady gazes
on her suffering parent, longing to help him, and thinking over all her various little store
of accomplishments, not one of which bears the remotest relation to the case. She could knit
him a bead purse, or make him a guard-chain, or work him a footstool, or festoon him with cut
tissue-paper, or sketch his likeness, or crust him over with alum crystals, or stick him over
with little rosettes of red and white wafers; but none of these being applicable to his present
case, she sits gazing in resigned imbecility, till finally she desperately resolves to improvise
him some gruel, and, after a laborious turn in the kitchen,--after burning her dress and blacking
her fingers,--succeeds only in bringing him a bowl of paste!

"Not unlike this might be the feeling of many an elegant and accomplished woman, whose education
has taught and practiced her in everything that woman ought to know, except those identical
ones which fit her for the care of a home, for the comfort of a sick-room; and so I say again
that, whatever a woman may be in the way of beauty and elegance, she must have the strength
and skill of a practical worker, or she is nothing. She is not simply to be the beautiful,--she
is to make the beautiful, and preserve it; and she who makes and she who keeps the beautiful
must be able to work, and know how to work. Whatever offices of life are performed by women
of culture and refinement are thenceforth elevated; they cease to be mere servile toils, and
become expressions of the ideas of superior beings. If a true lady makes even a plate of toast,
in arranging a petit souper for her invalid friend, she does it as a lady should. She does
not cut blundering and uneven slices; she does not burn the edges; she does not deluge it with
bad butter, and serve it cold; but she arranges and serves all with an artistic care, with
a nicety and delicacy, which make it worth one's while to have a lady friend in sickness.

"And I am glad to hear that Monsieur Blot is teaching classes of New York ladies that cooking
is not a vulgar kitchen toil, to be left to blundering servants, but an elegant feminine accomplishment,
better worth a woman's learning than crochet or embroidery; and that a well-kept culinary apartment
may be so inviting and orderly that no lady need feel her ladyhood compromised by participating
in its pleasant toils. I am glad to know that his cooking-academy is thronged with more scholars
than he can accommodate, and from ladies in the best classes of society.

"Moreover, I am glad to see that in New Bedford, recently, a public course of instruction in
the art of bread-making has been commenced by a lady, and that classes of the most respectable
young and married ladies in the place are attending them. These are steps in the right direction,
and show that our fair countrywomen, with the grand good sense which is their leading characteristic,
are resolved to supply whatever in our national life is wanting.

"I do not fear that women of such sense and energy will listen to the sophistries which would
persuade them that elegant imbecility and inefficiency are charms of cultivated womanhood or
ingredients in the poetry of life. She alone can keep the poetry and beauty of married life
who has this poetry in her soul; who with energy and discretion can throw back and out of sight
the sordid and disagreeable details which beset all human living, and can keep in the foreground
that which is agreeable; who has enough knowledge of practical household matters to make unskilled
and rude hands minister to her cultivated and refined tastes, and constitute her skilled brain
the guide of unskilled hands. From such a home, with such a mistress, no sirens will seduce
a man, even though the hair grow gray, and the merely physical charms of early days gradually
pass away. The enchantment that was about her person alone in the days of courtship seems in
the course of years to have interfused and penetrated the home which she has created, and which
in every detail is only an expression of her personality. Her thoughts, her plans, her provident
care, are everywhere; and the home attracts and holds by a thousand ties the heart which before
marriage was held by the woman alone."

V

THE TRANSITION

"The fact is, my dear," said my wife, "that you have thrown a stone into a congregation of
blackbirds, in writing as you have of our family wars and wants. The response comes from all
parts of the country, and the task of looking over and answering your letters becomes increasingly
formidable. Everybody has something to say,--something to propose."

"Give me a résumé," said I.

"Well," said my wife, "here are three pages from an elderly gentleman, to the effect that women
are not what they used to be,--that daughters are a great care and no help, that girls have
no health and no energy in practical life, that the expense of maintaining a household is so
great that young men are afraid to marry, and that it costs more now per annum to dress one
young woman than it used to cost to carry a whole family of sons through college. In short,
the poor old gentleman is in a desperate state of mind, and is firmly of opinion that society
is going to ruin by an express train."

"Poor old fellow!" said I, "the only comfort I can offer him is what I take myself,--that this
sad world will last out our time at least. Now for the next."

"The next is more concise and spicy," said my wife. "I will read it.

  "CHRISTOPHER CROWFIELD, ESQ.:

  "Sir,--If you want to know how American women are to be brought
  back to family work, I can tell you a short method. Pay them as
  good wages for it as they can make in any other way. I get from
  seven to nine dollars a week in a shop where I work; if I could
  make the same in any good family, I should have no objection to
  doing it.

  "Your obedient servant,

  "LETITIA."

"My correspondent Letitia does not tell me," said I, "how much of this seven or nine dollars
she pays out for board and washing, fire and lights. If she worked in a good family at two
or three dollars a week, it is easily demonstrable that, at the present cost of these items,
she would make as much clear profit as she now does at nine dollars for her shop-work.

"And there are two other things, moreover, which she does not consider: First, that, besides
board, washing, fuel, and lights, which she would have in a family, she would have also less
unintermitted toil. Shop-work exacts its ten hours per diem; and it makes no allowance for
sickness or accident.

"A good domestic in a good family finds many hours when she can feel free to attend to her
own affairs. Her work consists of certain definite matters, which being done her time is her
own; and if she have skill and address in the management of her duties, she may secure many
leisure hours. As houses are now built, and with the many labor-saving conveniences that are
being introduced, the physical labor of housework is no more than a healthy woman really needs
to keep her in health. In case, however, of those slight illnesses to which all are more or
less liable, and which, if neglected, often lead to graver ones, the advantage is still on
the side of domestic service. In the shop and factory, every hour of unemployed time is deducted;
an illness of a day or two is an appreciable loss of just so much money, while the expense
of board is still going on. But in the family a good servant is always considered. When ill,
she is carefully nursed as one of the family, has the family physician, and is subject to no
deduction from her wages for loss of time. I have known more than one instance in which a valued
domestic has been sent, at her employer's expense, to the seaside or some other pleasant locality,
for change of air, when her health has been run down.

"In the second place, family work is more remunerative, even at a lower rate of wages, than
shop or factory work, because it is better for the health. All sorts of sedentary employment,
pursued by numbers of persons together in one apartment, are more or less debilitating and
unhealthy, through foul air and confinement.

"A woman's health is her capital. In certain ways of work she obtains more income, but she
spends on her capital to do it. In another way she may get less income, and yet increase her
capital. A woman cannot work at dressmaking, tailoring, or any other sedentary employment,
ten hours a day, year in and out, without enfeebling her constitution, impairing her eyesight,
and bringing on a complication of complaints, but she can sweep, wash, cook, and do the varied
duties of a well-ordered house with modern arrangements, and grow healthier every year. The
times, in New England, when all women did housework a part of every day, were the times when
all women were healthy. At present, the heritage of vigorous muscles, firm nerves, strong backs,
and cheerful physical life has gone from American women, and is taken up by Irish women. A
thrifty young man I have lately heard of married a rosy young Irish girl, quite to the horror
of his mother and sisters, but defended himself by the following very conclusive logic: 'If
I marry an American girl, I must have an Irish girl to take care of her; and I cannot afford
to support both.'

"Besides all this, there is a third consideration, which I humbly commend to my friend Letitia.
The turn of her note speaks her a girl of good common sense, with a faculty of hitting the
nail square on the head; and such a girl must see that nothing is more likely to fall out than
that she will some day be married. Evidently, our fair friend is born to rule; and at this
hour, doubtless, her foreordained throne and humble servant are somewhere awaiting her.

"Now domestic service is all the while fitting a girl physically, mentally, and morally for
her ultimate vocation and sphere,--to be a happy wife and to make a happy home. But factory
work, shop work, and all employments of that sort, are in their nature essentially undomestic,--entailing
the constant necessity of a boarding-house life, and of habits as different as possible from
the quiet routine of home. The girl who is ten hours on the strain of continued, unintermitted
toil feels no inclination, when evening comes, to sit down and darn her stockings, or make
over her dresses, or study any of those multifarious economies which turn a wardrobe to the
best account. Her nervous system is flagging; she craves company and excitement; and her dull,
narrow room is deserted for some place of amusement or gay street promenade. And who can blame
her? Let any sensible woman, who has had experience of shop and factory life, recall to her
mind the ways and manners in which young girls grow up who leave a father's roof for a crowded
boarding-house, without any supervision of matron or mother, and ask whether this is the best
school for training young American wives and mothers.

"Doubtless there are discreet and thoughtful women who, amid all these difficulties, do keep
up thrifty, womanly habits, but they do it by an effort greater than the majority of girls
are willing to make, and greater than they ought to make. To sew or read or study after ten
hours of factory or shop work is a further drain on the nervous powers which no woman can long
endure without exhaustion.

"When the time arrives that such a girl comes to a house of her own, she comes to it as unskilled
in all household lore, with muscles as incapable of domestic labor and nerves as sensitive,
as if she had been leading the most luxurious, do-nothing, fashionable life. How different
would be her preparation, had the forming years of her life been spent in the labors of a family!
I know at this moment a lady at the head of a rich country establishment, filling her station
in society with dignity and honor, who gained her domestic education in a kitchen in our vicinity.
She was the daughter of a small farmer, and when the time came for her to be earning her living,
her parents wisely thought it far better that she should gain it in a way which would at the
same time establish her health and fit her for her own future home. In a cheerful, light, airy
kitchen, which was kept so tidy always as to be an attractive sitting-room, she and another
young country girl were trained up in the best of domestic economies by a mistress who looked
well to the ways of her household, till at length they married from the house with honor, and
went to practice in homes of their own the lessons they had learned in the home of another.
Formerly, in New England, such instances were not uncommon; would that they might become so again!"

"The fact is," said my wife, "the places which the daughters of American farmers used to occupy
in our families are now taken by young girls from the families of small farmers in Ireland.
They are respectable, tidy, healthy, and capable of being taught. A good mistress, who is reasonable
and liberal in her treatment, is able to make them fixtures. They get good wages, and have
few expenses. They dress handsomely, have abundant leisure to take care of their clothes and
turn their wardrobes to the best account, and they very soon acquire skill in doing it equal
to that displayed by any women of any country. They remit money continually to relatives in
Ireland, and from time to time pay the passage of one and another to this country,--and whole
families have thus been established in American life by the efforts of one young girl. Now,
for my part, I do not grudge my Irish fellow citizens these advantages obtained by honest labor
and good conduct; they deserve all the good fortune thus accruing to them. But when I see sickly,
nervous American women jostling and struggling in the few crowded avenues which are open to
mere brain, I cannot help thinking how much better their lot would have been, with good strong
bodies, steady nerves, healthy digestion, and the habit of looking any kind of work in the
face, which used to be characteristic of American women generally, and of Yankee women in particular."

"The matter becomes still graver," said I, "by the laws of descent. The woman who enfeebles
her muscular system by sedentary occupation, and over-stimulates her brain and nervous system,
when she becomes a mother perpetuates these evils to her offspring. Her children will be born
feeble and delicate, incapable of sustaining any severe strain of body or mind. The universal
cry now about the ill health of young American girls is the fruit of some three generations
of neglect of physical exercise and undue stimulus of brain and nerves. Young girls now are
universally born delicate. The most careful hygienic treatment during childhood, the strictest
attention to diet, dress, and exercise, succeeds merely so far as to produce a girl who is
healthy so long only as she does nothing. With the least strain, her delicate organism gives
out, now here, now there. She cannot study without her eyes fail or she has headache,--she
cannot get up her own muslins, or sweep a room, or pack a trunk, without bringing on a backache,--she
goes to a concert or a lecture, and must lie by all the next day from the exertion. If she
skates, she is sure to strain some muscle; or if she falls and strikes her knee or hits her
ankle, a blow that a healthy girl would forget in five minutes terminates in some mysterious
lameness which confines our poor sibyl for months.

"The young American girl of our times is a creature who has not a particle of vitality to spare,--no
reserved stock of force to draw upon in cases of family exigency. She is exquisitely strung,
she is cultivated, she is refined; but she is too nervous, too wiry, too sensitive,--she burns
away too fast; only the easiest of circumstances, the most watchful of care and nursing, can
keep her within the limits of comfortable health; and yet this is the creature who must undertake
family life in a country where it is next to an absolute impossibility to have permanent domestics.
Frequent change, occasional entire breakdowns, must be the lot of the majority of housekeepers,--particularly
those who do not live in cities."

"In fact," said my wife, "we in America have so far got out of the way of a womanhood that
has any vigor of outline or opulence of physical proportions that, when we see a woman made
as a woman ought to be, she strikes us as a monster. Our willowy girls are afraid of nothing
so much as growing stout; and if a young lady begins to round into proportions like the women
in Titian's and Giorgione's pictures, she is distressed above measure, and begins to make secret
inquiries into reducing diet, and to cling desperately to the strongest corset-lacing as her
only hope. It would require one to be better educated than most of our girls are, to be willing
to look like the Sistine Madonna or the Venus of Milo.

"Once in a while our Italian opera-singers bring to our shores those glorious physiques which
formed the inspiration of Italian painters; and then American editors make coarse jokes about
Barnum's fat woman, and avalanches, and pretend to be struck with terror at such dimensions.

"We should be better instructed, and consider that Italy does us a favor, in sending us specimens,
not only of higher styles of musical art, but of a warmer, richer, and more abundant womanly
life. The magnificent voice is only in keeping with the magnificent proportions of the singer.
A voice which has no grate, no strain, which flows without effort,--which does not labor eagerly
up to a high note, but alights on it like a bird from above, there carelessly warbling and
trilling,--a voice which then without effort sinks into broad, rich, sombre depths of soft,
heavy chest-tone,--can come only with a physical nature at once strong, wide, and fine,--from
a nature such as the sun of Italy ripens, as he does her golden grapes, filling it with the
new wine of song."

"Well," said I, "so much for our strictures on Miss Letitia's letter. What comes next?"

"Here is a correspondent who answers the question, 'What shall we do with her?'--apropos of
the case of the distressed young woman which we considered in our first chapter."

"And what does he recommend?"

"He tells us that he should advise us to make our distressed woman Marianne's housekeeper,
and to send South for three or four contrabands for her to train, and, with great apparent
complacency, seems to think that course will solve all similar cases of difficulty."

"That's quite a man's view of the subject," said Jenny. "They think any woman who isn't particularly
fitted to do anything else can keep house."

"As if housekeeping were not the very highest craft and mystery of social life," said I. "I
admit that our sex speak too unadvisedly on such topics, and, being well instructed by my household
priestesses, will humbly suggest the following ideas to my correspondent.

"1st. A woman is not of course fit to be a housekeeper because she is a woman of good education
and refinement.

"2d. If she were, a family with young children in it is not the proper place to establish a
school for untaught contrabands, however desirable their training may be.

"A woman of good education and good common sense may learn to be a good housekeeper, as she
learns any trade, by going into a good family and practicing first one and then another branch
of the business, till finally she shall acquire the comprehensive knowledge to direct all.

"The next letter I will read:--

  "DEAR MR. CROWFIELD,--Your papers relating to the domestic problem
  have touched upon a difficulty which threatens to become a matter
  of life and death with me.

  "I am a young man, with good health, good courage, and good
  prospects. I have, for a young man, a fair income, and a prospect
  of its increase. But my business requires me to reside in a
  country town, near a great manufacturing city. The demand for
  labor there has made such a drain on the female population of the
  vicinity, that it seems, for a great part of the time, impossible
  to keep any servants at all; and what we can hire are of the
  poorest quality, and want exorbitant wages. My wife was a
  well-trained housekeeper, and knows perfectly all that pertains to
  the care of a family; but she has three little children, and a
  delicate babe only a few weeks old; and can any one woman do all
  that is needed for such a household? Something must be trusted to
  servants; and what is thus trusted brings such confusion and waste
  and dirt into our house, that the poor woman is constantly
  distraught between the disgust of having them and the utter
  impossibility of doing without them.

  "Now, it has been suggested that we remedy the trouble by paying
  higher wages; but I find that for the very highest wages I secure
  only the most miserable service; and yet, poor as it is, we are
  obliged to put up with it, because there is an amount of work to
  be done in our family that is absolutely beyond my wife's
  strength.

  "I see her health wearing away under these trials, her life made a
  burden; I feel no power to help her, and I ask you, Mr. Crowfield,
  What are we to do? What is to become of family life in this
  country?

  "Yours truly,

  "A YOUNG FAMILY MAN."

"My friend's letter," said I, "touches upon the very hinge of the difficulty of domestic life
with the present generation.

"The real, vital difficulty, after all, in our American life is, that our country is so wide,
so various, so abounding in the richest fields of enterprise, that in every direction the cry
is of the plenteousness of the harvest and the fewness of the laborers. In short, there really
are not laborers enough to do the work of the country.

"Since the war has thrown the whole South open to the competition of free labor, the demand
for workers is doubled and trebled. Manufactories of all sorts are enlarging their borders,
increasing their machinery, and calling for more hands. Every article of living is demanded
with an imperativeness and over an extent of territory which set at once additional thousands
to the task of production. Instead of being easier to find hands to execute in all branches
of useful labor, it is likely to grow every year more difficult, as new departments of manufacture
and trade divide the workers. The price of labor, even now higher in this country than in any
other, will rise still higher, and thus complicate still more the problem of domestic life.
Even if a reasonable quota of intelligent women choose domestic service, the demand will be
increasingly beyond the supply."

"And what have you to say to this," said my wife, "seeing you cannot stop the prosperity of
the country?"

"Simply this,--that communities will be driven to organize, as they now do in Europe, to lessen
the labors of individual families by having some of the present domestic tasks done out of
the house.

"In France, for example, no housekeeper counts either washing, ironing, or bread-making as
part of her domestic cares. All the family washing goes out to a laundry, and being attended
to by those who make that department of labor a specialty, it comes home in refreshingly beautiful
order.

"We in America, though we pride ourselves on our Yankee thrift, are far behind the French in
domestic economy. If all the families of a neighborhood should put together the sums they separately
spend in buying or fitting up and keeping in repair tubs, boilers, and other accommodations
for washing, all that is consumed or wasted in soap, starch, bluing, fuel, together with the
wages and board of an extra servant, the aggregate would suffice to fit up a neighborhood laundry,
where one or two capable women could do easily and well what ten or fifteen women now do painfully
and ill, and to the confusion and derangement of all other family processes.

"The model laundries for the poor in London had facilities which would enable a woman to do
both the washing and ironing of a small family in from two to three hours, and were so arranged
that a very few women could, with ease, do the work of a neighborhood.

"But in the absence of an establishment of this sort, the housekeepers of a country village
might help themselves very much by owning a mangle in common, to which all the heavier parts
of the ironing could be sent. American ingenuity has greatly improved the machinery of the
mangle. It is no longer the heavy, cumbersome, structure that it used to be in the Old World,
but a compact, neat piece of apparatus, made in three or four different sizes to suit different-sized
apartments.

"Mr. H. F. Bond, of Waltham, Massachusetts, now manufactures these articles, and sends them
to all parts of the country. The smallest of them does not take up much more room than a sewing-machine,
can be turned by a boy of ten or twelve, and thus in the course of an hour or two the heaviest
and most fatiguing part of a family ironing may be accomplished.

"I should certainly advise the 'Young Family Man' with a delicate wife and uncertain domestic
help to fortify his kitchen with one of these fixtures.

"But after all, I still say that the quarter to which I look for the solution of the American
problem of domestic life is a wise use of the principle of association.

"The future model village of New England, as I see it, shall have for the use of its inhabitants
not merely a town lyceum hall and a town library, but a town laundry, fitted up with conveniences
such as no private house can afford, and paying a price to the operators which will enable
them to command an excellence of work such as private families seldom realize. It will also
have a town bakery, where the best of family bread, white, brown, and of all grains, shall
be compounded; and lastly a town cook-shop, where soup and meats may be bought, ready for the
table. Those of us who have kept house abroad remember the ease with which our foreign establishments
were carried on. A suite of elegant apartments, a courier, and one female servant were the
foundation of domestic life. Our courier boarded us at a moderate expense, and the servant
took care of our rooms. Punctually at the dinner hour every day, our dinner came in on the
head of a porter from a neighboring cook-shop. A large chest lined with tin, and kept warm
by a tiny charcoal stove in the centre, being deposited in an anteroom, from it came forth
first soup, then fish, then roasts of various names, and lastly pastry and confections,--far
more courses than any reasonable Christian needs to keep him in healthy condition; and dinner
being over, our box with its débris went out of the house, leaving a clear field.

"Now I put it to the distressed 'Young Family Man' whether these three institutions of a bakery,
a cook-shop, and a laundry, in the village where he lives, would not virtually annihilate his
household cares, and restore peace and comfort to his now distracted family.

"There really is no more reason why every family should make its own bread than its own butter,--why
every family should do its own washing and ironing than its own tailoring or mantua-making.
In France, where certainly the arts of economy are well studied, there is some specialty for
many domestic needs for which we keep servants. The beautiful inlaid floors are kept waxed
and glossy by a professional gentleman who wears a brush on his foot-sole, skates gracefully
over the surface, and, leaving all right, departeth. Many families, each paying a small sum,
keep this servant in common.

"Now, if ever there was a community which needed to study the art of living, it is our American
one; for, at present, domestic life is so wearing and so oppressive as seriously to affect
health and happiness. Whatever has been done abroad in the way of comfort and convenience can
be done here; and the first neighborhood that shall set the example of dividing the tasks and
burdens of life by the judicious use of the principle of association will initiate a most important
step in the way of national happiness and prosperity.

"My solution, then, of the domestic problem may be formulized as follows:--

"1st. That women make self helpfulness and family helpfulness fashionable, and every woman
use her muscles daily in enough household work to give her a good digestion.

"2d. That the situation of a domestic be made so respectable and respected that well-educated
American women shall be induced to take it as a training-school for their future family life.

"3d. That families by association lighten the multifarious labors of the domestic sphere.

"All of which I humbly submit to the good sense and enterprise of American readers and workers."

VI

BODILY RELIGION: A SERMON ON GOOD HEALTH

One of our recent writers has said, that "good health is physical religion;" and it is a saying
worthy to be printed in golden letters. But good health being physical religion, it fully shares
that indifference with which the human race regards things confessedly the most important.
The neglect of the soul is the trite theme of all religious teachers; and, next to their souls,
there is nothing that people neglect so much as their bodies. Every person ought to be perfectly
healthy, just as everybody ought to be perfectly religious; but, in point of fact, the greater
part of mankind are so far from perfect moral or physical religion that they cannot even form
a conception of the blessing beyond them. 

7. What work does the brain do?

8. What makes the mind good or bad?

9. What is habit?

10. How long should children sleep?

11. How can you get the most good out of sleep?

CHAPTER XXI

HOW NARCOTICS AND STIMULANTS AFFECT THE BRAIN AND NERVES

=What Narcotics and Stimulants Are.=--A narcotic is something which when taken into the body
makes the organs do their work more slowly and tends to cause sleepiness. Alcoholic drinks,
tobacco, opium, soothing sirups, and pain killers are narcotics.

A stimulant is a substance which makes the organs of the body do more and quicker work and
does not later make the organs work more slowly. Coffee and tea are stimulants. Beer, wine,
and whisky were once thought to be stimulants, but experiments have shown them to be narcotics.
They urge the brain to faster work for a few minutes, but a half hour later they make it act
slower than usual.

=Alcohol hurts the Brain.=--Within five minutes after a drink of beer or whisky has been swallowed,
part of the alcohol has reached the blood. Within fifteen minutes much of the alcohol has gone
from the stomach directly into the blood.

In a minute after entering the blood vessels it reaches the brain.

If much strong drink is taken, the cells of the brain become so numbed that they cannot give
the right orders to the muscles to move the limbs. The person then staggers about and is said
to be drunk. Much whisky taken will make the nerve cells so numb that a man cannot move, and he
will then lie down as if in a deep sleep.

A tablespoonful of whisky
will make a child drunk and twice that amount may make him very sick.
Much use of strong drink sometimes gives to the brain a terrible disease
called delirium tremens. In this sickness the man thinks he sees horned
animals, hissing snakes, and other creatures which annoy him.

=Alcohol
injures the Thinking Part of the Brain.=--It was once thought that
wine or whisky would make a man think better. Now we know that either
of these drinks makes his thoughts slower and also causes him to make
mistakes.

Two doctors in Europe made many tests with men to learn
how alcohol affected their thinking. They found that when using wine
the men could do about one tenth less work in adding numbers than
when they took no strong drink. These doctors also tested the effect
of alcohol on memory and discovered that the use of even small quantities
of liquor caused their pupils to learn their lessons more slowly.

When
persons have taken only a very little drink, they often say and do
very foolish things. They sometimes tell secrets, for which they are
very sorry when they get sober. Often they become angry at the least
cause and strike or even shoot any person who seems to speak or work
against them in any way.

=Alcohol makes People Steal and Kill.=--The
alcohol in strong drink, when often used, appears to deaden that part
of the brain which helps the mind know right from wrong. Yet there is no store of vitality, no buoyancy, no superabundant
vigor, to resist the strain and pressure to which life puts him. A checked perspiration, a
draught of air ill-timed, a crisis of perplexing business or care, and he is down with a bilious
attack or an influenza, and subject to doctors' orders for an indefinite period. And if the
case be so with men, how is it with women? How many women have at maturity the keen appetite,
the joyous love of life and motion, the elasticity and sense of physical delight in existence,
that little children have? How many have any superabundance of vitality with which to meet
the wear and strain of life? And yet they call themselves well.

But is it possible, in maturity, to have the joyful fullness of the life of childhood? Experience
has shown that the delicious freshness of this dawning hour may be preserved even to midday,
and may be brought back and restored after it has been for years a stranger. Nature, though
a severe disciplinarian, is still, in many respects, most patient and easy to be entreated,
and meets any repentant movement of her prodigal children with wonderful condescension. Take
Bulwer's account of the first few weeks of his sojourn at Malvern, and you will read, in very
elegant English, the story of an experience of pleasure which has surprised and delighted many
a patient at a water-cure. The return to the great primitive elements of health--water, air,
and simple food, with a regular system of exercise--has brought to many a jaded, weary, worn-down
human being the elastic spirits, the simple, eager appetite, the sound sleep, of a little child.
Hence the rude huts and châlets of the peasant Priessnitz were crowded with battered dukes
and princesses and notables of every degree, who came from the hot, enervating luxury which
had drained them of existence, to find a keener pleasure in peasants' bread under peasants'
roofs than in soft raiment and palaces. No arts of French cookery can possibly make anything
taste so well to a feeble and palled appetite as plain brown bread and milk taste to a hungry
water-cure patient, fresh from bath and exercise.

If the water-cure had done nothing more than establish the fact that the glow and joyousness
of early life are things which may be restored after having been once wasted, it would have
done a good work. For if Nature is so forgiving to those who have once lost or have squandered
her treasures, what may not be hoped for us if we can learn the art of never losing the first
health of childhood? And though with us, who have passed to maturity, it may be too late for
the blessing, cannot something be done for the children who are yet to come after us?

Why is the first health of childhood lost? Is it not the answer, that childhood is the only
period of life in which bodily health is made a prominent object? Take our pretty boy, with
cheeks like apples, who started in life with a hop, skip, and dance,--to whom laughter was
like breathing, and who was enraptured with plain bread and milk,--how did he grow into the
man who wakes so languid and dull, who wants strong coffee and Worcestershire sauce to make
his breakfast go down? When and where did he drop the invaluable talisman that once made everything
look brighter and taste better to him, however rude and simple, than now do the most elaborate
combinations? What is the boy's history? Why, for the first seven years of his life his body
is made of some account. It is watched, cared for, dieted, disciplined, fed with fresh air,
and left to grow and develop like a thrifty plant. But from the time school education begins,
the body is steadily ignored, and left to take care of itself.

The boy is made to sit six hours a day in a close, hot room, breathing impure air, putting
the brain and the nervous system upon a constant strain, while the muscular system is repressed
to an unnatural quiet. During the six hours, perhaps twenty minutes are allowed for all that
play of the muscles which, up to this time, has been the constant habit of his life. After
this he is sent home with books, slate, and lessons to occupy an hour or two more in preparing
for the next day. In the whole of this time there is no kind of effort to train the physical
system by appropriate exercise. Something of the sort was attempted years ago in the infant
schools, but soon given up; and now, from the time study first begins, the muscles are ignored
in all primary schools. One of the first results is the loss of that animal vigor which formerly
made the boy love motion for its own sake. Even in his leisure hours he no longer leaps and
runs as he used to; he learns to sit still, and by and by sitting and lounging come to be the
habit, and vigorous motion the exception, for most of the hours of the day. The education thus
begun goes on from primary to high school, from high school to college, from college through
professional studies of law, medicine, or theology, with this steady contempt for the body,
with no provision for its culture, training, or development, but rather a direct and evident
provision for its deterioration and decay.

The want of suitable ventilation in school-rooms, recitation-rooms, lecture-rooms, offices,
court-rooms, conference-rooms, and vestries, where young students of law, medicine, and theology
acquire their earlier practice, is something simply appalling. Of itself it would answer for
men the question, why so many thousand glad, active children come to a middle life without
joy,--a life whose best estate is a sort of slow, plodding endurance. The despite and hatred
which most men seem to feel for God's gift of fresh air, and their resolution to breathe as
little of it as possible, could only come from a long course of education, in which they have
been accustomed to live without it. Let any one notice the conduct of our American people traveling
in railroad cars. We will suppose that about half of them are what might be called well-educated
people, who have learned in books, or otherwise, that the air breathed from the lungs is laden
with impurities,--that it is noxious and poisonous; and yet, travel with these people half
a day, and you would suppose from their actions that they considered the external air as a
poison created expressly to injure them, and that the only course of safety lay in keeping
the cars hermetically sealed, and breathing over and over the vapor from each others' lungs.
If a person in despair at the intolerable foulness raises a window, what frowns from all the
neighboring seats, especially from great rough-coated men, who always seem the first to be
apprehensive! The request to "put down that window" is almost sure to follow a moment or two
of fresh air. In vain have rows of ventilators been put in the tops of some of the cars, for
conductors and passengers are both of one mind, that these ventilators are inlets of danger,
and must be kept carefully closed.

Railroad traveling in America is systematically, and one would think carefully, arranged so
as to violate every possible law of health. The old rule to keep the head cool and the feet
warm is precisely reversed. A red-hot stove heats the upper stratum of air to oppression, while
a stream of cold air is constantly circulating about the lower extremities. The most indigestible
and unhealthy substances conceivable are generally sold in the cars or at way-stations for
the confusion and distress of the stomach. Rarely can a traveler obtain so innocent a thing
as a plain good sandwich of bread and meat, while pie, cake, doughnuts, and all other culinary
atrocities are almost forced upon him at every stopping-place. In France, England, and Germany,
the railroad cars are perfectly ventilated; the feet are kept warm by flat cases filled with
hot water and covered with carpet, and answering the double purpose of warming the feet and
diffusing an agreeable temperature through the car, without burning away the vitality of the
air; while the arrangements at the refreshment-rooms provide for the passenger as wholesome
and well-served a meal of healthy, nutritious food as could be obtained in any home circle.

What are we to infer concerning the home habits of a nation of men who so resignedly allow
their bodies to be poisoned and maltreated in traveling over such an extent of territory as
is covered by our railroad lines? Does it not show that foul air and improper food are too
much matters of course to excite attention? As a writer in "The Nation" has lately remarked,
it is simply and only because the American nation like to have unventilated cars, and to be
fed on pie and coffee at stopping-places, that nothing better is known to our travelers; if
there were any marked dislike of such a state of things on the part of the people, it would
not exist. We have wealth enough, and enterprise enough, and ingenuity enough, in our American
nation, to compass with wonderful rapidity any end that really seems to us desirable. An army
was improvised when an army was wanted,--and an army more perfectly equipped, more bountifully
fed, than so great a body of men ever was before. Hospitals, Sanitary Commissions, and Christian
Commissions all arose out of the simple conviction of the American people that they must arise.
If the American people were equally convinced that foul air was a poison,--that to have cold
feet and hot heads was to invite an attack of illness,--that maple-sugar, popcorn, peppermint
candy, pie, doughnuts, and peanuts are not diet for reasonable beings,--they would have railroad
accommodations very different from those now in existence.

We have spoken of the foul air of court-rooms. What better illustration could be given of the
utter contempt with which the laws of bodily health are treated, than the condition of these
places? Our lawyers are our highly educated men. They have been through high-school and college
training, they have learned the properties of oxygen, nitrogen, and carbonic-acid gas, and
have seen a mouse die under an exhausted receiver, and of course they know that foul, unventilated
rooms are bad for the health; and yet generation after generation of men so taught and trained
will spend the greater part of their lives in rooms notorious for their close and impure air,
without so much as an attempt to remedy the evil. A well-ventilated court-room is a four-leaved
clover among court-rooms. Young men are constantly losing their health at the bar; lung diseases,
dyspepsia, follow them up, gradually sapping their vitality. Some of the brightest ornaments
of the profession have actually fallen dead as they stood pleading,--victims of the fearful
pressure of poisonous and heated air upon the excited brain. The deaths of Salmon P. Chase
of Portland, uncle of our present Chief Justice, and of Ezekiel Webster, the brother of our
great statesman, are memorable examples of the calamitous effects of the errors dwelt upon;
and yet, strange to say, nothing efficient is done to mend these errors, and give the body
an equal chance with the mind in the pressure of the world's affairs.

But churches, lecture-rooms, and vestries, and all buildings devoted especially to the good
of the soul, are equally witness of the mind's disdain of the body's needs, and the body's
consequent revenge upon the soul. In how many of these places has the question of a thorough
provision of fresh air been even considered? People would never think of bringing a thousand
persons into a desert place and keeping them there without making preparations to feed them.
Bread and butter, potatoes and meat, must plainly be found for them; but a thousand human beings
are put into a building to remain a given number of hours, and no one asks the question whether
means exist for giving each one the quantum of fresh air needed for his circulation, and these
thousand victims will consent to be slowly poisoned, gasping, sweating, getting red in the
face, with confused and sleepy brains, while a minister with a yet redder face and a more oppressed
brain struggles and wrestles, through the hot, seething vapors, to make clear to them the mysteries
of faith. How many churches are there that for six or eight months in the year are never ventilated
at all, except by the accidental opening of doors? The foul air generated by one congregation
is locked up by the sexton for the use of the next assembly; and so gathers and gathers from
week to week, and month to month, while devout persons upbraid themselves, and are ready to
tear their hair, because they always feel stupid and sleepy in church. The proper ventilation
of their churches and vestries would remove that spiritual deadness of which their prayers
and hymns complain. A man hoeing his corn out on a breezy hillside is bright and alert, his
mind works clearly, and he feels interested in religion, and thinks of many a thing that might
be said at the prayer-meeting at night. But at night, when he sits down in a little room where
the air reeks with the vapor of his neighbor's breath and the smoke of kerosene lamps, he finds
himself suddenly dull and drowsy,--without emotion, without thought, without feeling,--and
he rises and reproaches himself for this state of things. He calls upon his soul and all that
is within him to bless the Lord; but the indignant body, abused, insulted, ignored, takes the
soul by the throat, and says, "If you won't let me have a good time, neither shall you." Revivals
of religion, with ministers and with those people whose moral organization leads them to take
most interest in them, often end in periods of bodily ill health and depression. But is there
any need of this? Suppose that a revival of religion required, as a formula, that all the members
of a given congregation should daily take a minute dose of arsenic in concert,--we should not
be surprised after a while to hear of various ill effects therefrom; and, as vestries and lecture-rooms
are now arranged, a daily prayer-meeting is often nothing more nor less than a number of persons
spending half an hour a day breathing poison from each other's lungs. There is not only no
need of this, but, on the contrary, a good supply of pure air would make the daily prayer-meeting
far more enjoyable. The body, if allowed the slightest degree of fair play, so far from being
a contumacious infidel and opposer, becomes a very fair Christian helper, and, instead of throttling
the soul, gives it wings to rise to celestial regions.

This branch of our subject we will quit with one significant anecdote. A certain rural church
was somewhat famous for its picturesque Gothic architecture, and equally famous for its sleepy
atmosphere, the rules of Gothic symmetry requiring very small windows, which could be only
partially opened. Everybody was affected alike in this church; minister and people complained
that it was like the enchanted ground in the Pilgrim's Progress. Do what they would, sleep
was ever at their elbows; the blue, red, and green of the painted windows melted into a rainbow
dimness of hazy confusion; and ere they were aware, they were off on a cloud to the land of dreams.

An energetic sister in the church suggested the inquiry, whether it was ever ventilated, and
discovered that it was regularly locked up at the close of service, and remained so till opened
for the next week. She suggested the inquiry, whether giving the church a thorough airing on
Saturday would not improve the Sunday services; but nobody acted on her suggestion. Finally,
she borrowed the sexton's key one Saturday night, and went into the church and opened all the
windows herself, and let them remain so for the night. The next day everybody remarked the
improved comfort of the church, and wondered what had produced the change. Nevertheless, when
it was discovered, it was not deemed a matter of enough importance to call for an order on
the sexton to perpetuate the improvement.

The ventilation of private dwellings in this country is such as might be expected from that
entire indifference to the laws of health manifested in public establishments. Let a person
travel in private conveyance up through the valley of the Connecticut, and stop for a night
at the taverns which he will usually find at the end of each day's stage. The bedchamber into
which he will be ushered will be the concentration of all forms of bad air. The house is redolent
of the vegetables in the cellar,--cabbages, turnips, and potatoes; and this fragrance is confined
and retained by the custom of closing the window blinds and dropping the inside curtains, so
that neither air nor sunshine enters in to purify. Add to this the strong odor of a new feather
bed and pillows, and you have a combination of perfumes most appalling to a delicate sense.
Yet travelers take possession of these rooms, sleep in them all night without raising the window
or opening the blinds, and leave them to be shut up for other travelers.

The spare chamber of many dwellings seems to be an hermetically closed box, opened only twice
a year, for spring and fall cleaning; but for the rest of the time closed to the sun and the
air of heaven. Thrifty country housekeepers often adopt the custom of making their beds on
the instant after they are left, without airing the sheets and mattresses; and a bed so made
gradually becomes permeated with the insensible emanations of the human body, so as to be a
steady corrupter of the atmosphere.

In the winter, the windows are calked and listed, the throat of the chimney built up with a
tight brick wall, and a close stove is introduced to help burn out the vitality of the air.
In a sitting-room like this, from five to ten persons will spend about eight months of the
year, with no other ventilation than that gained by the casual opening and shutting of doors.
Is it any wonder that consumption every year sweeps away its thousands?--that people are suffering
constant chronic ailments,--neuralgia, nervous dyspepsia, and all the host of indefinite bad
feelings that rob life of sweetness and flower and bloom?

A recent writer raises the inquiry, whether the community would not gain in health by the demolition
of all dwelling-houses. That is, he suggests the question, whether the evils from foul air
are not so great and so constant that they countervail the advantages of shelter. Consumptive
patients far gone have been known to be cured by long journeys, which have required them to
be day and night in the open air. Sleep under the open heaven, even though the person be exposed
to the various accidents of weather, has often proved a miraculous restorer after everything
else had failed. But surely, if simple fresh air is so healing and preserving a thing, some
means might be found to keep the air in a house just as pure and vigorous as it is outside.

An article in the May number of "Harpers' Magazine" presents drawings of a very simple arrangement
by which any house can be made thoroughly self-ventilating. Ventilation, as this article shows,
consists in two things,--a perfect and certain expulsion from the dwelling of all foul air
breathed from the lungs or arising from any other cause, and the constant supply of pure air.

One source of foul air cannot be too much guarded against,--we mean imperfect gas-pipes. A
want of thoroughness in execution is the sin of our American artisans, and very few gas-fixtures
are so thoroughly made that more or less gas does not escape and mingle with the air of the
dwelling. There are parlors where plants cannot be made to live, because the gas kills them;
and yet their occupants do not seem to reflect that an air in which a plant cannot live must
be dangerous for a human being. The very clemency and long-suffering of Nature to those who
persistently violate her laws is one great cause why men are, physically speaking, such sinners
as they are. If foul air poisoned at once and completely, we should have well-ventilated houses,
whatever else we failed to have. But because people can go on for weeks, months, and years
breathing poisons, and slowly and imperceptibly lowering the tone of their vital powers, and
yet be what they call "pretty well, I thank you," sermons on ventilation and fresh air go by
them as an idle song. "I don't see but we are well enough, and we never took much pains about
these things. There's air enough gets into houses, of course. What with doors opening and windows
occasionally lifted, the air of houses is generally good enough;"--and so the matter is dismissed.

One of Heaven's great hygienic teachers is now abroad in the world, giving lessons on health
to the children of men. The cholera is like the angel whom God threatened to send as leader
to the rebellious Israelites. "Beware of him, obey his voice, and provoke him not; for he will
not pardon your transgressions." The advent of this fearful messenger seems really to be made
necessary by the contempt with which men treat the physical laws of their being. What else
could have purified the dark places of New York? What a wiping-up and reforming and cleansing
is going before him through the country! At last we find that Nature is in earnest, and that
her laws cannot be always ignored with impunity. Poisoned air is recognized at last as an evil,--even
although the poison cannot be weighed, measured, or tasted; and if all the precautions that
men are now willing to take could be made perpetual, the alarm would be a blessing to the world.

Like the principles of spiritual religion, the principles of physical religion are few and
easy to be understood. An old medical apothegm personifies the hygienic forces as the Doctors
Air, Diet, Exercise, and Quiet: and these four will be found, on reflection, to cover the whole
ground of what is required to preserve human health. A human being whose lungs have always
been nourished by pure air, whose stomach has been fed only by appropriate food, whose muscles
have been systematically trained by appropriate exercises, and whose mind is kept tranquil
by faith in God and a good conscience, has perfect physical religion. There is a line where
physical religion must necessarily overlap spiritual religion and rest upon it. No human being
can be assured of perfect health, through all the strain and wear and tear of such cares and
such perplexities as life brings, without the rest of faith in God. An unsubmissive, unconfiding,
unresigned soul will make vain the best hygienic treatment; and, on the contrary, the most
saintly religious resolution and purpose may be defeated and vitiated by an habitual ignorance
and disregard of the laws of the physical system.

Perfect spiritual religion cannot exist without perfect physical religion. Every flaw and defect
in the bodily system is just so much taken from the spiritual vitality: we are commanded to
glorify God, not simply in our spirits, but in our bodies and spirits. The only example of
perfect manhood the world ever saw impresses us more than anything else by an atmosphere of
perfect healthiness. There is a calmness, a steadiness, in the character of Jesus, a naturalness
in his evolution of the sublimest truths under the strain of the most absorbing and intense
excitement, that could come only from the one perfectly trained and developed body, bearing
as a pure and sacred shrine the One Perfect Spirit. Jesus of Nazareth, journeying on foot from
city to city, always calm yet always fervent, always steady yet glowing with a white heat of
sacred enthusiasm, able to walk and teach all day and afterwards to continue in prayer all
night, with unshaken nerves, sedately patient, serenely reticent, perfectly self-controlled,
walked the earth, the only man that perfectly glorified God in His body no less than in His
spirit. It is worthy of remark, that in choosing His disciples He chose plain men from the
laboring classes, who had lived the most obediently to the simple, unperverted laws of nature.
He chose men of good and pure bodies,--simple, natural, childlike, healthy men,--and baptized
their souls with the inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

The hygienic bearings of the New Testament have never been sufficiently understood. The basis
of them lies in the solemn declaration, that our bodies are to be temples of the Holy Spirit,
and that all abuse of them is of the nature of sacrilege. Reverence for the physical system,
as the outward shrine and temple of the spiritual, is the peculiarity of the Christian religion.
The doctrine of the resurrection of the body, and its physical immortality, sets the last crown
of honor upon it. That bodily system which God declared worthy to be gathered back from the
dust of the grave, and re-created, as the soul's immortal companion, must necessarily be dear
and precious in the eyes of its Creator. The one passage in the New Testament in which it is
spoken of disparagingly is where Paul contrasts it with the brighter glory of what is to come:
"He shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like his glorious body." From
this passage has come abundance of reviling of the physical system. Memoirs of good men are
full of abuse of it, as the clog, the load, the burden, the chain. It is spoken of as pollution,
as corruption,--in short, one would think that the Creator had imitated the cruelty of some
Oriental despots who have been known to chain a festering corpse to a living body. Accordingly,
the memoirs of these pious men are also mournful records of slow suicide, wrought by the persistent
neglect of the most necessary and important laws of the bodily system; and the body, outraged
and downtrodden, has turned traitor to the soul, and played the adversary with fearful power.
Who can tell the countless temptations to evil which flow in from a neglected, disordered,
deranged nervous system,--temptations to anger, to irritability, to selfishness, to every kind
of sin of appetite and passion? No wonder that the poor soul longs for the hour of release
from such a companion.

But that human body which God declares expressly was made to be the temple of the Holy Spirit,
which he considers worthy to be perpetuated by a resurrection and an immortal existence, cannot
be intended to be a clog and a hindrance to spiritual advancement. A perfect body, working
in perfect tune and time, would open glimpses of happiness to the soul approaching the joys
we hope for in heaven. It is only through the images of things which our bodily senses have
taught us, that we can form any conception of that future bliss; and the more perfect these
senses, the more perfect our conceptions must be.

The conclusion of the whole matter, and the practical application of this sermon, is,--First,
that all men set themselves to form the idea of what perfect health is, and resolve to realize
it for themselves and their children. Second, that with a view to this they study the religion
of the body, in such simple and popular treatises as those of George Combe, Dr. Dio Lewis,
and others, and with simple and honest hearts practice what they there learn. Third, that the
training of the bodily system should form a regular part of our common-school education,--every
common school being provided with a well-instructed teacher of gymnastics; and the growth and
development of each pupil's body being as much noticed and marked as is now the growth of his
mind. The same course should be continued and enlarged in colleges and female seminaries, which
should have professors of hygiene appointed to give thorough instruction concerning the laws
of health.

And when this is all done, we may hope that crooked spines, pimpled faces, sallow complexions,
stooping shoulders, and all other signs indicating an undeveloped physical vitality, will,
in the course of a few generations, disappear from the earth, and men will have bodies which
will glorify God, their great Architect.

The soul of man has got as far as it can without the body. Religion herself stops and looks
back, waiting for the body to overtake her. The soul's great enemy and hindrance can be made
her best friend and most powerful help; and it is high time that this era were begun. We old
sinners, who have lived carelessly, and almost spent our day of grace, may not gain much of
its good; but the children,--shall there not be a more perfect day for them? Shall there not
come a day when the little child, whom Christ set forth to his disciples as the type of the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven, shall be the type no less of our physical than our spiritual
advancement,--when men and women shall arise, keeping through long and happy lives the simple,
unperverted appetites, the joyous freshness of spirit, the keen delight in mere existence,
the dreamless sleep and happy waking of early childhood?

VII

HOW SHALL WE ENTERTAIN OUR COMPANY

"The fact is," said Marianne, "we must have a party. Bob don't like to hear of it, but it must
come. We are in debt to everybody: we have been invited everywhere, and never had anything
like a party since we were married, and it won't do."

"For my part, I hate parties," said Bob. "They put your house all out of order, give all the
women a sick-headache, and all the men an indigestion; you never see anybody to any purpose;
the girls look bewitched, and the women answer you at cross-purposes, and call you by the name
of your next-door neighbor, in their agitation of mind. We stay out beyond our usual bedtime,
come home and find some baby crying, or child who has been sitting up till nobody knows when;
and the next morning, when I must be at my office by eight, and wife must attend to her children,
we are sleepy and headachy. I protest against making overtures to entrap some hundred of my
respectable married friends into this snare which has so often entangled me. If I had my way,
I would never go to another party; and as to giving one--I suppose, since my empress has declared
her intentions, that I shall be brought into doing it; but it shall be under protest."

"But, you see, we must keep up society," said Marianne.

"But I insist on it," said Bob, "it isn't keeping up society. What earthly thing do you learn
about people by meeting them in a general crush, where all are coming, going, laughing, talking,
and looking at each other? No person of common sense ever puts forth any idea he cares twopence
about, under such circumstances; all that is exchanged is a certain set of commonplaces and
platitudes which people keep for parties, just as they do their kid gloves and finery. Now
there are our neighbors, the Browns. When they drop in of an evening, she knitting, and he
with the last article in the paper, she really comes out with a great deal of fresh, lively,
earnest, original talk. We have a good time, and I like her so much that it quite verges on
loving; but see her in a party, when she manifests herself over five or six flounces of pink
silk and a perfect egg-froth of tulle, her head adorned with a thicket of crêped hair and roses,
and it is plain at first view that talking with her is quite out of the question. What has
been done to her head on the outside has evidently had some effect within, for she is no longer
the Mrs. Brown you knew in her every-day dress, but Mrs. Brown in a party state of mind, and
too distracted to think of anything in particular. She has a few words that she answers to
everything you say, as for example, 'Oh, very!' 'Certainly!' 'How extraordinary!' 'So happy
to,' etc. The fact is, that she has come into a state in which any real communication with
her mind and character must be suspended till the party is over and she is rested. Now I like
society, which is the reason why I hate parties."

"But you see," said Marianne, "what are we to do? Everybody can't drop in to spend an evening
with you. If it were not for these parties, there are quantities of your acquaintances whom
you would never meet."

"And of what use is it to meet them? Do you really know them any better for meeting them got
up in unusual dresses, and sitting down together when the only thing exchanged is the remark
that it is hot or cold, or it rains, or it is dry, or any other patent surface-fact that answers
the purpose of making believe you are talking when neither of you is saying a word?"

"Well, now, for my part," said Marianne, "I confess I like parties: they amuse me. I come home
feeling kinder and better to people, just for the little I see of them when they are all dressed
up and in good humor with themselves. To be sure we don't say anything very profound,--I don't
think the most of us have anything profound to say; but I ask Mrs. Brown where she buys her
lace, and she tells me how she washes it, and somebody else tells me about her baby, and promises
me a new sack-pattern. Then I like to see the pretty, nice young girls flirting with the nice
young men; and I like to be dressed up a little myself, even if my finery is all old and many
times made over. It does me good to be rubbed up and brightened."

"Like old silver," said Bob.

"Yes, like old silver, precisely; and even if I do come home tired, it does my mind good to
have that change of scene and faces. You men do not know what it is to be tied to house and
nursery all day, and what a perfect weariness and lassitude it often brings on us women. For
my part I think parties are a beneficial institution of society, and that it is worth a good
deal of fatigue and trouble to get one up."

"Then there's the expense," said Bob. "What earthly need is there of a grand regale of oysters,
chicken salad, ice-creams, coffee, and champagne, between eleven and twelve o'clock at night,
when no one of us would ever think of wanting or taking any such articles upon our stomachs
in our own homes? If we were all of us in the habit of having a regular repast at that hour,
it might be well enough to enjoy one with our neighbor; but the party fare is generally just
so much in addition to the honest three meals which we have eaten during the day. Now, to spend
from fifty to one, two, or three hundred dollars in giving all our friends an indigestion from
a midnight meal seems to me a very poor investment. Yet if we once begin to give the party,
we must have everything that is given at the other parties, or wherefore do we live? And caterers
and waiters rack their brains to devise new forms of expense and extravagance; and when the
bill comes in, one is sure to feel that one is paying a great deal of money for a great deal
of nonsense. It is in fact worse than nonsense, because our dear friends are, in half the cases,
not only no better, but a great deal worse, for what they have eaten."

"But there is this advantage to society," said Rudolph,--"it helps us young physicians. What
would the physicians do if parties were abolished? Take all the colds that are caught by our
fair friends with low necks and short sleeves, all the troubles from dancing in tight dresses
and inhaling bad air, and all the headaches and indigestion from the mélange of lobster salad,
two or three kinds of ice-cream, cake, and coffee on delicate stomachs, and our profession
gets a degree of encouragement that is worthy to be thought of."

"But the question arises," said my wife, "whether there are not ways of promoting social feeling
less expensive, more simple and natural and rational. I am inclined to think that there are."

"Yes," said Theophilus Thoro; "for large parties are not, as a general thing, given with any
wish or intention of really improving our acquaintance with our neighbors. In many cases they
are openly and avowedly a general tribute paid at intervals to society, for and in consideration
of which you are to sit with closed blinds and doors and be let alone for the rest of the year.
Mrs. Bogus, for instance, lives to keep her house in order, her closets locked, her silver
counted and in the safe, and her china-closet in undisturbed order. Her 'best things' are put
away with such admirable precision, in so many wrappings and foldings, and secured with so
many a twist and twine, that to get them out is one of the seven labors of Hercules, not to
be lightly or unadvisedly taken in hand, but reverently, discreetly, and once for all, in an
annual or biennial party. Then says Mrs. Bogus, 'For Heaven's sake, let's have every creature
we can think of, and have 'em all over with at once. For pity's sake, let's have no driblets
left that we shall have to be inviting to dinner or to tea. No matter whether they can come
or not,--only send them the invitation, and our part is done; and, thank Heaven! we shall be
free for a year.'"

"Yes," said my wife; "a great stand-up party bears just the same relation towards the offer
of real hospitality and good will as Miss Sally Brass's offer of meat to the little hungry
Marchioness, when, with a bit uplifted on the end of a fork, she addressed her, 'Will you have
this piece of meat? No? Well, then, remember and don't say you haven't had meat offered to
you!' You are invited to a general jam, at the risk of your life and health; and if you refuse,
don't say you haven't had hospitality offered to you. All our debts are wiped out and our slate
clean; now we will have our own closed doors, no company and no trouble, and our best china
shall repose undisturbed on its shelves. In the gradual desuetude of old observances, this custom
of solemnizing our proper birth-day hath nearly passed away, or is left to children, who reflect
nothing at all about the matter, nor understand any thing in it beyond
cake and orange. It must keep
her house in confusion all the time; yet, for real social feeling, real exchange of thought
and opinion, there is more of it in one half-hour at Mrs. Easygo's than in a dozen of Mrs.
Bogus's great parties.

"The fact is, that Mrs. Easygo really does like the society of human beings. She is genuinely
and heartily social; and, in consequence, though she has very limited means, and no money to
spend in giving great entertainments, her domestic establishment is a sort of social exchange,
where more friendships are formed, more real acquaintance made, and more agreeable hours spent,
than in any other place that can be named. She never has large parties,--great general pay-days
of social debts,--but small, well-chosen circles of people, selected so thoughtfully, with
a view to the pleasure which congenial persons give each other, as to make the invitation an
act of real personal kindness. She always manages to have something for the entertainment of
her friends, so that they are not reduced to the simple alternative of gaping at each other's
dresses and eating lobster salad and ice-cream. There is either some choice music, or a reading
of fine poetry, or a well-acted charade, or a portfolio of photographs and pictures, to enliven
the hour and start conversation; and as the people are skillfully chosen with reference to
each other, as there is no hurry or heat or confusion, conversation, in its best sense, can
bubble up, fresh, genuine, clear, and sparkling as a woodland spring, and one goes away really
rested and refreshed. The slight entertainment provided is just enough to enable you to eat
salt together in Arab fashion,--not enough to form the leading feature of the evening. A cup
of tea and a basket of cake, or a salver of ices, silently passed at quiet intervals, do not
interrupt conversation or overload the stomach."

"The fact is," said I, "that the art of society among us Anglo-Saxons is yet in its rudest
stages. We are not, as a race, social and confiding, like the French and Italians and Germans.
We have a word for home, and our home is often a moated grange, an island, a castle with its
drawbridge up, cutting us off from all but our own home-circle. In France and Germany and Italy
there are the boulevards and public gardens, where people do their family living in common.
Mr. A. is breakfasting under one tree, with wife and children around, and Mr. B. is breakfasting
under another tree, hard by; and messages, nods, and smiles pass backward and forward. Families
see each other daily in these public resorts, and exchange mutual offices of good will. Perhaps
from these customs of society come that naïve simplicity and abandon which one remarks in the
Continental, in opposition to the Anglo-Saxon, habits of conversation. A Frenchman or an Italian
will talk to you of his feeling and plans and prospects with an unreserve that is perfectly
unaccountable to you, who have always felt that such things must be kept for the very innermost
circle of home privacy. But the Frenchman or Italian has from a child been brought up to pass
his family life in places of public resort, in constant contact and intercommunion with other
families; and the social and conversational instinct has thus been daily strengthened. Hence
the reunions of these people have been characterized by a sprightliness and vigor and spirit
that the Anglo-Saxon has in vain attempted to seize and reproduce. English and American conversazioni
have very generally proved a failure, from the rooted, frozen habit of reticence and reserve
which grows with our growth and strengthens with our strength. The fact is, that the Anglo-Saxon
race as a race does not enjoy talking, and, except in rare instances, does not talk well. A
daily convocation of people, without refreshments or any extraneous object but the simple pleasure
of seeing and talking with each other, is a thing that can scarcely be understood in English
or American society. Social entertainment presupposes in the Anglo-Saxon mind something to
eat, and not only something, but a great deal. Enormous dinners or great suppers constitute
the entertainment. Nobody seems to have formed the idea that the talking--the simple exchange
of social feelings--is, of itself, the entertainment, and that being together is the pleasure.

"Madame Rocamier for years had a circle of friends who met every afternoon in her salon from
four to six o'clock, for the simple and sole pleasure of talking with each other. The very
first wits and men of letters and statesmen and savans were enrolled in it, and each brought
to the entertainment some choice morceau which he had laid aside from his own particular field
to add to the feast. =Pain Killers and Soothing Sirups.=--All pain killers contain opium or morphine
or other harmful drugs. They are therefore dangerous to use. Pain is useful in telling us that
some organ is out of order and needs care. Killing the pain does not help the sick organ, and
it may let the organ get so sick as to cause death.

One use of the nerves is to tell us when any part of the body is hurt or sick. Pain is nature's
warning, and to numb the nerves which tell us about it is as foolish as to kill a person because
he brings us bad news. No medicine should ever be given children to make them sleep or stop their
crying except by the advice of the physician.

=Powders and Pills.=--If
you get sick, do not try to cure yourself with pills or powders bought
at the store. Men and women are crowded together like
cattle in a pen. They look at each other, they jostle each other, exchange a few common bleatings,
and eat together; and so the performance terminates. One may be crushed evening after evening
against men or women, and learn very little about them. You may decide that a lady is good-tempered,
when any amount of trampling on the skirt of her new silk dress brings no cloud to her brow.
But is it good temper, or only wanton carelessness, which cares nothing for waste? You can
see that a man is not a gentleman who squares his back to ladies at the supper-table, and devours
boned turkey and paté de foie gras, while they vainly reach over and around him for something,
and that another is a gentleman so far as to prefer the care of his weaker neighbors to the
immediate indulgence of his own appetites; but further than this you learn little. Sometimes,
it is true, in some secluded corner, two people of fine nervous system, undisturbed by the
general confusion, may have a sociable half-hour, and really part feeling that they like each
other better, and know more of each other than before. Yet these general gatherings have, after
all, their value. They are not so good as something better would be, but they cannot be wholly
dispensed with. It is far better that Mrs. Bogus should give an annual party, when she takes
down all her bedsteads and throws open her whole house, than that she should never see her
friends and neighbors inside her doors at all. She may feel that she has neither the taste
nor the talent for constant small reunions. Such things, she may feel, require a social tact
which she has not. She would be utterly at a loss how to conduct them. Each one would cost
her as much anxiety and thought as her annual gathering, and prove a failure after all; whereas
the annual demonstration can be put wholly into the hands of the caterer, who comes in force,
with flowers, silver, china, servants, and, taking the house into his own hands, gives her
entertainment for her, leaving to her no responsibility but the payment of the bills; and if
Mr. Bogus does not quarrel with them, we know no reason why any one else should; and I think
Mrs. Bogus merits well of the republic, for doing what she can do towards the hospitalities
of the season. I'm sure I never cursed her in my heart, even when her strong coffee has held
mine eyes open till morning, and her superlative lobster salads have given me the very darkest
views of human life that ever dyspepsia and east wind could engender. Mrs. Bogus is the Eve
who offers the apple; but after all, I am the foolish Adam who take and eat what I know is
going to hurt me, and I am too gallant to visit my sins on the head of my too obliging tempter.
In country places in particular, where little is going on and life is apt to stagnate, a good,
large, generous party, which brings the whole neighborhood into one house to have a jolly time,
to eat, drink, and be merry, is really quite a work of love and mercy. People see one another
in their best clothes, and that is something; the elders exchange all manner of simple pleasantries
and civilities, and talk over their domestic affairs, while the young people flirt, in that
wholesome manner which is one of the safest of youthful follies. A country party, in fact,
may be set down as a work of benevolence, and the money expended thereon fairly charged to
the account of the great cause of peace and good will on earth."

"But don't you think," said my wife, "that, if the charge of providing the entertainment were
less laborious, these gatherings could be more frequent? You see, if a woman feels that she
must have five kinds of cake, and six kinds of preserves, and even ice-cream and jellies in
a region where no confectioner comes in to abbreviate her labors, she will sit with closed
doors, and do nothing towards the general exchange of life, because she cannot do as much as
Mrs. Smith or Mrs. Parsons. If the idea of meeting together had some other focal point than
eating, I think there would be more social feeling. It might be a musical reunion, where the
various young people of a circle agreed to furnish each a song or an instrumental performance.
It might be an impromptu charade party, bringing out something of that taste in arrangement
of costume, and capacity for dramatic effect, of which there is more latent in society than
we think. It might be the reading of articles in prose and poetry furnished to a common paper
or portfolio, which would awaken an abundance of interest and speculation on the authorship,
or it might be dramatic readings and recitations. Any or all of these pastimes might make an
evening so entertaining that a simple cup of tea and a plate of cake or biscuit would be all
the refreshment needed."

"We may with advantage steal a leaf now and then from some foreign book," said I. "In France
and Italy, families have their peculiar days set apart for the reception of friends at their
own houses. The whole house is put upon a footing of hospitality and invitation, and the whole
mind is given to receiving the various friends. In the evening the salon is filled. The guests,
coming from week to week, for years, become in time friends; the resort has the charm of a
home circle; there are certain faces that you are always sure to meet there. A lady once said
to me of a certain gentleman and lady whom she missed from her circle, 'They have been at our
house every Wednesday evening for twenty years.' It seems to me that this frequency of meeting
is the great secret of agreeable society. One sees, in our American life, abundance of people
who are everything that is charming and cultivated, but one never sees enough of them. One
meets them at some quiet reunion, passes a delightful hour, thinks how charming they are, and
wishes one could see more of them. But the pleasant meeting is like the encounter of two ships
in mid-ocean: away we sail, each on his respective course, to see each other no more till the
pleasant remembrance has died away. Yet were there some quiet, home-like resort where we might
turn in to renew from time to time the pleasant intercourse, to continue the last conversation,
and to compare anew our readings and our experiences, the pleasant hour of liking would ripen
into a warm friendship.

"But in order that this may be made possible and practicable, the utmost simplicity of entertainment
must prevail. In a French salon all is to the last degree informal. The bouilloire, the French
tea-kettle, is often tended by one of the gentlemen, who aids his fair neighbors in the mysteries
of tea-making. One nymph is always to be found at the table dispensing tea and talk; and a
basket of simple biscuit and cakes, offered by another, is all the further repast. The teacups
and cake-basket are a real addition to the scene, because they cause a little lively social
bustle, a little chatter and motion,--always of advantage in breaking up stiffness, and giving
occasion for those graceful, airy nothings that answer so good a purpose in facilitating acquaintance.

"Nothing can be more charming than the description which Edmond About gives, in his novel of
'Tolla,' of the reception evenings of an old noble Roman family,--the spirit of repose and
quietude through all the apartments; the ease of coming and going; the perfect home-like spirit
in which the guests settle themselves to any employment of the hour that best suits them: some
to lively chat, some to dreamy, silent lounging, some to a game, others in a distant apartment
to music, and others still to a promenade along the terraces.

"One is often in a state of mind and nerves which indisposes for the effort of active conversation;
one wishes to rest, to observe, to be amused without an effort; and a mansion which opens wide
its hospitable arms, and offers itself to you as a sort of home, where you may rest, and do
just as the humor suits you, is a perfect godsend at such times. You are at home there, your
ways are understood, you can do as you please,--come early or late, be brilliant or dull,--you
are always welcome. If you can do nothing for the social whole to-night, it matters not. There
are many more nights to come in the future, and you are entertained on trust, without a challenge.

"I have one friend,--a man of genius, subject to the ebbs and flows of animal spirits which
attend that organization. Of general society he has a nervous horror. A regular dinner or evening
party is to him a terror, an impossibility; but there is a quiet parlor where stands a much-worn
old sofa, and it is his delight to enter without knocking, and be found lying with half-shut
eyes on this friendly couch, while the family life goes on around him without a question. Nobody
is to mind him, to tease him with inquiries or salutations. If he will, he breaks into the
stream of conversation, and sometimes, rousing up from one of these dreamy trances, finds himself,
ere he or they know how, in the mood for free and friendly talk. People often wonder, 'How
do you catch So-and-so? He is so shy! I have invited and invited, and he never comes.' We never
invite, and he comes. We take no note of his coming or his going; we do not startle his entrance
with acclamation, nor clog his departure with expostulation; it is fully understood that with
us he shall do just as he chooses; and so he chooses to do much that we like.

"The sum of this whole doctrine of society is, that we are to try the value of all modes and
forms of social entertainment by their effect in producing real acquaintance and real friendship
and good will. The first and rudest form of seeking this is by a great promiscuous party, which
simply effects this,--that people at least see each other on the outside, and eat together.
Next come all those various forms of reunion in which the entertainment consists of something
higher than staring and eating,--some exercise of the faculties of the guests in music, acting,
recitation, reading, etc.; and these are a great advance, because they show people what is
in them, and thus lay a foundation for a more intelligent appreciation and acquaintance. These
are the best substitute for the expense, show, and trouble of large parties. They are in their
nature more refining and intellectual. It is astonishing, when people really put together,
in some one club or association, all the different talents for pleasing possessed by different
persons, how clever a circle may be gathered,--in the least promising neighborhood. A club
of ladies in one of our cities has had quite a brilliant success. It is held every fortnight
at the houses of the members, according to alphabetical sequence. The lady who receives has
charge of arranging what the entertainment shall be,--whether charade, tableau, reading, recitation,
or music; and the interest is much increased by the individual taste shown in the choice of
the diversion and the variety which thence follows.

"In the summertime, in the country, open-air reunions are charming forms of social entertainment.
Croquet parties, which bring young people together by daylight for a healthy exercise, and
end with a moderate share of the evening, are a very desirable amusement. What are called 'lawn
teas' are finding great favor in England and some parts of our country. They are simply an
early tea enjoyed in a sort of picnic style in the grounds about the house. Such an entertainment
enables one to receive a great many at a time, without crowding, and, being in its very idea
rustic and informal, can be arranged with very little expense or trouble. With the addition
of lanterns in the trees and a little music, this entertainment may be carried on far into
the evening with a very pretty effect.

"As to dancing, I have this much to say of it. Either our houses must be all built over and
made larger, or female crinolines must be made smaller, or dancing must continue as it now
is, the most absurd and ungraceful of all attempts at amusement. The effort to execute round
dances in the limits of modern houses, in the prevailing style of dress, can only lead to developments
more startling than agreeable. Dancing in the open air, on the shaven green of lawns, is a
pretty and graceful exercise, and there only can full sweep be allowed for the present feminine
toilet.

"The English breakfast is an institution growing in favor here, and rightfully, too; for a
party of fresh, good-natured, well-dressed people, assembled at breakfast on a summer morning,
is as nearly perfect a form of reunion as can be devised. All are in full strength from their
night's rest; the hour is fresh and lovely, and they are in condition to give each other the
very cream of their thoughts, the first keen sparkle of the uncorked nervous system. The only
drawback is that, in our busy American life, the most desirable gentlemen often cannot spare
their morning hours. Breakfast parties presuppose a condition of leisure; but when they can
be compassed, they are perhaps the most perfectly enjoyable of entertainments."

"Well," said Marianne, "I begin to waver about my party. I don't know, after all, but the desire
of paying off social debts prompted the idea; perhaps we might try some of the agreeable things
suggested. But, dear me! there's the baby. We'll finish the talk some other time."

VIII

HOW SHALL WE BE AMUSED

"One, two, three, four,--this makes the fifth accident on the Fourth of July, in the two papers
I have just read," said Jenny.

"A very moderate allowance," said Theophilus Thoro, "if you consider the Fourth as a great
national saturnalia, in which every boy in the land has the privilege of doing whatever is
right in his own eyes."

"The poor boys!" said Mrs. Crowfield. "All the troubles of the world are laid at their door."

"Well," said Jenny, "they did burn the city of Portland, it appears. The fire arose from firecrackers,
thrown by boys among the shavings of a carpenter's shop,--so says the paper."

"And," said Rudolph, "we surgeons expect a harvest of business from the Fourth, as surely as
from a battle. Certain to be woundings, fractures, possibly amputations, following the proceedings
of our glorious festival."

"Why cannot we Americans learn to amuse ourselves peaceably like other nations?" said Bob Stephens.
"In France and Italy, the greatest national festivals pass off without fatal accident, or danger
to any one. The fact is, in our country we have not learned how to be amused. Amusement has
been made of so small account in our philosophy of life, that we are raw and unpracticed in
being amused. Our diversions, compared with those of the politer nations of Europe, are coarse
and savage,--and consist mainly in making disagreeable noises and disturbing the peace of the
community by rude uproar. The only idea an American boy associates with the Fourth of July
is that of gunpowder in some form, and a wild liberty to fire off pistols in all miscellaneous
directions, and to throw firecrackers under the heels of horses, and into crowds of women and
children, for the fun of seeing the stir and commotion thus produced. Now take a young Parisian
boy and give him a fête, and he conducts himself with greater gentleness and good breeding,
because he is part of a community in which the art of amusement has been refined and perfected,
so that he has a thousand resources beyond the very obvious one of making a great banging and
disturbance. 

Has, or not, each Christian church been tempted by worldly power, wealth, and honor, like all
other systems of religion?

Have there existed within their jurisdiction, confraternities, with secular power, directly or indirectly
under their control, seeking by secret measures to manage the government of the nations of this
earth?

That great Creator, whose word is truth which can not change,
declared as law to govern all his creatures, "THOU SHALT NOT KILL."
What saith history of those who claim to have acted in his name? A French traveler, in the year 1837, says that attending
the Thursday-evening lectures and church prayer-meetings was the only recreation of the young
people of Boston; and we can remember the time when this really was no exaggeration. Think
of that, with all the seriousness of our Boston east winds to give it force, and fancy the
provision for amusement in our society! The consequence is, that boys who have the longing
for amusement strongest within them, and plenty of combativeness to back it, are the standing
terror of good society, and our Fourth of July is a day of fear to all invalids and persons
of delicate nervous organization, and of real, appreciable danger of life and limb to every one."

"Well, Robert," said my wife, "though I agree with you as to the actual state of society in
this respect, I must enter my protest against your slur on the memory of our Pilgrim fathers."

"Yes," said Theophilus Thoro, "the New Englanders are the only people, I believe, who take
delight in vilifying their ancestry. Every young hopeful in our day makes a target of his grandfather's
gravestone, and fires away, with great self-applause. People in general seem to like to show
that they are well-born, and come of good stock; but the young New Englanders, many of them,
appear to take pleasure in insisting that they came of a race of narrow-minded, persecuting bigots.

"It is true, that our Puritan fathers saw not everything. They made a state where there were
no amusements, but where people could go to bed and leave their house doors wide open all night,
without a shadow of fear or danger, as was for years the custom in all our country villages.
The fact is, that the simple early New England life, before we began to import foreigners,
realized a state of society in whose possibility Europe would scarcely believe. If our fathers
had few amusements, they needed few. Life was too really and solidly comfortable and happy
to need much amusement.

"Look over the countries where people are most sedulously amused by their rulers and governors.
Are they not the countries where the people are most oppressed, most unhappy in their circumstances,
and therefore in greatest need of amusement? It is the slave who dances and sings, and why?
Because he owns nothing, and can own nothing, and may as well dance and forget the fact. But
give the slave a farm of his own, a wife of his own, and children of his own, with a schoolhouse
and a vote, and ten to one he dances no more. He needs no amusement, because he is happy.

"The legislators of Europe wished nothing more than to bring up a people who would be content
with amusements, and not ask after their rights or think too closely how they were governed.
'Gild the dome of the Invalides,' was Napoleon's scornful prescription, when he heard the Parisian
population were discontented. They gilded it, and the people forgot to talk about anything
else. They were a childish race, educated from the cradle on spectacle and show, and by the
sight of their eyes could they be governed. The people of Boston, in 1776, could not have been
managed in this way, chiefly because they were brought up in the strict schools of the fathers."

"But don't you think," said Jenny, "that something might be added and amended in the state
of society our fathers established here in New England? Without becoming frivolous, there might
be more attention paid to rational amusement."

"Certainly," said my wife, "the State and the Church both might take a lesson from the providence
of foreign governments, and make liberty, to say the least, as attractive as despotism. It
is a very unwise mother that does not provide her children with playthings."

"And yet," said Bob, "the only thing that the Church has yet done is to forbid and to frown.
We have abundance of tracts against dancing, whist-playing, ninepins, billiards, operas, theatres,--in
short, anything that young people would be apt to like. The General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church refused to testify against slavery, because of political diffidence, but made up for
it by ordering a more stringent crusade against dancing. The theatre and opera grow up and
exist among us like plants on the windy side of a hill, blown all awry by a constant blast
of conscientious rebuke. There is really no amusement young people are fond of, which they
do not pursue, in a sort of defiance of the frown of the peculiarly religious world. With all
the telling of what the young shall not do, there has been very little telling what they shall do.

"The whole department of amusements--certainly one of the most important in education--has
been by the Church made a sort of outlaws' ground, to be taken possession of and held by all
sorts of spiritual ragamuffins; and then the faults and shortcomings resulting from this arrangement
have been held up and insisted on as reasons why no Christian should ever venture into it.

"If the Church would set herself to amuse her young folks, instead of discussing doctrines
and metaphysical hair-splitting, she would prove herself a true mother, and not a hard-visaged
stepdame. Let her keep this department, so powerful and so difficult to manage, in what are
morally the strongest hands, instead of giving it up to the weakest.

