M. de Vendome learnt the news of this defeat while on his way to Spain. Like a prudent man
as he was, for his own interests, he stopped at once so as to see what turn affairs were taking,
and to know how to act. He waited at Bayonne, gaining time there by sending a courier to the
King for instructions how to act, and remaining until the reply came.  After its arrival he
set out to continue his journey, and joined the King of Spain at Valladolid.

Staremberg, after his victory, was joined by the Archduke, and a debate soon took place as
to the steps next to be taken.  Staremberg was for giving battle to the army of eighteen thousand
men under Bay, which I have just alluded to, beating it, and then advancing little by little
into Spain, to make head against the vanquished army of the King.  Had this advice been acted
on, it could scarcely have failed to ruin the King of Spain, and the whole country must have
fallen into the hands of the enemy.  But it was not acted on.  Stanhope, who commanded the
English and Dutch troops, said that his Queen had ordered him to march upon Madrid when possible,
in preference to every other place.  He therefore proposed that they should go straight to
Madrid with the Archduke, proclaim him King there, and thus terrify all Spain by seizing the
capital. Staremberg, who admitted that the project was dazzling, sustained, however, that it
was of little use, and of great danger.  He tried all in his power to shake the inflexibility
of Stanhope, but in vain, and at last was obliged to yield as being the feebler of the two.
The time lost in this dispute saved the wreck of the army which had just been defeated. What
was afterwards done saved the King of Spain.

When the plan of the allies became known, however, the consternation at Madrid, which was already
great, was extreme.  The King resolved to withdraw from a place which could not defend itself,
and to carry away with him the Queen, the Prince, and the Councils.  The grandees declared
that they would follow the King and his fortune everywhere, and very few failed to do so; the
departure succeeded the declaration in twenty-four hours.  The Queen, holding the Prince in
her arms, at a balcony of the palace, spoke to the people assembled beneath, with so much grace,
force, and courage, that the success she had is incredible.  The impression that the people
received was communicated everywhere, and soon gained all the provinces.  The Court thus left
Madrid for the second time in the midst of the most lamentable cries, uttered from the bottom
of their hearts, by people who came from town and country, and who so wished to follow the
King and Queen that considerable effort was required in order to induce them to return, each
one to his home.

Valladolid was the retreat of this wretched Court, which in the most terrible trouble it had
yet experienced, lost neither judgment nor courage.  Meanwhile the grandest and rarest example
of attachment and of courage that had ever been heard of or seen was seen in Spain.  Prelates
and the humblest of the clergy, noblemen and the poorest people, lawyers and artisans all bled
themselves of the last drop of their substance, in order to form new troops and magazines,
and to provide all kinds of provisions for the Court, and those who had followed it.  Never
nation made more efforts so surprising, with a unanimity and a concert which acted everywhere
at once.  The Queen sold off all she possessed, received with her own hands sometimes even
as little as ten pistoles, in order to content the zeal of those; who brought, and thanked
them with as much affection as they themselves displayed.  She would continually say that she
should like to put herself at the head of her troops, with her son in her arms.