SLAVERY ORDAINED OF GOD

By

Rev. Fred. A. Ross, D.D.

"The powers that be are ordained of God." Romans xiii. 1.

TO The Men NORTH AND SOUTH, WHO HONOR THE WORD OF GOD AND LOVE THEIR COUNTRY.

Preface.

The book I give to the public, is not made up of isolated articles. It is one harmonious demonstration--that
slavery is part of the government ordained in certain conditions of fallen mankind. I present
the subject in the form of speeches, actually delivered, and letters written just as published.
I adopt this method to make a readable book.

I give it to the North and South--to maintain harmony among Christians, and to secure the integrity
of the union of this great people.

This harmony and union can be preserved only by the view presented in this volume,--i.e. that
slavery is of God, and to continue for the good of the slave, the good of the master, the good
of the whole American family, until another and better destiny may be unfolded.

The one great idea, which I submit to North and South, is expressed in the speech, first in
order, delivered in the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, Buffalo, May 27, 1853.
I therein say:--

"Let us then, North and South, bring our minds to comprehend two ideas, and submit to their
irresistible power. Let the Northern philanthropist learn from the Bible that the relation
of master and slave is not sin per se. Let him learn that God says nowhere it is sin. Let him
learn that sin is the transgression of the law; and where there is no law there is no sin,
and that the Golden Rule may exist in the relations of slavery. Let him learn that slavery
is simply an evil in certain circumstances. Let him learn that equality is only the highest
form of social life; that subjection to authority, even slavery, may, in given conditions,
be for a time better than freedom to the slave of any complexion. Let him learn that slavery,
like all evils, has its corresponding and greater good; that the Southern slave, though degraded
compared with his master, is elevated and ennobled compared with his brethren in Africa. Let
the Northern man learn these things, and be wise to cultivate the spirit that will harmonize
with his brethren of the South, who are lovers of liberty as truly as himself: And let the
Southern Christian--nay, the Southern man of every grade--comprehend that God never intended
the relation of master and slave to be perpetual. Let him give up the theory of Voltaire, that
the negro is of a different species. Let him yield the semi-infidelity of Agassiz, that God
created different races of the same species--in swarms, like bees--for Asia, Europe, America,
Africa, and the islands of the sea. Let him believe that slavery, although not a sin, is a
degraded condition,--the evil, the curse on the South,--yet having blessings in its time to
the South and to the Union. Let him know that slavery is to pass away in the fulness of Providence.
Let the South believe this, and prepare to obey the hand that moves their destiny."

All which comes after, in the speech delivered in New York, 1856, and in the letters, is just
the expansion of this one controlling thought, which must be understood, believed, and acted
out North and South.

The Author.

Written in Cleveland, Ohio, May 28, 1857.

Contents.

Speech Before the General Assembly at Buffalo Speech Before the General Assembly at New York
Letter to Rev. A. Blackburn What Is the Foundation of Moral Obligation?

Letters to Rev. A. Barnes:--

  I.--Results of the slavery agitation--Declaration of Independence--
      The way men are made infidels--Testimonies of General Assemblies
 II.--Government over man a divine institute
III.--Man-stealing
 IV.--The Golden Rule

Speech Delivered at Buffalo, Before the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church.

To understand the following speech, the reader will be pleased to learn--if he don't know already--that
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, before its division in 1838, and since,--both
Old School and New School,--has been, for forty years and more, bearing testimony, after a
fashion, against the system of slavery; that is to say, affirming, in one breath, that slave-holding
is a "blot on our holy religion," &c. &c.; and then, in the next utterance, making all sorts
of apologies and justifications for the slave-holder. Thus: this august body has been in the
habit of telling the Southern master (especially in the Detroit resolutions of 1850) that he
is a sinner, hardly meet to be called a Christian; but, nevertheless, if he will only sin "from
unavoidable necessity, imposed by the laws of the States,"--if he will only sin under the "obligations
of guardianship,"--if he will only sin "from the demands of humanity,"--why, then, forsooth,
he may be a slave-holder as long as he has a mind to. Yea, he may hold one slave, one hundred
or one thousand slaves, and till the day of judgment.

Happening to be in attendance, as a member of the body, in Buffalo, May, 1853, when, as usual,
the system of slavery was touched, in a series of questions sent down to the church courts
below, I made the following remarks, in good-natured ridicule of such preposterous and stultifying
testimony; and, as an argument, opening the views I have since reproduced in the second speech
of this volume, delivered in the General Assembly which convened in New York, May, 1856, and
also in the letters following:--

BUFFALO, FRIDAY, May 27, 1853.

The order of the day was reached at a quarter before eleven, and the report read again,--viz.:

"1. That this body shall reaffirm the doctrine of the second resolution adopted by the General
Assembly, convened in Detroit, in 1850, and,

"2. That with an express disavowal of any intention to be impertinently inquisitorial, and
for the sole purpose of arriving at the truth, so as to correct misapprehensions and allay
all causeless irritation, a committee be appointed of one from each of the synods of Kentucky,
Tennessee, Missouri, and Virginia, who shall be requested to report to the next General Assembly
on the following points:--1. The number of slave-holders in connection with the churches, and
the number of slaves held by them. 2. The extent to which slaves are held from an unavoidable
necessity imposed by the laws of the States, the obligations of guardianship, and the demands
of humanity. 3. Whether the Southern churches regard the sacredness of the marriage relation
as it exists among the slaves; whether baptism is duly administered to the children of the
slaves professing Christianity, and in general, to what extent and in what manner provision
is made for the religious well-being of the slave," &c. &c.

Dr. Ross moved to amend the report by substituting the following,--with an express disavowal
of being impertinently inquisitorial:--that a committee of one from each of the Northern synods
of ---- be appointed, who shall be requested to report to the next General Assembly,--

1. The number of Northern church-members concerned, directly or indirectly, in building and
fitting out ships for the African slave-trade, and the slave-trade between the States.

2. The number of Northern church-members who traffic with slave-holders, and are seeking to
make money by selling them negro-clothing, handcuffs, and cowhides.

3. The number of Northern church-members who have sent orders to New Orleans, and other Southern
cities, to have slaves sold, to pay debts owing them from the South. [See Uncle Tom's Cabin.]

4. The number of Northern church-members who buy the cotton, sugar, rice, tobacco, oranges,
pine-apples, figs, ginger, cocoa, melons, and a thousand other things, raised by slave-labor.

5. The number of Northern church-members who have intermarried with slave-holders, and have
thus become slave-owners themselves, or enjoy the wealth made by the blood of the slave,--especially
if there be any Northern ministers of the gospel in such a predicament.

6. The number of Northern church-members who are the descendants of the men who kidnapped negroes
in Africa and brought them to Virginia and New England in former years.

7. The aggregate and individual wealth of members thus descended, and what action is best to
compel them to disgorge this blood-stained gold, or to compel them to give dollar for dollar
in equalizing the loss of the South by emancipation.

8. The number of Northern church-members, ministers especially, who have advocated murder in
resistance to the laws of the land.

9. The number of Northern church-members who own stock in under-ground railroads, running off
fugitive slaves, and in Sabbath-breaking railroads and canals.

10. That a special commission be sent up Red River, to ascertain whether Legree, who whipped
Uncle Tom to death, (and who was a Northern gentleman,) be not still in connection with some
Northern church in good and regular standing.

11. The number of Northern church-members who attend meetings of Spiritual Rappers,--or Bloomers,--or
Women's-Rights Conventions.

12. The number of Northern church-members who are cruel husbands.

13. The number of Northern church-members who are hen-pecked husbands.

[As it is always difficult to know the temper of speaker and audience from a printed report,
it is due alike to Dr. R., to the whole Assembly, and the galleries, to say, that he, in reading
these resolutions, and throughout his speech, evinced great good-humour and kindness of feeling,
which was equally manifested by the Assembly and spectators, repeatedly, while he was on the
floor.]

Dr. Ross then proceeded:--Mr. Moderator, I move this amendment in the best spirit. I desire
to imitate the committee in their refinement and delicacy of distinction. I disavow all intention
to be impertinently inquisitorial. I intend to be inquisitorial, as the committee say they
are,--but not impertinently so. No, sir; not at all; not at all. (Laughter.) Well, sir, we
of the South, who desire the removal of the evil of slavery, and believe it will pass away
in the developments of Providence, are grieved when we read your graphic, shuddering pictures
of the "middle passage,"--the slave-ship, piling up her canvas, as the shot pours after her
from English or American guns,--see her again and again hurrying hogshead after hogshead, filled
with living slaves, into the deep, and, thus lightened, escape. Sir, what horror to believe
that clipper-ship was built by the hands of Northern, noisy Abolition church-members! ["Yes,
I know some in New York and Boston," said one in the crowd.] Again, sir, when we walk along
your Broadways, and see, as we do, the soft hands of your church-members sending off to the
South, not only clothing for the slave, but manacles and whips, manufactured expressly for
him,--what must we think of your consistency of character? [True, true.] And what must we think
of your self-righteousness, when we know your church-members order the sale of slaves,--yes,
slaves such as St. Clair's,--and under circumstances involving all the separations and all
the loathsome things you so mournfully deplore? Your Mrs. Stowe says so, and it is so, without
her testimony. I have read that splendid, bad book. Splendid in its genius, over which I have
wept, and laughed, and got mad, (here some one said, "All at the same time?") yes--all at the
same time. Bad in its theology, bad in its morality, bad in its temporary evil influence here
in the North, in England, and on the continent of Europe; bad, because her isolated cruelties
will be taken (whether so meant by her or not) as the general condition of Southern life,--while
her Shelbys, and St. Clairs, and Evas, will be looked upon as angel-visitors, lingering for
a moment in that earthly hell. The impression made by the book is a falsehood.

Sir, why do your Northern church-members and philanthropists buy Southern products at all?
You know you are purchasing cotton, rice, sugar, sprinkled with blood, literally, you say,
from the lash of the driver! Why do you buy? What's the difference between my filching this
blood-stained cotton from the outraged negro, and your standing by, taking it from me? What's
the difference? You, yourselves, say, in your abstractions, there is no difference; and yet
you daily stain your hands in this horrid traffic. You hate the traitor, but you love the treason.
Your ladies, too,--oh, how they shun the slave-owner at a distance, in the abstract! But alas,
when they see him in the concrete,--when they see the slave-owner himself, standing before
them,--not the brutal driver, but the splendid gentleman, with his unmistakable grace of carriage
and ease of manners,--why, lo, behold the lady says, "Oh, fie on your slavery!--what a wretch
you are! But, indeed, sir, I love your sugar,--and truly, truly, sir, wretch as you are, I
love you too." Your gentlemen talk just the same way when they behold our matchless women.
And well for us all it is, that your good taste, and hearts, can thus appreciate our genius,
and accomplishments, and fascinations, and loveliness, and sugar, and cotton. Why, sir, I heard
this morning, from one pastor only, of two or three of his members thus intermarried in the
South. May I thus give the mildest rebuke to your inconsistency of conduct? (Much good-natured
excitement.)

Sir, may we know who are the descendants of the New England kidnappers? What is their wealth?
Why, here you are, all around me. You, gentlemen, made the best of that bargain. And you have
kept every dollar of your money from the charity of emancipating the slave. You have left us,
unaided, to give millions. Will you now come to our help? Will you give dollar for dollar to
equalize our loss? [Here many voices cried out, "Yes, yes, we will."]

Yes, yes? Then pour out your millions. Good. I may thank you personally. My own emancipated
slaves would to-day be worth greatly more than $20,000. Will you give me back $10,000? Good.
I need it now.

I recommend to you, sirs, to find out your advocates of murder,--your owners of stock in under-ground
railroads,--your Sabbath-breakers for money. I particularly urge you to find Legree, who whipped
Uncle Tom to death. He is a Northern gentleman, although having a somewhat Southern name. Now,
sir, you know the Assembly was embarrassed all yesterday by the inquiry how the Northern churches
may find their absent members, and what to do with them. Here then, sir, is a chance for you.
Send a committee up Red River. You may find Legree to be a Garrison, Phillips, Smith, or runaway
husband from some Abby Kelly. [Here Rev. Mr. Smith protested against Legree being proved to
be a Smith. Great laughter. [Footnote: This gentleman was soon after made a D.D., and I think
in part for that witticism.]] I move that you bring him back to lecture on the cuteness there
is in leaving a Northern church, going South, changing his name, buying slaves, and calculating,
without guessing, what the profit is of killing a negro with inhuman labor above the gain of
treating him with kindness.

I have little to say of spirit-rappers, women's-rights conventionists, Bloomers, cruel husbands,
or hen-pecked. But, if we may believe your own serious as well as caricature writers, you have
things up here of which we down South know very little indeed. Sir, we have no young Bloomers,
with hat to one side, cigar in mouth, and cane tapping the boot, striding up to a mincing young
gentleman with long curls, attenuated waist, and soft velvet face,--the boy-lady to say, "May
I see you home, sir?" and the lady-boy to reply, "I thank ye--no; pa will send the carriage."
Sir, we of the South don't understand your women's-rights conventions. Women have their wrongs.
"The Song of the Shirt,"--Charlotte Elizabeth,--many, many laws,--tell her wrongs. But your
convention ladies despise the Bible. Yes, sir; and we of the South are afraid of them, and
for you. When women despise the Bible, what next? Paris,--then the City of the Great Salt Lake,--then
Sodom, before and after the Dead Sea. Oh, sir, if slavery tends in any way to give the honour
of chivalry to Southern young gentlemen towards ladies, and the exquisite delicacy and heavenly
integrity and love to Southern maid and matron, it has then a glorious blessing with its curse.

Sir, your inquisitorial committee, and the North so far as represented by them, (a small fraction,
I know,) have, I take it, caught a Tartar this time. Boys say with us, and everywhere, I reckon,
"You worry my dog, and I'll worry your cat." Sir, it is just simply a fixed fact: the South
will not submit to these questions. No, not for an instant. We will not permit you to approach
us at all. If we are morbidly sensitive, you have made us so. But you are directly and grossly
violating the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church. The book forbids you to put such questions;
the book forbids you to begin discipline; the book forbids your sending this committee to help
common fame bear testimony against us; the book guards the honour of our humblest member, minister,
church, presbytery, against all this impertinently-inquisitorial action. Have you a prosecutor,
with his definite charge and witnesses? Have you Common Fame, with her specified charges and
witnesses? Have you a request from the South that you send a committee to inquire into slanders?
No. Then hands off. As gentlemen you may ask us these questions,--we will answer you. But,
ecclesiastically, you cannot speak in this matter. You have no power to move as you propose.

I beg leave to say, just here, that Tennessee [Footnote: At that time I resided in Tennessee.]
will be more calm under this movement than any other slave-region. Tennessee has been ever
high above the storm, North and South,--especially we of the mountains. Tennessee!--"there
she is,--look at her,"--binding this Union together like a great, long, broad, deep stone,--more
splendid than all in the temple of Baalbec or Solomon. Tennessee!--there she is, in her calm
valour. I will not lower her by calling her unconquerable, for she has never been assailed;
but I call her ever-victorious. King's Mountain,--her pioneer battles:--Talladega, Emucfau,
Horse-shoe, New Orleans, San Jacinto, Monterey, the Valley of Mexico. Jackson represented her
well in his chivalry from South Carolina,--his fiery courage from Virginia and Kentucky,--all
tempered by Scotch-Irish Presbyterian prudence from Tennessee. We, in his spirit, have looked
on this storm for years untroubled. Yes, Jackson's old bones rattled in their grave when that
infamous disunion convention met in Nashville, and its members turned pale and fled aghast.
Yes, Tennessee, in her mighty million, feels secure; and, in her perfect preparation to discuss
this question, politically, ecclesiastically, morally, metaphysically, or physically, with
the extreme North or South, she is willing and able to persuade others to be calm. In this
connection, I wish to say, for the South to the North, and to the world, that we have no fears
from our slave-population. There might be a momentary insurrection and bloodshed; but destruction
to the black man would be inevitable. The Greeks and Romans controlled immense masses of white
slaves,--many of them as intelligent as their lords. Schoolmasters, fabulists, and poets were
slaves. Athens, with her thirty thousand freemen, governed half a million of bondmen. Single
Roman patricians owned thirty thousand. If, then, the phalanx and the legion mastered such
slaves for ages, when battle was physical force of man to man, how certain it is that infantry,
cavalry, and artillery could hold in bondage millions of Africans for a thousand years!

But, dear brethren, our Southern philanthropists do not seek to have this unending bondage;
Oh, no, no. And I earnestly entreat you to "stand still and see the salvation of the Lord."
Assume a masterly inactivity, and you will behold all you desire and pray for,--you will see
America liberated from the curse of slavery.

The great question of the world is, WHAT IS TO BE THE FUTURE OF THE AMERICAN SLAVE?--WHAT IS
TO BE THE FUTURE OF THE AMERICAN MASTER? To this the court agreed.(1068) The money was despatched
to the fleet by the hands of Alderman Tichborne, and gratefully acknowledged
by the admirals Deane and Monk in a letter addressed to the lord mayor
(2 April).(1069) Two months later Deane was dead, having been killed
in another engagement with the Dutch, when the English fleet again
came off victorious.

For this success a general thanksgiving at St. Paul’s was voted by the Court of Aldermen, who were
invited to attend the public funeral of the late gallant admiral.(1070)

(M544)

A few weeks before the Long Parliament was so rudely "interrupted" by Cromwell (20 April, 1653)
it raised the ire of the Common Council of the city by the action of its commissioners, sitting
at Haberdashers’ Hall, who had prosecuted and fined certain inhabitants of the ward of Farringdon Within
for having contravened the Act touching election of officers upon the Treasonable Engagement.(1071)
A deputation from the court was ordered to wait upon the commissioners and to get some explanation
of their conduct and to report the result of their interview. The commissioners assumed a very
haughty tone.

They were, they said, entrusted with full powers to deal with such matters by parliament, but expressed
their intention to "be tender to passe severe sentence upon any well affected citizen. For that
they have power to doe it or not to doe it."

This was not at all to the mind of the Common Council, who thereupon resolved (4 March, 1653)
to ask parliament to explain who were promoters and abettors of the Treasonable Engagement,
and whether the citizens were to be considered as promoters and abettors for having obeyed the orders
of the militia authorised by parliament in manning forts and appearing in arms, as they so often
had done, in defence of parliament as well as of themselves.(1072) Before any answer was given
to this awkward question the Long Parliament had ceased to exist, to be succeeded by another
of a very different character.

(M545)

"Praise-God Barebone, Esquire," who gave a nick-name to the next parliament, was a leatherseller
of London, and was summoned by Cromwell to sit as member for the city. "I, as commander-in-chief
of the armies of the Commonwealth," wrote Cromwell to him, "summon you ... to appear at the council chamber,
Whitehall, on 4th July, and take upon you the said trust for the city of London."(1073) The
rest of the members of this Puritan parliament were for the most part also Cromwell’s nominees.
It was destined to be short lived. It attacked the law and the Church and threatened the universities.
To save the last mentioned institutions the city of London intervened and received the thanks
of the university of Oxford.(1074) Afraid of their own acts, which they felt were displeasing
to Cromwell, they agreed to dissolve parliament and to transfer their powers to the man from whom
they had received them. This took place somewhat suddenly and unexpectedly on the 12th December.

(M546)

On
the 16th Cromwell was solemnly installed as Lord Protector, the lord mayor, the aldermen and
the Recorder being invited to be present, and in due course his new
title was proclaimed in the city.(1075) The lord mayor, Thomas Vyner,
happening to be a goldsmith, the Council of State commissioned him
to supply two services of plate for the use of the "Lord Protector
and his lady."(1076)

(M547)

Having recognised the new order of things
and caused the Lord Protector to be proclaimed at the Old Exchange
and other places in the city,(1077) the Common Council proceeded to
ask him to a banquet to be given in his honour at Grocers’ Hall.(1078)
The invitation was accepted, and the dinner took place on the 8th
February, 1654.

The entertainment was given in right royal style, the mayor and his brother aldermen riding out
in state to meet his Highness, who exercised the privilege of his new position by knighting the
chief magistrate of the city on his departure.(1079)

(M548)

In July (1654) when there was some talk of sending the city’s Recorder,
William Steele, to Ireland on affairs of State, the Common Council
addressed a petition to the Lord Protector praying him not to deprive
the city of the services of so excellent an officer, and one who was
likely to prove particularly useful both to the city and the whole
Commonwealth in the forthcoming parliament,(1080) the first parliament
under the Protectorate and one of the very few parliaments to which
the city sent as many as six burgesses.(1081)

(M549)

This parliament,
like its predecessor, was of short duration, lasting little more than
five months.

One other parliament and no more was summoned by Cromwell (17 Sept., 1656).
 They can live in the extremest South.
It is their latitude,--their side of the ocean. They can cultivate cotton, rice, sugar, tea,
and the silkworm. Their skill, their manipulation, is unrivalled. Their commonest gong you
can neither make nor explain. They are a law-abiding people, without castes, accustomed to
rise by merit to highest distinctions, and capable of the noblest training, when their idolatry,
which is waxing old as a garment, shall be folded up as a vesture and changed for that whose
years shall not fail. The English ambassador assures us that the Chinese negotiator of the
late treaty was a splendid gentleman, and a diplomatist to move in any court of Europe. Shem,
then, can mingle with Japheth in America.

The Chinese must come. God will bring them. He will fulfil Benton's noble thought. The railroad
must complete the voyage of Columbus. The statue of the Genoese, on some peak of the Rocky
Mountains, high above the flying cars, must point to the West, saying, "There is the East!
There is India and Cathay."

Ham will be ever lower than Shem; Shem will be ever lower than Japheth. All will rise in the
Christian grandeur to be revealed. Ham will be lower than Shem, because he was sent to Central
Africa. Man south of the Equator--in Asia, Australia, Oceanica, America, especially Africa--is
inferior to his Northern brother. The blessing was upon Shem in his magnificent Asia. The greater
blessing was upon Japheth in his man-developing Europe. Both blessings will be combined, in
America, north of the Zone, in commingled light and life. I see it all in the first symbolical
altar of Noah on that mound at the base of Ararat. The father of all living men bows before
the incense of sacrifice, streaming up and mingling with the rays of the rising sun. His noble
family, and all flesh saved, are grouped round about him. There is Ham, at the foot of the
green hillock, standing, in his antediluvian, rakish recklessness, near the long-necked giraffe,
type of his Africa,--his magnificent wife, seated on the grass, her little feet nestling in
the tame lion's mane, her long black hair flowing over crimson drapery and covered with gems
from mines before the flood. Higher up is Shem, leaning his arm over that mouse-colored horse,--his
Arab steed. His wife, in pure white linen, feeds the elephant, and plays with his lithe proboscis,--the
mother of Terah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, and Christ. And yet she looks up, and
bows in mild humility, to her of Japheth, seated amid plumed birds, in robes like the sky.
Her noble lord, meanwhile, high above all, stands, with folded arms, following that eagle which
wheels up towards Ararat, displaying his breast glittering with stars and stripes of scarlet
and silver,--radiant heraldry, traced by the hand of God. Now he purifies his eye in the sun,
and now he spreads his broad wings in symbolic flight to the West, until lost to the prophetic
eye of Japheth, under the bow of splendors set that day in the cloud. God's covenant with man,--oh,
may the bow of covenant between us be here to-day, that the waters of this flood shall never
again threaten our beloved land!

Speech Delivered in the General Assembly New York, 1856.

The circumstances, under which this speech was delivered, are sufficiently shown in the statement
below.

It was not a hasty production. After being spoken, it was prepared for the "Journal of Commerce,"
with the greatest care I could give to it: most of it was written again and again. Unlike Pascal,
who said, as to his longest and inferior sixteenth letter, that he had not had time to make
it shorter, I had time; and I did condense in that one speech the matured reflections of my
whole life. I am calmly satisfied I am right. I am sure God has said, and does say, "Well done."

The speech brings to view a wide range of thought, all belonging to the subject of slavery,
of immense importance. As introductory,--there is the question of the abolition agitation the
last thirty years; then, what is right and wrong, and the foundation of moral obligation; then,
the definition of sin; next, the origin of human government, and the relations, in which God
has placed men under his rule of subjection; finally, the word of God is brought to sustain
all the positions taken.

The challenge to argue the question of slavery from the Bible was thrown down on the floor
of the Assembly, as stated. Presently I took up the gauntlet, and made this argument. The challenger
never claimed his glove, then nor since; nor has anybody, so far as I know, attempted to refute
this speech. Nothing has come to my ears (save as to two points, to be noticed hereafter) but
reckless, bold denial of God's truth, infidel affirmation without attempt at proof, and denunciations
of myself.

Dr. Wisner having said that he would argue the question on the Bible at a following time, Dr.
Ross rose, when he took his seat, and, taking his position on the platform near the Moderator's
chair, said,--

"I accept the challenge given by Dr. Wisner, to argue the question of slavery from the Scriptures."

Dr. Wisner.--Does the brother propose to go into it here?

Dr. Ross.--Yes, sir.

Dr. Wisner.--Well, I did not propose to go into it here.

Dr. Ross.--You gave the challenge, and I accept it.

Dr. Wisner.--I said I would argue it at a proper time; but it is no matter. Go ahead.

Dr. Beman hoped the discussion would be ruled out. He did not think it a legitimate subject
to go into,--Moses and the prophets, Christ and his apostles, and all intermediate authorities,
on the subject of what the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America had done.

Judge Jessup considered the question had been opened by this report of the majority: after
which Dr. Beman withdrew his objection, and Dr. Ross proceeded.

I am not a slave-holder. Nay, I have shown some self-denial in that matter. I emancipated slaves
whose money-value would now be $40,000. In the providence of God, my riches have entirely passed
from me. I do not mean that, like the widow, I gave all the living I had. My estate was then
greater than that slave-property. I merely wish to show I have no selfish motive in giving,
as I shall, the true Southern defence of slavery. (Applause.) I speak from Huntsville, Alabama,
my present home. That gem of the South, that beautiful city where the mountain softens into
the vale,--where the water gushes, a great fountain, from the rock,--where around that living
stream there are streets of roses, and houses of intelligence and gracefulness and gentlest
hospitality,--and, withal, where so high honor is ever given to the ministers of God.

Speaking then from that region where "Cotton is king," I affirm, contrary as my opinion is
to that most common in the South, that the slavery agitation has accomplished and will do great
good. I said so, to ministerial and political friends, twenty-five years ago. I have always
favored the agitation,--just as I have always countenanced discussion upon all subjects. I
felt that the slavery question needed examination. I believed it was not understood in its
relations to the Bible and human liberty. Sir, the light is spreading North and South. 'Tis
said, I know, this agitation has increased the severity of slavery. True, but for a moment
only, in the days of the years of the life of this noble problem. Farmers tell us that deep
ploughing in poor ground will, for a year or two, give you a worse crop than before you went
so deep; but that that deep ploughing will turn up the under-soil, and sun and air and rain
will give you harvests increasingly rich. So, this moral soil, North and South, was unproductive.
It needed deep ploughing. For a time the harvest was worse. Now it is becoming more and more
abundant. The political controversy, however fierce and threatening, is only for power. But
the moral agitation is for the harmony of the Northern and Southern mind, in the right interpretations
of Scripture on this great subject, and, of course, for the ultimate union of the hearts of
all sensible people, to fulfil God's intention,--to bless the white man and the black man in
America. I am sure of this. I take a wide view of the progress of the destiny of this vast
empire. I see God in America. I see him in the North and in the South. I see him more honored
in the South to-day than he was twenty-five years ago; and that that higher regard is due,
mainly, to the agitation of the slavery question. Do you ask how? Why, sir, this is the how.
Twenty-five years ago the religious mind of the South was leavened by wrong Northern training,
on the great point of the right and wrong of slavery. Meanwhile, powerful intellects in the
South, following the mere light of a healthy good sense, guided by the common grace of God,
reached the very truth of this great matter,--namely, that the relation of the master and slave
is not sin; and that, notwithstanding its admitted evils, it is a connection between the highest
and the lowest races of man, revealing influences which may be, and will be, most benevolent
for the ultimate good of the master and the slave,--conservative on the Union, by preserving
the South from all forms of Northern fanaticism, and thereby being a great balance-wheel in
the working of the tremendous machinery of our experiment of self-government. This seen result
of slavery was found to be in absolute harmony with the word of God. These men, then, of highest
grade of thought, who had turned in scorn from Northern notions, now see, in the Bible, that
these notions are false and silly. They now read the Bible, never examined before, with growing
respect. God is honored, and his glory will be more and more in their salvation. These are
some of the moral consummations of this agitation in the South. The development has been twofold
in the North. On the one hand, some anti-slavery men have left the light of the Bible, and
wandered into the darkness until they have reached the blackness of the darkness of infidelity.
Other some are following hard after, and are throwing the Bible into the furnace,--are melting
it into iron, and forging it, and welding it, and twisting it, and grooving it into the shape
and significance and goodness and gospel of Sharpe's rifles. Sir, are you not afraid that some
of your once best men will soon have no better Bible than that?

But, on the other hand, many of your brightest minds are looking intensely at the subject,
in the same light in which it is studied by the highest Southern reason. Ay, sir, mother-England,
old fogy as she is, begins to open her eyes. What, then, is our gain? Sir, Uncle Tom's Cabin,
in many of its conceptions, could not have been written twenty-five years ago. That book of
genius,--over which I and hundreds in the world have freely wept,--true in all its facts, false
in all its impressions,--yea, as false in the prejudice it creates to Southern social life
as if Webster, the murderer of Parkman, may be believed to be a personification of the elite
of honor in Cambridge, Boston, and New England. Nevertheless, Uncle Tom's Cabin could not have
been written twenty-five years ago. Dr. Nehemiah Adams's "South-Side View" could not have been
written twenty-five years ago. Nor Dr. Nathan Lord's "Letter of Inquiry." Nor Miss Murray's
book. Nor "Cotton is King". Nor Bledsoe's "Liberty and Slavery". These books, written in the
midst of this agitation, are all of high, some the highest, reach of talent and noblest piety;
all give, with increasing confidence, the present Southern Bible reading on Slavery. May the
agitation, then, go on! I know the New School Presbyterian church has sustained some temporary
injury. But God is honored in his word. The reaction, when the first abolition-movement commenced,
has been succeeded by the sober second thought of the South. The sun, stayed, is again travelling
in the greatness of his strength, and will shine brighter and brighter to the perfect day.

My only fear, Mr. Moderator, is that, as you Northern people are so prone to go to extremes
in your zeal and run every thing into the ground, you may, perhaps, become too pro-slavery;
and that we may have to take measures against your coveting, over much, our daughters, if not
our wives, our men-servants, our maid-servants, our houses, and our lands. (Laughter.)

Sir, I come now to the Bible argument. I begin at the beginning of eternity! (Laughter.) WHAT
is RIGHT AND WRONG? That's the question of questions.

Two theories have obtained in the world. The one is, that right and wrong are eternal facts;
that they exist per se in the nature of things; that they are ultimate truths above God; that
he must study, and does study, to know them, as really as man. And that he comprehends them
more clearly than man, only because he is a better student than man. Now, sir, this theory
is atheism. For if right and wrong are like mathematical truths--fixed facts--then I may find
them out, as I find out mathematical truths, without instruction from God. I do not ask God
to tell me that one and one make two. I do not ask him to reveal to me the demonstrations of
Euclid. I thank him for the mind to perceive. But I perceive mathematical relations without
his telling me, because they exist independent of his will. If, then, moral truths, if right
and wrong, if rectitude and sin, are, in like manner, fixed, eternal facts,--if they are out
from and above God, like mathematical entities,--then I may find them for myself. I may condescend,
perhaps, to regard the Bible as a hornbook, in which God, an older student than I, tells me
how to begin to learn what he had to study; or I may decline to be taught, through the Bible,
how to learn right and wrong. I may think the Bible was good enough, may be, for the Israelite
in Egypt and in Canaan; good enough for the Christian in Jerusalem and Antioch and Rome, but
not good enough, even as a hornbook, for me,--the man of the nineteenth century,--the man of
Boston, New York, and Brooklyn! Oh, no. I may think I need it not at all. What next? Why, sir,
if I may think I need not God to teach me moral truth, I may think I need him not to teach
me any thing. What next? The irresistible conclusion is, I may think I can live without God;
that Jehovah is a myth,--a name; I may bid him stand aside, or die. Oh, sir, I will be the
fool to say there is no God. This is the result of the notion that right and wrong exist in
the nature of things.

The other theory is, that right and wrong are results brought into being, mere contingencies,
means to good, made to exist solely by the will of God, expressed through his word; or, when
his will is not thus known, he shows it in the human reason by which he rules the natural heart.
This is so; because God, in making all things, saw that in the relations he would constitute
between himself and intelligent creatures, and among themselves, NATURAL GOOD AND EVIL would
come to pass. In his benevolent wisdom, he then willed LAW, to control this natural good and
evil. And he thereby made conformity to that law to be right, and non-conformity to be wrong.
Why? Simply because he saw it to be good, and made it to be right; not because he saw it to
be right, but because he made it to be right.

Hence, the ten specific commandments of the one moral law of love are just ten rules which
God made to regulate the natural good and evil which he knew would be in the ten relations,
which he himself constituted between himself and man, and between man and his neighbor. The
Bible settles the question:--sin is the transgression of the law, and where there is no law
there is no sin.

I must-advance one step further. What is sin, as a mental state? Is it some quality--some concentrated
essence--some elementary moral particle in the nature of things--something black, or red, like
crimson, in the constitution of the soul, or the soul and body as amalgamated? No. Is it self-love?
No. Is it selfishness? No. What is it? Just exactly, self-will. Just that. I, the creature,
WILL not submit to thy WILL, God, the Creator. It is the I AM, created, who dares to defy and
dishonor the I AM, not created,--the Lord God, the Almighty, Holy, Eternal.

That IS SIN, per se. And that is all of it,--so help me God! Your child there--John--says to
his father, "I WILL not to submit to your will." "Why not, John?" And he answers and says,
"Because I WILL not." There, sir, John has revealed all of sin, on earth or in hell. Satan
has never said--can never say--more. "I, Satan, WILL NOT, because I WILL not to submit to thee,
God; MY WILL, not thine, shall be."

This beautiful theory is the ray of light which leads us from night, and twilight, and fog,
and mist, and mystification, on this subject, to clear day. I will illustrate it by the law
which has controlled and now regulates the most delicate of all the relations of life,--viz.:
that of the intercourse between the sexes. I take this, because it presents the strongest apparent
objections to my argument.

Cain and Abel married their sisters. Was it wrong in the nature of things? [Here Dr. Wisner
spoke out, and said, "Certainly."] I deny it. What an absurdity, to suppose that God could
not provide for the propagation of the human race from one pair, without requiring them to
sin! Adam's sons and daughters must have married, had they remained in innocence. They must
then have sinned in Eden, from the very necessity of the command upon the race:--"Be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the earth." (Gen. i. 28). What pure nonsense! There, sir!--that,
my one question, Dr. Wisner's reply, and my rejoinder, bring out, perfectly, the two theories
of right and wrong. Sir, Abraham married his half-sister. And there is not a word forbidding
such marriage, until God gave the law (Lev. xviii.) prohibiting marriage in certain degrees
of consanguinity. That law made, then, such marriage sin. But God gave no such law in the family
of Adam; because he made, himself, the marriage of brother and sister the way, and the only
way, for the increase of the human race. He commanded them thus to marry. They would have sinned
had they not thus married; for they would have transgressed his law. Such marriage was not
even a natural evil, in the then family of man. But when, in the increase of numbers, it became
a natural evil, physical and social, God placed man on a higher platform for the development
of civilization, morals, and religion, and then made the law regulating marriages in the particulars
of blood. But he still left polygamy untouched. [Here Dr. Wisner again asked if Dr. R. regarded
the Bible as sustaining the polygamy of the Old Testament.] Dr. R.--Yes, sir; yes, sir; yes,
sir. Let the reporters mark that question, and my answer. (Laughter.) My principle vindicates
God from unintelligible abstractions. I fearlessly tell what the Bible says. In its strength,
I am not afraid of earth or hell. I fear only God. God made no law against polygamy, in the
beginning. Therefore it was no sin for a man to have more wives than one. God sanctioned it,
and made laws in regard to it. Abraham had more wives than one; Jacob had, David had, Solomon
had. God told David, by the mouth of Nathan, when he upbraided him with his ingratitude for
the blessings he had given him, and said, "And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's
wives into thy bosom." (2 Sam. xvii. 8.)

God, in the gospel, places man on another platform, for the revelation of a nobler social and
spiritual life. He now forbids polygamy. Polygamy now is sin--not because it is in itself sin.
No; but because God forbids it,--to restrain the natural and social evil, and to bring out
a higher humanity. And see, sir, how gently in the gospel the transition from the lower to
the higher table-land of our progress upward is made. Christ and his apostles do not declare
polygamy to be sin. The new law is so wisely given that nothing existing is rudely disturbed.
The minister of God, unmarried, must have only one wife at the same time. This law, silently
and gradually, by inevitable and fair inference of its meaning, and from the example of the
apostles, passed over the Christian world. God, in the gospel, places us in this higher and
holier ground and air of love. We sin, then, if we marry the sister, and other near of kin;
and we sin if we marry, at the same time, more wives than one, not because there is sin in
the thing itself, whatever of natural evil there might be, but because in so doing we transgress
God's law, given to secure and advance the good of man. I might comment in the same way on
every one of the ten commandments, but I pass on.

The subject of slavery, in this view of right and wrong, is seen in the very light of heaven.
And you, Mr. Moderator, know that, if the view I have presented be true, I have got you. (Great
laughter.)

[The Moderator said, very pleasantly--Yes--if--but it is a long if.] (Continued laughter.)

Dr. R. touched the Moderator on the shoulder, and said, Yes, if--it is a long if; for it is
this:--if there is a God, he is not Jupiter, bowing to the Fates, but God, the sovereign over
the universe he has created, in which he makes right, by making law to be known and obeyed
by angels and men, in their varied conditions.

He gave Adam that command,--sublime in its simplicity, and intended to vindicate the principle
I am affirming,--that there is no right and wrong in the nature of things. There was no right
or wrong, per se, in eating or willing to eat of that tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

But God made the law,--Thou shall not eat of that tree. As if he had said,--I seek to test
the submission of your will, freely, to my will. And, that your test may be perfect, I will
let your temptation be nothing more than your natural desire for that fruit. Adam sinned. What
was the sin?

Adam said, in heart, MY WILL, not thine, SHALL BE. That was the sin,--the simple transgression
of God's law, when there was neither sin nor evil in the thing which God forbade to be done.

Man fell and was cursed. The law of the control of the superior over the inferior is now to
begin, and is to go on in the depraved conditions of the fallen and cursed race. And, FIRST,
God said to the woman, "Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." There,
in that law, is the beginning of government ordained of God. There is the beginning of the
rule of the superior over the inferior, bound to obey. There, in the family of Adam, is the
germ of the rule in the tribe,--the state. Adam, in his right, from God, to rule over his wife
and his children, had all the authority afterwards expanded in the patriarch and the king.
This simple, beautiful fact, there, on the first leaf of the Bible, solves the problem, whence
and how has man right to rule over man. In that great fact God gives his denial to the idea
that government over man is the result of a social compact, in which each individual man living
in a state of natural liberty, yielded some of that liberty to secure the greater good of government.
Such a thing never was; such a thing never could have been. Government was ordained and established
before the first child was born:--"HE SHALL RULE OVER THEE." Cain and Abel were born in a state
as perfect as the empire of Britain or the rule of these United States. All that Blackstone,
and Paley, and Hobbs, or anybody else, says about the social compact, is flatly and fully denied
and upset by the Bible, history, and common sense. Let any New York lawyer--or even a Philadelphia
lawyer--deny this if he dares. Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness never were the inalienable
right of the individual man.

His self-control, in all these particulars, from the beginning, was subordinate to the good
of the family,--the empire. There is nothing right or wrong in the taking of life, per se,
or in itself considered. It may or it may not be a natural good or evil. As a general fact,
the taking of life is a natural evil. Hence, "Thou shalt not kill" is the general rule, to
preserve the good there is in life. To take life under the forbidden conditions is sin, simply
because God forbids it under those conditions. The sin is not in taking life, but in transgressing
God's law.

But sometimes the taking of life will secure a greater good. God, then, commands that life
be taken. Not to take life, under the commanded conditions, is sin,--solely because God then
commands it.

This power over life, for the good of the one great family of man, God delegated to Noah, and
through him to the tribe, the clan, the kingdom, the empire, the democracy, the republic, as
they may be governed by chief, king, emperor, parliament, or congress. Had Ham killed Shem,
Noah would have commanded Japheth to slay him. So much for the origin of the power over life:
now for the power over liberty.

The right to take life included the right over liberty. But God intended the rule of the superior
over the inferior, in relations of service, should exemplify human depravity, his curse and
his overruling blessing.

The rule and the subordination which is essential to the existence of the family, God made
commensurate with mankind; for mankind is only the congeries of families. When Ham, in his
antediluvian recklessness, laughed at his father, God took occasion to give to the world the
rule of the superior over the inferior. He cursed him. He cursed him because he left him unblessed.
The withholding of the father's blessing, in the Bible, was curse. Hence Abraham prayed God,
when Isaac was blessed, that Ishmael might not be passed by. Hence Esau prayed his father,
when Jacob was blessed, that he might not be left untouched by his holy hands. Ham was cursed
to render service, forever, to Shem and Japheth. The special curse on Canaan made the general
curse on Ham conspicuous, historic, and explanatory, simply because his descendants were to
be brought under the control of God's peculiar people. Shem was blessed to rule over Ham. Japheth
was blessed to rule over both. God sent Ham to Africa, Shem to Asia, Japheth to Europe. Mr.
Moderator, you have read Guyot's "Earth and Man." That admirable book is a commentary upon
this part of Genesis. It is the philosophy of geography. And it is the philosophy of the rule
of the higher races over the inferior, written on the very face of the earth. He tells you
why the continents are shaped as they are shaped; why the mountains stand where they stand;
why the rivers run where they run; why the currents of the sea and the air flow as they flow.
And he tells you that the earth south of the Equator makes the inferior man. That the oceanic
climate makes the inferior man in the Pacific Islands. That South America makes the inferior
man. That the solid, unindented Southern Africa makes the inferior man. That the huge, heavy,
massive, magnificent Asia makes the huge, heavy, massive, magnificent man. That Europe, indented
by the sea on every side, with its varied scenery, and climate, and Northern influences, makes
the varied intellect, the versatile power and life and action, of the master-man of the world.
And it is so. Africa, with here and there an exception, has never produced men to compare with
the men of Asia. For six thousand years, save the unintelligible stones of Egypt, she has had
no history. Asia has had her great men and her name. But Europe has ever shown, and now, her
nobler men and higher destiny. Japheth has now come to North America, to give us his past greatness
and his transcendent glory. (Applause.) And, sir, I thank God our mountains stand where they
stand; and that our rivers run where they run. Thank God they run not across longitudes, but
across latitudes, from north to south. If they crossed longitudes, we might fear for the Union.
But I hail the Union,--made by God, strong as the strength of our hills, and ever to live and
expand,--like the flow and swell of the current of our streams. (Applause.)

These two theories of Right and Wrong,--these two ideas of human liberty,--the right, in the
nature of things, or the right as made by God,--the liberty of the individual man, of Atheism,
of Red Republicanism, of the devil,--or the liberty of man, in the family, in the State, the
liberty from God,--these two theories now make the conflict of the world. This anti-slavery
battle is only part of the great struggle: God will be victorious,--and we, in his might.

I now come to particular illustrations of the world-wide law that service shall be rendered
by the inferior to the superior. The relations in which such service obtains are very many.
Some of them are these:--husband and wife; parent and child; teacher and scholar; commander
and soldier,--sailor; master and apprentice; master and hireling; master and slave. Now, sir,
all these relations are ordained of God. They are all directly commanded, or they are the irresistible
law of his providence, in conditions which must come up in the progress of depraved nature.
The relations themselves are all good in certain conditions. And there may be no more of evil
in the lowest than in the highest. And there may be in the lowest, as really as in the highest,
the fulfilment of the commandment to love thy neighbor as thyself, and of doing unto him whatsoever
thou wouldst have him to do unto thee.

Why, sir, the wife everywhere, except where Christianity has given her elevation, is the slave.
And, sir, I say, without fear of saying too strongly, that for every sigh, every groan, every
tear, every agony of stripe or death, which has gone up to God from the relation of master
and slave, there have been more sighs, more groans, more tears, and more agony in the rule
of the husband over the wife. Sir, I have admitted, and do again admit, without qualification,
that every fact in Uncle Tom's Cabin has occurred in the South. But, in reply, I say deliberately,
what one of your first men told me, that he who will make the horrid examination will discover
in New York City, in any number of years past, more cruelty from husband to wife, parent to
child, than in all the South from master to slave in the same time. I dare the investigation.
And you may extend it further, if you choose,--to all the results of honor and purity. I fear
nothing on this subject. I stand on rock,--the Bible,--and therefore, just before I bring the
Bible, to which all I have said is introductory, I will run a parallel between the relation
of master and slave and that of husband and wife. I will say nothing of the grinding oppression
of capital upon labor, in the power of the master over the hireling--the crushed peasant--the
chain-harnessed coal-pit woman, a thousand feet under ground, working in darkness, her child
toiling by her side, and another child not born; I will say nothing of the press-gang which
fills the navy of Britain--the conscription which makes the army of France--the terrible floggings--the
awful court-martial--the quick sentence--the lightning-shot--the chain, and ball, and every-day
lash--the punishment of the soldier, sailor, slave, who had run away. I pass all this by: I
will run the parallel between the slave and wife.

Do you say, The slave is held to involuntary service? So is the wife. Her relation to her husband,
in the immense majority of cases, is made for her, and not by her. And when she makes it for
herself, how often, and how soon, does it become involuntary! How often, and how soon, would
she throw off the yoke if she could! O ye wives, I know how superior you are to your husbands
in many respects,--not only in personal attraction, (although in that particular, comparison
is out of place,) in grace, in refined thought, in passive fortitude, in enduring love, and
in a heart to be filled with the spirit of heaven. Oh, I know all this. Nay, I know you may
surpass him in his own sphere of boasted prudence and worldly wisdom about dollars and cents.
Nevertheless, he has authority, from God, to rule over you. You are under service to him. You
are bound to obey him in all things. Your service is very, very, very often involuntary from
the first, and, if voluntary at first, becomes hopeless necessity afterwards. I know God has
laid upon the husband to love you as Christ loved the church, and in that sublime obligation
has placed you in the light and under the shadow of a love infinitely higher, and purer, and
holier than all talked about in the romances of chivalry. But the husband may not so love you.
He may rule you with the rod of iron. What can you do? Be divorced? God forbids it, save for
crime. Will you say that you are free,--that you will go where you please, do as you please?
Why, ye dear wives, your husbands may forbid. And listen, you cannot leave New York, nor your
palaces, any more than your shanties. No; you cannot leave your parlor, nor your bedchamber,
nor your couch, if your husband commands you to stay there! What can you do? Will you run away,
with your stick and your bundle? He can advertise you!! What can you do? You can, and I fear
some of you do, wish him, from the bottom of your hearts, at the bottom of the Hudson. Or,
in your self-will, you will do just as you please. (Great laughter.)

[A word on the subject of divorce. One of your standing denunciations on the South is the terrible
laxity of the marriage vow among the slaves. Well, sir, what does your Boston Dr. Nehemiah
Adams say? He says, after giving eighty, sixty, and the like number of applications for divorce,
and nearly all granted at individual quarterly courts in New England,--he says he is not sure
but that the marriage relation is as enduring among the slaves in the South as it is among
white people in New England. I only give what Dr. Adams says. I would fain vindicate the marriage
relation from this rebuke. But one thing I will say: you seldom hear of a divorce in Virginia
or South Carolina.]

But to proceed:--

Do you say the slave is sold and bought? So is the wife the world over. Everywhere, always,
and now as the general fact, however done away or modified by Christianity. The savage buys
her. The barbarian buys her. The Turk buys her. The Jew buys her. The Christian buys her,--Greek,
Armenian, Nestorian, Roman Catholic, Protestant. The Portuguese, the Spaniard, the Italian,
the German, the Russian, the Frenchman, the Englishman, the New England man, the New Yorker,--especially
the upper ten,--buy the wife--in many, very many cases. She is seldom bought in the South,
and never among the slaves themselves; for they always marry for love. (Continued laughter.)
Sir, I say the wife is bought in the highest circles, too often, as really as the slave is
bought. Oh, she is not sold and purchased in the public market. But come, sir, with me, and
let us take the privilege of spirits out of the body to glide into that gilded saloon, or into
that richly comfortable family room, of cabinets, and pictures, and statuary: see the parties,
there, to sell and buy that human body and soul, and make her a chattel! See how they sit,
and bend towards each other, in earnest colloquy, on sofa of rosewood and satin,--Turkey carpet
(how befitting!) under feet, sunlight over head, softened through stained windows: or it is
night, and the gas is turned nearly off, and the burners gleam like stars through the shadow
from which the whisper is heard, in which that old ugly brute, with gray goatee--how fragrant!--bids
one, two, five, ten hundred thousand dollars, and she is knocked off to him,--that beautiful
young girl asleep up there, amid flowers, and innocent that she is sold and bought. Sir, that
young girl would as soon permit a baboon to embrace her, as that old, ignorant, gross, disgusting
wretch to approach her. Ah, has she not been sold and bought for money? But--But what? But,
you say, she freely, and without parental authority, accepted him. Then she sold herself for
money, and was guilty of that which is nothing better than legal prostitution. I know what
I say; you know what I say. Up there in the gallery you know: you nod to one another. Ah! you
know the parties. Yes, you say: All true, true, true. (Laughter.)

Now, Mr. Moderator, I will clinch all I have said by nails sure, and fastened from the word of God.

There is King James's English Bible, with its magnificent dedication. I bring the English acknowledged
translation. And just one word more to push gently aside--for I am a kind man to those poor,
deluded anti-slavery people--their last argument. It is that this English Bible, in those parts
which treat of slavery, don't give the ideas which are found in the original Hebrew and Greek.
Alas for the common people!--alas for this good old translation! Are its days numbered? No,
sir; no, sir. The Unitarian, the Universalist, the Arminian, the Baptist, when pressed by this
translation, have tried to find shelter for their false isms by making or asking for a new
rendering. And now the anti-slavery men are driving hard at the same thing. (Laughter.) Sir,
shall we permit our people everywhere to have their confidence in this noble translation undermined
and destroyed by the isms and whims of every or any man in our pulpits? I affirm, whatever
be our perfect liberty of examination into God's meaning in all the light of the original languages,
that there is a respect due to this received version, and that great caution should be used,
lest we teach the people to doubt its true rendering from the original word of God. I protest,
sir, against having a Doctor-of-Divinity priest, Hebrew or Greek, to tell the people what God
has spoken on the subject of slavery or any other subject. (Laughter.) I would as soon have
a Latin priest,--I would as soon have Archbishop Hughes,--I would as soon go to Rome as to
Jerusalem or Athens,--I would as soon have the Pope at once in his fallible infallibility,--as
ten or twenty, little or big, anti-slavery Doctor-of-Divinity priests, each claiming to give
his infallible rendering, however differing from his peer. (Laughter.) I never yet produced
this Bible, in its plain unanswerable authority, for the relation of master and slave, but
the anti-slavery man ran away into the fog of his Hebrew or Greek, (laughter,) or he jabbered
the nonsense that God permitted the sin of slaveholding among the Jews, but that he don't do
it now! Sir, God sanctioned slavery then, and sanctions it now. He made it right, they know,
then and now. Having thus taken the last puff of wind out of the sails of the anti-slavery
phantom ship, turn to the twenty-first chapter of Exodus, vs. 2-5. God, in these verses, gave
the Israelites his command how they should buy and hold the Hebrew servant,--how, under certain
conditions, he went free,--how, under other circumstances, he might be held to service forever,
with his wife and her children. There it is. Don't run into the Hebrew. Now, sir, the wit of
man can't dodge that passage, unless he runs away into the Hebrew. (Great laughter.) For what
does God say? Why, this:--that an Israelite might sell his own daughter, not only into servitude,
but into polygamy,--that the buyer might, if he pleased, give her to his son for a wife, or
take her to himself. If he took her to himself, and she did not please him, he should not sell
her unto a strange nation, but should allow her to be redeemed by her family. But, if he took
him another wife before he allowed the first one to be redeemed, he should continue to give
the first one food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage; that is to say, her right to his
bed. If he did not do these three things, she should go out free; i.e. cease to be his slave,
without his receiving any money for her. There, sir, God sanctioned the Israelite father in
selling his daughter, and the Israelite man to buy her, into slavery and into polygamy. And
it was then right, because God made it right. What does this passage mean? Surely this:--if
the master gave his slave a hasty blow with a rod, and he died under his hand, he should be
punished. But, if the slave lived a day or two, it would so extenuate the act of the master
he should not be punished, inasmuch as he would be in that case sufficiently punished in losing
his money in his slave. Now, sir, I affirm that God was more lenient to the degraded Hebrew
master than Southern laws are to the higher Southern master in like cases. But there you have
what was the divine will. Find fault with God, ye anti-slavery men, if you dare. In Leviticus, xxv.

Sir, I do not see how God could tell us more plainly that he did command his people to buy
slaves from the heathen round about them, and from the stranger, and of their families sojourning
among them. The passage has no other meaning. Did God merely permit sin?--did he merely tolerate
a dreadful evil? God does not say so anywhere. He gives his people law to buy and hold slaves
of the heathen forever, on certain conditions, and to buy and hold Hebrew slaves in variously-modified
particulars. Well, how did the heathen, then, get slaves to sell? Did they capture them in
war?--did they sell their own children? Wherever they got them, they sold them; and God's law
gave his people the right to buy them.

God in the New Testament made no law prohibiting the relation of master and slave. But he made
law regulating the relation under Greek and Roman slavery, which was the most oppressive in
the world.

God saw that these regulations would ultimately remove the evils in the Greek and Roman systems,
and do it away entirely from the fitness of things, as there existing; for Greek and Roman
slaves, for the most part, were the equals in all respects of their masters. AEsop was a slave;
Terence was a slave. The precepts in Colossians iv. 18, 23, 1 Tim. vi. 1-6, and other places,
show, unanswerably, that God as really sanctioned the relation of master and slave as those
of husband and wife, and parent and child; and that all the obligations of the moral law, and
Christ's law of love, might and must be as truly fulfilled in the one relation as in the other.
The fact that he has made the one set of relations permanent, and the other more or less dependent
on conditions of mankind, or to pass away in the advancement of human progress, does not touch
the question. He sanctioned it under the Old Testament and the New, and ordains it now while
he sees it best to continue it, and he now, as heretofore, proclaims the duty of the master
and the slave. Dr. Parker's admirable explanation of Colossians, and other New Testament passages,
saves me the necessity of saying any thing more on the Scripture argument.

One word on the Detroit resolutions, and I conclude. Those resolutions of the Assembly of 1850
decide that slavery is sin, unless the master holds his slave as a guardian, or under the claims
of humanity.

Mr. Moderator, I think we had on this floor, yesterday, proof conclusive that those resolutions
mean any thing or nothing; that they are a fine specimen of Northern skill in platform-making;
that it put in a plank here, to please this man,--a plank there, to please that man,--a plank
for the North, a broad board for the South. It is Jackson's judicious tariff. It is a gum-elastic
conscience, stretched now to a charity covering all the multitude of our Southern sins, contracted
now, giving us hardly a fig-leaf of righteousness. It is a bowl of punch,--

  A little sugar to make it sweet,
    A little lemon to make it sour,
  A little water to make it weak,
    A little brandy to give it power. (Laughter.)

As a Northern argument against us, it is a mass of lead so heavy that it weighed down even
the strong shoulders of Judge Jessup. For, sir, when he closed his speech, I asked him a single
question I had made ready for him. It was this:--"Do you allow that Mr. Aiken, of South Carolina,
may, under the claims of humanity, hold three thousand slaves, or must he emancipate them?"
The Judge staggered, and stammered, and said, "No man could rightly hold so many." I then asked,
"How many may he hold, in humanity?" The Judge saw his fatal dilemma. He recovered himself
handsomely, and fairly said, "Mr. Aiken might hold three thousand slaves, in harmony with the
Detroit action." I replied, "Then, sir, you have surrendered the whole question of Southern
slavery." And, sir, the Judge looked as if he felt he had surrendered it. And every man in
this house, capable of understanding the force of that question, felt it had shivered the whole
anti-slavery argument, on those resolutions, to atoms. Why, sir, if a man can hold three slaves,
with a right heart and the approbation of God, he may hold thirty, three hundred, three thousand,
or thirty thousand. It is a mere question of heart, and capacity to govern. The Emperor of
Russia holds sixty millions of slaves: and is there a man in this house so much of a fool as
to say that God regards the Emperor of Russia a sinner because he is the master of sixty millions
of slaves? Sir, that Emperor has certainly a high and awful responsibility upon him. But, if
he is good as he is great, he is a god of benevolence on earth. And so is every Southern master.
His obligation is high, and great, and glorious. It is the same obligation, in kind, he is
under to his wife and children, and in some respects immensely higher, by reason of the number
and the tremendous interests involved for time and eternity in connection with this great country,
Africa, and the world. Yes, sir, I know, whether Southern masters fully know it or not, that
they hold from God, individually and collectively, the highest and the noblest responsibility
ever given by Him to individual private men on all the face of the earth. For God has intrusted
to them to train millions of the most degraded in form and intellect, but, at the same time,
the most gentle, the most amiable, the most affectionate, the most imitative, the most susceptible
of social and religious love, of all the races of mankind,--to train them, and to give them
civilization, and the light and the life of the gospel of Jesus Christ. And I thank God he
has given this great work to that type of the noble family of Japheth best qualified to do
it,--to the Cavalier stock,--the gentleman and the lady of England and France, born to command,
and softened and refined under our Southern sky. May they know and feel and fulfil their destiny!
Oh, may they "know that they also have a Master in heaven."

Letter from Dr. Ross.

I need only say, in reference to this letter, that my friends having questioned my position
as to the good of the agitation, I wrote the following letter to vindicate that point, as given,
in the New York speech:--

HUNTSVILLE, ALA., July 14, 1856.

Brother Blackburn:--I affirmed, in my New York speech, that the Slavery agitation has done,
and will accomplish, good.

Your very kind and courteous disagreement on that point I will make the occasion to say something
more thereon, without wishing you, my dear friend, to regard what I write as inviting any discussion.

I said that agitation has brought out, and would reveal still more fully, the Bible, in its
relation to slavery and liberty,--also the infidelity which long has been, and is now, leavening
with death the whole Northern mind. And that it would result in the triumph of the true Southern
interpretation of the Bible; to the honor of God, and to the good of the master, the slave,
the stability of the Union, and be a blessing to the world. To accomplish this, the sin per
se doctrine will be utterly demolished. That doctrine is the difficulty in every Northern mind,
(where there is any difficulty about slavery,) whether they confess it or not. Yes, the difficulty
with every Northern man is, that the relation of master and slave is felt to be sin. I know
that to be the fact. I have talked with all grades of Northern men, and come in contact with
all varieties of Northern mind on this subject. And I know that the man who says and tries
to believe, and does, partially in sober judgment, believe, that slavery is not sin, yet, in
his feelings, in his educated prejudices, he feels that slavery is sin.

Yes, that is the difficulty, and that is the whole of the difficulty, between the North and
the South, so far as the question is one of the Bible and morals. Now, I again say, that that
sin per se doctrine will, in this agitation, be utterly demolished. And when that is done,--when
the North will know and feel fully, perfectly, that the relation of master and slave is not
sin, but sanctioned of God,--then, and not till then, the North and South can and will, without
anger, consider the following questions:--Whether slavery, as it exists in the United States,
all things considered, be or be not a great good, and the greatest good for a time, notwithstanding
its admitted evils? Again, whether these evils can or cannot be modified and removed? Lastly,
whether slavery itself can or cannot pass away from this land and the world? Now, sir, the
moment the sin question is settled, then all is peace. For these other questions belong entirely
to another category of morals. They belong entirely to the category of what is wise to realize
good. This agitation will bring this great result. And therefore I affirm the agitation to be good.

There is another fact also, the result, in great measure, of this agitation, which in my view
proves it to have been and to be of great good. I mean the astonishing rise and present stability
of the slave-power of the United States. This fact, when examined, is undeniable. And it is
equally undeniable that it has been caused, in great part, by the slavery question in all its
bearings. It is a wonderful development made by God. And I must believe he intends thereby
either to destroy or bless this great Union. But, as I believe he intends to bless, therefore
I am fortified in affirming the good there has been and is in this agitation. Let me bring
out to view this astonishing fact.

1. Twenty-five years ago, and previously, the whole slave-holding South and West had a strong
tendency to emancipation, in some form. But the abolition movement then began, and arrested
that Southern and Western leaning to emancipation. Many people have said, and do say, that
that arrest was and is a great evil. I say it was and is a great good. Why? Answer: It was
and would now be premature. Had it been carried out, it would have been and would now be evil,
immense, inconceivable,--to master, slave, America, Africa, and the world; because neither
master, slave, America, Africa, the world, were, or are, ready for emancipation. God has a
great deal to do before he is ready for emancipation. He tells us so by this arrest put upon
that tendency to emancipation years ago. For He put it into the hearts of abolitionists to
make the arrest. And He stopped the Southern movement all the more perfectly by permitting
Great Britain to emancipate Jamaica, and letting that experiment prove, as it has, a perfect
failure and a terrible warning. JAMAICA IS DESTROYED. And now, whatever be done for its negroes
must be done with the full admission that what has been attempted was in violation of the duty
Britain owed to those negroes. But her failure in seeing and doing her duty, God has given
to us to teach us knowledge; and, through us, to instruct the world in the demonstration of
the problem of slavery.

2. God put it into the hearts of Northern men--especially abolitionists--to give Texas to the
South. Texas, a territory so vast that a bird, as Webster said, can't fly over it in a week.
Many in the South did not want Texas. But many longer-headed ones did want it. And Northern
men voted and gave to the South exactly what these longer-headed Southern statesmen wanted.
This, I grant, was Northern anti-slavery fatuity, utterly unaccountable but that God made them
do it.

3. God put it into the hearts of Northern men--especially abolitionists--to vote for Polk,
Dallas, and Texas. This gave us the Mexican War; and that immense territory, its spoil,--a
territory which, although it may not be favorable for slave-labor, has increased, and will,
in many ways, extend the slave-power.

4. This leads me to say that God put it into the hearts of many Northern men--especially abolitionists--to
believe what Great Britain said,--namely, that free trade would result in slave-emancipation.
But lo! the slave-holder wanted free trade. So Northern abolitionists helped to destroy the
tariff policy, and thus to expand the demand for, and the culture of, cotton. Now, see, the
gold of California has perpetuated free trade by enabling our merchants to meet the enormous
demand for specie created by free trade. So California helps the slave-power. But the abolitionists
gave us Polk, the Mexican War, and California.

5. God put it into the hearts of the North, and especially abolitionists, to stimulate the
settlement of new free States, and to be the ardent friends of an immense foreign emigration.
The result has been to send down to the South, with railroad speed and certainty, corn, wheat,
flour, meal, bacon, pork, beef, and every other imaginable form of food, in quantity amazing,
and so cheap that the planter can spread wider and wider the culture of cotton.

6. God has, by this growth of the Northwest, made the demand for cotton enormous in the North
and Northwest. Again, he has made English and French experiments to procure cotton somewhere
else than from the United States dead failures,--in the East Indies, Egypt, Algeria, Brazil.
God has thus given to the Southern planter an absolute monopoly. A monopoly so great that he,
the Southern planter, sits now upon his throne of cotton and wields the commercial sceptre
of the world. Yes, it is the Southern planter who says to-day to haughty England, Go to war,
if you dare; dismiss Dallas, if you dare. Yes, he who sits on the throne of the cotton-bag
has triumphed at last over him who sits on the throne of the wool-sack. England is prostrate
at his feet, as well as the abolitionists.

7. God has put it into the hearts of abolitionists to prevent half a million of free negroes
from going to Liberia; and thereby the abolitionists have made them consumers of slave-products
to the extension of the slave-power. And, by thus keeping them in America, the abolitionists
have so increased their degradation as to prove all the more the utter folly of emancipation
in the United States.

8. God has permitted the anti-slavery men in the North, in England, in France, and everywhere,
so to blind themselves in hypocrisy as to give the Southern slave-holder his last perfect triumph
over them; for God tells the planter to say to the North, to England, to France, to all who
buy cotton, "Ye men of Boston, New York, London, Paris,--ye hypocrites,--ye brand me as a pirate,
a kidnapper, a murderer, a demon, fit only for hell, and yet ye buy my blood-stained cotton.
O ye hypocrites!--ye Boston hypocrites! why don't ye throw the cotton in the sea, as your fathers
did the tea? Ye Boston hypocrites! ye say, if we had been in the days of our fathers, we would
not have been partakers with them in the blood of the slave-trade! Wherefore ye be witnesses
unto yourselves that ye are the children of them who, in fact, kidnapped and bought in blood,
and sold the slave in America! for now, ye hypocrites, ye buy the blood-stained cotton in quantity
so immense, that ye have run up the price of slaves to be more than a thousand dollars,--the
average of old and young! O ye hypocrites! ye denounce slavery; then ye bid it live, and not
die,--in that ye buy sugar, rice, tobacco, and, above all, cotton! Ye hypocrites! ye abuse
the devil, and then fall down and worship him!--ye hypocrites,--ye New England hypocrites,--ye
Old England hypocrites,--ye French hypocrites,--ye Uncle Tom's Cabin hypocrites,--ye Beecher
hypocrites,--ye Rhode Island Consociation hypocrites! Oh, your holy twaddle stinks in the nostrils
of God, and he commands me to lash you with my scorn, and his scorn, so long as ye gabble about
the sin of slavery, and then bow down to me, and buy and spin cotton, and thus work for me
as truly as my slaves! O ye fools and blind, fill ye up the measure of your folly, and blindness,
and shame! And this ye are doing. Ye have, like the French infidels, made reason your goddess,
and are exalting her above the Bible; and, in your unitarianism and neology and all modes of
infidelity, ye are rejecting and crucifying the Son of God."

Now, my brother, this controlling slave-power is a world-wide fact. Its statistics of bales
count by millions; its tonnage counts by hundreds of thousands; its manufacture is reckoned
by the workshops of America and Europe; its supporters are numbered by all who must thus be
clothed in the world. This tremendous power has been developed in great measure by the abolition
agitation, controlled by God. I believe, then, as I have already said, that God intends one
of two things. He either intends to destroy the United States by this slave-power, or he intends
to bless my country and the world by the unfoldings of his wisdom in this matter. I believe
he will bless the world in the working out of this slavery. I rejoice, then, in the agitation
which has so resulted, and will so terminate, to reveal the Bible, and bless mankind.

Your affectionate friend,

F.A. Ross.

REV. A. BLACKBURN.

What Is the Foundation of Moral Obligation?

My position as to this all-important question, in my New York speech, was made subject of remark
in the "Presbyterian Herald," Louisville, Kentucky, to which I replied at length in the "Presbyterian
Witness," Knoxville, Tennessee. No rejoinder was ever made to that reply. But, recently, an
extract from the younger Edwards was submitted to me. To that I gave the following letter.
The subject is of the first and the last importance, and bears directly, as set forth in my
New York speech, on infidelity, and, of course, the slavery question:--

Mr. Editor:--In your paper of Tuesday, 24th ult., there is an article, under this head, giving
the argument of Edwards (the son) against my views as to the foundation of moral obligation.

I thank the writer for his argument, and his courteous manner of presenting it. In my third
letter to Mr. Barnes, I express my preparation to meet "all comers" on this question; and I
am pleased to see this "comer". If my views cannot be refuted by Edwards, I may wait long for
an "uglier customer."

A word, introductory, to your correspondent. He says, "His [Dr. Ross's] theory was advanced
and argued against in a former age." By this, I understand him to express his belief that my
theory has been rejected heretofore. Well. It may, nevertheless, be the true theory. The Copernican
astronomy was argued against in a former age and rejected; yet it has prevailed. Newton's law
of gravitation was argued against and rejected by a whole generation of philosophers on the
continent of Europe; yet it has prevailed. And now all school-boys and girls would call anybody
a fool who should deny it. Steam, in all its applications, was argued against and rejected;
yet it has prevailed. So the electric telegraph; and, to go back a little, the theory of vaccination,--the
circulation of the blood,--a thousand things; yea, Edwards's (the father) theory of virtue,
although received by many, has been argued against, and by many rejected; yet it will prevail.
Yea, his idea of the unity of the race in Adam was and is argued against and rejected; yet
it will prevail. I feel, therefore, no fear that my theory of moral obligation will not be
acknowledged because it was argued against and rejected by many in a former age, and may be
now. Nay; facts to prove it are accumulating,--facts which were not developed in Edwards's
day,--facts showing, irresistibly, that Edwards's theory, which is that most usually now held,
is what I say it is,--the rejection of revelation, infidelity, and atheism. The evidence amounts
to demonstration.

The question is in a nutshell; it is this:--Shall man submit to the revealed will of God, or
to his own will? That is the naked question when the fog of confused ideas and unmeaning words
is lifted and dispersed.

Your correspondent replies to this theory in the following words of Edwards:--"Some hold that
the foundation of moral obligation is primarily in the will of God. But the will of God is
either benevolent or not. If it be benevolent, and on that account the foundation of moral
obligation, it is not the source of obligation merely because it is the will of God, but because
it is benevolent, and is of a tendency to promote happiness; and this places the foundation
of obligation in a tendency to happiness, and not primarily in the will of God. But if the
will of God, and that which is the expression of it, the divine law, be allowed to be not benevolent,
and are foundation of obligation, we are obliged to conform to them, whatever they be, however
malevolent and opposite to holiness and goodness the requirements be. But this, I presume,
none will pretend." Very fairly and strongly put; that's to say, if I understand Edwards, he
supposes, if God was the devil and man what he is, then man would not be under obligation to
obey the devil's will! That's it! Well, I suppose so too; and I reckon most Christians would
agree to that statement, Nay, more: I presume nobody ever taught that the mere naked will,
abstractly considered, if it could be, from the character of God, was the ground of moral obligation?
Nay, I think nobody ever imagined that the notion of an infinite Creator presupposes or includes
the idea that he is a malevolent Being! I agree, then, with Edwards, that the ultimate ground
of obligation is in the fact that God is benevolent, or is a good God. I said that in my speech
quoted above. I hold that the REVEALED WORD tells us who God is and what he does, and is, therefore,
the ULTIMATE GROUND OF OBLIGATION. But Edwards holds that HUMAN REASON must tell us who God
is and what he does, and IS, therefore, the PRIMARY GROUND OF OBEDIENCE. That is my issue with
Edwards and others; and it is as broad an issue as faith in revelation, or the REJECTION OF
IT. I do not charge that Edwards did, or that all who hold with him do, deny the word of God;
but I do affirm that their argument does. The matter is plain. For what is revelation? It is
that God has appeared in person, and told man in WORD that he is GOD; and told him first in
WORD (to be expanded in studying creation and providence) that God is a Spirit, eternal, infinite
in power, wisdom, goodness, holiness,--the Creator, Preserver, Benefactor. That WORD, moreover,
he proved by highest evidence--namely, supernatural evidence--to be absolute, perfect TRUTH
as to all FACT affirmed of him and what he does. REVELATION, as claimed in the Bible, was and
is THAT THING.

Man, then, having this revelation; is under obligation ever to believe every jot and tittle
of that WORD. He at first, no doubt, knew little of the meaning of some facts declared; nay,
he may have comprehended nothing of the sense or scope of many facts affirmed. Nay, he may
now, after thousands of years, know most imperfectly the meaning of that WORD. But he was and
he is, notwithstanding, to believe with absolute faith the WORD,--that God is all he says he
is, and does all he says he does,--however that WORD may go beyond his reason, or surprise
his feelings, or alarm his conscience, or command his will.

This statement of what revelation is, settles the whole question as presented by Edwards. For
REVELATION, as explained, does FIX forever the foundation of man's moral obligation in the
benevolence of God, PRIMARILY, as it is expressed in the word of God. REVELATION does then,
in that sense, FIX obligation in the MERE WILL OF GOD; for, the moment you attempt to establish
the foundation somewhere else, you have abandoned the ground of revelation. You have left the
WILL OF GOD in his word, and you have made your rule of right to be the WILL OF MAN in the
SELF of the HEART. The proof of what I here say is so plain, even as the writing on the tables
of Habakkuk's vision, that he may run that readeth it. Read, then, even as on the tables.

God says in his WORD, "I am all-powerful, all-wise, the Creator." "You may be," says Edwards,
"but I want primary foundation for my faith; and I can't take your word for it. I must look
first into nature to see if evidence of infinite power and wisdom is there,--to see if evidence
of a Creator is there,--and if thou art he!"

Again, God says in his word, "I am benevolent, and my will in my law is expression of that
benevolence." "You may tell the truth," Edwards replies, "but I want primary ground for my
belief, and I must hold your word suspended until I examine into my reason, my feelings, my
conscience, my will,--to see if your WORD harmonizes with my HEART,--to see if what you reveal
tends to happiness IN MY NOTION OF HAPPINESS; or tends to right IN MY NOTION OF RIGHT!" That's
it. That's the theory of Edwards, Barnes, and others.

And what is this but the attempt to know the divine attributes and character in some other
way than through the divine WORD? And what is this but the denial of the divine WORD, except
so far as it agrees with the knowledge of the attributes and character of God, obtained in
THAT some other way? And what is this but to make the word of God subordinate to the teaching
of the HUMAN HEART? And what is this but to make the WILL of God give place to the WILL of
man? And what is this but the REJECTION OF REVELATION? Yet this is the result (though not intended
by him) of the whole scheme of obligation, maintained by Edwards and by all who agree with him.

Carry it out, and what is the progress and the end of it? This. Human reason--the human heart--will
be supreme. Some, I grant, will hold to a revelation of some sort. A thing more and more transcendental,--a
thing more and more of fog and moonshine,--fog floating in German cellars from fumes of lager-beer,
and moonshine gleaming from the imaginations of the drinkers. Some, like Socrates and Plato,
will have a God supreme, personal, glorious, somewhat like the true; and with him many inferior
deities,--animating the stars, the earth, mountains, valleys, plains, the sea, rivers, fountains,
the air, trees, flowers, and all living things. Some will deny a personal God, and conceive,
instead, the intelligent mind of the universe, without love. Some will contend for mere law,--of
gravitation and attraction; and some will suggest that all is the result of a fortuitous concourse
of atoms! Here, having passed through the shadows and the darkness, we have reached the blackness
of infidelity,--blank atheism. No God--yea, all the way the "fools" were saying in their hearts,
no God. What now is man? Alas! some, the Notts and Gliddons, tell us, man was indeed created
millions of ages ago, the Lord only knows when, in swarms like bees to suit the zones of the
earth,--while other some, the believers in the vestiges of creation, say man is the result
of development,--from fire, dust, granite, grass, the creeping thing, bird, fish, four-footed
beast, monkey. Yea, and some of these last philosophers are even now going to Africa to try
to find men they have heard tell of, who still have tails and are jumping and climbing somewhere
in the regions around the undiscovered sources of the Nile.

This is the progress and the result of the Edwards theory; because, deny or hesitate about
revelation, and man cannot prove, absolutely, any of the things we are considering. Let us
see if he can. Edwards writes, "On the supposition that the will or law of God is the primary
foundation, reason, and standard of right and virtue, every attempt to prove the moral perfection
or attributes of God is absurd." Here, then, Edwards believes, that, to reach the primary foundation
of right and virtue, he must not take God's word as to his perfection or attributes, no matter
how fully God may have proved his word: no; but he, Edwards, he, man, must first prove them
in some other way. And, of course, he believes he can reach such primary foundation by such
other proof. Well, let us see how he goes about it. I give him, to try his hand, the easiest
attribute,--"POWER." I give him, then, all creation, and providence besides, as his black-board,
on which to work his demonstration. I give him, then, the lifetime of Methuselah, in which
to reach his conclusion of proof.--Well, I will now suppose we have all lived and waited that
long time: what is his proof OF INFINITE POWER? Has he found the EXHIBITION of infinite power?
No. He has found proof of GREAT POWER; but he has not reached the DISPLAY of infinite power.
What then is his faith in infinite power after such proof? Why, just this: he INFERS only,
that THE POWER, which did the things he sees, can go on, and on, and on, to give greater, and
greater, and greater manifestations of itself! VERY GOOD: if so be, we can have no better proof.
But that PROOF is infinitely below ABSOLUTE PROOF of infinite power. And all manifestations
of power to a finite creature, even to the archangel Michael, during countless millions of
ages, never gives, because it never can give to him, ABSOLUTE PROOF of infinite power. But
the word of GOD gives the PROOF ABSOLUTE, and in a moment of time! "I AM THE ALMIGHTY!" The
perfect proof is in THAT WORD OF GOD.

I might set Edwards to work to prove the infinite wisdom, the infinite benevolence, the infinite
holiness--yea, the EXISTENCE--of God. And he, finite man, in any examination of creation or
providence, must fall infinitely below the PERFECT PROOF.

So then I tell Edwards, and all agreeing with him, that it is absurd to attempt to prove the
moral perfection and attributes of God, if he thereby seeks to reach the HIGHEST EVIDENCE,
or if he thereby means to find the PRIMARY GROUND of moral obligation.

Do I then teach that man should not seek the proof there is, of the perfection and attributes
of God, in nature and providence? No. I hold that such proof unfolds the meaning of the FACTS
declared in the WORD of God, and is all-important, as such expansion of meaning. But I say,
by authority of the Master, that the highest proof, the absolute proof, the perfect proof,
of the FACTS as to who God is, and what he does, and the PRIMARY OBLIGATION thereupon, is in
the REVEALED WORD.

FRED. A. ROSS.

Huntsville, Ala., April 3, 1857.

N.B.--In notice of last Witness's extract from Erskine, I remark that Thomas Erskine was, and
may yet be, a lawyer of Edinburgh. He wrote three works:--one on the Internal Evidences, the
next on Faith, the last on the Freeness of the Gospel. They are all written with great ability,
and contain much truth. But all have in them fundamental untruths. There is least in the Evidences;
more in the essay on Faith; most in the tract on the Freeness of the Gospel,--which last has
been utterly refuted, and has passed away. His Faith is, also, not republished. The Evidences
is good, like good men, notwithstanding the evil.

Letters to Rev. A. Barnes.

Introduction.

As part of the great slavery discussion, Rev. A. Barnes, of Philadelphia, published, in October,
1856, a pamphlet, entitled, "The CHURCH and SLAVERY." In this tract he invites every man to
utter his views on the subject. And, setting the example, he speaks his own with the greatest
freedom and honesty.

In the same freedom of speech, I have considered his views unscriptural, false, fanatical,
and infidel. Therefore, while I hold him in the highest respect, esteem, and affection, as
a divine and Christian gentleman, and cherish his past relations to me, yet I have in these
letters written to him, and of him, just as I would have done had he lived in France or Germany,
a stranger to me, and given to the world the refined scoff of the one, or the muddy transcendentalism
of the other.

My first letter is merely a glance at some things in his pamphlet, in which I show wherein
I agree and disagree with him,--i.e. in our estimate of the results of the agitation; in our
views of the Declaration of Independence; in our belief of the way men are made infidels; and
in our appreciation of the testimonies of past General Assemblies.

The other letters I will notice in similar introductions.

These letters first appeared as original contributions to the Christian Observer, published
and edited by Dr. A. Converse, Philadelphia.

I take this occasion to express my regard for him, and my sense of the ability with which he
has long maintained the rights and interests of the Presbyterian body, to which we both belong;
and the wise and masterly way in which he has vindicated, from the Bible, the truth on the
slavery question. To him, too, the public is indebted for the first exhibition of Mr. Barnes's
errors in his recent tract which has called forth my reply.

No. I.

Rev. A. Barnes:--

Dear Sir:--You have recently published a tract:--"The Church and Slavery."

"The opinion of each individual," you remark, "contributes to form public sentiment, as the
labor of the animalcule in the ocean contributes to the coral reefs that rise above the waves."

True, sir, and beautifully expressed. But while, in harmony with your intimation, I must regard
you one of the animalcules, rearing the coral reef of public opinion, I cannot admit your disclaimer
of "special influence" among them in their work. Doubtless, sir, you have "special influence,"--and
deserve to have. I make no apology for addressing you. I am one of the animalcules.

I agree, and I disagree, with you. I harmonize in your words,--"The present is eminently a
time when the views of every man on the subject of slavery should be uttered in unambiguous
tones." I agree with you in this affirmation; because the subject has yet to be fully understood;
because, when understood, if THE BIBLE does not sanction the system, the MASTER must cease
to be the master. The SLAVE must cease to be the slave. He must be free, AND EQUAL IN POLITICAL
AND SOCIAL LIFE. That is your "unambiguous tone". Let it be heard, if that is the word of God.

But if THE BIBLE does sanction the system, then that "unambiguous tone" will silence abolitionists
who admit the Scriptures; it will satisfy all good men, and give peace to the country. That
is the "tone" I want men to hear. Listen to it in the past and present speech of providence.
The time was when you had the very public sentiment you are now trying to form. From Maine
to Louisiana, the American mind was softly yielding to the impress of emancipation, in some
hope, however vague and imaginary. Southern as well as Northern men, in the church and out
of it, not having sufficiently studied the word of God, and, under our own and French revolutionary
excitement, looking only at the evils of slavery, wished it away from the land. It was a mistaken
public sentiment. Yet, such as it was, you had it, and it was doing your work. It was Quaker-like,
mild and affectionate. It did not, however, work fast enough for you. You thought that the
negro, with his superior attributes of body and mind and higher advantages of the nineteenth
century, might reach, in a day, the liberty and equality which the Anglo-American had attained
after the struggle of his ancestors during a thousand years! You got up the agitation. You
got it up in the Church and State. You got it up over the length and breadth of this whole
land. Let me show you some things you have secured, as the results of your work.

First Result of Agitation.

1. The most consistent abolitionists, affirming the sin of slavery, on the maxim of created
equality and unalienable right, after torturing the Bible for a while, to make it give the
same testimony, felt they could get nothing from the book. They felt that the God of the Bible
disregarded the thumb-screw, the boot, and the wheel; that he would not speak for them, but
against them. These consistent men have now turned away from the word, in despondency; and
are seeking, somewhere, an abolition Bible, an abolition Constitution for the United States,
and an abolition God.

This, sir, is the first result of your agitation:--the very van of your attack repulsed, and
driven into infidelity.

A Second Result of Agitation.

2. Many others, and you among them, are trying in exactly the same way just mentioned to make
the Bible speak against slave-holding. You get nothing by torturing the English version. People
understand English. Nay, you get little by applying the rack to the Hebrew and Greek; even
before a tribunal of men like you, who proclaim beforehand that Moses, in Hebrew, and Paul,
in Greek, must condemn slavery because "it is a violation of the first sentiments of the Declaration
of Independence." You find it difficult to persuade men that Moses and Paul were moved by the
Holy Ghost to sanction the philosophy of Thomas Jefferson! You find it hard to make men believe
that Moses saw in the mount, and Paul had vision in heaven, that this future apostle of Liberty
was inspired by Jesus Christ.

You torture very severely. But the muscles and bones of those old men are tough and strong.
They won't yield under your terrible wrenchings. You get only groans and mutterings. You claim
these voices, I know, as testimony against slavery. But you cannot torture in secret as in
olden times. When putting the question, you have to let men be present,--who tell us that Moses
and Paul won't speak for you,--that they are silent, like Christ before Pilate's scourging-men;
or, in groans and mutterings,--the voices of their sorrow and the tones of their indignation,--they
rebuke your pre-judgment of the Almighty when you say if the Bible sanctions slavery, "it neither
ought to be nor could be received by mankind as a divine revelation."

This, sir, is the second result you have gained by your agitation. You have brought a thousand
Northern ministers of the gospel, with yourself, to the verge of the same denial of the word
of God which they have made, who are only a little ahead of you in the road you are travelling.

A Third Result of Agitation.

3. Meanwhile, many of your most pious men, soundest scholars, and sagacious observers of providence,
have been led to study the Bible more faithfully in the light of the times. And they are reading
it more and more in harmony with the views which have been reached by the highest Southern
minds, to wit:--That the relation of master and slave is sanctioned by the Bible;--that it
is a relation belonging to the same category as those of husband and wife, parent and child,
master and apprentice, master and hireling;--that the relations of husband and wife, parent
and child, were ordained in Eden for man, as man, and modified after the fall, while the relation
of slavery, as a system of labor, is only one form of the government ordained of God over fallen
and degraded man;--that the evils in the system are the same evils of OPPRESSION we see in
the relation of husband and wife, and all other forms of government;--that slavery, as a relation,
suited to the more degraded or the more ignorant and helpless types of a sunken humanity, is,
like all government, intended as the proof of the curse of such degradation, and at the same
time to elevate and bless;--that the relation of husband and wife, being for man, as man, will
ever be over him, while slavery will remain so long as God sees it best, as a controlling power
over the ignorant, the more degraded and helpless;--and that, when he sees it for the good
of the country, he will cause it to pass away, if the slave can be elevated to liberty and
equality, political and social, with his master, in that country; or out of that country, if
such elevation cannot be given therein, but may be realized in some other land: all which result
must be left to the unfoldings of the divine will, in harmony with the Bible, and not to a
newly-discovered dispensation. These facts are vindicated in the Bible and Providence. In the
Old Testament, they stare you in the face:--in the family of Abraham,--in his slaves, bought
with his money and born in his house,--in Hagar, running away under her mistress's hard dealing
with her, and yet sent back, as a fugitive slave, by the angel,--in the law which authorized
the Hebrews to hold their brethren as slaves for a time,--in which parents might sell their
children into bondage,--in which the heathen were given to the Hebrews as their slaves forever,--in
which slaves were considered so much the money of their master, that the master who killed
one by an unguarded blow was, under certain circumstances, sufficiently punished in his slave's
death, because he thereby lost his money,--in which the difference between man-stealing and
slave-holding is, by law, set forth,--in which the runaway from heathen masters may not be
restored, because God gave him the benefits of an adopted Hebrew. Grateful for this concession, a
number of lads employed the day in presenting a petition to the Commons calling upon them to uphold
their own authority, recall those who had been so unreasonably expelled, protect the clergy, and bring
prisoners to a speedy trial.(777) This was more than the royalist apprentices could stand, so
the next day they had their turn, and presented a petition to both
Houses praying for the suppression of conventicles, the restoration
of the king, the maintenance of the covenant, and the disbandment
of the army.(778) This last petition roused the indignation of the
army, and was one of the motives which led the "agitators"(779) to
demand of the council of war an immediate march on London, a step
which would most certainly have been undertaken but for the strenuous
opposition of Cromwell and Ireton.(780)

(M379)

A week later (21
July) a mob of apprentices, reformadoes, watermen and other disaffected
persons met at Skinners’ Hall, and one and all signed a Solemn Engagement
pledging themselves to maintain the Covenant and to procure the king’s
restoration to power on the terms offered by him on the 12th May last,
viz., the abandonment of the episcopacy for three years and the militia
for ten.

An endeavour was made to enlist the support of the municipal authorities to this engagement,
but a letter from Fairfax (23 July) soon gave them to understand that the army looked on the
matter as one "set on foot by the malice of some desperate-minded
men, this being their last engine for the putting all into confusion
when they could not accomplish their wicked ends by other means."(781)
On the 24th both Houses joined in denouncing the Solemn Engagement
of the City, their declaration against it being ordered to be published
by beat of drum and sound of trumpet through London and Westminster,
and within the lines of communication.(782) Anyone found subscribing
his name to the engagement after such publication would be adjudged
guilty of high treason.

(M380)

In the meanwhile the army council had forwarded (19 July) certain recommendations to the city
which they proposed to submit to parliament, among them being one for removing the command
of the city’s militia out of the hands of the municipal authorities and vesting it in parliament.(783)
This proposal was accepted in due course by both Houses.(784)

(M381) (M382) (M383)

On Saturday, the 24th July, the day after the Lords had given their assent to the proposal
touching the militia, two petitions were presented to the Common Council praying it to take
steps for retaining the militia in the hands of the city committee.(785) Both petitions were
well received by the court, and a draft of another petition from the court itself was at once made
for presentation to both Houses on the following Monday, together with the petitions presented
to the court.

The sheriffs and the whole court, or as many of them as could go, with the exception of those
actually serving on the militia committee, were ordered to carry the petitions to Westminster.
When Monday came an excited crowd of apprentices and others followed the sheriffs and members
of the Common Council up to the very doors of the Houses. The few Peers who were in attendance
on that day were soon brought to pass a resolution abrogating the recent ordinance.(786) When
the turn of the Commons came they made a bolder stand. The consideration of the petitions was frequently
interrupted by cries of "Vote! vote!" from the apprentices, who stood at the open doorway with
their hats on.(787) Hostile as the city was, the House had no means of restoring order without
its aid. The civic authorities showed no particular haste in complying with a request for
assistance. The Common Council assembled in the afternoon, but all it did was to agree that
the members present should adjourn in a body to Westminster "and use their best endeavour by all
gentle ways and means possible they can to appease the said multitude and to free the said House
from danger."(788) At length, towards eight o’clock in the evening,
the Commons, worn-out and exhausted, yielded to the pressure put upon
them and repealed the obnoxious ordinance, after which the mob was
content to obey the city councillors and quietly disperse.

(M384) (M385)

The civic authorities having recovered its control over the militia immediately began to put
the city in a posture of defence. In this it was assisted by the apprentices offering their
services, their lives and fortunes against any power whatsoever that should attack the city.
The Common Council thanked them for their good will, and desired them to carry themselves
in an orderly and regular way, and endeavour to prevent disorder and tumult.(789) There were already
rumours that the army had broken up and was marching towards London. No time was to be lost if
the city was to be saved from falling into its hands. The militia committee was ordered to draw
up a declaration in justification of all that the civic authorities had done, whilst a letter
was sent (28 July) to Fairfax deprecating any attempt by the army to "intermeddle" with the liberties
or privileges of the city or to interpose in the matter of the militia, which should be used only
in defence of parliament and the city without giving occasion for offence to anyone. He was
assured that now the government of the militia had become revested in the city there would be
no more disorder.(790) The day on which this letter was despatched had been set apart by the civic
authorities as a day of fasting and humiliation. Three ministers were appointed to pray and preach
before the mayor, aldermen and common council at the church of St. Michael Bassishaw that God might
turn away his wrathful indignation against the city and the nation.(791)

(M386) (M387)

In the meantime Fairfax had been informed of the terrorism brought to bear upon parliament,
and wrote (29 July) from Bedford to the Common Council(792) saying that, for his part, he looked
upon them, being in authority, as responsible to the kingdom for
the recent disturbances.

The letter reached the council at eleven o’clock at night. In spite of the lateness of the
hour an answer was drawn up(793) disclaiming any responsibility for the riot at Westminster on
the ground that at the time the city was without a settled militia and held no commission on which
to act. So far from having encouraged the tumult, as many of the council had been reported to
have done, they had used their best endeavours to allay it. In conclusion the council declared
themselves unconscious of having contributed to the interruption of the "hopeful way of peace
and settlement" mentioned in the general’s letter, and would accordingly rely upon God for
His protection over the city.

(M388)

The time for negotiations had clearly passed away, and there was no other recourse but to repel
force by force. The Common Council immediately voted (29 July) a sum of £20,000 on the security
of the city seal for the purposes of defence.(794) The trained bands were sent to man the
works, and orders were given for a general muster to be held on the following morning of all
the inhabitants who were not members of the trained bands but were capable of bearing arms.(795)

(M389)

When
parliament re-assembled on the 30th the Speakers of the two Houses and a number of members failed to appear.
New Speakers were immediately appointed and the expelled members ordered to take their seats.
One of the first acts of the House was to authorise the militia committee to seize all horses
within the lines of communication for the defence of parliament and
the City, and in accordance with the City’s request sent word to Fairfax
not to approach within thirty miles of London.(796)

(M390)

On the
following day (31 July) the House signified its assent to the appointment
of Massey as commander-in-chief of the city forces, in accordance
with the desire of the militia committee and the Common Council, and
informed a city deputation that it had taken the precaution to secure
the Block-houses at Tilbury and Gravesend.

On hearing this some of the deputation expressed a hope that the House would also see to Windsor
Castle.(797)

(M391) (M392)

The Common Council was getting more and more anxious every day. Fairfax had disdained giving
any reply to their last letters, and the army was known to have already advanced as near as
Colnbrook. On the afternoon of the 2nd August the council resolved to send another letter
to the general, disclaiming any intention on the part of the city to raise a new war. The
delivery of this despatch was entrusted to six aldermen and twelve commoners, who were to remain
with the army, in addition to the commissioners previously appointed, and use every means in
their power to prevent any further bloodshed.

If Fairfax complained that the city was engaged in raising a body of horse, they were instructed
to throw the responsibility on parliament. If he objected to the drilling of reformadoes, it
was again the work of parliament and not of the militia committee. If the commissioners were asked
for some assurance that the city would protect parliament in future from all attacks, they
were to say that the city would do its best to protect not only the
sitting members, but all who should return to the House.

If objection was raised to the appointment of Massey, it was to be laid to the sudden approach
of the army. Should any question arise as to the recent riot at Westminster, the whole affair
was to be ascribed to the absence of any settled authority of the city militia; and lastly, if
the matter of the petition and engagement was raked up, the commissioners
were to say that the city had not been the promoters.(798) Furnished
with these instructions, the commissioners set out for the army, which
they found the next day (3 Aug.) drawn up on Hounslow Heath.

(M393)

In the meantime another declaration(799) had been prepared by Fairfax and the council of war recapitulating
the course affairs had taken, the changes that had taken place in the government of the city militia,
the pressure that had been put upon parliament resulting in the Speakers and many members being
driven away, and the continued presence of the eleven members in the House after charges had been
brought against them, and signifying the intention of the army to give a welcome to all members
of parliament who found themselves unable to take their seats at Westminster with freedom and
safety, and to regard them as persons in whom the public trust of
the kingdom still remained.

It was moreover the purpose of the army to march on London, when it was expected the eleven members
would be either delivered up or else kept in custody until they could be brought to trial.

(M394)

As soon as the city commissioners arrived at headquarters this declaration was put into their hands,
and with it they hurried back to London in time to lay it before
the Common Council the same afternoon.

The council was quick to discern that no other course lay open to them but submission. A letter(800)
was accordingly despatched to Fairfax the same night, to the effect
that, as it appeared from the declaration that the main object of
the army drawing so near London was to bring back to a free parliament
at Westminster those members who had withdrawn owing to the tumult
on the 26th July, the Common Council heartily concurred therein, and
no opposition whatever would be shown to the troops appointed to escort
the members to Westminster.

The City declared itself ready to submit to parliament in everything, and offered its entire
force for its protection. In order to remove all cause of offence or misunderstanding, the
City’s own declaration(801) recently published (30 July) was withdrawn. Under these circumstances
the council expressed a hope that the army would be prevented from
doing any offence or prejudice to the city or the lines of communication.

(M395)

The

City was now all submission. On the 4th August it agreed to a demand to surrender the forts from
"Giles Forte" down to the river-side, and the Common Council wrote to Fairfax to that effect, saying that
"now, next unto Almighty God, we do rely upon your excellencye’s honourable word for our safety,
and to be protected from all violence of the soldiery."(802) By that time Fairfax had arrived
with the army at Hammersmith, whence he wrote to the City acknowledging
their ready compliance in the surrender of the forts, which he would
shortly garrison, and assuring them that the army would behave itself
in such a manner "as to witness to the world the integrity of their
hearts in having no other design but the quiet and happy settlement
of a firm and lasting peace."(803)

(M396)

On the 6th August the
army entered the lines of fortification and made its way to Westminster,
accompanied by the Speakers of both Houses and those members who had
betaken themselves to the army after withdrawing from parliament.

The civic authorities, taking advantage of the hint offered them,
welcomed the army on its approach, the mayor and aldermen going out
as far as Hyde Park in coaches, whilst the Common Council betook themselves
to Charing Cross by water, and there ranged themselves in view of
the soldiers as they passed.(804) Glyn, the Recorder, on whose behalf
the City had already addressed Fairfax, was instructed to make a speech
with the view of absolving the City from any implication in the tumult
of the 26th July.

(M397) (M398)

On the following day (7 Aug.) the citizens made a closer acquaintance with the army as it marched
through the heart of the city on its way to Croydon. The words of Fairfax proved true. The
troops marched through the streets "with all civility, not doing the least hurt or prejudice."
The civic authorities felt so much relief at seeing this unexpected maintenance of discipline
that they gave vent to their feelings by asking Fairfax and all the
officers to meet them at dinner at Grocers’ Hall on Thursday, the
13th, but that day proving inconvenient to the general, who was busy
settling the affairs of the army, the dinner was ordered to be put
off until the city should again hear from him.(805) The termination
of hostilities gave rise to the following poetical ebullition on the
part of Mercurius Pragmaticus:—

"A Peace, a Peace, the countrey cries,
Or else we shall be undone; For this brave warre we thank the wise
Confiding men of London."

"Sure now they may as well as we Know how to value Quiet, When th’ army comes their Guests
to be For a twelve-month’s Cash and Diet."

CHAPTER XXV.

(M399)

The City was now powerless. The day of reckoning had come, and the City had to pay for the opposition
it had displayed towards the army.

The Tower was no longer entrusted to the citizens, but was committed by parliament to Fairfax
as constable.(806) Diligent search was made for reformadoes with the intention of making an
example of some of them,(807) and a committee consisting of members of both Houses was appointed
to enquire into the violence recently offered to parliament.(808) The Town Clerk received orders
to produce to the committee all such books of the city as contained the Acts and Orders of
the Common Council passed and made from the 20th July until the 6th August, as well as the original
petitions of which copies had been presented to the Commons on the memorable 26th July, and other
documents.(809)

(M400)

The cry raised by the agitators of the army for the expulsion of the eleven members from parliament
became so great that six of the number thought it advisable to make their escape to the continent.(810)
Of those that remained to face the worst in England, Glyn, the city’s Recorder, was one. It was
in vain that the Common Council, who upheld the conduct of their officer, interceded with Fairfax
and invoked the aid of friends in both Houses on his behalf.(811) He was expelled the House and
committed to the Tower, one week only being allowed him to put his
papers and affairs in order.(812)

(M401) (M402)

On the 24th August
a deputation of the committee of the army waited on the Common Council
and demanded an advance of a month’s pay (£50,000).

The City was to re-imburse itself out of the arrears which the citizens had failed to contribute
to the army, and which amounted to over £60,000. The matter was referred to a committee.(813)
Ten days elapsed and parliament became impatient for an answer.(814) The City was told (4 Sept.) that
its "engagement" of the 21st July had been the occasion of the army approaching London, and
its failing to pay the money as it became due was the occasion of keeping the army near London.
If the citizens failed to take the necessary steps for the removal of the army, "they must expect
to suffer the inconveniences that will come hereby."(815) To this the City replied (6 Sept.)
that whatever arrears of assessments were due they were not due from the Common Council as a
body, for that had never been assessed, but were due from particular individuals. The council feared
that it would be impossible to raise the money on the security offered, but it promised to
use its best endeavours to raise it if some better security were found, and to get in arrears
of assessments at the same time. As to the "engagement," they called God to witness that the
Common Council as a body had had no hand in it; but as soon as a copy of it was received from
the army, the council returned answer that "according to their duty they did rest in that
which both Houses of Parliament had resolved hereupon." In that resolution the council expressed
itself as still remaining and altogether disavowed the "engagement." It even ventured to hope
that the House would not permit such a mark of its displeasure to remain on record, reflecting
so badly as it did upon the whole City.(816)

(M403) (M404)

This reply being deemed unsatisfactory the Commons sent a more peremptory demand (9 Sept.) to
the effect that not only the sum of £50,000 should be advanced by the City before the 18th September,
but that also the whole of the arrears, amounting to £64,000, should
be levied,(817) and they got Fairfax himself to write and back up
their demand for £50,000.

The letter of Fairfax was dated from Putney on the 6th September,
but it was not communicated to the Common Council until Saturday the
11th, a court which had been specially summoned for the previous day
(Friday) having been adjourned for want of a quorum.(818) To this
letter was appended the following postscript:—"We understand itts
neare a fortnight since the committee applied themselves to you in
this busines, and that yet nothing is done, we desire there may be
a present performance, the condicon of the armie not admitting any
longer delay."

(M405)

To the Commons the City made answer (13 Sept.) that arrears were already
being got in as speedily as possible, and asked that the hands of
the collectors might be strengthened by additional parliamentary powers.(819)
To Fairfax a long letter was sent the same day explaining the reason
of the delay that had occurred in satisfying the demand of parliament,
and informing him of the steps that were being taken to get in the
arrears due to the army.(820)

(M406)

The excuses put forward were
considered to be of so unsatisfactory and temporising a character
that Fairfax and the General Council of the Army proposed to parliament,
that unless the arrears came in by a certain day the general himself
should be authorised to levy them and to inflict fines upon delinquents.

This withholding the money by the City, said they, was but a scheme for bringing the army into disrepute,
and for the purpose of causing disturbance; the Common Council had been ready enough to advance
far larger sums to encourage designs against parliament and the army; it might again be induced
to show a similar readiness in providing money, without which the
army could not disperse, if parliament would but impose a fine upon
them as a body, "which money being chargeable so properly upon themselves,
we presume they will not have the like excuse not to provide."(821)

(M407)
(M408) (M409)

Before any further steps were taken to enforce the
loan the committee appointed to investigate the outrage upon parliament
in July reported (24 Sept.) to the House that they had discovered
sufficient evidence for the impeachment of Sir John Gayer, the mayor,
Thomas Cullum, one of the sheriffs, and three aldermen of the city,
viz., James Bunce, John Langham and Thomas Adams, on the charge of
threatening the Commons with force and raising a fresh war.(822) The
House at once accepted the committee’s report and ordered the accused
parties to the Tower.

 The slavery question has
brought on this conflict; and, strange as it may seem, the South, the land of the slave, is
summoned by God to defend the liberty he gives; while the North, the clime of the free, misunderstands
and changes the truth of God into a lie,--claiming a liberty he does not give. Wherefore is
this? I reply:---

God, when he ordained government over men, gave to the individual man RIGHTS, only as he is
under government. He first established the family; hence all other rule is merely the family
expanded. The good of the family limited the rights of every member. God required the family,
and then the state, so to rule as to give to every member the good which is his, in harmony
with the welfare of the whole; and he commanded the individual to seek that good, and NO MORE.

Now, mankind being depraved, government has ever violated its obligation to rule for the benefit
of the entire community, and has wielded its power in oppression. Consequently, the governed
have ever struggled to secure the good which was their right. But, in this struggle, they have
ever been tempted to go beyond the limitation God had made, and to seek supposed good, not
given, in rights, prompted by self-will, destructive of the state.

Government thus ever existing in oppression, and people thus ever rising up against despotism,
have been the history of mankind.

The Reformation was one of the many convulsions in this long-continued conflict. In its first
movements, men claimed the liberty the Bible grants. Soon they ran into licentiousness. God
then stayed the further progress of emancipation in Europe, because the spread of the asserted
liberty would have made infidelity prevail over that part of the continent where the Reformation
was arrested. God preferred Romanism, and other despotisms, modified as they were by the struggle,
to rule for a time, than have those countries destroyed under the sway of a licentious freedom.

In this contest the North American colonies had their rise, and they continued the strife with
England until they declared themselves independent.

That "Declaration" affirmed not only the liberty sanctioned of the Bible, but also the liberty
constituting infidelity. Its first paragraph, to the word "separation," is a noble introduction.
Omit, then, what follows, to the sentence beginning "Prudence will dictate," and the paper,
thus expurgated, is complete, and is then simply the complaint of the colonies against the
government of England, which had oppressed them beyond further submission, and the assertion
of their right to be free and independent States.

This declaration was, in that form, nothing more than the affirmation of the right God gives
to children, in a family, applied to the colonies, in regard to their mother-country. That
is to say, children have, from God, RIGHT, AS CHILDREN, when cruelly treated, to secure the
good to which they are entitled, as children, IN THE FAMILY. They may secure this good by becoming
part of another family, or by setting up for themselves, if old enough. So the colonies had,
from God, right as colonies, when oppressed beyond endurance, to exchange the British family
for another, or, if of sufficient age, to establish their own household. The Declaration, then,
in that complaint of oppression and affirmation of right, in the colonies, to be independent,
asserts liberty sanctioned by the word of God. And therefore the pledge to that Declaration,
of "lives, fortune, and sacred honor," was blessed of Heaven, in the triumph of their cause.

But the Declaration, in the part I have omitted, affirms other things, and very different.
It asserts facts and rights as appertaining to man, not in the Scriptures, but contrary thereto.

This is the affirmation of the liberty claimed by infidelity. It teaches as a fact that which
is not true; and it claims as right that which God has not given. It asserts nothing new, however.
It lays claim to that individual right beyond the limitation God has put, which man has ever
asserted when in his struggle for liberty he has refused to be guided and controlled by the
word and providence of his Creator.

The paragraph is a chain of four links, each of which is claimed to be a self-evident truth.

The first and controlling assertion is, "that ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL;" which proposition,
as I understand it, is, that every man and woman on earth is created with equal attributes
of body and mind.

Secondly, and consequently, that every individual has, by virtue of his or her being created
the equal of each and every other individual, the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, so in his or her own keeping that that right is unalienable without his or her consent.

Thirdly, it follows, that government among men must derive its just powers only from the consent
of the governed; and, as the governed are the aggregate of individuals, then each person must
consent to be thus controlled before he or she can be rightfully under such authority.

Fourthly, and finally, that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of the right
to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, as each such individual man or woman may think,
then each such person may rightly set to work to alter or abolish such form, and institute
a new government, on such principles and in such form as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness.

This is the celebrated averment of created equality, and unalienable right to life, liberty,
and pursuit of happiness, with the necessary consequences. I have fairly expanded its meaning.
It is the old infidel averment. It is not true in any one of its assertions.

All Men not created equal.

It is not a truth, self-evident, that all men are created equal. Webster, in his dictionary,
defines "Self-evident--Evident without proof or reason: clear conviction upon a bare presentation
to the mind, as that two and three make five."

Now, I affirm, and you, I think, will not contradict me, that the position, "all men are created
equal" is not self-evident; that the nature of the case makes it impossible for it to be self-evident.
For the created nature of man is not in the class of things of which such self-evident propositions
can by possibility be predicated. It is equally clear and beyond debate, that it is not self-evident
that all men have unalienable rights, that governments derive their just powers from the consent
of the governed, and may be altered or abolished whenever to them such rights may be better
secured. All these assertions can be known to be true or false only from revelation of the
Creator, or from examination and induction of reasoning, covering the nature and the obligations
of the race on the whole face of the earth. What revelation and examination of facts do teach,
I will now show. The whole battle-ground, as to the truth of this series of averments, is on
the first affirmation, "that all men are created equal." Or, to keep up my first figure, the
strength of the chain of asserted truths depend on that first link. It must then stand the
following perfect trial.

God reveals to us that he created man in his image, i.e. a spirit endowed with attributes resembling
his own,--to reason, to form rule of right, to manifest various emotions, to will, to act,--and
that he gave him a body suited to such a spirit, (Gen. i. 26, 27, 28;) that he created MAN
"male and female," (Gen. i. 27;) that he made the woman "out of the man," (Gen. ii. 7.) Here,
then, God created the race to be in the beginning TWO,--a male and a female MAN; one of them
not equal to the other in attributes of body and mind, and, as we shall see presently, not
equal in rights as to government. Observe, this inequality was fact as to the TWO, in the perfect
state wherein they were created.

But these two fell from that perfect state, became depraved, and began to be degraded in body
and mind. This statement of the original inequality in which man was created controls all that
comes after, in God's providence and in the natural history of the race. (Acts xvii. 26, 27.)

These "bounds of their habitation" have had much to do in the natural history of man; for "all
men" have been "created," or, more correctly, born, (since the race was "created" once only
at the first,) with attributes of body and mind derived from the TWO unequal parents, and these
attributes, in every individual, the combined result of the parental natures. "All men," then,
come into the world under influences upon the amalgamated and transmitted body and mind, from
depravity and degradation, sent down during all the generations past; and, therefore, under
causes of inequality, acting on each individual from climate, from scenery, from food, from
health, from sickness, from love, from hatred, from government, inconceivable in variety and
power. Under such causes, to produce infinite shades of inequality, physical and mental, in
birth--if "all men" were created equal (i.e. born equal) in attributes of body and mind--such
"creation" would be a violation of all the known analogies in the world of life.

Do, then, the facts in man's natural history exhibit this departure from the laws of life and
spirit? Do they prove that "all men are created equal"? Do they show that every man and every
woman of Africa, Asia, Europe, America, and the islands of the seas, is created each one equal
in body and mind to each other man or woman on the face of the earth, and that this has always
been?

Need I extend these questions? Methinks, sir, I hear you say, what others have told me, that
the "Declaration" is not to be understood as affirming what is so clearly false, but merely
asserts that all men are "created equal" in natural rights.

I reply that that is not the meaning of the clause before us; for that is the meaning of the
next sentence,--the second in the series we are considering.

There are, as I have said, four links to the chain of thought in this passage:--1. That all
men are created equal. 2. That they are endowed by the Creator with certain unalienable rights.
3. That government derives its just powers from the consent of the governed. 4. That the people
may alter and abolish it, &c.

These links are logical sequences. All men--man and woman--are created equal,--equal in attributes
of body and mind; (for that is the only sense in which they could be created equal;) therefore
they are endowed with right to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness, unalienable, except
in their consent; consequently such consent is essential to all rightful government; and, finally
and irresistibly, the people have supreme right to alter or abolish it, &c.

The meaning, then, I give to that first link, and to the chain following, is the sense, because,
if you deny that meaning to the first link, then the others have no logical truth whatever. Thus:--

If all men are not created equal in attributes of body and mind, then the inequality may be
so great that such men cannot be endowed with right to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness,
unalienable save in their consent; then government over such men cannot rightfully rest upon
their consent; nor can they have right to alter or abolish government in their mere determination.

Yea, sir, you concede every thing if you admit that the "Declaration" does not mean to affirm
that all men are "created" equal in body and mind.

I will suppose in the Alps a community of Cretins,--i.e. deformed and helpless idiots,--but
among them many from the same parents, who, in body and mind, by birth are comparatively Napoleons.
Now, this inequality, physical and mental, by birth, makes it impossible that the government
over these Cretins can be in their "consent." The Napoleons must rule. The Napoleons must absolutely
control their "life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness," for the good of the community. Do
you reply that I have taken an extreme case? that everybody admits sensible people must govern
natural fools? Ay, sir, there is the rub. Natural fools! Are some men, then, "created" natural
fools? Very well. Then you also admit that some men are created just a degree above natural
fools!--and, consequently, that men are "created" in all degrees, gradually rising in the scale
of intelligence. Are they not "created" just above the brute, with savage natures along with
mental imbecility and physical degradation? Must the Napoleons govern the Cretins without their
"consent"? Must they not also govern without their "consent" these types of mankind, whether
one, two, three, thirty, or three hundred degrees above the Cretins, if they are still greatly
inferior by nature? Suppose the Cretins removed from the imagined community, and a colony of
Australian ant-catchers or California lizard-eaters be in their stead: must not the Napoleons
govern these? And, if you admit inequality to be in birth, then that inequality is the very
ground of the reason why the Napoleons must govern the ant-catchers and lizard-eaters. Remove
these, and put in their place an importation of African negroes. Do you admit their inferiority
by "CREATION?" Then the same control over them must be the irresistible fact in common sense
and Scripture of God. The Napoleons must govern. They must govern without asking "consent,"--if
the inequality be such that "consent" would be evil, and not good, in the family--the state.

Yea, sir, if you deny that the "Declaration" asserts "all men are created equal" in body and
mind, then you admit the inequality may be such as to make it impossible that in such cases
men have rights unalienable save in their "consent;" and you admit it to be impossible that
government in such circumstances can exist in such "consent" But, if you affirm the "Declaration"
does mean that men are "created equal" in attributes of body and mind, then you hold to an
equality which God, in his word, and providence, and the natural history of man, denies to
be truth.

I think I have fairly shown, from Scripture and facts, that the first averment is not the truth;
and have reduced it to an absurdity. I will now regard the second, third, and fourth links
of the chain.

I know they are already broken; for, the whole chain being but an electric current from a vicious
imagination, I have destroyed the whole by breaking the first link. Or was it but a cluster
from a poisonous vine, then I have killed the branches by cutting the vine. I will, however,
expose the other three sequences by a distinct argument covering them all.

Authority Delegated to Adam.

God gave to Adam sovereignty over the human race, in his first decree:--"He shall rule over
thee." That was THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT. It was not based on the "consent" of Eve, the
governed. It was from God. He gave to Adam like authority to rule his children. It was not
derived from their "consent". It was from God. He gave Noah the same sovereignty, with express
power over life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness. It was not founded in "consent" of Shem,
Ham, and Japheth, and their wives. It was from God. He then determined the habitations of men
on all the face of the earth, and indicated to them, in every clime, the form and power of
their governments. He gave, directly, government to Israel. He just as truly gave it to Idumea,
to Egypt, and to Babylon, to the Arab, to the Esquimaux, the Caffre, the Hottentot, and the negro.

God, in the Bible, decides the matter. (Rom. xiii. 1-7.)

Here God reveals to us that he has delegated to government his own RIGHT over life, liberty,
and pursuit of happiness; and that that RIGHT is not, in any sense, from the "consent" of the
governed, but is directly from him. Government over men, whether in the family or in the state,
is, then, as directly from God as it would be if he, in visible person, ruled in the family
or in the state. I speak not only of the RIGHT simply to govern, but the mode of the government,
and the extent of the power. Government can do ALL which God would do,--just THAT,--no more,
no less. And it is bound to do just THAT,--no more, no less. Government is responsible to God,
if it fails to do just THAT which He himself would do. It is under responsibility, then, to
rule in righteousness. It must not oppress. It must give to every individual "life, liberty,
and pursuit of happiness," in harmony with the good of the family,--the state,--as God himself
would give it,--just THAT, no more, no less.

This passage of Scripture settles the question, From whence has government RIGHT to rule, and
what is the extent of its power? The RIGHT is from God, and the EXTENT of the power is just
THAT to which God would exercise it if he were personally on the earth. God, in this passage,
and others, settles, with equal clearness, from whence is the OBLIGATION to submit to government,
and what is the extent of the duty of obedience? The OBLIGATION to submit is not from individual
RIGHT to consent or not to consent to government,--but the OBLIGATION to submit is directly
from God.

The EXTENT of the duty of obedience is equally revealed--in this wise: so long as the government
rules in righteousness, the duty is perfect obedience. So soon, however, as government requires
that which God, in his word, forbids the subject to do, he must obey God, and not man. He must
refuse to obey man. But, inasmuch as the obligation to submit to authority of government is
so great, the subject must know it is the will of God, that he shall refuse to obey, before
he assumes the responsibility of resistance to the powers that be. His conscience will not
justify him before God, if he mistakes his duty. He may be all the more to blame for having
SUCH A CONSCIENCE.

But, when government requires that which God does not forbid the subject to do, although in
that the government may have transcended the line of its righteous rule, the subject must,
nevertheless, submit,--until oppression has gone to the point at which God makes RESISTANCE
to be duty. And that point is when RESISTANCE will clearly be less of evil, and more of good,
TO THE COMMUNITY, than further submission.

That is the rule of duty God gives to the whole people, or to the minority, or to the individual,
to guide them in resistance to the powers that be.

It is irresistibly certain that He who ordains government has, alone, the right to alter or
abolish it,--that He who institutes the powers that be has, alone, the right to say when and
how the people, in whole or in part, may resist. So, then, the people, in whole, or in part,
have no right to resist, to alter, or abolish government, simply because they may deem it destructive
of the end for which it was instituted; but they may resist, alter, or abolish, when it shall
be seen that God so regards it. This places the great fact where it must be placed,--under
the CONTROL of the BIBLE and PROVIDENCE.

Illustrations.

I will conclude with one or two illustrations. God, in his providence, ordains the Russian
form of government,--i.e. He places the sovereignty in one man, because He sees that such government
can secure, for a time, more good to that degraded people than any other form. Now, I ask,
Has the emperor right, from God, to change at once, in his mere "consent," the form of his
government to that of the United States? No. God forbids him. Why? Because he would thereby
destroy the good, and bring immense evil in his empire. I ask again, Have the Russian serfs
and nobles,--yea, all,--"consenting," the right, from God, to make that change? No. For the
government of the United States is not suited to them. And, in such an attempt, they would
deprive themselves of the blessings they now have, and bring all the horrors of anarchy.

Do you ask if I then hold, that God ordains the Russian type of rule to be perpetual over that
people? No. The emperor is bound to secure all of "life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness,"
to each individual, consistent with the good of the nation. And he is to learn his obligation
from the Bible, and faithfully apply it to the condition of his subjects. He will thus gradually
elevate them; while they, on their part, are bound to strive for this elevation, in all the
ways in which God may show them the good, and the right, which, more and more, will belong
to them in their upward progress. The result of such government and such obedience would be
that of a father's faithful training, and children's corresponding obedience. The Russian people
would thus have, gradually, that measure of liberty they could bear, under the one-man power,--and
then, in other forms, as they might be qualified to realize them. This development would be
without convulsion,--as the parent gives place, while the children are passing from the lower
to their higher life. It would be the exemplification of Carlyle's illustration of the snake.
He says, A people should change their government only as a snake sheds his skin: the new skin
is gradually formed under the old one,--and then the snake wriggles out, with just a drop of
blood here and there, where the old jacket held on rather tightly.

God ordains the government of the United States. And He places the sovereignty in the will
of the majority, because He has trained the people, through many generations in modes of government,
to such an elevation in moral and religious intelligence, that such sovereignty is best suited
to confer on them the highest right, as yet, to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."
But God requires that that will of the majority be in perfect submission to Him. Once more
then I inquire,--Whether the people of this country, yea all of them consenting, have right
from God, to abolish now, at this time, our free institutions, and set up the sway of Russia?
No. But why? There is one answer only. He tells us that our happiness is in this form of government,
and in it, its developed results.

The "Social Compact" not recognised in the Divine Institute.

Here I pause. So, then, God gives no sanction to the notion of a SOCIAL COMPACT. He never gave
to man individual, isolated, natural rights, unalienably in his keeping. He never made him
a Caspar Hauser, in the forest, without name or home,--a Melchisedek, in the wilderness, without
father, without mother, without descent,--a Robinson Crusoe, on his island, in skins and barefooted,
waiting, among goats and parrots, the coming of the canoes and the savages, to enable him to
"consent" if he would, to the relations of social life.

And, therefore, those five sentences in that second paragraph of the Declaration of Independence
are not the truth; so, then, it is not self-evident truth that all men are created equal. So,
then, it is not the truth, in fact, that they are created equal. So, then, it is not the truth
that God has endowed all men with unalienable right to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness.
So, then, it is not the truth that governments derive their just powers from the consent of
the governed. So, then, it is not the truth that the people have right to alter or abolish
their government, and institute a new form, whenever to them it shall seem likely to effect
their safety and happiness.

The manner in which these unscriptural dogmas have been modified or developed in the United
States, I will examine in another paper.

I merely add, that the opinions of revered ancestors, on these questions of right and their
application to American slavery, must now, as never before, be brought to the test of the light
of the Bible. F.A. Ross.

Huntsville, Ala., Jan. 1857.

Man-Stealing.

This argument on the abolition charge, against the slave-holder,--that he is a man-stealer,--covers
the whole question of slavery, especially as it is seen in the Old Testament. The headings
in the letter make the subject sufficiently clear.

No. III.

Rev. Albert Barnes:--

Dear Sir:--In my first letter, I merely touched some points in your tract, intending to notice
them more fully in subsequent communications. I have, in my second paper, sufficiently examined
the imaginary maxims of created equality and unalienable rights.

In this, I will test your views by Scripture more directly. "To the law and to the testimony:
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." (Isaiah
viii. 20).

The abolitionist charges the slave-holder with being a man-stealer. He makes this allegation
in two affirmations. First, that the slave-holder is thus guilty, because, the negro having
been kidnapped in Africa, therefore those who now hold him, or his children, in bondage, lie
under the guilt of that first act. Secondly, that the slave-holder, by the very fact that he
is such, is guilty of stealing from the negro his unalienable right to freedom.

This is the charge. It covers the whole subject. I will meet it in all its parts.

The Difference between Man-Stealing and Slave-Holding, as set forth in the Bible.

What, then, is it to kidnap or steal a man? Webster informs us--To kidnap is "to steal a human
being, a man, woman, or child; or to seize and forcibly carry away any person whatever, from
his own country or state into another." The idea of "seizing and forcibly carrying away" enters
into the meaning of the word in all the definitions of law.

The crime, then, set forth in the Bible was not selling a man: but selling a stolen man. The
crime was not having a man in his hand as a slave; but......in his hand, as a slave, a stolen
man. And hence, the penalty of death was affixed, not to selling, buying, or holding man, as
a slave, but to the specific offence of stealing and selling, or holding a man thus stolen,
contrary to this law. Yea, it was this law, and this law only, which made it wrong. For, under
some circumstances, God sanctioned the seizing and forcibly carrying away a man, woman, or
child from country or state, into slavery or other condition. He sanctioned the utter destruction
of every male and every married woman, and child, of Jabez-Gilead, and the seizure, and forcibly
carrying away, four hundred virgins, unto the camp to Shiloh, and there, being given as wives
to the remnant of the slaughtered tribe of Benjamin, in the rock Rimmon. Sir, how did that
destruction of Jabez-Gilead, and the kidnapping of those young women, differ from the razing
of an African village, and forcibly seizing, and carrying away, those not put to the sword?
The difference is in this:--God commanded the Israelites to seize and bear off those young
women. But he forbids the slaver to kidnap the African. Therefore, the Israelites did right;
therefore, the trader does wrong. The Israelites, it seems, gave wives, in that way, to the
spared Benjamites, because they had sworn not to give their daughters. But there were six hundred
of these Benjamites. Two hundred were therefore still without wives. What was done for them?
Why, God authorized the elders of the congregation to tell the two hundred Benjamites to catch
every man his wife, of the daughters of Shiloh, when they came out to dance, in the feast of
the Lord, on the north side of Bethel. And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives,
"whom they caught:" (Judges xxi.) God made it right for those Benjamites to catch every man
his wife, of the daughters of Shiloh. But he makes it wrong for the trader to catch his slaves
of the sons or daughters of Africa. Lest you should try to deny that God authorized this act
of the children of Israel, although I believe he did order it, let me remind you of another
such case, the authority for which you will not question.

Moses, by direct command from God, destroyed the Midianites. He slew all the males, and carried
away all the women and children. He then had all the married women and male children killed;
but all the virgins, thirty-two thousand, were divided as spoil among the people. And thirty-two
of these virgins, the Lord's tribute, were given unto Eleazar, the priest, "as the Lord commanded
Moses." (Numbers xxxi.)

Sir, Thomas Paine rejected the Bible on this fact among his other objections. Yea, his reason,
his sensibilities, his great law of humanity, his intuitional and eternal sense of right, made
it impossible for him to honor such a God. And, sir, on your now avowed principles of interpretation,
which are those of Paine, you sustain him in his rejection of the books of Moses and all the
word of God.

God's command made it right for Moses to destroy the Midianites and make slaves of their daughters;
and I have dwelt upon these facts, to reiterate what I hold to be THE FIRST TRUTH IN MORALS:--that
a thing is right, not because it is ever so per se, but because God makes it right; and, of
course, a thing is wrong, not because it is so in the nature of things, but because God makes
it wrong. I distinctly have taken, and do take, that ground in its widest sense, and am prepared
to maintain it against all comers. He made it right for the sons of Adam to marry their sisters.
He made it right for Abraham to marry his half-sister. He made it right for the patriarchs,
and David and Solomon, to have more wives than one. He made it right when he gave command to
kill whole nations, sparing none. He made it right when he ordered that nations, or such part
as he pleased, should be spared and enslaved. He made it right that the patriarchs and the
Israelites should hold slaves in harmony with the system of servile labor which had long been
in the world. He merely modified that system to suit his views of good among his people. So,
then, when he saw fit, they might capture men. So, then, when he forbade the individual Israelite
to steal a man, he made it crime, and the penalty death. So, then, that crime was not the mere
stealing a man, nor the selling a man, nor the holding a man,--but the stealing and selling,
or holding, a man under circumstances thus forbidden of God.

Was the Israelite Master a Man-Stealer?

I now ask, Did God intend to make man-stealing and slave-holding the same thing? Let us see.
(Verses 20, 21.)

Sir, that man was not a hired servant. He was bought with money. He was regarded by God as
the money of his master. He was his slave, in the full meaning of a slave, then, and now, bought
with money. God, then, did not intend the Israelites to understand, and not one of them ever
understood, from that day to this, that Jehovah in his law to Moses regarded the slave-holder
as a man-stealer. Man-stealing was a specific offence, with its specific penalty. Slave-holding
was one form of God's righteous government over men,--a government he ordained, with various
modifications, among the Hebrews themselves, and with sterner features in its relation to heathen
slaves.

In Exodus xxi. and Leviticus xxv., various gradations of servitude were enacted, with a careful
particularity which need not be misunderstood. That is, the man by the law became free, while
his wife and children remained slaves. (Ex. xxi. 1-6.) Sir, you have urged discussion:--give
us then your views of that passage. Tell us how that man was separated from his wife and children
according to the eternal right. Tell us what was the condition of the woman in case the man
chose to "go out" without her? Tell us if the Hebrew who thus had his ear bored by his master
with an awl was not a slave for life? Tell us, lastly, whether those children were not slaves?
And, while on that chapter, tell us whether in the next verses, 7-11, God did not allow the
Israelite father to sell his own daughter into bondage and into polygamy by the same act of sale?

I will not dwell longer on these milder forms of slavery, but read to you the clear and unmistakable
command of the Lord in Leviticus xxv.

Sir, the sun will grow dim with age before that Scripture can be tortured to mean any thing
else than just what it says; that God commanded the Israelites to be slave-holders in the strict
and true sense over the heathen, in manner and form therein set forth. Do you tell the world
that this cannot be the sense of the Bible, because it is "a violation of the first principles
of the American Declaration of Independence;" because it grates upon your "instinct of liberty;"
because it reveals God in opposition to the "spirit of the age;" because, if it be the sense
of the passage, then "the Bible neither ought to be, nor can be, received by mankind as a divine
revelation"? That is what you say: that is what Albert Barnes affirms in his philosophy. What
if we may then choose between Albert Barnes's philosophy and God's truth?

Or will you say, God, under the circumstances, permitted the Israelites to sin in the matter
of slave-holding, just as he permitted them to sin by living in polygamy. Permitted them to
sin! No, sir; God commanded them to be slave-holders. He made it the law of their social state.
He made it one form of his ordained government among them. Moreover, you take it for granted
all too soon, that the Israelites committed sin in their polygamy. God sanctioned their polygamy.
It was therefore not sin in them. It was right. But God now forbids polygamy, under the gospel;
and now it is sin.

Or will you tell us the iniquity of the Canaanites was then full, and God's time to punish
them had come? True; but the same question comes up:--Did God punish the Canaanites by placing
them in the relation of slaves to his people, by express command, which compelled them to sin?
That's the point. I will not permit you to evade it. In plainer words:--Did God command the
Hebrews to make slaves of their fellow-men, to buy them and sell them, to regard them as their
money? He did. Then, did the Hebrews sin when they obeyed God's command? No. Then they did
what was right, and it was right because God made it so. Then the Hebrew slave-holder was not
a man-stealer. But, you say, the Southern slave-holder is. Well, we shall see presently.

Just here, the abolitionist who professes to respect the Scriptures is wont to tell us that
the whole subject of bondage among the Israelites was so peculiar to God's ancient dispensation,
that no analogy between that bondage and Southern slavery can be brought up. Thus he attempts
to raise a dust out of the Jewish institutions, to prevent people from seeing that slaveholding
then was the same thing that it is now. But, to sustain my interpretation of the plain Scriptures
given, I will go back five hundred years before the existence of the Hebrew nation.

I read at that time, (Gen. xiv. 14:)--"And when Abraham heard that his brother was taken captive,
he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued
them even unto Damascus," &c. (Gen. xvii. (Gen. xx. (Gen. xxiv.

Was Abraham a Man-Stealer?

Sir, what is the common sense of these Scriptures? Why, that the slave-trade existed in Abraham's
day, as it had long before, and has ever since, in all the regions of Syria, Palestine, Arabia,
and Egypt, in which criminals and prisoners of war were sold,--in which parents sold their
children. Abraham, then, it is plain, bought, of the sellers in this traffic, men-servants
and maid-servants; he had them born in his house; he received them as presents.

Do you tell me that Abraham, by divine authority, made these servants part of his family, social
and religious? Very good. But still he regarded them as his slaves. He took Hagar as a wife,
but he treated her as his slave,--yea, as Sarah's slave; and as such he gave her to be chastised,
for misconduct, by her mistress. Yea, he never placed Ishmael, the son of the bondwoman, on
a level with Isaac, the son of the freewoman. If, then, he so regarded Hagar and Ishmael, of
course he never considered his other slaves on an equality with himself. True, had he been
childless, he would have given his estate to Eliezer: but he would have given it to his slave.
True, had Isaac not been born, he would have given his wealth to Ishmael; but he would nave
given it to the son of his bondwoman. Sir, every Southern planter is not more truly a slave-holder
than Abraham. And the Southern master, by divine authority, may, to-day, consider his slaves
part of his social and religious family, just as Abraham did. His relation is just that of
Abraham. He has slaves of an inferior type of mankind from Abraham's bondmen; and he therefore,
for that reason, as well as from the fact that they are his slaves, holds them lower than himself.
But, nevertheless, he is a slave-holder in no other sense than was Abraham. Did Abraham have
his slave-household circumcised? Every Southern planter may have his slave-household baptized.
I baptized, not long since, a slave-child,--the master and mistress offering it to God. What
was done in the parlor might be done with divine approbation on every plantation.

So, then, Abraham lived in the midst of a system of slave-holding exactly the same in nature
with that in the South,--a system ordained of God as really as the other forms of government
round about him. He, then, with the divine blessing, made himself the master of slaves, men,
women, and children, by buying them,--by receiving them in gifts,--by having them born in his
house; and he controlled them as property, just as really as the Southern master in the present
day. I ask now, was Abraham a man-stealer? Oh, no, you reiterate: but the Southern master is. Why?

Is the Southern Master a Man-Stealer?

Do you, sir, or anybody, contend that the Southern master seized his slave in Africa, and forcibly
brought him away to America, contrary to law? That, and that alone, was and is kidnapping in
divine and human statute. No. What then? Why, the abolitionist responds, The African man-stealer
sold his victim to the slave-holder; he, to the planter; and the negro has been ever since
in bondage: therefore the guilt of the man-stealer has cleaved to sellers, buyers, and inheritors,
to this time, and will through all generations to come. That is the charge.

And it brings up the question so often and triumphantly asked by the abolitionist; i.e. "You,"
he says to the slave-holder,--"you admit it was wrong to steal the negro in Africa. Can the
slave-holder, then, throw off wrong so long as he holds the slave at any time or anywhere thereafter?"
I answer, yes; and my reply shall be short, yet conclusive. It is this:--Guilt, or criminality,
is that state of a moral agent which results from his actual commission of a crime or offence
knowing it to be crime or violation of law. That is the received definition of guilt, and you,
I know, do accept it. The guilt, then, of kidnapping terminated with the man-stealer, the seller,
the buyer, and holders, who, knowingly and intentionally, carried on the traffic contrary to
the divine law. THAT GUILT attaches in no sense whatever, as a personal, moral responsibility,
to the present slave-holder. Observe, I am here discussing, not the question of mere slave-holding,
but whether the master, who has had nothing to do with the slave-trade, can now hold the slave
without the moral guilt of the man-stealer? I have said that that guilt, in no sense whatever,
rests upon him; for he neither stole the man, nor bought him from the kidnapper, nor had any
complicity in the traffic. Here, I know, the abolitionist insists that the master is guilty
of this complicity, unless he will at once emancipate the slave; because, so long as he holds
him, he thereby, personally and voluntarily, assumes the same relation which the original kidnapper
or buyer held to the African.

This is Dr. Cheever's argument in a recent popular sermon. He thinks it unanswerable; but it
has no weight whatever. It is met perfectly by adding one word to his proposition. Thus:--The
master does NOT assume the same relation which the original man-stealer or buyer held to the
African. The master's relation to God and to his slave is now wholly changed from that of the
man-stealer, and those engaged in the trade; and his obligation is wholly different. What is
his relation? and what is his obligation? They are as follows:----

The master finds himself, with no taint of personal concern in the African trade, in a Christian
community of white Anglo-Americans, holding control over his black fellow-man, who is so unlike
himself in complexion, in form, in other peculiarities, and so unequal to himself in attributes
of body and mind, that it is impossible, in every sense, to place him on a level with himself
in the community. This is his relation to the negro. What, then, does God command him to do?
Does God require him to send the negro back to his heathen home from whence he was stolen?
That home no longer exists. But, if it did remain, does God command the master to send his
Christianized slave into the horrors of his former African heathenism? No. God has placed the
master under law entirely different from his command to the slave-trader. God said to the trader,
Let the negro alone. But he says to the present master, Do unto the negro all the good you
can; make him a civilized man; make him a Christian man; lift him up and give him all he has
a right to claim in the good of the whole community. This the master can do; this he must do,
and then leave the result with the Almighty.

We reach the same conclusion by asking, What does God say to the negro-slave?

Does he tell him to ask to be sent back to heathen Africa? No. Does he give him authority to
claim a created equality and unalienable right to be on a level with the white man in civil
and social relations? No. To ask the first would be to ask a great evil; to claim the second
is to demand a natural and moral impossibility. No. God tells him to seek none of these things.
But he commands him to know the facts in his case as they are in the Bible, and have ever been,
and ever will be in Providence:--that he is not the white man's equal,--that he can never have
his level--that he must not claim it; but that he can have, and ought to have, and must have,
all of good, in his condition as a slave, until God may reveal a higher happiness for him in
some other relation than that he must ever have to the Anglo-American. The present slave-holder,
then, by declining to emancipate his bondman, does not place himself in the guilt of the man-stealer
or of those who had complicity with him; but he stands exactly in that NICK of time and place,
in the course of Providence, where wrong, in the transmission of African slavery, ends, and
right begins.

I have, sir, fairly stated this, your strongest argument, and fully met it. The Southern master
is not a man-stealer. The abolitionist--repulsed in his charge that the slave-owner is a kidnapper,
either in fact or by voluntarily assuming any of the relations of the traffic--then makes his
impeachment on his second affirmation, mentioned at the opening of this letter. That the slave-holder
is, nevertheless, thus guilty, because, in the simple fact of being a master, he steals from
the negro his unalienable right to freedom.

This, sir, looks like a new view of the subject. The crime forbidden in the Bible was stealing
and selling a man; i.e. seizing and forcibly carrying away, from country or State, a human
being--man, woman, or child--contrary to law, and selling or holding the same. But the abolitionist
gives us to understand this crime rests on the slave-holder in another sense:--namely, that
he steals from the negro a metaphysical attribute,--his unalienable right to liberty!

This is a new sort of kidnapping. This is, I suppose, stealing the man from himself, as it
is sometimes elegantly expressed,--robbing him of his body and his soul. Sir, I admit this
is a strong figure of speech, a beautiful personification, a sonorous rhetorical flourish,
which must make a deep impression on Dr. Cheever's people, Broadway, New York, and on your
congregation, Washington Square, Philadelphia; but it is certainly not the Bible crime of man-stealing.
And whether the Southern master is guilty of this sublimated thing will be understood by us
when you prove that the negro, or anybody else, has such metaphysical right to be stolen,--such
transcendental liberty not in subordination to the good of the whole people. In a word, sir,
this refined expression is, after all, just the old averment that the slave-holder is guilty
of sin per se! That's it.

I have given you, in reply, the Old Testament. In my next, I propose to inquire what the New
Testament says in the light of the Golden Rule.

F.A. Ross.

Huntsville, Ala., Jan. 31, 1857.

The Golden Rule.

This view of the Golden Rule is the only exposition of that great text which has ever been
given in words sufficiently clear, and, with practical illustrations, to make the subject intelligible
to every capacity. The explanation is the truth of God, and it settles forever the slavery
question, so far as it rests on this precept of Jesus Christ.

No. IV.

Rev. Albert Barnes:--

Dear Sir:--The argument against slave-holding, founded on the Golden Rule, is the strongest
which can be presented, and I admit that, if it cannot be perfectly met, the master must give
the slave liberty and equality. But if it can be absolutely refuted, then the slave-holder
in this regard may have a good conscience; and the abolitionist has nothing more to say. Here
is the rule.

This, sir, is your exposition of the Savior's rule of right. With all due respect, I decline
your interpretation. You have missed the meaning by leaving out ONE word. Observe,--you do
not say, All that you OUGHT to expect or desire, &c., THAT do to them. No. But you make the
EXPECTATION or DESIRE, which every man ACTUALLY HAS in similar circumstances, THE MEASURE of
his DUTY to every other man. Or, in different words, you make, without qualification or explanation,
the MERE EXPECTATION or DESIRE which every man,--with no instruction, or any sort of training,--wise
or simple, good or bad, heathen, Mohammedan, nominal Christian,--WOULD HAVE in similar circumstances,
THE LAW OF OBLIGATION, always binding upon him TO DO THAT SAME THING unto his neighbor!

Sir, you have left out the very idea which contains the sense of that Scripture. It is this:
Christ, in his rule, presupposes that the man to whom he gives it knows, and from the Bible,
(or providence, or natural conscience, so far as in harmony with the Bible,) the various relations
in which God has placed him; and the respective duties in those relations; i.e. The rule assumes
that he KNOWS what he OUGHT to expect or desire in similar circumstances.

I will test this affirmation by several and varied illustrations. I will show how Christ, according
to your exposition of his rule, speaks on the subject,--of revenge, marriage, emancipation,--the
fugitive from bondage. And how he truly speaks on these subjects.

Revenge--Right according to your view of the Golden Rule.

Indian and Missionary--Prisoner tied to a tree, stuck over with burning splinters.

Here is an Indian torturing his prisoner. The missionary approaches and beseeches him to regard
the Golden Rule. "Humph!" utters the savage: "Golden Rule! what's that?" "Why" says the good
man, "all that you expect or desired other Indians, in similar circumstances, do you even so
to them." "Humph!" growls the warrior, with a fierce smile,--"Missionary--good: that's what
I do now. If I was tied to that tree, I would expect and desire him to have his revenge,--to
do to me as I do to him; and I would sing my death-song, as he sings his. Missionary, your
rule is Indian rule,--good rule, missionary. Humph!" And he sticks more splinters into his
victim, brandishes his tomahawk, and yells.

Sir, what has the missionary to say, after this perfect proof that you have mistaken the great
law of right? Verily, he finds that the rule, with your explanation, tells the Indian to torture
his prisoner. Verily, he finds that the wild man has the best of the argument. He finds he
had left out the word OUGHT; and that he can't put it in, until he teaches the Indian things
which as yet he don't know. Yea, he finds he gave the commandment too soon; for that he must
begin back of that commandment, and teach the savage God's ordination of the relations in which
he is to his fellow-men, before he can make him comprehend or apply the rule as Christ gives it.

Marriage--Void under your Interpretation of the Golden Rule.

Lucy Stone, and Moses--Lady on sofa, having just divorced herself--Moses, with the Tables of
the Law, appears: she falls at his feet, and covers her face with her hands.

This woman, everybody knows, was married some time since, after a fashion; that is to say,
protesting publicly against all laws of wedlock, and entering into the relation so long only
as she, or her husband, might continue pleased therewith.

Very well. Then I, without insult to her or offense to my readers, suppose that about this
time she has shown her unalienable right to liberty and equality by giving her husband a bill
of divorcement. Free again, she reclines on her couch, and is reading the Tribune. It is mid-day.
But there is a light, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about her. And he, who
saw God on Sinai, stands before her, the glory on his face, and the tables of stone in his
hands. The woman falls before him, veils her eyes with her trembling fingers, and cries out,
"Moses, oh, I believed till now that thou practised deception, in claiming to be sent of God
to Israel. But now, I know thou didst see God in the burning bush, and heard him speak that
law from the holy mountain. Moses, I know ... I confess.".... And Moses answers, and says unto
her, "Woman, thou art one of a great class in this land, who claim to be more just than God,
more pure than their Maker, who have made their inward light their God. Woman, thou in 'convention'
hast uttered Declaration of Independence from man. And, verily, thou hast asserted this claim
to equality and unalienable right, even now, by giving thy husband his bill of divorcement,
in thy sense of the Golden Rule. Yea, verily, thou hast done unto him all that thou expectedst
or desiredst of him, in similar circumstances. And now thou thinkest thyself free again. Woman,
thou art a sinner. Verily, thine inward light, and declaration of independence, and Golden
Rule, do well agree the one with the other. Verily, thou hast learned of Jefferson, and Channing,
and Barnes. But, woman, notwithstanding thou hast sat at the feet of these wise men, I, Moses,
say thou art a sinner before the law, and the prophets, and the gospel. Woman, thy light is
darkness; thy declaration of equality and right is vanity and folly; and thy Golden Rule is
license to wickedness.

"Woman, hast thou ears? Hear: I, by authority of God, ordained that the man should rule over
thee. I placed thee, and children, and men-servants, and maid-servants, under the same law
of subjection to the government ordained of God in the family,--the state. I for a time sanctioned
polygamy, and made it right. I, for the hardness of men's hearts, allowed them, and made it
right, to give their wives a bill of divorcement. Woman, hear. Paul, having the same Spirit
of God, confirms my word. The manner of the rule he varies with the relations. He requires
it to be, in the love of the husband, even as Christ loved the church,--in the mildness of
the father, not provoking the children to anger, lest they be discouraged,--in the justice
and equity of the master, knowing that he also has a master in heaven: (Colossians.) Woman,
hear. Paul says to thee, the man now shall have one wife, and he now shall not give her a bill
of divorcement, save for crime. Woman, thou art not free from thy husband. Christ's Golden
Rule must not be interpreted by thee as A. Barnes has rendered it; Christ assumes that thou
believest God's truth,--that thou knowest the relation of husband and wife, and the obligations
and rights of the same, as in the Bible; then, in the light of this knowledge, verily, thou
art required to do what God says thou oughtest to do. Woman, thou art a sinner. Go, sin no
more. Go, find thy husband; see to it that he takes thee back. Go, submit to him, and honor
him, and obey him."

Emancipation--Ruin--Golden Rule, in your meaning, carried out.

Island in the Tropics--Elegant houses falling to decay--Broad fields abandoned to the forest--Wharves
grass-grown--Negroes relapsing into the savage state--A dark cloud over the island, through
which the lightning glares, revealing, in red writing, these words:--"Redeemed, regenerated,
and disenthralled by the irresistible genius of universal emancipation".--[Gospel--according
to Curran--and the British Parliament.]

Jamaica, sir, to say nothing of St. Domingo, is illustration of your theory of the Golden Rule,
in negro emancipation. You tell the Southern master that all he would expect or desire, if
he were a slave, he must do unto his bondman; that he must not pause to ask whether the relation
of master and slave be ordained of God or not. No. You tell him, if he would expect or desire
liberty were he a slave, that settles the question as to what he is to do! He must let his
bondman go free. Yea, that is what you teach: because the moment you put in the word OUGHT,
and say, all that you OUGHT to expect or desire,--i.e. all that you know God commands you to
expect  or desire in your relations to men, as established by him,--THAT do to them. Sir, when
you thus explain the Golden Rule, then your argument against slave-holding, so far as founded
on this rule, is at once arrested; it is stopped short, in full career; it has to wait for
reinforcement of FACT, which may never come up. For, suppose the FACT to be, that the relation
of master and slave is one mode of the government ordained of God. Then, sir, the master, knowing
that FACT, and knowing what the slave, as a slave, OUGHT to expect or desire, he, the master,
then FULFILS THE GOLDEN RULE when he does that unto his slave which, in similar circumstances,
he OUGHT to expect to be done unto himself. Now comes the question, OUGHT he then to expect
or desire liberty and equality? THAT is the question of questions on this subject. And without
hesitation I reply, The Golden Rule DECIDES that question YEA or NAY, absolutely and perfectly,
as God's word or providence shows that the GOOD of the family, the community, the state, REQUIRES
that the slave IS or IS NOT to be set free and made equal. THAT GOOD, as God reveals it, SETTLES
THE QUESTION.

Let the master then see to it, how he hears God's word as to THAT GOOD. Let him see to it,
how he understands God's providence as to THAT GOOD. Let him see to it, that he makes no mistake
as to THAT GOOD. For God will not hold him guiltless, if he will not hear what he tells him
as to THAT GOOD. God will not justify him, if he has a bad conscience or blunders in his philosophy.
God will punish him, if he fails to bless his land by letting the bond go free when, he OUGHT
to emancipate. And God will punish him, if he brings a curse upon his country by freeing his
slave when he OUGHT NOT to give him liberty.

So, then, the Golden Rule does not, OF ITSELF, reveal to man at all what are his RELATIONS
to his fellow-men; but it tells him what he is to DO, when he ALREADY KNOWS THEM.

So, then, you, sir, cannot be permitted to tell the world that this rule must emancipate all
the negro slaves in the United States,--no matter how unprepared they may be,--no matter how
degraded,--no matter how unlike and unequal to the white man by creation,--no matter if it
be a natural and moral impossibility,--no matter: the Golden Rule must emancipate by authority
of the first sentiments of the Declaration of Independence, and by obligation of the great
law of liberty,--the intuitional consciousness of the eternal right!

No. The Rule, as said, presupposes that he who is required to obey it does already know the
relations in which God has placed him, and the respective duties in those conditions. Has God,
then, established the relations of husband and wife, parent and child, master and slave? Yes.
Then the command comes. It says to the husband, To aid you in your known obligations to your
wife,--to give you a lively sense of it,--suppose yourself to be the wife: whatsoever, therefore,
you OUGHT, in that condition, to expect or desire, that, as husband, do unto your wife. It
says to the parent, Imagine yourself the child; and whatsoever, as such, you OUGHT to expect
or desire, that, as parent, do unto your child. It says to the master, Put yourself in the
place of your slave; and whatsoever you OUGHT, in that condition, to expect or desire, that,
as master, do unto your slave. Let husband, parent, master, know his obligations from God,
and obey the Rule.

Fugitive Slave--Obeying the Golden Rule under your version.

Honorable Joshua R. Giddings and the Angel of the Lord--Hon. Gentleman at table--Nine runaway
negroes dining with him--The Angel, uninvited, comes in and disturbs the feast.

Giddings has boasted in Congress of having had nine fugitive slaves to break bread with him
at one time. I choose, then, to imagine that, during the dinner, the angel who found Hagar
by the fountain stands suddenly in the midst, and says to the negroes, "Ye slaves, whence came
ye, and whither will ye go?" And they answer and say, "We flee from the face of our masters.
This abolitionist told us to kill, and steal, and run away from bondage; and we have murdered
and stolen and escaped. He, thou seest, welcomes us to liberty and equality. We expect and
desire to be members of Congress, Governors of States, to marry among the great, and one of
us to be President. Giddings, and all abolitionists, tell us that these honors belong to us
equally as to white people, and will be given under the Golden Rule." And the angel of the
Lord says to them, "Ye slaves, return unto your masters, and submit yourselves under their
hands. I sent your fathers, and I send you, into bondage. I mean it unto good, and I will bring
it to pass to save much people alive." Then, turning to the tempter, he says, "Thou, a statesman!
thou, a reader of my word and providence! why hast thou not understood my speech to Hagar?
I gave her, a slave, to Sarah. She fled from her mistress. I sent her back. Why hast thou not
understood my word four thousand years ago,--that the slave shall not flee from his master?
I commanded, Israel, in such case, not to hold him in bondage. I made this specific law for
this specific fact. Why hast thou taught that, in this commandment, I gave license to all men-servants
and maid-servants in the whole land of Israel to run away from their masters? Why hast thou
thus made me, in one saying, contradict and make void all my laws wherein I ordained that the
Hebrews should be slave-owners over their brethren during years, and over the heathen forever?
Why hast thou in all this changed my Golden Rule? I, in that rule, assume that men know from
revelation and providence the relations in which I have placed them, and their duties therein.
I then command them to do unto others what they thus know they ought to do unto them in these
relations; and I make the obligation quick and powerful, by telling every man to imagine himself
in such conditions, and then he will the better KNOW 'whatsoever' he should do unto his neighbor.
Why hast thou made void my law, by making me say, 'All that thou expectest or desirest of others,
in similar circumstances, do to them'? I never imagined to give such license to folly and sin.
Why hast thou imagined such license to iniquity? Verily, thou tempter, thou hast in thy Golden
Rule made these slaves thieves and murderers, and art now eating with them the bread of sin
and death.

"Why hast thou tortured my speech wherein I say that I have made of one blood all nations of
men, to mean that I have created all men equal and endowed them with rights unalienable save
in their consent? I never said that thing! I said that I made all men to descend from one parentage!
That is what I say in that place! Why hast thou tortured that plain truth? Thou mightest as
well teach that all 'the moving creatures that have life, and fowl that fly above the earth,
in the open firmament of heaven,' are created equal, because I said I brought them forth of
the water. Thou mightest as well say that 'all cattle, and creeping thing and beast of the
earth, are created equal, because I said I brought them forth of the earth, as to affirm the
equality of men because I say they are of one blood. Nay, I have made men unequal as the leaves
of the trees, the sands of the sea, the stars of heaven. I have made them so, in harmony with
the infinite variety and inequality in every thing in my creation. And I have made them unequal
in my mercy. Had I made all men equal in attributes of body and mind, then unfallen man would
never have realized the varied glories of his destiny. And had I given fallen man equality
of nature and unalienable rights, then I had made the earth an Aceldama and Valley of Gehenna.
For what would be the strife in all the earth among men equal in body and mind, equal in power,
equal in depravity, equal in will, each one maintaining rights unalienable? When would the
war end? Who would be the victors where all are giants? Who would sue for peace where none
will submit? What would be human social life? Who would be the weak, the loving? Who would
seek or need forbearance, compassion, self-denying benevolence? Who would be the grateful?
Who would be the humble, the meek? What would be human virtue, what human vice, what human
joy or sorrow? Nay, I have made men unequal and given them alienable rights, that I might INSTITUTE
HUMAN GOVERNMENT and reveal HUMAN CHARACTER.

"Why hast thou been willingly ignorant of these first principles of the oracles of God, which
would have made thee truly a Christian philosopher and statesman?"

Fugitive Slave--Obeying the Golden Rule as Christ gave it

Rev. A. Barnes and the Apostle Paul--Minister of the gospel in his study--Fugitive slave, converted
under his preaching, inquiring whether it is not his duty to return to his master--Paul appears
and rebukes the minister for wresting his Gospel. 

He had examined Everard on oath, and the result of the examination being then openly read, it was
resolved to lay the same before parliament.(851) Accordingly, on the 27th, Everard’s information,
which was nothing more nor less than a threat which he had overheard some officers make of disarming
and plundering the city, was laid before both Houses, together with a petition from the municipal
authorities that the chains which had been recently removed from
the streets of the city by order of parliament might be restored for
the purpose of defence, that the army should be removed to a greater
distance, and that Skippon might be placed in command of the city’s
forces.(852) There was nothing to be gained by opposing the city’s
wishes in the matter of replacing the chains and the appointment of
Skippon, so that these concessions were readily made, but the question
of removing the army could only be decided with the concurrence of
the army itself.

(M425)

A member of the Common Council, Philip Chetwyn, was charged with having
publicly declared that Skippon’s appointment was not the real wish
of the court, and that "seaven lies" had been voted by the court on
the 11th April last.(853) Chetwyn gave an emphatic denial to the first
charge, and eventually both charges were allowed to drop.

The council at the same time passed a resolution to the effect that whenever a charge should
in future be made by one member of the court against another, and the court take cognisance of it, the
charge itself and the names of the accuser and the accused should be expressed in the order of the
court.(854)

(M426) (M427)

The City lost no time in availing itself of the assent of parliament to replace the chains in
the streets from which they had been removed. They went further than this. From Saturday night
to the following Monday night (28-30 May) the gates and posterns were ordered to be kept closed
and guarded, the names of all lodgers were to be taken, vagrant soldiers were to be ordered
to their quarters, whilst servants and children were to be confined indoors, except on the Sunday
that intervened, when they might be escorted to church by their parents or masters.(855) The
reason for these precautions was that there had been unmistakable signs of the army getting out
of hand. Yea, verily,--and
I say to thee, Albert Barnes, thou hast never been in the South, and thou dost not understand,
and canst not understand, the force, or even the meaning, of my words in the flesh; i.e. in
the love of the master and the slave to one another. But Philemon I knew would feel its power,
and so I made that appeal to him.

"Why hast thou said, that I did not send Onesimus back by authority? I did send him back by
authority,--yea, by authority of the Lord Jesus Christ? For it was my duty to send him again
to Philemon, whether he had been willing to go or not; and it was his duty to go. But he was
willing. So we both felt our obligations; and, when I commanded, he cheerfully obeyed. What
else was my duty and his? (Coloss. iii. 18.) Onesimus had broken these commandments when he
fled from his master. Was it not then of my responsibility to send him again to Philemon? And
was it not Christ's law to him to return and submit himself under his master's hand?

"Why, then, hast thou not understood my speech? Has it been even because thou couldst not hear
my word? What else has hindered? What more could I have said, than (in 1 Tim. vi. 1-5) I do
say, to rebuke all abolitionists? Yea, I describe them--I show their principles--as fully as
if I had called them by name in Boston, in New York, in Philadelphia, and said they would live
in 1857.

"And yet thou hast, in thy commentary on my letter to Timothy, utterly distorted, maimed, and
falsified my meaning. Thou hast mingled truth and untruth so together as to make me say what
was not and is not in my mind. For thou teachest the slave, while professing not so to teach
him, that I tell him that he is not to count his master worthy of all honor; that he is to
despise him; that he is not to do him service as to a Christian faithful and beloved. No. But
thou teachest the slave, in my name, to regard his Christian master an offender in the sight
of Christ, if he continues a slave-owner.

"Thou tellest him to obey only in the sense in which he is to submit to injustice, oppression,
and cruelty; and that he is ever to seek to throw off the yoke in his created equality and
unalienable right to liberty. (See Notes.)

"This is what thou hast taught as my gospel. But I commanded thee to teach and exhort just
the contrary. These things teach and exhort.'

"Thou, in thy 'Notes,' art compelled, though most unwillingly, to confess that I do mean slaves
in this place, in the full and proper sense; yea, slaves under the Roman law. Good. Then do
I here tell slaves to count their masters, even when not Christians, worthy of all honor; and,
when Christians, to regard them as faithful and beloved, and not to despise them, and to do
them service? Yet, after all this, do I say to these same slaves that they have a created equality
and unalienable right to liberty, under which, whenever they think fit, I command them to dishonor
their masters, despise them, and run away! Sir, I did never so instruct slaves; nay, I did
never command thee so to teach them. What more can I say to them in this day? That which was
true of them two thousand years ago, is true now. I rebuked abolitionists then, and I rebuke
them now. I tell them the things in their hearts,--the things on their tongues,--the things
in their hands,--are contrary to wholesome words, even the words of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Canst thou hear my words in this place without feeling how faithfully I have given the head,
and the heart, and the words, and the doings of the men, from whom thou hast not withdrawn thyself?

"Verily, thou canst not hear my speech, and therefore thou canst not interpret my gospel. Thou
believest it is impossible that I sanction slavery! Hence it is impossible for thee to understand
my words: for I do sanction slavery. How? Thus:--

"I found slavery in Asia, in Greece, in Rome. I saw it to be one mode of the government ordained
of God. I regarded it, in most conditions of fallen mankind, necessarily and irresistibly part
of such government, and therefore as natural, as wise, as good, in such conditions, as the
other ways men are ruled in the state or the family.

"I took up slavery, then, as such ordained government,--wise, good, yea best, in certain circumstances,
until, in the elevating spirit and power of my gospel, the slave is made fit for the liberty
and equality of his master, if he can be so lifted up. Hence I make the RULE of magistrate,
subject, master and servant, parent and child, husband and wife, THE SAME RULE; i.e. I make
it THE SAME RIGHT in the superior to control the obedience and the service of the inferior,
bound to obey, whatever the difference in the relations and service to be rendered. There the
four aldermen remained prisoners until a crisis arrived in the following June, when the Commons,
fearing to alienate the city at a time when the enemy was almost at its gates, declared (3 June)
that they would proceed no further with the charges.(847) The Lords thereupon ordered (6 June)
their discharge and their impeachments to be vacated.(848)

(M420)
Gayer did not live long to enjoy his liberty. By his will, dated
the 19th December following his discharge, he left a sum of £200 for
the purchase of lands or tenements the rents of which were to be devoted
to the preaching of a sermon on the 16th October of every year in
the church of St. Catherine Cree in commemoration of the testator’s
escape from a lion whilst travelling in Africa. In my gospel I condemn
wrong in all these states of life, while I fully sanction and sustain the relations themselves.
I tell the magistrate, husband, father, master, how to rule; I tell the subject, wife, child,
servant, how to submit. Hence, I command the slave not to flee from bondage, just as I require
the subject, the wife, the child, not to resist or flee from obedience. I warn the slave, if
he leaves his master he has sinned, and must return; and I make it the duty of all men to see
to it, that he shall go back. Hence, I myself did what I command others to do: I sent Onesimus
back to his master.

"Thus I sanction slavery everywhere in the New Testament. But it is impossible for thee, with
thy principles,--thy law of reason,--thy law of created equality and unalienable right,--thy
elevation of the Declaration of Independence above the ordinance of God,--to sustain slavery.
Nay, it is impossible for thee, with thy interpretation of Christ's Golden Rule, to recognise
the system of servile labor; nay, it is impossible for thee to tell this slave to return to
his master as I sent Onesimus back; nay, thou art guarded by thy Golden Rule. Thou tellest
him that, if thou hadst been in his place, thou wouldst have expected, desired freedom, that
thou wouldst have run away, and that thou wouldst not now return; that thou wouldst have regarded
thy created equality and unalienable right as thy supreme law, and have disregarded and scorned
all other obligations as pretended revelation from God. Therefore thou now doest unto him 'whatsoever'
thou wouldst expect or desire him to do unto thee in similar circumstances; i.e. thou tellest
him he did right to run away, and will do right not to return! This is thy Golden Rule. But
I did not instruct thee so to learn Christ. Nay, this slave knows thou hast not not given him
the mind of Christ; nay, he knows that Christ commands thee to send him to his master again.
And thus do what thou OUGHTEST to expect or desire in similar circumstances; yea, do now thy
duty, and this slave, like Onesimus, will bless thee for giving him a good conscience whenever
he will return to his obedience. Thus Paul, the aged, speaks to thee."

So, then, the Golden Rule is the whole Bible; yea, Christ says it is-"the law and the prophets;"
yea, it is the Old Testament and the New condensed; and with ever-increasing glory of Providence
in one sublime aphorism, which can be understood and obeyed only by those who know what the
Bible, or Providence, reveals as to man's varied conditions and his obligations therein.

I think, sir, I have refuted your interpretation of the Golden Rule, and have given its true
meaning.

The slave-holder, then, may have a good conscience under this commandment. Let him so exercise
himself as to have a conscience void of offence towards God and towards men.

Yours, &c. F.A. Ross.

Conclusion. 

I protest, off goes your head as round as a hoop!"(1061) The ill-timed jest, which the earl passed
off with a laugh, was wanting in fulfilment, for he lived to witness the Restoration and to earn
the universal hatred of his countrymen.


The End.

