A TANGLED TALE

[Decoration]

   A TANGLED TALE

   BY

   LEWIS CARROLL

   WITH SIX ILLUSTRATIONS

   BY

   ARTHUR B. FROST

   Hoc meum tale quale est accipe.

   SECOND THOUSAND.

   London
   MACMILLAN AND CO.
   1885

   [All Rights Reserved]

   RICHARD CLAY & SONS,
   BREAD STREET HILL, LONDON, E.C.

   And Bungay, Suffolk.

To My Pupil.

   Beloved pupil! Tamed by thee,
     Addish-, Subtrac-, Multiplica-tion,
   Division, Fractions, Rule of Three,
     Attest thy deft manipulation!

   Then onward! Let the voice of Fame
     From Age to Age repeat thy story,
   Till thou hast won thyself a name
     Exceeding even Euclid's glory!

PREFACE.

This Tale originally appeared as a serial in The Monthly Packet, beginning in April, 1880.
The writer's intention was to embody in each Knot (like the medicine so dexterously, but ineffectually,
concealed in the jam of our early childhood) one or more mathematical questions--in Arithmetic,
Algebra, or Geometry, as the case might be--for the amusement, and possible edification, of
the fair readers of that Magazine.

                                                           L. C.

   October, 1885.

CONTENTS.

   KNOT                                  PAGE

      I. EXCELSIOR                          1

     II. ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS                4

    III. MAD MATHESIS                      13

     IV. THE DEAD RECKONING                19

      V. OUGHTS AND CROSSES                27

     VI. HER RADIANCY                      34

    VII. PETTY CASH                        43

   VIII. DE OMNIBUS REBUS                  52

     IX. A SERPENT WITH CORNERS            58

      X. CHELSEA BUNS                      66

   ANSWERS TO KNOT    I.                   77

      "        "     II.                   84

      "        "    III.                   90

      "        "     IV.                   96

      "        "      V.                  102

      "        "     VI.                  106

      "        "    VII.                  112

      "        "   VIII.                  132

      "        "     IX.                  135

      "        "      X.                  142

A TANGLED TALE.

KNOT I.

EXCELSIOR.

"Goblin, lead them up and down."

The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading into the sombre shadows of night, when two travellers
might have been observed swiftly--at a pace of six miles in the hour--descending the rugged
side of a mountain; the younger bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn, while
his companion, whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease in the heavy chain armour habitually worn
by tourists in that district, toiled on painfully at his side.

As is always the case under such circumstances, the younger knight was the first to break the
silence.

"A goodly pace, I trow!" he exclaimed. "We sped not thus in the ascent!"

"Goodly, indeed!" the other echoed with a groan. "We clomb it but at three miles in the hour."

"And on the dead level our pace is----?" the younger suggested; for he was weak in statistics,
and left all such details to his aged companion.

"Four miles in the hour," the other wearily replied. "Not an ounce more," he added, with that
love of metaphor so common in old age, "and not a farthing less!"

"'Twas three hours past high noon when we left our hostelry," the young man said, musingly.
"We shall scarce be back by supper-time. Perchance mine host will roundly deny us all food!"

"He will chide our tardy return," was the grave reply, "and such a rebuke will be meet."

"A brave conceit!" cried the other, with a merry laugh. "And should we bid him bring us yet
another course, I trow his answer will be tart!"

"We shall but get our deserts," sighed the elder knight, who had never seen a joke in his life,
and was somewhat displeased at his companion's untimely levity. "'Twill be nine of the clock,"
he added in an undertone, "by the time we regain our hostelry. Full many a mile shall we have
plodded this day!"

"How many? How many?" cried the eager youth, ever athirst for knowledge.

The old man was silent.

"Tell me," he answered, after a moment's thought, "what time it was when we stood together
on yonder peak. Not exact to the minute!" he added hastily, reading a protest in the young
man's face. "An' thy guess be within one poor half-hour of the mark, 'tis all I ask of thy
mother's son! Then will I tell thee, true to the last inch, how far we shall have trudged betwixt
three and nine of the clock."

A groan was the young man's only reply; while his convulsed features and the deep wrinkles
that chased each other across his manly brow, revealed the abyss of arithmetical agony into
which one chance question had plunged him.

KNOT II.

ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS.

   "Straight down the crooked lane,
   And all round the square."

"Let's ask Balbus about it," said Hugh.

"All right," said Lambert.

"He can guess it," said Hugh.

"Rather," said Lambert.

No more words were needed: the two brothers understood each other perfectly.

Balbus was waiting for them at the hotel: the journey down had tired him, he said: so his two
pupils had been the round of the place, in search of lodgings, without the old tutor who had
been their inseparable companion from their childhood. They had named him after the hero of
their Latin exercise-book, which overflowed with anecdotes of that versatile genius--anecdotes
whose vagueness in detail was more than compensated by their sensational brilliance. "Balbus
has overcome all his enemies" had been marked by their tutor, in the margin of the book, "Successful
Bravery." In this way he had tried to extract a moral from every anecdote about Balbus--sometimes
one of warning, as in "Balbus had borrowed a healthy dragon," against which he had written
"Rashness in Speculation"--sometimes of encouragement, as in the words "Influence of Sympathy
in United Action," which stood opposite to the anecdote "Balbus was assisting his mother-in-law
to convince the dragon"--and sometimes it dwindled down to a single word, such as "Prudence,"
which was all he could extract from the touching record that "Balbus, having scorched the tail
of the dragon, went away." His pupils liked the short morals best, as it left them more room
for marginal illustrations, and in this instance they required all the space they could get
to exhibit the rapidity of the hero's departure.

Their report of the state of things was discouraging. That most fashionable of watering-places,
Little Mendip, was "chockfull" (as the boys expressed it) from end to end. But in one Square
they had seen no less than four cards, in different houses, all announcing in flaming capitals
"ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS." "So there's plenty of choice, after all, you see," said spokesman Hugh
in conclusion.

"That doesn't follow from the data," said Balbus, as he rose from the easy chair, where he
had been dozing over The Little Mendip Gazette. "They may be all single rooms. However, we
may as well see them. I shall be glad to stretch my legs a bit."

An unprejudiced bystander might have objected that the operation was needless, and that this
long, lank creature would have been all the better with even shorter legs: but no such thought
occurred to his loving pupils. One on each side, they did their best to keep up with his gigantic
strides, while Hugh repeated the sentence in their father's letter, just received from abroad,
over which he and Lambert had been puzzling. "He says a friend of his, the Governor of----what
was that name again, Lambert?" ("Kgovjni," said Lambert.) "Well, yes.

There was an anxious pause. "How large did he say the pudding was to be?" Balbus said at last.
"Take its cubical contents, divide by the cubical contents of what each man can eat, and the
quotient----"

"He didn't say anything about pudding," said Hugh, "--and here's the Square," as they turned
a corner and came into sight of the "eligible apartments."

"It is a Square!" was Balbus' first cry of delight, as he gazed around him. "Beautiful! Beau-ti-ful!
Equilateral! And rectangular!"

The boys looked round with less enthusiasm. "Number nine is the first with a card," said prosaic
Lambert; but Balbus would not so soon awake from his dream of beauty.

"See, boys!" he cried. "Twenty doors on a side! What symmetry! Each side divided into twenty-one
equal parts! It's delicious!"

"Shall I knock, or ring?" said Hugh, looking in some perplexity at a square brass plate which
bore the simple inscription "RING ALSO."

"Both," said Balbus. "That's an Ellipsis, my boy. Did you never see an Ellipsis before?"

"I couldn't hardly read it," said Hugh, evasively. "It's no good having an Ellipsis, if they
don't keep it clean."

"Which there is one room, gentlemen," said the smiling landlady. "And a sweet room too! As
snug a little back-room----"

"We will see it," said Balbus gloomily, as they followed her in. "I knew how it would be! One
room in each house! No view, I suppose?"

"Which indeed there is, gentlemen!" the landlady indignantly protested, as she drew up the
blind, and indicated the back garden.

"Cabbages, I perceive," said Balbus. "Well, they're green, at any rate."

"Which the greens at the shops," their hostess explained, "are by no means dependable upon.
Here you has them on the premises, and of the best."

"Does the window open?" was always Balbus' first question in testing a lodging: and "Does the
chimney smoke?" his second. Satisfied on all points, he secured the refusal of the room, and
they moved on to Number Twenty-five.

This landlady was grave and stern. "I've nobbut one room left," she told them: "and it gives
on the back-gyardin."

"But there are cabbages?" Balbus suggested.

The landlady visibly relented. "There is, sir," she said: "and good ones, though I say it as
shouldn't. We can't rely on the shops for greens. So we grows them ourselves."

"A singular advantage," said Balbus: and, after the usual questions, they went on to Fifty-two.

"And I'd gladly accommodate you all, if I could," was the greeting that met them. "We are but
mortal," ("Irrelevant!" muttered Balbus) "and I've let all my rooms but one."

"Which one is a back-room, I perceive," said Balbus: "and looking out on--on cabbages, I presume?"

"Yes, indeed, sir!" said their hostess. "Whatever other folks may do, we grows our own. For
the shops----"

"An excellent arrangement!" Balbus interrupted. "Then one can really depend on their being
good. Does the window open?"

The usual questions were answered satisfactorily: but this time Hugh added one of his own invention--"Does
the cat scratch?"

The landlady looked round suspiciously, as if to make sure the cat was not listening, "I will
not deceive you, gentlemen," she said. "It do scratch, but not without you pulls its whiskers!
It'll never do it," she repeated slowly, with a visible effort to recall the exact words of
some written agreement between herself and the cat, "without you pulls its whiskers!"

"Much may be excused in a cat so treated," said Balbus, as they left the house and crossed
to Number Seventy-three, leaving the landlady curtseying on the doorstep, and still murmuring
to herself her parting words, as if they were a form of blessing, "---- not without you pulls
its whiskers!"

At Number Seventy-three they found only a small shy girl to show the house, who said "yes'm"
in answer to all questions.

"The usual room," said Balbus, as they marched in: "the usual back-garden, the usual cabbages.
I suppose you can't get them good at the shops?"

"Yes'm," said the girl.

"Well, you may tell your mistress we will take the room, and that her plan of growing her own
cabbages is simply admirable!"

"Yes'm," said the girl, as she showed them out.

"One day-room and three bed-rooms," said Balbus, as they returned to the hotel. "We will take
as our day-room the one that gives us the least walking to do to get to it."

"Must we walk from door to door, and count the steps?" said Lambert.

"No, no! Figure it out, my boys, figure it out!" Balbus gaily exclaimed, as he put pens, ink,
and paper before his hapless pupils, and left the room.

"I say! It'll be a job!" said Hugh.

"Rather!" said Lambert.

KNOT III.

MAD MATHESIS.

   "I waited for the train."

"Well, they call me so because I am a little mad, I suppose," she said, good-humouredly, in
answer to Clara's cautiously-worded question as to how she came by so strange a nick-name.
"You see, I never do what sane people are expected to do now-a-days. I never wear long trains,
(talking of trains, that's the Charing Cross Metropolitan Station--I've something to tell you
about that), and I never play lawn-tennis. I can't cook an omelette. I can't even set a broken
limb! There's an ignoramus for you!"

Clara was her niece, and full twenty years her junior; in fact, she was still attending a High
School--an institution of which Mad Mathesis spoke with undisguised aversion. "Let a woman
be meek and lowly!" she would say. "None of your High Schools for me!" But it was vacation-time
just now, and Clara was her guest, and Mad Mathesis was showing her the sights of that Eighth
Wonder of the world--London.

"The Charing Cross Metropolitan Station!" she resumed, waving her hand towards the entrance
as if she were introducing her niece to a friend. "The Bayswater and Birmingham Extension is
just completed, and the trains now run round and round continuously--skirting the border of
Wales, just touching at York, and so round by the east coast back to London. The way the trains
run is most peculiar. The westerly ones go round in two hours; the easterly ones take three;
but they always manage to start two trains from here, opposite ways, punctually every quarter-of-an-hour."

"They part to meet again," said Clara, her eyes filling with tears at the romantic thought.

"No need to cry about it!" her aunt grimly remarked. "They don't meet on the same line of rails,
you know. Talking of meeting, an idea strikes me!" she added, changing the subject with her
usual abruptness. "Let's go opposite ways round, and see which can meet most trains. No need
for a chaperon--ladies' saloon, you know. You shall go whichever way you like, and we'll have
a bet about it!"

"I never make bets," Clara said very gravely. "Our excellent preceptress has often warned us----"

"You'd be none the worse if you did!" Mad Mathesis interrupted. "In fact, you'd be the better,
I'm certain!"

"Neither does our excellent preceptress approve of puns," said Clara. "But we'll have a match,
if you like. Let me choose my train," she added after a brief mental calculation, "and I'll
engage to meet exactly half as many again as you do."

"Not if you count fair," Mad Mathesis bluntly interrupted. "Remember, we only count the trains
we meet on the way. You mustn't count the one that starts as you start, nor the one that arrives
as you arrive."

"That will only make the difference of one train," said Clara, as they turned and entered the
station. "But I never travelled alone before. There'll be no one to help me to alight. However,
I don't mind. Let's have a match."

A ragged little boy overheard her remark, and came running after her. "Buy a box of cigar-lights,
Miss!" he pleaded, pulling her shawl to attract her attention. Clara stopped to explain.

"I never smoke cigars," she said in a meekly apologetic tone. "Our excellent preceptress----,"
but Mad Mathesis impatiently hurried her on, and the little boy was left gazing after her with
round eyes of amazement.

The two ladies bought their tickets and moved slowly down the central platform, Mad Mathesis
prattling on as usual--Clara silent, anxiously reconsidering the calculation on which she rested
her hopes of winning the match.

"Mind where you go, dear!" cried her aunt, checking her just in time. "One step more, and you'd
have been in that pail of cold water!"

"I know, I know," Clara said, dreamily. "The pale, the cold, and the moony----"

"Take your places on the spring-boards!" shouted a porter.

"What are they for!" Clara asked in a terrified whisper.

"Merely to help us into the trains." The elder lady spoke with the nonchalance of one quite
used to the process. "Very few people can get into a carriage without help in less than three
seconds, and the trains only stop for one second." At this moment the whistle was heard, and
two trains rushed into the station. A moment's pause, and they were gone again; but in that
brief interval several hundred passengers had been shot into them, each flying straight to
his place with the accuracy of a Minie bullet--while an equal number were showered out upon
the side-platforms.

Three hours had passed away, and the two friends met again on the Charing Cross platform, and
eagerly compared notes. Then Clara turned away with a sigh. To young impulsive hearts, like
hers, disappointment is always a bitter pill. Mad Mathesis followed her, full of kindly sympathy.

"Try again, my love!" she said, cheerily. "Let us vary the experiment. We will start as we
did before, but not to begin counting till our trains meet. When we see each other, we will
say 'One!' and so count on till we come here again."

Clara brightened up. "I shall win that," she exclaimed eagerly, "if I may choose my train!"

Another shriek of engine whistles, another upheaving of spring-boards, another living avalanche
plunging into two trains as they flashed by: and the travellers were off again.

Each gazed eagerly from her carriage window, holding up her handkerchief as a signal to her
friend. A rush and a roar. Two trains shot past each other in a tunnel, and two travellers
leaned back in their corners with a sigh--or rather with two sighs--of relief. "One!" Clara
murmured to herself. "Won! It's a word of good omen. This time, at any rate, the victory will
be mine!"

But was it?

KNOT IV.

THE DEAD RECKONING.

   "I did dream of money-bags to-night."

Noonday on the open sea within a few degrees of the Equator is apt to be oppressively warm;
and our two travellers were now airily clad in suits of dazzling white linen, having laid aside
the chain-armour which they had found not only endurable in the cold mountain air they had
lately been breathing, but a necessary precaution against the daggers of the banditti who infested
the heights. Their holiday-trip was over, and they were now on their way home, in the monthly
packet which plied between the two great ports of the island they had been exploring. »Home
  draw all to watch out for. Come, let
  us cling soul to soul. "

  
  Slow hard into the abyss distance Decreases
  going out of the green hill And
  the kingdom of heaven of the stars Emerged from its dark eyes mirror.

  
  
  An angel has the full circle of love Once
  set on this foolish young head, And that
  he rose exuberantly drives, With his flood
  of tears wetted him rich. The sun set, since we trust
  praised. How green it was, the wreath has
  long faded - - O shame, triumph and humility of proven, The God of
eternal life, the crown last!

  
  
  A death angel, divinely tender and beautiful,
  Do you wear mighty heaven my soul. Through
  all the night, as winds blow, Do you feel
  the way I miss alone. As the stars
  move far, so far! The earth far and away the eternity
  I grasp nothing more than beating of your heart.

  An eagle is the one who rises: days once it
  becomes.

  
  Oh God, a grave wrong song my heart, Because of the earth now, it
takes leave.

  
  

  Has conspired's the wicked masquerade, It takes
  the veil and the rosary.

  
  The monastery's go, shall submit it to the cowl, A's holy will, pray
where you can.

  
  

  Once she is dancing up as a little star
  in the blue; It fell down and died out in the dew.

  
  

  An enthusiast's got into the charmed air,
  Sprayed colored light, now it has faded away!

  
  

  St. John's Beetle was glowing and beautiful;
  Now it is a worm, to look at ugly.

  
  

  As love's nightingales sang all
  the time; now it was an owl and owl calls.

  
  

  Yesterday I cried in the lap of happiness: Oh,
  I miss the sun of your eyes!

  
  Let me, let me feel your sweet proud Golden
  eyes enjoy once more,
  
  I glad the eyes again turn The dance of Weltallsgegenstände,

And
  the bells ring again hear Lovely in the colorful
  world things.
  

  As I saw in the great distance A meadow full of flowers
  star,
  
  About trickles from the sun red, Bienenübersummt
  like a breath of the flute,
  
  And happiness said, Look shalt thou lie And
  snuggle up to two trusted lips.

  

  But once, after long days of summer - - -
  And since nothing was going
  to say anything more.
  

  O blooming heather, wither you will need!
  You have to face star, you also pass
  away? If there was a chance to kiss else but
  you, And to look at other needs than you?

  Your soul eyes, warm light of love,
  You shall go out? never reflect
  The golden blue over these hills? You
  were there, and would remain earth and sky?

  
  
  Now decreases the spring dream faded from all the
  trees, So my heart trembles from a cheer: It must pass
  by that lives in soil areas - I have you, and you
  pass. High on fire on Mount Ararat of love The wild waters
  of the transience, We see the world to our feet
  stranded, Haloed from heaven, the grave of time.

  
  STORM SONG
  
  O roar of the sea and part of the storm And
  err in the fog swarm! In calm harbor,
  under cover of the tower, How narrow and
  poor.
  

  I do not want my pillow Unters head No stepping
  on carpets soft; Has robbed me of the storm,
  the sails - Since I was rich!
  
  O beautiful ride in the breeze Up and down
  and back! Only by fighting, and I lie well,
  Is happiness in life.
  

  You, I belong to, let, if I died, What may
  be left of me, my ashes up to you. And your
  hand to the advertised my life once, Dive
  into the dust that was once your flesh, a. Can
  you see the murky river flood through your hands,
  The former, like spring breeze flame of the young stem,
  In contact with this body ignited the flame,
  Do you feel it suddenly erglühn well in old gluten.

  
  
  How Laodamiens husband for three hours untied
  from the fog lap of death, You published
  as part of me once; And since I still have
  to summon the most intimate sucking on your
  traumesschweren body, Senk you in my heart for
  the last With a dark force, the mitternächtge eye And dive down into
the empty pain!

  
  
  For three days I knelt weeping at the threshold
  And called on the name, once so mild to
  me. Then I pressed the temple last cell Trembling
  and saw the venerated image. The gods
  countenance, the langentbehrte, Revealing
  he was strict in flames shine.

  Only when the flames attacked me, but not consumed,
  Said he: I know you. And you are mine.
  
  It shook the mountain and valleys of thunderstorms
  The light went out in the sky at night. Still
  runs over the distant hills trembling,
  But gently dissolves even the storms battle.
  In fresh entwölkten blue radiates through the crowd Proud of the
stars with a sword cutting and pommel.

  O earth roll, shouting through the sky: The constellation
  of our love for you was on!
  
  Your name, suddenly I hear him speak, Seems to fall from the clouds
like lightning, The seal is broken all the melting, The goals of never
throwing betretnen halls.

  You fall, nice name, not igniting
  In this breast, a ray, an eternally new,
  You shrug and into the soul open out, Wed
  you with their flood your fire.
  
  Me tied to the stake, the love of pain,
  Drilling by the sword, which does
  not kill My bowels, until the sharp stone, On which I kneel, reddens
with blood.

  But I tend thanking me painless; Because
  I see above me like a sun The crown
  of martyrdom dark red roses: My blood in bloom
  that crowns me to bliss.
  
  You came to me, my idol, my snake In a dark night,
  the glowing around you. I love you served with
  exuberance And drank the fire that sprayed your breath.

  You fled, I was looking long in darkness. Since
  I knew the gods and demons That glory, which
  I snatched from thee, And led me into the
  light of posing with you.
  
  As if God beckons, and the rivers and seas of
  the earth Roaring business, fell to the omnipotence
  gesture My blood rushes to you when you wave, from the gorges of
the soul It swells with ardor, turning to your commands.

  
  
  The harp was strung without
  a goal.

  No wehnder wind caused to sound, No
  finger she could get used to the song. You
  put a hand on the banned
  game: The strings that are not comfortable grip, Tremble under you
charmed and alarmed; Suddenly rushed from their sound In rapid swelling
and heavy, dark currents.

  
  
  You went through a rocky valley
  in the fire, Gebundnen foot like a faithless, Eaten dried, languishing,
without an exit Before blatant and contemptuous mockery of the scornful
look.

  Now that the day is drawing on our roads, And
  you, against the head of the holy night,
  Hervortrittst from the merciless gorge
  You shine like the golden immortal gods.
  
  You test me the cup full of rich bitter flames
  And I was left in dark labyrinths. But,
  remember, and come home, I suffered service and fight in foreign-minded
people.

  I wandered in the death shrouded river In the
  cry of the dry leaves, and hoped nothing.
  As you step in front of me, a god of light,
  And glow with diamond kiss me young.
  
  Because our love has flamed too hot We snatched
  the old gods powers. condemned by mortals
  Beat her up in unterirdschen nights.

  
  They blazed like torches over his grave.
  The star army melted away in their breath And she
  was dripping down upon. As painful as our souls
  melted too.
  
  O perfume, O fire! O joy and glory! O agony,
  never close enough so close together!

  Reception at last in full, Abyss of night, in your
  love flames.
  
  The love of the sea does not cease, it swelled, Himself dining, high
to our ways.

  First it wets our feet fully foam, Then
  it began to be at the heart beats. On a Clear
  Day, swelling in his desire Tear it from the
  top of us, the errungnen hardly And flooded the highest happiness
gear Chants and roars us Verschlungnen.

  
  
  In that time, since I no longer called up, I created a sacred vessel
made of fine earth And hid the fact that once burned in you; The flame
that it would kept clean.

  From the oestrus empfangnen blushing shook
  The sacred vessel, but it is not broke in
  two. No spark of my love 'soars!

  Now take it you think it is holy to you.
  
  Schwill to my current, bloated on your pasture,
  Hugging the head and trunk down to you.
  That is not a leaf out of your flood distinguish more Dips
  them in the branches of your grave, sobbing.
  The fact that you were thirsty but how they
  perished! Consume them as they will drink up!

  In bent up, all of you deranged, Devour in your
  soul is still.
  
  I am your shadow is you, me, creates You
  give me the form and degree and moving.
  With you I can only lift and place, I am
  your creature, you will of me and force.
  

  I am to you nestled in your custody, As the
  heavy chains of the foot does not move.
  What do you do me, I fight not preclude By your command revived and
carried off.

  
  
  But I am yours, also you're one of yours.

  You can not run away from me, I would gain
  up again, Cast me not, I'd re-elected.
  
  As long as stars shine on Sundays and up, Do you see inseparable at
your feet The lover, born for you from yourself.

  
  
  You will let fragrance and harmony, where you went, The air that surrounded
you is sweet and drunk.

  What do you embraced with your golden
  eye, Ward crowded mature love sparks. It
  blooms and glows and swells and sounds and lights To your appearance
here and your name.

  You pour out, moistened with life jam O fruit
  of paradise, the beauty of seeds.
  

  You were, my hands, the dove, which I cherished, With milk and honey,
bread and wine.

  You gave what granted intoxication and sobriety
  And that spells the dedicate to love.
  You gave me a fatal heat poured into the heart,
  But your arm was the night escort; The meat that fed you that you
enjoyed Betaust you over there with immortality.

  
  
  If ever a beautiful succeeded to make
  me Was it because I gave your being, With my soul enraptured me into
you,

And, as the wine after the grape harvests And bathed in purple
glow varies Spirit As patients who recovered after a deep sleep,

As
a lover, the invite God to He dealt at the table of the golden flower
nectar, - I came back blessed with harmony, Live births fire waves
in the mind.

  
  
  The mortals, which would be costly to the Olympian, In his deity craves
splendor of her, Melted, he came to be unbearable fire.

  
  
  I am standing forever in flames.

  From your eyes imbued gods way Kindled this
  body that passes always
  
  again clear of the blaze, which it conquered.

  Extinguished the blaze and not bathing
  in Lethe, The pain I feel blessed swallowed
  cool
  

  Still heavy with earth joy even in grace.
  
  As a satrap of the bride's body is adorned, That he erschimmert under
Goldgehängen, A breathing statue, thus displace my flesh The kisses
that your lips pressed him.

  
  
  Ambrosially was that you dipped in fire, With tears cords wrapped
around a hundred times, That you have bathed in caresses This breathy
thy breath their fragrance.

  
  
  It does not age and you will never mean,
  Degraded through the years, constant pressure.

  The time must be serving beautify my body:
  
  The sweet light bestowed his appearance, The
  richer it hides the love of jewelry, And crown thy grace his humility.

  
  
  How does the sacrificing spring from the sun
  On hills, sweet incense, self-consumed, I surrender you, O Lord,
my desire, The erschloßne love your eyes delight.

  
  
  In your flame I threw my flowers. Your Divine
  Fire enjoys storming fast The soft pile which sprouts from my heart:
Myself because, as you love me, guard!

  
  
  Let to, o ardor, lest I die! Long With new
  victims up reverently, I have, what was mine, given your desire;

Do
not ask me all you receive, My life, too. - You deny shaking The head
and said: Love! why live?

  
  
  You were only short days, my companion, But my nature is so irradiated
by you, And that painted your picture in my deeds, As if life lasted
you are near.

  
  
  Thus, sprayed into the glass, a drop of wine Sobriety is in the water
swallow And penetrate it with sweetness, color, fragrance, Entzwein
that none of the other more.

  
  
  Sun Star and swinging but Stars A sun that never
  reveals itself, With their strength and light it fills, And she ruled
out immeasurable distance.

  
  
  You were in this godless time Where no light
  cloudy dreamer thoughts As empty vessels vary under heaven, The star,
who has guided me and to anyone.

  
  
  The track that you went to enter, That I was not mistaken, my high
goal.

  From earthly shops, drive and play Carried me
  up the chance to worship you.
  

  As night controlling a sail home ward
  The light to the heavy fog splits And
  so directed the rescue in the harbor,
  

  I was comforted, chained to look at you,
  The hands folded on his chest faith, By floods
  and darkness of your radiant heart.
  

  The beggar child the same, the front of the doors
  With shy mouth of poverty Please whispers
  And reverently amazed to external resources, On its barren lots does
not charge,

I came to you that my empty hands I showered born rich,
mild, Me decorated like a miraculous image Now that I myself own and
wastes.

  
  
  The symbol of power radiated from tiaras From my head, diamond and
ruby.

  But it will void the boastful Bright
  
  Before you, for what you gavest, you can
  take, And again as before is the beggar Bare-foot on thy golden threshold.

You

  lead me into the sanctuary first test Lights
  to idols and altars, You taught what they refuse
  to grant and The fate of man and the heroic
  glory.

  
  You melted gently with a long loving kiss
  Childhood seal my mouth and eyes, And let me suck your blood, To
my mind mixing your river.

  
  
  Thus was my blood, my love, you serfs, subjugated by a source of yours,
It inflamed with longing for itself.

  
  
  After you demand it has to fall, descend,
  Until it opens in the
  ocean of your heart, And beats the same beat
  with his stroke.

  
  Dear Lord, you baptized me with fire, Chosen
  to bless you, I reborn from its own
  pain You auferstände
  pure, stronger, more loyal.
  

  Not that you previously considered me less,
  For me only eradicating what you hardly
  blamed. Like gold in its essence
  Flammenbad ennobles Was my way
  of frailty hardened.
  

  You hid me up once in strict folding Now,
  do, my love, your love all over! You need
  not henceforth hold you back.
  

  Pour desire, fervor, fire and sparkle! My heart
  receives the deadly powers, Like a deified
  the main circle of stars.
  

  We found high in the twilight paths, A sad wind was
  brisk from afar. The black bushes, bend over,
  Zerbläst be When, The sky flashed white through leaves gaps The pass
away quickly.

  
  
  The heart is hard for us, the foot is tired As if we belüde a touch
of fear.

  The evil time in fate reasons vanished for ever;
  What we can tell the wind of disaster, Hand in
  hand?
  

  He comes from the hills, where we complained,
  Of clouds and winds only umjagten, Lost, where
  on earth pale Nothing grows, nothing remains
  No wandering shepherd his flock Drives over.

  
  
  The saga of a well know of virtue, illustrious as fertile and mysterious,
That he the old man, who appeared shaken by, Transforming decorated
with neugewirkter youth.

  
  
  See how the body, the familiar of his strength, Blessed are the highlights
from the waves glowed, From their fervor saturated swelling, With
fresh dewy dawn of life,

Soon to yourself, now graze in the world,
The arms breitend after the spring floor, With wundertätgen drops
moisten,

So, if my heart leaves your arms, I greet the smiling younger
nature, By shining your strength and your beauty.

  
  
  You far and farther, your not thinking of,
  Conceal what once was lucky pride and honor I went through valleys,
over mountains and seas, In debris and mud, the weary feet downward.

  
  
  But you walked me to the side invisible From your
  dark glance I was embraced, Your breath blew gently around my cheeks,
That I was leaving but your own.

  
  
  So quiet slip of death to which we belong, Around our steps which
might have turned from him, And if shrouded by dazzling colorful Flören

The
eye still in the stuff of life chooses Our soul rests in God's hands
The most faithful, the married from the start it.

  
  
  As in the haze from the East chariot The sun rolled on instead of
governing, Creature and Lord, fill in his own wealth, Motivated by
self-generated flame effect

And how you turned what Living, The dun-colored
sheet, which takes its rays, The fruit ripens in the still boiling
sap, At its extremes are completed,

So you go special stain, compare,
A victory on the final track unbegangner Transmitted through transmission
of the human world;

And what we know than the deity characters Do
you seen all that draw near to you: Completion, that echoes the love.

"Tell her," cried Norman, in a wild burst of eloquence, "that, like two grasshoppers in a volcano,
we are shrivelled up in the presence of Her Spangled Vehemence!"

"It is well," said the Governor, and translated this into Kgovjnian. "I am now to tell you,"
he proceeded, "what Her Radiancy requires of you before you go. The yearly competition for
the post of Imperial Scarf-maker is just ended; you are the judges. You will take account of
the rate of work, the lightness of the scarves, and their warmth. Usually the competitors differ
in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial-week,
and they were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's and she was pronounced
twice as good. But this year, woe is me, who can judge it? Three competitors are here, and
they differ in all points! While you settle their claims, you shall be lodged, Her Radiancy
bids me say, free of expense--in the best dungeon, and abundantly fed on the best bread and water."

The old man groaned. "All is lost!" he wildly exclaimed. But Norman heeded him not: he had
taken out his note-book, and was calmly jotting down the particulars.

"Three they be," the Governor proceeded, "Lolo, Mimi, and Zuzu. Lolo makes 5 scarves while
Mimi makes 2; but Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3! Again, so fairylike is Zuzu's handiwork,
5 of her scarves weigh no more than one of Lolo's; yet Mimi's is lighter still--5 of hers will
but balance 3 of Zuzu's! And for warmth one of Mimi's is equal to 4 of Zuzu's; yet one of Lolo's
is as warm as 3 of Mimi's!"

Here the little lady once more clapped her hands.

"It is our signal of dismissal!" the Governor hastily said. "Pay Her Radiancy your farewell
compliments--and walk out backwards."

The walking part was all the elder tourist could manage. Norman simply said "Tell Her Radiancy
we are transfixed by the spectacle of Her Serene Brilliance, and bid an agonized farewell to
her Condensed Milkiness!"

"Her Radiancy is pleased," the Governor reported, after duly translating this. "She casts on
you a glance from Her Imperial Eyes, and is confident that you will catch it!"

"That I warrant we shall!" the elder traveller moaned to himself distractedly.

Once more they bowed low, and then followed the Governor down a winding staircase to the Imperial
Dungeon, which they found to be lined with coloured marble, lighted from the roof, and splendidly
though not luxuriously furnished with a bench of polished malachite. "I trust you will not
delay the calculation," the Governor said, ushering them in with much ceremony. "I have known
great inconvenience--great and serious inconvenience--result to those unhappy ones who have
delayed to execute the commands of Her Radiancy! And on this occasion she is resolute: she
says the thing must and shall be done: and she has ordered up ten thousand additional bamboos!"
With these words he left them, and they heard him lock and bar the door on the outside.

"I told you how it would end!" moaned the elder traveller, wringing his hands, and quite forgetting
in his anguish that he had himself proposed the expedition, and had never predicted anything
of the sort. "Oh that we were well out of this miserable business!"

"Courage!" cried the younger cheerily. "Hæc olim meminisse juvabit! The end of all this will
be glory!"

"Glory without the L!" was all the poor old man could say, as he rocked himself to and fro
on the malachite bench. "Glory without the L!"

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: "Maskee," in Pigeon-English, means "without."]

KNOT VII.

PETTY CASH.

   "Base is the slave that pays."

"Aunt Mattie!"

"My child?"

"Would you mind writing it down at once? I shall be quite certain to forget it if you don't!"

"My dear, we really must wait till the cab stops. How can I possibly write anything in the
midst of all this jolting?"

"But really I shall be forgetting it!"

Clara's voice took the plaintive tone that her aunt never knew how to resist, and with a sigh
the old lady drew forth her ivory tablets and prepared to record the amount that Clara had
just spent at the confectioner's shop. Her expenditure was always made out of her aunt's purse,
but the poor girl knew, by bitter experience, that sooner or later "Mad Mathesis" would expect
an exact account of every penny that had gone, and she waited, with ill-concealed impatience,
while the old lady turned the tablets over and over, till she had found the one headed "PETTY
CASH."

"Here's the place," she said at last, "and here we have yesterday's luncheon duly entered.
One glass lemonade (Why can't you drink water, like me?) three sandwiches (They never put in
half mustard enough. I told the young woman so, to her face; and she tossed her head--like
her impudence!) and seven biscuits. Total one-and-two-pence. Well, now for to-day's?"

"One glass of lemonade----" Clara was beginning to say, when suddenly the cab drew up, and
a courteous railway-porter was handing out the bewildered girl before she had had time to finish
her sentence.

Her aunt pocketed the tablets instantly. "Business first," she said: "petty cash--which is
a form of pleasure, whatever you may think--afterwards." And she proceeded to pay the driver,
and to give voluminous orders about the luggage, quite deaf to the entreaties of her unhappy
niece that she would enter the rest of the luncheon account.

"My dear, you really must cultivate a more capacious mind!" was all the consolation she vouchsafed
to the poor girl. "Are not the tablets of your memory wide enough to contain the record of
one single luncheon?"

"Not wide enough! Not half wide enough!" was the passionate reply.

The words came in aptly enough, but the voice was not that of Clara, and both ladies turned
in some surprise to see who it was that had so suddenly struck into their conversation. A fat
little old lady was standing at the door of a cab, helping the driver to extricate what seemed
an exact duplicate of herself: it would have been no easy task to decide which was the fatter,
or which looked the more good-humoured of the two sisters.

"I tell you the cab-door isn't half wide enough!" she repeated, as her sister finally emerged,
somewhat after the fashion of a pellet from a pop-gun, and she turned to appeal to Clara. "Is
it, dear?" she said, trying hard to bring a frown into a face that dimpled all over with smiles.

"Some folks is too wide for 'em," growled the cab-driver.

"Don't provoke me, man!" cried the little old lady, in what she meant for a tempest of fury.
"Say another word and I'll put you into the County Court, and sue you for a Habeas Corpus!"
The cabman touched his hat, and marched off, grinning.

"Nothing like a little Law to cow the ruffians, my dear!" she remarked confidentially to Clara.
"You saw how he quailed when I mentioned the Habeas Corpus? Not that I've any idea what it
means, but it sounds very grand, doesn't it?"

"It's very provoking," Clara replied, a little vaguely.

"Very!" the little old lady eagerly repeated. "And we're very much provoked indeed. Aren't
we, sister?"

"I never was so provoked in all my life!" the fatter sister assented, radiantly.

By this time Clara had recognised her picture-gallery acquaintances, and, drawing her aunt
aside, she hastily whispered her reminiscences. "I met them first in the Royal Academy--and
they were very kind to me--and they were lunching at the next table to us, just now, you know--and
they tried to help me to find the picture I wanted--and I'm sure they're dear old things!"

"Friends of yours, are they?" said Mad Mathesis. "Well, I like their looks. You can be civil
to them, while I get the tickets. But do try and arrange your ideas a little more chronologically!"

And so it came to pass that the four ladies found themselves seated side by side on the same
bench waiting for the train, and chatting as if they had known one another for years.

"Now this I call quite a remarkable coincidence!" exclaimed the smaller and more talkative
of the two sisters--the one whose legal knowledge had annihilated the cab-driver. "Not only
that we should be waiting for the same train, and at the same station--that would be curious
enough--but actually on the same day, and the same hour of the day! That's what strikes me
so forcibly!" She glanced at the fatter and more silent sister, whose chief function in life
seemed to be to support the family opinion, and who meekly responded--

"And me too, sister!"

"Those are not independent coincidences----" Mad Mathesis was just beginning, when Clara ventured
to interpose.

"There's no jolting here," she pleaded meekly. "Would you mind writing it down now?"

Out came the ivory tablets once more. "What was it, then?" said her aunt.

"One glass of lemonade, one sandwich, one biscuit--Oh dear me!" cried poor Clara, the historical
tone suddenly changing to a wail of agony.

"Toothache?" said her aunt calmly, as she wrote down the items. The two sisters instantly opened
their reticules and produced two different remedies for neuralgia, each marked "unequalled."

"It isn't that!" said poor Clara. "Thank you very much. It's only that I can't remember how
much I paid!"

"Well, try and make it out, then," said her aunt. "You've got yesterday's luncheon to help
you, you know. And here's the luncheon we had the day before--the first day we went to that
shop--one glass lemonade, four sandwiches, ten biscuits. Total, one-and-fivepence." She handed
the tablets to Clara, who gazed at them with eyes so dim with tears that she did not at first
notice that she was holding them upside down.

The two sisters had been listening to all this with the deepest interest, and at this juncture
the smaller one softly laid her hand on Clara's arm.

"Do you know, my dear," she said coaxingly, "my sister and I are in the very same predicament!
Quite identically the very same predicament! Aren't we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely the very----" began the fatter sister, but she was constructing
her sentence on too large a scale, and the little one would not wait for her to finish it.

"Yes, my dear," she resumed; "we were lunching at the very same shop as you were--and we had
two glasses of lemonade and three sandwiches and five biscuits--and neither of us has the least
idea what we paid. Have we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely----" murmured the other, who evidently considered that she
was now a whole sentence in arrears, and that she ought to discharge one obligation before
contracting any fresh liabilities; but the little lady broke in again, and she retired from
the conversation a bankrupt.

"Would you make it out for us, my dear?" pleaded the little old lady.

"You can do Arithmetic, I trust?" her aunt said, a little anxiously, as Clara turned from one
tablet to another, vainly trying to collect her thoughts. Her mind was a blank, and all human
expression was rapidly fading out of her face.

A gloomy silence ensued.

KNOT VIII.

DE OMNIBUS REBUS.

   "This little pig went to market:
   This little pig staid at home."

"By Her Radiancy's express command," said the Governor, as he conducted the travellers, for
the last time, from the Imperial presence, "I shall now have the ecstasy of escorting you as
far as the outer gate of the Military Quarter, where the agony of parting--if indeed Nature
can survive the shock--must be endured! From that gate grurmstipths start every quarter of
an hour, both ways----"

"Would you mind repeating that word?" said Norman. "Grurm----?"

"Grurmstipths," the Governor repeated. "You call them omnibuses in England. They run both ways,
and you can travel by one of them all the way down to the harbour."

The old man breathed a sigh of relief; four hours of courtly ceremony had wearied him, and
he had been in constant terror lest something should call into use the ten thousand additional
bamboos.

In another minute they were crossing a large quadrangle, paved with marble, and tastefully
decorated with a pigsty in each corner. Soldiers, carrying pigs, were marching in all directions:
and in the middle stood a gigantic officer giving orders in a voice of thunder, which made
itself heard above all the uproar of the pigs.

"It is the Commander-in-Chief!" the Governor hurriedly whispered to his companions, who at
once followed his example in prostrating themselves before the great man. The Commander gravely
bowed in return. He was covered with gold lace from head to foot: his face wore an expression
of deep misery: and he had a little black pig under each arm. Still the gallant fellow did
his best, in the midst of the orders he was every moment issuing to his men, to bid a courteous
farewell to the departing guests.

"Farewell, oh old one--carry these three to the South corner--and farewell to thee, thou young
one--put this fat one on the top of the others in the Western sty--may your shadows never be
less--woe is me, it is wrongly done! Empty out all the sties, and begin again!" And the soldier
leant upon his sword, and wiped away a tear.

"He is in distress," the Governor explained as they left the court. "Her Radiancy has commanded
him to place twenty-four pigs in those four sties, so that, as she goes round the court, she
may always find the number in each sty nearer to ten than the number in the last."

"Does she call ten nearer to ten than nine is?" said Norman.

"Surely," said the Governor. "Her Radiancy would admit that ten is nearer to ten than nine
is--and also nearer than eleven is."

"Then I think it can be done," said Norman.

The Governor shook his head. "The Commander has been transferring them in vain for four months,"
he said. "What hope remains? And Her Radiancy has ordered up ten thousand additional----"

"The pigs don't seem to enjoy being transferred," the old man hastily interrupted. He did not
like the subject of bamboos.

"They are only provisionally transferred, you know," said the Governor. "In most cases they
are immediately carried back again: so they need not mind it. And all is done with the greatest
care, under the personal superintendence of the Commander-in-Chief."

"Of course she would only go once round?" said Norman.

"Alas, no!" sighed their conductor. "Round and round. Round and round. These are Her Radiancy's
own words. But oh, agony! Here is the outer gate, and we must part!" He sobbed as he shook
hands with them, and the next moment was briskly walking away.

"He might have waited to see us off!" said the old man, piteously.

"And he needn't have begun whistling the very moment he left us!" said the young one, severely.
"But look sharp--here are two what's-his-names in the act of starting!"

Unluckily, the sea-bound omnibus was full. "Never mind!" said Norman, cheerily. "We'll walk
on till the next one overtakes us."

They trudged on in silence, both thinking over the military problem, till they met an omnibus
coming from the sea. The elder traveller took out his watch. "Just twelve minutes and a half
since we started," he remarked in an absent manner. Suddenly the vacant face brightened; the
old man had an idea. "My boy!" he shouted, bringing his hand down upon Norman's shoulder so
suddenly as for a moment to transfer his centre of gravity beyond the base of support.

Thus taken off his guard, the young man wildly staggered forwards, and seemed about to plunge
into space: but in another moment he had gracefully recovered himself. "Problem in Precession
and Nutation," he remarked--in tones where filial respect only just managed to conceal a shade
of annoyance. "What is it?" he hastily added, fearing his father might have been taken ill.
"Will you have some brandy?"

"When will the next omnibus overtake us? When? When?" the old man cried, growing more excited
every moment.

Norman looked gloomy. "Give me time," he said. "I must think it over." And once more the travellers
passed on in silence--a silence only broken by the distant squeals of the unfortunate little
pigs, who were still being provisionally transferred from sty to sty, under the personal superintendence
of the Commander-in-Chief.

KNOT IX.

A SERPENT WITH CORNERS.

   "Water, water, every where,
   Nor any drop to drink."

"It'll just take one more pebble."

"What ever are you doing with those buckets?"

The speakers were Hugh and Lambert. Place, the beach of Little Mendip. Time, 1.30, P.M. Hugh
was floating a bucket in another a size larger, and trying how many pebbles it would carry
without sinking. Lambert was lying on his back, doing nothing.

For the next minute or two Hugh was silent, evidently deep in thought. Suddenly he started.
"I say, look here, Lambert!" he cried.

"If it's alive, and slimy, and with legs, I don't care to," said Lambert.

"Didn't Balbus say this morning that, if a body is immersed in liquid, it displaces as much
liquid as is equal to its own bulk?" said Hugh.

"He said things of that sort," Lambert vaguely replied.

"Well, just look here a minute. Here's the little bucket almost quite immersed: so the water
displaced ought to be just about the same bulk. And now just look at it!" He took out the little
bucket as he spoke, and handed the big one to Lambert. "Why, there's hardly a teacupful! Do
you mean to say that water is the same bulk as the little bucket?"

"Course it is," said Lambert.

"Well, look here again!" cried Hugh, triumphantly, as he poured the water from the big bucket
into the little one. "Why, it doesn't half fill it!"

"That's its business," said Lambert. "If Balbus says it's the same bulk, why, it is the same
bulk, you know."

"Well, I don't believe it," said Hugh.

"You needn't," said Lambert. "Besides, it's dinner-time. Come along."

They found Balbus waiting dinner for them, and to him Hugh at once propounded his difficulty.

"Let's get you helped first," said Balbus, briskly cutting away at the joint. "You know the
old proverb 'Mutton first, mechanics afterwards'?"

The boys did not know the proverb, but they accepted it in perfect good faith, as they did
every piece of information, however startling, that came from so infallible an authority as
their tutor. They ate on steadily in silence, and, when dinner was over, Hugh set out the usual
array of pens, ink, and paper, while Balbus repeated to them the problem he had prepared for
their afternoon's task.

"A friend of mine has a flower-garden--a very pretty one, though no great size--"

"How big is it?" said Hugh.

"That's what you have to find out!" Balbus gaily replied. "All I tell you is that it is oblong
in shape--just half a yard longer than its width--and that a gravel-walk, one yard wide, begins
at one corner and runs all round it."

"Joining into itself?" said Hugh.

"Not joining into itself, young man. Just before doing that, it turns a corner, and runs round
the garden again, alongside of the first portion, and then inside that again, winding in and
in, and each lap touching the last one, till it has used up the whole of the area."

"Like a serpent with corners?" said Lambert.

"Exactly so. And if you walk the whole length of it, to the last inch, keeping in the centre
of the path, it's exactly two miles and half a furlong. Now, while you find out the length
and breadth of the garden, I'll see if I can think out that sea-water puzzle."

"You said it was a flower-garden?" Hugh inquired, as Balbus was leaving the room.

"I did," said Balbus.

"Where do the flowers grow?" said Hugh. But Balbus thought it best not to hear the question.
He left the boys to their problem, and, in the silence of his own room, set himself to unravel
Hugh's mechanical paradox.

"To fix our thoughts," he murmured to himself, as, with hands deep-buried in his pockets, he
paced up and down the room, "we will take a cylindrical glass jar, with a scale of inches marked
up the side, and fill it with water up to the 10-inch mark: and we will assume that every inch
depth of jar contains a pint of water. We will now take a solid cylinder, such that every inch
of it is equal in bulk to half a pint of water, and plunge 4 inches of it into the water, so
that the end of the cylinder comes down to the 6-inch mark. Well, that displaces 2 pints of
water. What becomes of them? Why, if there were no more cylinder, they would lie comfortably
on the top, and fill the jar up to the 12-inch mark. But unfortunately there is more cylinder,
occupying half the space between the 10-inch and the 12-inch marks, so that only one pint of
water can be accommodated there. What becomes of the other pint? Why, if there were no more
cylinder, it would lie on the top, and fill the jar up to the 13-inch mark. But unfortunately----Shade
of Newton!" he exclaimed, in sudden accents of terror. "When does the water stop rising?"

A bright idea struck him. "I'll write a little essay on it," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Balbus's Essay.

"When a solid is immersed in a liquid, it is well known that it displaces a portion of the
liquid equal to itself in bulk, and that the level of the liquid rises just so much as it would
rise if a quantity of liquid had been added to it, equal in bulk to the solid. Lardner says,
precisely the same process occurs when a solid is partially immersed: the quantity of liquid
displaced, in this case, equalling the portion of the solid which is immersed, and the rise
of the level being in proportion.

"Suppose a solid held above the surface of a liquid and partially immersed: a portion of the
liquid is displaced, and the level of the liquid rises. But, by this rise of level, a little
bit more of the solid is of course immersed, and so there is a new displacement of a second
portion of the liquid, and a consequent rise of level. Again, this second rise of level causes
a yet further immersion, and by consequence another displacement of liquid and another rise.
It is self-evident that this process must continue till the entire solid is immersed, and that
the liquid will then begin to immerse whatever holds the solid, which, being connected with
it, must for the time be considered a part of it. If you hold a stick, six feet long, with
its end in a tumbler of water, and wait long enough, you must eventually be immersed. The question
as to the source from which the water is supplied--which belongs to a high branch of mathematics,
and is therefore beyond our present scope--does not apply to the sea. Let us therefore take
the familiar instance of a man standing at the edge of the sea, at ebb-tide, with a solid in
his hand, which he partially immerses: he remains steadfast and unmoved, and we all know that
he must be drowned. The multitudes who daily perish in this manner to attest a philosophical
truth, and whose bodies the unreasoning wave casts sullenly upon our thankless shores, have
a truer claim to be called the martyrs of science than a Galileo or a Kepler. To use Kossuth's
eloquent phrase, they are the unnamed demigods of the nineteenth century."[B]

       *       *       *       *       *

"There's a fallacy somewhere," he murmured drowsily, as he stretched his long legs upon the
sofa. "I must think it over again." He closed his eyes, in order to concentrate his attention
more perfectly, and for the next hour or so his slow and regular breathing bore witness to
the careful deliberation with which he was investigating this new and perplexing view of the
subject.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote B: Note by the writer.--For the above Essay I am indebted to a dear friend, now deceased.]

KNOT X.

CHELSEA BUNS.

   "Yea, buns, and buns, and buns!"

                          OLD SONG.

"How very, very sad!" exclaimed Clara; and the eyes of the gentle girl filled with tears as
she spoke.

"Sad--but very curious when you come to look at it arithmetically," was her aunt's less romantic
reply. "Some of them have lost an arm in their country's service, some a leg, some an ear,
some an eye----"

"And some, perhaps, all!" Clara murmured dreamily, as they passed the long rows of weather-beaten
heroes basking in the sun. "Did you notice that very old one, with a red face, who was drawing
a map in the dust with his wooden leg, and all the others watching? I think it was a plan of
a battle----"

"The battle of Trafalgar, no doubt," her aunt interrupted, briskly.

"Hardly that, I think," Clara ventured to say. "You see, in that case, he couldn't well be
alive----"

"Couldn't well be alive!" the old lady contemptuously repeated. "He's as lively as you and
me put together! Why, if drawing a map in the dust--with one's wooden leg--doesn't prove one
to be alive, perhaps you'll kindly mention what does prove it!"

Clara did not see her way out of it. Logic had never been her forte.

"To return to the arithmetic," Mad Mathesis resumed--the eccentric old lady never let slip
an opportunity of driving her niece into a calculation--"what percentage do you suppose must
have lost all four--a leg, an arm, an eye, and an ear?"

"How can I tell?" gasped the terrified girl. She knew well what was coming.

"You can't, of course, without data," her aunt replied: "but I'm just going to give you----"

"Give her a Chelsea bun, Miss! That's what most young ladies likes best!" The voice was rich
and musical, and the speaker dexterously whipped back the snowy cloth that covered his basket,
and disclosed a tempting array of the familiar square buns, joined together in rows, richly
egged and browned, and glistening in the sun.

"No, sir! I shall give her nothing so indigestible! Be off!" The old lady waved her parasol
threateningly: but nothing seemed to disturb the good-humour of the jolly old man, who marched
on, chanting his melodious refrain:--

[Music: Chel-sea buns! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!

Pi-ping hot! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!]

"Far too indigestible, my love!" said the old lady. "Percentages will agree with you ever so
much better!"

Clara sighed, and there was a hungry look in her eyes as she watched the basket lessening in
the distance: but she meekly listened to the relentless old lady, who at once proceeded to
count off the data on her fingers.

"Say that 70 per cent. have lost an eye--75 per cent. an ear--80 per cent. an arm--85 per cent.
a leg--that'll do it beautifully. Now, my dear, what percentage, at least, must have lost all
four?"

No more conversation occurred--unless a smothered exclamation of "Piping hot!" which escaped
from Clara's lips as the basket vanished round a corner could be counted as such--until they
reached the old Chelsea mansion, where Clara's father was then staying, with his three sons
and their old tutor.

Balbus, Lambert, and Hugh had entered the house only a few minutes before them. They had been
out walking, and Hugh had been propounding a difficulty which had reduced Lambert to the depths
of gloom, and had even puzzled Balbus.

"It changes from Wednesday to Thursday at midnight, doesn't it?" Hugh had begun.

"Sometimes," said Balbus, cautiously.

"Always," said Lambert, decisively.

"Sometimes," Balbus gently insisted. "Six midnights out of seven, it changes to some other name."

"I meant, of course," Hugh corrected himself, "when it does change from Wednesday to Thursday,
it does it at midnight--and only at midnight."

"Surely," said Balbus. Lambert was silent.

"Well, now, suppose it's midnight here in Chelsea. Then it's Wednesday west of Chelsea (say
in Ireland or America) where midnight hasn't arrived yet: and it's Thursday east of Chelsea
(say in Germany or Russia) where midnight has just passed by?"

"Surely," Balbus said again. Even Lambert nodded this time.

"But it isn't midnight, anywhere else; so it can't be changing from one day to another anywhere
else. And yet, if Ireland and America and so on call it Wednesday, and Germany and Russia and
so on call it Thursday, there must be some place--not Chelsea--that has different days on the
two sides of it. And the worst of it is, the people there get their days in the wrong order:
they've got Wednesday east of them, and Thursday west--just as if their day had changed from
Thursday to Wednesday!"

"I've heard that puzzle before!" cried Lambert. "And I'll tell you the explanation. When a
ship goes round the world from east to west, we know that it loses a day in its reckoning:
so that when it gets home, and calls its day Wednesday, it finds people here calling it Thursday,
because we've had one more midnight than the ship has had. And when you go the other way round
you gain a day."

"I know all that," said Hugh, in reply to this not very lucid explanation: "but it doesn't
help me, because the ship hasn't proper days. One way round, you get more than twenty-four
hours to the day, and the other way you get less: so of course the names get wrong: but people
that live on in one place always get twenty-four hours to the day."

"I suppose there is such a place," Balbus said, meditatively, "though I never heard of it.
And the people must find it very queer, as Hugh says, to have the old day east of them, and
the new one west: because, when midnight comes round to them, with the new day in front of
it and the old one behind it, one doesn't see exactly what happens. I must think it over."

So they had entered the house in the state I have described--Balbus puzzled, and Lambert buried
in gloomy thought.

"Yes, m'm, Master is at home, m'm," said the stately old butler. (N.B.--It is only a butler
of experience who can manage a series of three M's together, without any interjacent vowels.)
"And the ole party is a-waiting for you in the libery."

"I don't like his calling your father an old party," Mad Mathesis whispered to her niece, as
they crossed the hall. And Clara had only just time to whisper in reply "he meant the whole
party," before they were ushered into the library, and the sight of the five solemn faces there
assembled chilled her into silence.

Her father sat at the head of the table, and mutely signed to the ladies to take the two vacant
chairs, one on each side of him. His three sons and Balbus completed the party. Writing materials
had been arranged round the table, after the fashion of a ghostly banquet: the butler had evidently
bestowed much thought on the grim device. Sheets of quarto paper, each flanked by a pen on
one side and a pencil on the other, represented the plates--penwipers did duty for rolls of
bread--while ink-bottles stood in the places usually occupied by wine-glasses. The pièce de
resistance was a large green baize bag, which gave forth, as the old man restlessly lifted
it from side to side, a charming jingle, as of innumerable golden guineas.

"Sister, daughter, sons--and Balbus--," the old man began, so nervously, that Balbus put in
a gentle "Hear, hear!" while Hugh drummed on the table with his fists. This disconcerted the
unpractised orator. "Sister--" he began again, then paused a moment, moved the bag to the other
side, and went on with a rush, "I mean--this being--a critical occasion--more or less--being
the year when one of my sons comes of age--" he paused again in some confusion, having evidently
got into the middle of his speech sooner than he intended: but it was too late to go back.
"Hear, hear!" cried Balbus. "Quite so," said the old gentleman, recovering his self-possession
a little: "when first I began this annual custom--my friend Balbus will correct me if I am
wrong--" (Hugh whispered "with a strap!" but nobody heard him except Lambert, who only frowned
and shook his head at him) "--this annual custom of giving each of my sons as many guineas
as would represent his age--it was a critical time--so Balbus informed me--as the ages of two
of you were together equal to that of the third--so on that occasion I made a speech----" He
paused so long that Balbus thought it well to come to the rescue with the words "It was a most----"
but the old man checked him with a warning look: "yes, made a speech," he repeated. "A few
years after that, Balbus pointed out--I say pointed out--" ("Hear, hear"! cried Balbus. "Quite
so," said the grateful old man.) "--that it was another critical occasion. The ages of two
of you were together double that of the third. So I made another speech--another speech. And
now again it's a critical occasion--so Balbus says--and I am making----" (Here Mad Mathesis
pointedly referred to her watch) "all the haste I can!" the old man cried, with wonderful presence
of mind. "Indeed, sister, I'm coming to the point now! The number of years that have passed
since that first occasion is just two-thirds of the number of guineas I then gave you. Now,
my boys, calculate your ages from the data, and you shall have the money!"

"But we know our ages!" cried Hugh.

"Silence, sir!" thundered the old man, rising to his full height (he was exactly five-foot
five) in his indignation. "I say you must use the data only! You mustn't even assume which
it is that comes of age!" He clutched the bag as he spoke, and with tottering steps (it was
about as much as he could do to carry it) he left the room.

"And you shall have a similar cadeau," the old lady whispered to her niece, "when you've calculated
that percentage!" And she followed her brother.

Nothing could exceed the solemnity with which the old couple had risen from the table, and
yet was it--was it a grin with which the father turned away from his unhappy sons? Could it
be--could it be a wink with which the aunt abandoned her despairing niece? And were those--were
those sounds of suppressed chuckling which floated into the room, just before Balbus (who had
followed them out) closed the door? Surely not: and yet the butler told the cook--but no, that
was merely idle gossip, and I will not repeat it.

The shades of evening granted their unuttered petition, and "closed not o'er" them (for the
butler brought in the lamp): the same obliging shades left them a "lonely bark" (the wail of
a dog, in the back-yard, baying the moon) for "awhile": but neither "morn, alas," (nor any
other epoch) seemed likely to "restore" them--to that peace of mind which had once been theirs
ere ever these problems had swooped upon them, and crushed them with a load of unfathomable
mystery!

"It's hardly fair," muttered Hugh, "to give us such a jumble as this to work out!"

"Fair?" Clara echoed, bitterly. "Well!"

And to all my readers I can but repeat the last words of gentle Clara--

   FARE-WELL!

APPENDIX.

     "A knot!" said Alice. "Oh, do let me help to undo it!"

ANSWERS TO KNOT I.

Problem.--"Two travellers spend from 3 o'clock till 9 in walking along a level road, up a hill,
and home again: their pace on the level being 4 miles an hour, up hill 3, and down hill 6.
Find distance walked: also (within half an hour) time of reaching top of hill."

Answer.--"24 miles: half-past 6."

       *       *       *       *       *

Solution.--A level mile takes 1/4 of an hour, up hill 1/3, down hill 1/6. Hence to go and return
over the same mile, whether on the level or on the hill-side, takes 1/2 an hour. Hence in 6
hours they went 12 miles out and 12 back. If the 12 miles out had been nearly all level, they
would have taken a little over 3 hours; if nearly all up hill, a little under 4. Hence 3-1/2
hours must be within 1/2 an hour of the time taken in reaching the peak; thus, as they started
at 3, they got there within 1/2 an hour of 1/2 past 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-seven answers have come in. Of these, 9 are right, 16 partially right, and 2 wrong.
The 16 give the distance correctly, but they have failed to grasp the fact that the top of
the hill might have been reached at any moment between 6 o'clock and 7.

The two wrong answers are from GERTY VERNON and A NIHILIST. The former makes the distance "23
miles," while her revolutionary companion puts it at "27." GERTY VERNON says "they had to go
4 miles along the plain, and got to the foot of the hill at 4 o'clock." They might have done
so, I grant; but you have no ground for saying they did so. "It was 7-1/2 miles to the top
of the hill, and they reached that at 1/4 before 7 o'clock." Here you go wrong in your arithmetic,
and I must, however reluctantly, bid you farewell. 7-1/2 miles, at 3 miles an hour, would not
require 2-3/4 hours. A NIHILIST says "Let x denote the whole number of miles; y the number
of hours to hill-top; [** therefore] 3y = number of miles to hill-top, and x-3y = number of
miles on the other side." You bewilder me. The other side of what? "Of the hill," you say.
But then, how did they get home again? However, to accommodate your views we will build a new
hostelry at the foot of the hill on the opposite side, and also assume (what I grant you is
possible, though it is not necessarily true) that there was no level road at all. Even then
you go wrong.

You say

   "y = 6 - (x - 3y)/6, ..... (i);

   x/4-1/2 = 6              ..... (ii)."

I grant you (i), but I deny (ii): it rests on the assumption that to go part of the time at
3 miles an hour, and the rest at 6 miles an hour, comes to the same result as going the whole
time at 4-1/2 miles an hour. But this would only be true if the "part" were an exact half,
i.e., if they went up hill for 3 hours, and down hill for the other 3: which they certainly
did not do.

The sixteen, who are partially right, are AGNES BAILEY, F. K., FIFEE, G. E. B., H. P., KIT,
M. E. T., MYSIE, A MOTHER'S SON, NAIRAM, A REDRUTHIAN, A SOCIALIST, SPEAR MAIDEN, T. B. C,
VIS INERTIÆ, and YAK. Of these, F. K., FIFEE, T. B. C, and VIS INERTIÆ do not attempt the second
part at all. F. K. and H. P. give no working. The rest make particular assumptions, such as
that there was no level road--that there were 6 miles of level road--and so on, all leading
to particular times being fixed for reaching the hill-top. The most curious assumption is that
of AGNES BAILEY, who says "Let x = number of hours occupied in ascent; then x/2 = hours occupied
in descent; and 4x/3 = hours occupied on the level." I suppose you were thinking of the relative
rates, up hill and on the level; which we might express by saying that, if they went x miles
up hill in a certain time, they would go 4x/3 miles on the level in the same time. You have,
in fact, assumed that they took the same time on the level that they took in ascending the
hill. FIFEE assumes that, when the aged knight said they had gone "four miles in the hour"
on the level, he meant that four miles was the distance gone, not merely the rate. This would
have been--if FIFEE will excuse the slang expression--a "sell," ill-suited to the dignity of
the hero.

And now "descend, ye classic Nine!" who have solved the whole problem, and let me sing your
praises. Your names are BLITHE, E. W., L. B., A MARLBOROUGH BOY, O. V. L., PUTNEY WALKER, ROSE,
SEA BREEZE, SIMPLE SUSAN, and MONEY SPINNER. (These last two I count as one, as they send a
joint answer.) ROSE and SIMPLE SUSAN and CO. do not actually state that the hill-top was reached
some time between 6 and 7, but, as they have clearly grasped the fact that a mile, ascended
and descended, took the same time as two level miles, I mark them as "right." A MARLBOROUGH
BOY and PUTNEY WALKER deserve honourable mention for their algebraical solutions being the
only two who have perceived that the question leads to an indeterminate equation. E. W. brings
a charge of untruthfulness against the aged knight--a serious charge, for he was the very pink
of chivalry! She says "According to the data given, the time at the summit affords no clue
to the total distance. It does not enable us to state precisely to an inch how much level and
how much hill there was on the road." "Fair damsel," the aged knight replies, "--if, as I surmise,
thy initials denote Early Womanhood--bethink thee that the word 'enable' is thine, not mine.
I did but ask the time of reaching the hill-top as my condition for further parley. If now
thou wilt not grant that I am a truth-loving man, then will I affirm that those same initials
denote Envenomed Wickedness!"

CLASS LIST.

I.

   A MARLBOROUGH BOY.
   PUTNEY WALKER.

II.

   BLITHE.
   E. W.
   L. B.
   O. V. L.
   ROSE.
   SEA BREEZE.
   {SIMPLE SUSAN.
   {MONEY-SPINNER.

BLITHE has made so ingenious an addition to the problem, and SIMPLE SUSAN and CO. have solved
it in such tuneful verse, that I record both their answers in full. I have altered a word or
two in BLITHE'S--which I trust she will excuse; it did not seem quite clear as it stood.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yet stay," said the youth, as a gleam of inspiration lighted up the relaxing muscles of his
quiescent features. "Stay. Methinks it matters little when we reached that summit, the crown
of our toil. For in the space of time wherein we clambered up one mile and bounded down the
same on our return, we could have trudged the twain on the level. We have plodded, then, four-and-twenty
miles in these six mortal hours; for never a moment did we stop for catching of fleeting breath
or for gazing on the scene around!"

"Very good," said the old man. "Twelve miles out and twelve miles in. And we reached the top
some time between six and seven of the clock. Now mark me! For every five minutes that had
fled since six of the clock when we stood on yonder peak, so many miles had we toiled upwards
on the dreary mountainside!"

The youth moaned and rushed into the hostel.

   BLITHE.

   The elder and the younger knight,
     They sallied forth at three;
   How far they went on level ground
     It matters not to me;
   What time they reached the foot of hill,
     When they began to mount,
   Are problems which I hold to be
     Of very small account.

   The moment that each waved his hat
     Upon the topmost peak--
   To trivial query such as this
     No answer will I seek.
   Yet can I tell the distance well
     They must have travelled o'er:
   On hill and plain, 'twixt three and nine,
     The miles were twenty-four.

   Four miles an hour their steady pace
     Along the level track,
   Three when they climbed--but six when they
     Came swiftly striding back
   Adown the hill; and little skill
     It needs, methinks, to show,
   Up hill and down together told,
     Four miles an hour they go.

   For whether long or short the time
     Upon the hill they spent,
   Two thirds were passed in going up,
     One third in the descent.
   Two thirds at three, one third at six,
     If rightly reckoned o'er,
   Will make one whole at four--the tale
     Is tangled now no more.

                                SIMPLE SUSAN.
                                MONEY SPINNER.

ANSWERS TO KNOT II.

§ 1. THE DINNER PARTY. Find the number of guests."

Answer.--"One."

       *       *       *       *       *

In this genealogy, males are denoted by capitals, and females by small letters.

The Governor is E and his guest is C.

            A = a
              |
       +------+-+----+
       |        |    |
   b = B    D = d    C = c
     |        |        |
     |   +---++--+   +-+-+
     |   |   |   |   |   |
     e = E   |   g = G   |
             F ========= f

Ten answers have been received. Of these, one is wrong, GALANTHUS NIVALIS MAJOR, who insists
on inviting two guests, one being the Governor's wife's brother's father. If she had taken
his sister's husband's father instead, she would have found it possible to reduce the guests
to one.

Of the nine who send right answers, SEA-BREEZE is the very faintest breath that ever bore the
name! She simply states that the Governor's uncle might fulfill all the conditions "by intermarriages"!
"Wind of the western sea," you have had a very narrow escape! Be thankful to appear in the
Class-list at all! BOG-OAK and BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE use genealogies which require 16 people
instead of 14, by inviting the Governor's father's sister's husband instead of his father's
wife's brother. I cannot think this so good a solution as one that requires only 14. CAIUS
and VALENTINE deserve special mention as the only two who have supplied genealogies.

CLASS LIST.

I.

   BEE.
   CAIUS.
   M. M.
   MATTHEW MATTICKS.
   OLD CAT.
   VALENTINE.

II.

   BOG-OAK.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.

III.

   SEA-BREEZE.

§ 2. THE LODGINGS.

Problem.--"A Square has 20 doors on each side, which contains 21 equal parts. They are numbered
all round, beginning at one corner. From which of the four, Nos. 9, 25, 52, 73, is the sum
of the distances, to the other three, least?"

Answer.--"From No. 9."

       *       *       *       *       *

Let A be No. 9, B No. 25, C No. 52, and D No. 73.

   Then AB = [** sqrt](12^{2} + 5^{2}) = [** sqrt]169 = 13;
   AC = 21;
   AD = [** sqrt](9^{2} + 8^{2}) = [** sqrt]145 = 12 +
   (N.B. i.e. "between 12 and 13.")
   BC = [** sqrt](16^{2} + 12^{2}) = [** sqrt]400 = 20;
   BD = [** sqrt](3^{2} + 21^{2}) = [** sqrt]450 = 21+;
   CD = [** sqrt](9^{2} + 13^{2}) = [** sqrt]250 = 15+;

Hence sum of distances from A is between 46 and 47; from B, between 54 and 55; from C, between
56 and 57; from D, between 48 and 51. (Why not "between 48 and 49"? Make this out for yourselves.)
Hence the sum is least for A.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-five solutions have been received. Of these, 15 must be marked "0," 5 are partly right,
and 5 right. Of the 15, I may dismiss ALPHABETICAL PHANTOM, BOG-OAK, DINAH MITE, FIFEE, GALANTHUS
NIVALIS MAJOR (I fear the cold spring has blighted our SNOWDROP), GUY, H.M.S. PINAFORE, JANET,
and VALENTINE with the simple remark that they insist on the unfortunate lodgers keeping to
the pavement. (I used the words "crossed to Number Seventy-three" for the special purpose of
showing that short cuts were possible.) SEA-BREEZE does the same, and adds that "the result
would be the same" even if they crossed the Square, but gives no proof of this. M. M. draws
a diagram, and says that No. 9 is the house, "as the diagram shows." I cannot see how it does
so. OLD CAT assumes that the house must be No. 9 or No. 73. She does not explain how she estimates
the distances. Bee's Arithmetic is faulty: she makes [** sqrt]169 + [** sqrt]442 + [** sqrt]130
= 741. (I suppose you mean [** sqrt]741, which would be a little nearer the truth. But roots
cannot be added in this manner. Do you think [** sqrt]9 + [** sqrt]16 is 25, or even [** sqrt]25?)
But AYR'S state is more perilous still: she draws illogical conclusions with a frightful calmness.
After pointing out (rightly) that AC is less than BD she says, "therefore the nearest house
to the other three must be A or C." And again, after pointing out (rightly) that B and D are
both within the half-square containing A, she says "therefore" AB + AD must be less than BC
+ CD. (There is no logical force in either "therefore." For the first, try Nos. 1, 21, 60,
70: this will make your premiss true, and your conclusion false. Similarly, for the second,
try Nos. 1, 30, 51, 71.)

Of the five partly-right solutions, RAGS AND TATTERS and MAD HATTER (who send one answer between
them) make No. 25 6 units from the corner instead of 5. CHEAM, E. R. D. L., and MEGGY POTTS
leave openings at the corners of the Square, which are not in the data: moreover CHEAM gives
values for the distances without any hint that they are only approximations. CROPHI AND MOPHI
make the bold and unfounded assumption that there were really 21 houses on each side, instead
of 20 as stated by Balbus. "We may assume," they add, "that the doors of Nos. 21, 42, 63, 84,
are invisible from the centre of the Square"! What is there, I wonder, that CROPHI AND MOPHI
would not assume?

Of the five who are wholly right, I think BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, CAIUS, CLIFTON C., and MARTREB
deserve special praise for their full analytical solutions. MATTHEW MATTICKS picks out No.
9, and proves it to be the right house in two ways, very neatly and ingeniously, but why he
picks it out does not appear. It is an excellent synthetical proof, but lacks the analysis
which the other four supply.

CLASS LIST.

I.

   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE
   CAIUS.
   CLIFTON C.
   MARTREB.

II.

MATTHEW MATTICKS.

III.

   CHEAM.
   CROPHI AND MOPHI.
   E. R. D. L.
   MEGGY POTTS.
   {RAGS AND TATTERS.
   {MAD HATTER.

A remonstrance has reached me from SCRUTATOR on the subject of KNOT I., which he declares was
"no problem at all." "Two questions," he says, "are put. To solve one there is no data: the
other answers itself." As to the first point, SCRUTATOR is mistaken; there are (not "is") data
sufficient to answer the question. As to the other, it is interesting to know that the question
"answers itself," and I am sure it does the question great credit: still I fear I cannot enter
it on the list of winners, as this competition is only open to human beings.

ANSWERS TO KNOT III.

Problem.--(1) "Two travellers, starting at the same time, went opposite ways round a circular
railway. Trains start each way every 15 minutes, the easterly ones going round in 3 hours,
the westerly in 2. How many trains did each meet on the way, not counting trains met at the
terminus itself?" (2) "They went round, as before, each traveller counting as 'one' the train
containing the other traveller. How many did each meet?"

Answers.--(1) 19. (2) The easterly traveller met 12; the other 8.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trains one way took 180 minutes, the other way 120. Let us take the L. C. M., 360, and
divide the railway into 360 units. Then one set of trains went at the rate of 2 units a minute
and at intervals of 30 units; the other at the rate of 3 units a minute and at intervals of
45 units. An easterly train starting has 45 units between it and the first train it will meet:
it does 2-5ths of this while the other does 3-5ths, and thus meets it at the end of 18 units,
and so all the way round. A westerly train starting has 30 units between it and the first train
it will meet: it does 3-5ths of this while the other does 2-5ths, and thus meets it at the
end of 18 units, and so all the way round. Hence if the railway be divided, by 19 posts, into
20 parts, each containing 18 units, trains meet at every post, and, in (1), each traveller
passes 19 posts in going round, and so meets 19 trains. But, in (2), the easterly traveller
only begins to count after traversing 2-5ths of the journey, i.e., on reaching the 8th post,
and so counts 12 posts: similarly the other counts 8. They meet at the end of 2-5ths of 3 hours,
or 3-5ths of 2 hours, i.e., 72 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty-five answers have been received. Of these 12 are beyond the reach of discussion, as they
give no working. I can but enumerate their names. ARDMORE, E. A., F. A. D., L. D., MATTHEW
MATTICKS, M. E. T., POO-POO, and THE RED QUEEN are all wrong. BETA and ROWENA have got (1)
right and (2) wrong. CHEEKY BOB and NAIRAM give the right answers, but it may perhaps make
the one less cheeky, and induce the other to take a less inverted view of things, to be informed
that, if this had been a competition for a prize, they would have got no marks. [N.B.--I have
not ventured to put E. A.'s name in full, as she only gave it provisionally, in case her answer
should prove right.]

Of the 33 answers for which the working is given, 10 are wrong; 11 half-wrong and half-right;
3 right, except that they cherish the delusion that it was Clara who travelled in the easterly
train--a point which the data do not enable us to settle; and 9 wholly right.

The 10 wrong answers are from BO-PEEP, FINANCIER, I. W. T., KATE B., M. A. H., Q. Y. Z., SEA-GULL,
THISTLEDOWN, TOM-QUAD, and an unsigned one. BO-PEEP rightly says that the easterly traveller
met all trains which started during the 3 hours of her trip, as well as all which started during
the previous 2 hours, i.e., all which started at the commencements of 20 periods of 15 minutes
each; and she is right in striking out the one she met at the moment of starting; but wrong
in striking out the last train, for she did not meet this at the terminus, but 15 minutes before
she got there. She makes the same mistake in (2). FINANCIER thinks that any train, met for
the second time, is not to be counted. I. W. T. finds, by a process which is not stated, that
the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes and 26-1/2 seconds. KATE B. thinks the trains which
are met on starting and on arriving are never to be counted, even when met elsewhere. Q. Y.
Z. tries a rather complex algebraical solution, and succeeds in finding the time of meeting
correctly: all else is wrong. SEA-GULL seems to think that, in (1), the easterly train stood
still for 3 hours; and says that, in (2), the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes 40 seconds.
THISTLEDOWN nobly confesses to having tried no calculation, but merely having drawn a picture
of the railway and counted the trains; in (1), she counts wrong; in (2) she makes them meet
in 75 minutes. TOM-QUAD omits (1): in (2) he makes Clara count the train she met on her arrival.
The unsigned one is also unintelligible; it states that the travellers go "1-24th more than
the total distance to be traversed"! The "Clara" theory, already referred to, is adopted by
5 of these, viz., BO-PEEP, FINANCIER, KATE B., TOM-QUAD, and the nameless writer.

The 11 half-right answers are from BOG-OAK, BRIDGET, CASTOR, CHESHIRE CAT, G. E. B., GUY, MARY,
M. A. H., OLD MAID, R. W., and VENDREDI. All these adopt the "Clara" theory. CASTOR omits (1).
VENDREDI gets (1) right, but in (2) makes the same mistake as BO-PEEP. I notice in your solution
a marvellous proportion-sum:--"300 miles: 2 hours :: one mile: 24 seconds." May I venture to
advise your acquiring, as soon as possible, an utter disbelief in the possibility of a ratio
existing between miles and hours? Do not be disheartened by your two friends' sarcastic remarks
on your "roundabout ways." Their short method, of adding 12 and 8, has the slight disadvantage
of bringing the answer wrong: even a "roundabout" method is better than that! M. A. H., in
(2), makes the travellers count "one" after they met, not when they met. CHESHIRE CAT and OLD
MAID get "20" as answer for (1), by forgetting to strike out the train met on arrival. The
others all get "18" in various ways. BOG-OAK, GUY, and R. W. divide the trains which the westerly
traveller has to meet into 2 sets, viz., those already on the line, which they (rightly) make
"11," and those which started during her 2 hours' journey (exclusive of train met on arrival),
which they (wrongly) make "7"; and they make a similar mistake with the easterly train. BRIDGET
(rightly) says that the westerly traveller met a train every 6 minutes for 2 hours, but (wrongly)
makes the number "20"; it should be "21." G. E. B. adopts BO-PEEP'S method, but (wrongly) strikes
out (for the easterly traveller) the train which started at the commencement of the previous
2 hours. MARY thinks a train, met on arrival, must not be counted, even when met on a previous
occasion.

The 3, who are wholly right but for the unfortunate "Clara" theory, are F. LEE, G. S. C., and
X. A. B.

And now "descend, ye classic Ten!" who have solved the whole problem. Your names are AIX-LES-BAINS,
ALGERNON BRAY (thanks for a friendly remark, which comes with a heart-warmth that not even
the Atlantic could chill), ARVON, BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, FIFEE, H. L. R., J. L. O., OMEGA,
S. S. G., and WAITING FOR THE TRAIN. Several of these have put Clara, provisionally, into the
easterly train: but they seem to have understood that the data do not decide that point.

CLASS LIST.

I.

   AIX-LES-BAINS.
   ALGERNON BRAY.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   FIFEE.
   H. L. R.
   OMEGA.
   S. S. G.
   WAITING FOR THE TRAIN.

II.

   ARVON.
   J. L. O.

III.

   F. LEE.
   G. S. C.
   X. A. B.

ANSWERS TO KNOT IV.

Problem.--"There are 5 sacks, of which Nos. 1, 2, weigh 12 lbs.; Nos. 2, 3, 13-1/2 lbs.; Nos.
3, 4, 11-1/2 lbs.; Nos. 4, 5, 8 lbs.; Nos. 1, 3, 5, 16 lbs. Required the weight of each sack."

Answer.--"5-1/2, 6-1/2, 7, 4-1/2, 3-1/2."

       *       *       *       *       *

The sum of all the weighings, 61 lbs., includes sack No. 3 thrice and each other twice. Deducting
twice the sum of the 1st and 4th weighings, we get 21 lbs. for thrice No. 3, i.e., 7 lbs. for
No. 3. Hence, the 2nd and 3rd weighings give 6-1/2 lbs., 4-1/2 lbs. for Nos. 2, 4; and hence
again, the 1st and 4th weighings give 5-1/2 lbs., 3-1/2 lbs., for Nos. 1, 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ninety-seven answers have been received. Of these, 15 are beyond the reach of discussion, as
they give no working. I can but enumerate their names, and I take this opportunity of saying
that this is the last time I shall put on record the names of competitors who give no sort
of clue to the process by which their answers were obtained. In guessing a conundrum, or in
catching a flea, we do not expect the breathless victor to give us afterwards, in cold blood,
a history of the mental or muscular efforts by which he achieved success; but a mathematical
calculation is another thing. The names of this "mute inglorious" band are COMMON SENSE, D.
E. R., DOUGLAS, E. L., ELLEN, I. M. T., J. M. C., JOSEPH, KNOT I, LUCY, MEEK, M. F. C., PYRAMUS,
SHAH, VERITAS.

Of the eighty-two answers with which the working, or some approach to it, is supplied, one
is wrong: seventeen have given solutions which are (from one cause or another) practically
valueless: the remaining sixty-four I shall try to arrange in a Class-list, according to the
varying degrees of shortness and neatness to which they seem to have attained.

The solitary wrong answer is from NELL. To be thus "alone in the crowd" is a distinction--a
painful one, no doubt, but still a distinction. I am sorry for you, my dear young lady, and
I seem to hear your tearful exclamation, when you read these lines, "Ah! This is the knell
of all my hopes!" Why, oh why, did you assume that the 4th and 5th bags weighed 4 lbs. each?
And why did you not test your answers? However, please try again: and please don't change your
nom-de-plume: let us have NELL in the First Class next time!

The seventeen whose solutions are practically valueless are ARDMORE, A READY RECKONER, ARTHUR,
BOG-LARK, BOG-OAK, BRIDGET, FIRST ATTEMPT, J. L. C., M. E. T., ROSE, ROWENA, SEA-BREEZE, SYLVIA,
THISTLEDOWN, THREE-FIFTHS ASLEEP, VENDREDI, and WINIFRED. BOG-LARK tries it by a sort of "rule
of false," assuming experimentally that Nos. 1, 2, weigh 6 lbs. each, and having thus produced
17-1/2, instead of 16, as the weight of 1, 3, and 5, she removes "the superfluous pound and
a half," but does not explain how she knows from which to take it. THREE-FIFTHS ASLEEP says
that (when in that peculiar state) "it seemed perfectly clear" to her that, "3 out of the 5
sacks being weighed twice over, 3/5 of 45 = 27, must be the total weight of the 5 sacks." As
to which I can only say, with the Captain, "it beats me entirely!" WINIFRED, on the plea that
"one must have a starting-point," assumes (what I fear is a mere guess) that No. 1 weighed
5-1/2 lbs. The rest all do it, wholly or partly, by guess-work.

The problem is of course (as any Algebraist sees at once) a case of "simultaneous simple equations."
It is, however, easily soluble by Arithmetic only; and, when this is the case, I hold that
it is bad workmanship to use the more complex method. I have not, this time, given more credit
to arithmetical solutions; but in future problems I shall (other things being equal) give the
highest marks to those who use the simplest machinery. I have put into Class I. those whose
answers seemed specially short and neat, and into Class III. those that seemed specially long
or clumsy. Of this last set, A. C. M., FURZE-BUSH, JAMES, PARTRIDGE, R. W., and WAITING FOR
THE TRAIN, have sent long wandering solutions, the substitutions having no definite method,
but seeming to have been made to see what would come of it. CHILPOME and DUBLIN BOY omit some
of the working. ARVON MARLBOROUGH BOY only finds the weight of one sack.

CLASS LIST

I.

   B. E. D.
   C. H.
   CONSTANCE JOHNSON.
   GREYSTEAD.
   GUY.
   HOOPOE.
   J. F. A.
   M. A. H.
   NUMBER FIVE.
   PEDRO.
   R. E. X.
   SEVEN OLD MEN.
   VIS INERTIÆ.
   WILLY B.
   YAHOO.

II.

   AMERICAN SUBSCRIBER.
   AN APPRECIATIVE SCHOOLMA'AM.
   AYR.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   CHEAM.
   C. M. G.
   DINAH MITE.
   DUCKWING.
   E. C. M.
   E. N. Lowry.
   ERA.
   EUROCLYDON.
   F. H. W.
   FIFEE.
   G. E. B.
   HARLEQUIN.
   HAWTHORN.
   HOUGH GREEN.
   J. A. B.
   JACK TAR.
   J. B. B.
   KGOVJNI.
   LAND LUBBER.
   L. D.
   MAGPIE.
   MARY.
   MHRUXI.
   MINNIE.
   MONEY-SPINNER.
   NAIRAM.
   OLD CAT.
   POLICHINELLE.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   S. S. G.
   THISBE.
   VERENA.
   WAMBA.
   WOLFE.
   WYKEHAMICUS.
   Y. M. A. H.

III.

   A. C. M.
   ARVON MARLBOROUGH BOY.
   CHILPOME.
   DUBLIN BOY.
   FURZE-BUSH.
   JAMES.
   PARTRIDGE.
   R. W.
   WAITING FOR THE TRAIN.

ANSWERS TO KNOT V.

Problem.--To mark pictures, giving 3 x's to 2 or 3, 2 to 4 or 5, and 1 to 9 or 10; also giving
3 o's to 1 or 2, 2 to 3 or 4 and 1 to 8 or 9; so as to mark the smallest possible number of
pictures, and to give them the largest possible number of marks.

Answer.--10 pictures; 29 marks; arranged thus:--

   x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  o
   x  x  x  x  x     o  o  o  o
   x  x  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

Solution.--By giving all the x's possible, putting into brackets the optional ones, we get
10 pictures marked thus:--

   x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x (x)
   x  x  x  x (x)
   x  x (x)

By then assigning o's in the same way, beginning at the other end, we get 9 pictures marked thus:--

                        (o) o
                  (o) o  o  o
   (o) o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

All we have now to do is to run these two wedges as close together as they will go, so as to
get the minimum number of pictures----erasing optional marks where by so doing we can run them
closer, but otherwise letting them stand. There are 10 necessary marks in the 1st row, and
in the 3rd; but only 7 in the 2nd. Hence we erase all optional marks in the 1st and 3rd rows,
but let them stand in the 2nd.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-two answers have been received. Of these 11 give no working; so, in accordance with
what I announced in my last review of answers, I leave them unnamed, merely mentioning that
5 are right and 6 wrong.

Of the eleven answers with which some working is supplied, 3 are wrong. C. H. begins with the
rash assertion that under the given conditions "the sum is impossible. For," he or she adds
(these initialed correspondents are dismally vague beings to deal with: perhaps "it" would
be a better pronoun), "10 is the least possible number of pictures" (granted): "therefore we
must either give 2 x's to 6, or 2 o's to 5." Why "must," oh alphabetical phantom? It is nowhere
ordained that every picture "must" have 3 marks! FIFEE sends a folio page of solution, which
deserved a better fate: she offers 3 answers, in each of which 10 pictures are marked, with
30 marks; in one she gives 2 x's to 6 pictures; in another to 7; in the 3rd she gives 2 o's
to 5; thus in every case ignoring the conditions. (I pause to remark that the condition "2
x's to 4 or 5 pictures" can only mean "either to 4 or else to 5": if, as one competitor holds,
it might mean any number not less than 4, the words "or 5" would be superfluous.) I. E. A.
(I am happy to say that none of these bloodless phantoms appear this time in the class-list.
Is it IDEA with the "D" left out?) gives 2 x's to 6 pictures. She then takes me to task for
using the word "ought" instead of "nought." No doubt, to one who thus rebels against the rules
laid down for her guidance, the word must be distasteful. But does not I. E. A. remember the
parallel case of "adder"? That creature was originally "a nadder": then the two words took
to bandying the poor "n" backwards and forwards like a shuttlecock, the final state of the
game being "an adder." May not "a nought" have similarly become "an ought"? Anyhow, "oughts
and crosses" is a very old game. I don't think I ever heard it called "noughts and crosses."

In the following Class-list, I hope the solitary occupant of III. will sheathe her claws when
she hears how narrow an escape she has had of not being named at all. Her account of the process
by which she got the answer is so meagre that, like the nursery tale of "Jack-a-Minory" (I
trust I. E. A. will be merciful to the spelling), it is scarcely to be distinguished from "zero."

CLASS LIST.

I.

   GUY.
   OLD CAT.
   SEA-BREEZE.

II.

   AYR.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   F. LEE.
   H. VERNON.

III.

CAT.

ANSWERS TO KNOT VI.

Problem 1.--A and B began the year with only 1,000l. a-piece. They borrowed nought; they stole
nought. On the next New-Year's Day they had 60,000l. between them. How did they do it?

Solution.--They went that day to the Bank of England. A stood in front of it, while B went
round and stood behind it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two answers have been received, both worthy of much honour. ADDLEPATE makes them borrow "0"
and steal "0," and uses both cyphers by putting them at the right-hand end of the 1,000l.,
thus producing 100,000l., which is well over the mark. But (or to express it in Latin) AT SPES
INFRACTA has solved it even more ingeniously: with the first cypher she turns the "1" of the
1,000l. into a "9," and adds the result to the original sum, thus getting 10,000l.: and in
this, by means of the other "0," she turns the "1" into a "6," thus hitting the exact 60,000l.

CLASS LIST

I.

AT SPES INFRACTA.

II.

ADDLEPATE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Problem 2.--L makes 5 scarves, while M makes 2: Z makes 4 while L makes 3. Five scarves of
Z's weigh one of L's; 5 of M's weigh 3 of Z's. One of M's is as warm as 4 of Z's: and one of
L's as warm as 3 of M's. Which is best, giving equal weight in the result to rapidity of work,
lightness, and warmth?

Answer.--The order is M, L, Z.

       *       *       *       *       *

Solution.--As to rapidity (other things being constant) L's merit is to M's in the ratio of
5 to 2: Z's to L's in the ratio of 4 to 3. In order to get one set of 3 numbers fulfilling
these conditions, it is perhaps simplest to take the one that occurs twice as unity, and reduce
the others to fractions: this gives, for L, M, and Z, the marks 1, 2/5, 4/3. In estimating
for lightness, we observe that the greater the weight, the less the merit, so that Z's merit
is to L's as 5 to 1. Thus the marks for lightness are 1/5, 5/3, 1. And similarly, the marks
for warmth are 3, 1, 1/4. To get the total result, we must multiply L's 3 marks together, and
do the same for M and for Z. The final numbers are 1 × 1/5 × 3, 2/5 × 5/3 × 1, 4/3 × 1 × 1/4;
i.e. 3/5, 2/3, 1/3; i.e. multiplying throughout by 15 (which will not alter the proportion),
9, 10, 5; showing the order of merit to be M, L, Z.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-nine answers have been received, of which five are right, and twenty-four wrong. These
hapless ones have all (with three exceptions) fallen into the error of adding the proportional
numbers together, for each candidate, instead of multiplying. Why the latter is right, rather
than the former, is fully proved in text-books, so I will not occupy space by stating it here:
but it can be illustrated very easily by the case of length, breadth, and depth. Suppose A
and B are rival diggers of rectangular tanks: the amount of work done is evidently measured
by the number of cubical feet dug out. Let A dig a tank 10 feet long, 10 wide, 2 deep: let
B dig one 6 feet long, 5 wide, 10 deep. The cubical contents are 200, 300; i.e. B is best digger
in the ratio of 3 to 2. Now try marking for length, width, and depth, separately; giving a
maximum mark of 10 to the best in each contest, and then adding the results!

Of the twenty-four malefactors, one gives no working, and so has no real claim to be named;
but I break the rule for once, in deference to its success in Problem 1: he, she, or it, is
ADDLEPATE. The other twenty-three may be divided into five groups.

First and worst are, I take it, those who put the rightful winner last; arranging them as "Lolo,
Zuzu, Mimi." The names of these desperate wrong-doers are AYR, BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, FURZE-BUSH
and POLLUX (who send a joint answer), GREYSTEAD, GUY, OLD HEN, and SIMPLE SUSAN. The latter
was once best of all; the Old Hen has taken advantage of her simplicity, and beguiled her with
the chaff which was the bane of her own chickenhood.

Secondly, I point the finger of scorn at those who have put the worst candidate at the top;
arranging them as "Zuzu, Mimi, Lolo." They are GRAECIA, M. M., OLD CAT, and R. E. X. "'Tis
Greece, but----."

The third set have avoided both these enormities, and have even succeeded in putting the worst
last, their answer being "Lolo, Mimi, Zuzu." Their names are AYR (who also appears among the
"quite too too"), CLIFTON C., F. B., FIFEE, GRIG, JANET, and MRS. SAIREY GAMP. F. B. has not
fallen into the common error; she multiplies together the proportionate numbers she gets, but
in getting them she goes wrong, by reckoning warmth as a de-merit. Possibly she is "Freshly
Burnt," or comes "From Bombay." JANET and MRS. SAIREY GAMP have also avoided this error: the
method they have adopted is shrouded in mystery--I scarcely feel competent to criticize it.
MRS. GAMP says "if Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3, Zuzu makes 6 while Lolo makes 5 (bad reasoning),
while Mimi makes 2." From this she concludes "therefore Zuzu excels in speed by 1" (i.e. when
compared with Lolo; but what about Mimi?). She then compares the 3 kinds of excellence, measured
on this mystic scale. JANET takes the statement, that "Lolo makes 5 while Mimi makes 2," to
prove that "Lolo makes 3 while Mimi makes 1 and Zuzu 4" (worse reasoning than MRS. GAMP'S),
and thence concludes that "Zuzu excels in speed by 1/8"! JANET should have been ADELINE, "mystery
of mysteries!"

The fourth set actually put Mimi at the top, arranging them as "Mimi, Zuzu, Lolo." They are
MARQUIS AND CO., MARTREB, S. B. B. (first initial scarcely legible: may be meant for "J"),
and STANZA.

The fifth set consist of AN ANCIENT FISH and CAMEL. These ill-assorted comrades, by dint of
foot and fin, have scrambled into the right answer, but, as their method is wrong, of course
it counts for nothing. Also AN ANCIENT FISH has very ancient and fishlike ideas as to how numbers
represent merit: she says "Lolo gains 2-1/2 on Mimi." Two and a half what? Fish, fish, art
thou in thy duty?

Of the five winners I put BALBUS and THE ELDER TRAVELLER slightly below the other three--BALBUS
for defective reasoning, the other for scanty working. BALBUS gives two reasons for saying
that addition of marks is not the right method, and then adds "it follows that the decision
must be made by multiplying the marks together." This is hardly more logical than to say "This
is not Spring: therefore it must be Autumn."

CLASS LIST.

I.

   DINAH MITE.
   E. B. D. L.
   JORAM.

II.

   BALBUS.
   THE ELDER TRAVELLER.

       *       *       *       *       *

With regard to Knot V., I beg to express to VIS INERTIÆ and to any others who, like her, understood
the condition to be that every marked picture must have three marks, my sincere regret that
the unfortunate phrase "fill the columns with oughts and crosses" should have caused them to
waste so much time and trouble. I can only repeat that a literal interpretation of "fill" would
seem to me to require that every picture in the gallery should be marked. VIS INERTIÆ would
have been in the First Class if she had sent in the solution she now offers.

ANSWERS TO KNOT VII.

Problem.--Given that one glass of lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 7 biscuits, cost 1s. 2d.; and
that one glass of lemonade, 4 sandwiches, and 10 biscuits, cost 1s. 5d.: find the cost of (1)
a glass of lemonade, a sandwich, and a biscuit; and (2) 2 glasses of lemonade, 3 sandwiches,
and 5 biscuits.

Answer.--(1) 8d.; (2) 1s. 7d.

Solution.--This is best treated algebraically. Let x = the cost (in pence) of a glass of lemonade,
y of a sandwich, and z of a biscuit. Then we have x + 3y + 7z = 14, and x + 4y + 10z = 17.
And we require the values of x + y + z, and of 2x + 3y + 5z. Now, from two equations only,
we cannot find, separately, the values of three unknowns: certain combinations of them may,
however, be found. Also we know that we can, by the help of the given equations, eliminate
2 of the 3 unknowns from the quantity whose value is required, which will then contain one
only. If, then, the required value is ascertainable at all, it can only be by the 3rd unknown
vanishing of itself: otherwise the problem is impossible.

Let us then eliminate lemonade and sandwiches, and reduce everything to biscuits--a state of
things even more depressing than "if all the world were apple-pie"--by subtracting the 1st
equation from the 2nd, which eliminates lemonade, and gives y + 3z = 3, or y = 3-3z; and then
substituting this value of y in the 1st, which gives x-2z = 5, i.e. x = 5 + 2z. Now if we substitute
these values of x, y, in the quantities whose values are required, the first becomes (5 + 2z)
+ (3-3z) + z, i.e. 8: and the second becomes 2(5 + 2z) + 3(3-3z) + 5z, i.e. 19. Hence the answers
are (1) 8d., (2) 1s. 7d.

       *       *       *       *       *

The above is a universal method: that is, it is absolutely certain either to produce the answer,
or to prove that no answer is possible. The question may also be solved by combining the quantities
whose values are given, so as to form those whose values are required. This is merely a matter
of ingenuity and good luck: and as it may fail, even when the thing is possible, and is of
no use in proving it impossible, I cannot rank this method as equal in value with the other.
Even when it succeeds, it may prove a very tedious process. Suppose the 26 competitors, who
have sent in what I may call accidental solutions, had had a question to deal with where every
number contained 8 or 10 digits! I suspect it would have been a case of "silvered is the raven
hair" (see "Patience") before any solution would have been hit on by the most ingenious of them.

Forty-five answers have come in, of which 44 give, I am happy to say, some sort of working,
and therefore deserve to be mentioned by name, and to have their virtues, or vices as the case
may be, discussed. Thirteen have made assumptions to which they have no right, and so cannot
figure in the Class-list, even though, in 10 of the 13 cases, the answer is right. Of the remaining
28, no less than 26 have sent in accidental solutions, and therefore fall short of the highest
honours.

I will now discuss individual cases, taking the worst first, as my custom is.

FROGGY gives no working--at least this is all he gives: after stating the given equations,
he says "therefore the difference, 1 sandwich + 3 biscuits, = 3d.": then follow the amounts
of the unknown bills, with no further hint as to how he got them. FROGGY has had a very narrow
escape of not being named at all!

Of those who are wrong, VIS INERTIÆ has sent in a piece of incorrect working. Peruse the horrid
details, and shudder! She takes x (call it "y") as the cost of a sandwich, and concludes (rightly
enough) that a biscuit will cost (3-y)/3. She then subtracts the second equation from the first,
and deduces 3y + 7 × (3-y)/3-4y + 10 × (3-y)/3 = 3. By making two mistakes in this line, she
brings out y = 3/2. Try it again, oh VIS INERTIÆ! Away with INERTIÆ: infuse a little more VIS:
and you will bring out the correct (though uninteresting) result, 0 = 0! This will show you
that it is hopeless to try to coax any one of these 3 unknowns to reveal its separate value.
The other competitor, who is wrong throughout, is either J. M. C. or T. M. C.: but, whether
he be a Juvenile Mis-Calculator or a True Mathematician Confused, he makes the answers 7d.
and 1s. 5d. He assumes, with Too Much Confidence, that biscuits were 1/2d. each, and that Clara
paid for 8, though she only ate 7!

We will now consider the 13 whose working is wrong, though the answer is right: and, not to
measure their demerits too exactly, I will take them in alphabetical order. ANITA finds (rightly)
that "1 sandwich and 3 biscuits cost 3d.," and proceeds "therefore 1 sandwich = 1-1/2d., 3
biscuits = 1-1/2d., 1 lemonade = 6d." DINAH MITE begins like ANITA: and thence proves (rightly)
that a biscuit costs less than a 1d.: whence she concludes (wrongly) that it must cost 1/2d.
F. C. W. is so beautifully resigned to the certainty of a verdict of "guilty," that I have
hardly the heart to utter the word, without adding a "recommended to mercy owing to extenuating
circumstances." But really, you know, where are the extenuating circumstances? She begins by
assuming that lemonade is 4d. a glass, and sandwiches 3d. each, (making with the 2 given equations,
four conditions to be fulfilled by three miserable unknowns!). And, having (naturally) developed
this into a contradiction, she then tries 5d. and 2d. with a similar result. (N.B. This process
might have been carried on through the whole of the Tertiary Period, without gratifying one
single Megatherium.) She then, by a "happy thought," tries half-penny biscuits, and so obtains
a consistent result. This may be a good solution, viewing the problem as a conundrum: but it
is not scientific. JANET identifies sandwiches with biscuits! "One sandwich + 3 biscuits" she
makes equal to "4." Four what? MAYFAIR makes the astounding assertion that the equation, s
+ 3b = 3, "is evidently only satisfied by s = 3/2, b = 1/2"! OLD CAT believes that the assumption
that a sandwich costs 1-1/2d. is "the only way to avoid unmanageable fractions." But why avoid
them? Is there not a certain glow of triumph in taming such a fraction? "Ladies and gentlemen,
the fraction now before you is one that for years defied all efforts of a refining nature:
it was, in a word, hopelessly vulgar. 

  You let the world in eternal twilight!
  Geduldger hearest prayer impetuosity
  Bury you in my love of power.

  
  On our side's memory And weaves threads of the
  way to crown trim, Like bees flying
  around summer Linden Hums sweet music of their feet going.

  
  
  Of melting of things shine their hands, Beware
  buried or meerversunknen Hort.

  He lifts and stirs awakening to their word Young
  and sparkles like dew in the area.
  

  Not flowers's what they read on the rim; She collects
  seeds of life that went by. From new hope,
  long since dried up tears,

  

  Today Verschmiedend ardent and rigid-been, Turn
  our golden life it to the ring, The fact that
  orbits in an infinite eternal spheres.
  

  LIFE
  
  Light flows from canyons of the past In our cup,
  we fill raving, Ambrosially blood from the purple-hull Transfigured
life sparkling freed:

Longing and love, tears, smiles, joy And fight
and curse and victorious thoughts The dead, as we drank the wine festival,
Lenz leaves in the hair, not our conscious;

And we do not perceive,
to-day lost in thought, That every drop that spills the time From
our soul dissolves and so durchglutet

Herniederrinnt in a dark fount
The once overflowing into other shells Drunken revelers who bathed
the day.

  
  
  As two dead who died for love, - Fragrant fire it melts together now
- Rest, we still, umblaut of spring flames Saturated in joy after
the separation starving.

  
  
  High in the sky with flaring hems Swirl and the hours in Sturmestänzen,
Their bare soles see we shine, But no sound comes from such distant
areas.

  
  
  But slowly sink regards the previous Days the
  heart listened in anguish, Heavy down in veiled depths

As if underground
Goldestriefen rustled in the rock hollow basin, The other side of
us ever close Umfangnen.

  
  
  There where the yellow blaze early Falter
  To wild undergrowth on the mountain slopes pulled out, And streams
swollen by stale Modern, We stayed, the burden of joy crushed.

  
  
  As of the master himself unleashed ore Poured down the sun's power
on us, She rushed through our heart beating red And grew like golden
skin around our limbs.

  
  
  Now I feel so as if there would remain above, The elements known,
and broach Immortal one: the smiling image of love,

However, we,
dust without meaning and life, The falls from the hour strike blind,
Stairs down into the valley of grief.

  
  
  How my busy life without you! We can now's
  fingertips to stimulate, A golden ball, as the manner of the jugglers,
The weight is still possible to just rock.

  It dances and shimmers, thin glass fabric
  And inviolable, but such as diamond, A blissful
  beings, stars mousing; Alas, that it never
  entschwebe our hands!

  
  Music moves me, that I think of you,
  Also wants the sea and cloud, mountain and star, How other than you,
you still so far away, I fully to you the heart devotion joints.

  No noble image that do not force my eye
  To dream of you, no animated rhyme The recall
  does not bring home to you - Brothers and sisters are all beautiful
things.

  
  
  Ancient words of knowledge comes the night; It
  solves things and armor from gang She
  changes the characters and dress And the
  same argument wrapped in brown costume.

As
  touched the stone mountains caress them
  And swells like the sea across the country.

  The abyss longing creeps to the edge And
  drink of the stars sat bent superb.
  
  I hold you and I'm surrounded by you, Weary
  traveler to turn home; So I feel you cast in
  flesh and blood,
  
  From your body and life of my clothed.

  The soul is resting from a long desire
  The one by the other does not distinguish.
  
  

  We wandered drunk young love In this cemetery
  verhangnen green corridors, Where harass periwinkle
  and ivy to With sunk dead in the graves night.

The
  old willow and birch trees shade Beat together protectively over
our heads, Left unpunished enduring flame For fleeting break in sacred
sites.

   He then concludes that
this agreement of results "shows that the answers are correct." Now I propose to disprove his
general law by simply giving one instance of its failing. One instance is quite enough. In
logical language, in order to disprove a "universal affirmative," it is enough to prove its
contradictory, which is a "particular negative." (I must pause for a digression on Logic, and
especially on Ladies' Logic. The universal affirmative "everybody says he's a duck" is crushed
instantly by proving the particular negative "Peter says he's a goose," which is equivalent
to "Peter does not say he's a duck." And the universal negative "nobody calls on her" is well
met by the particular affirmative "I called yesterday." In short, either of two contradictories
disproves the other: and the moral is that, since a particular proposition is much more easily
proved than a universal one, it is the wisest course, in arguing with a Lady, to limit one's
own assertions to "particulars," and leave her to prove the "universal" contradictory, if she
can. You will thus generally secure a logical victory: a practical victory is not to be hoped
for, since she can always fall back upon the crushing remark "that has nothing to do with it!"--a
move for which Man has not yet discovered any satisfactory answer. Now let us return to BALBUS.)
Here is my "particular negative," on which to test his rule. Suppose the two recorded luncheons
to have been "2 buns, one queen-cake, 2 sausage-rolls, and a bottle of Zoëdone: total, one-and-ninepence,"
and "one bun, 2 queen-cakes, a sausage-roll, and a bottle of Zoëdone: total, one-and-fourpence."
And suppose Clara's unknown luncheon to have been "3 buns, one queen-cake, one sausage-roll,
and 2 bottles of Zoëdone:" while the two little sisters had been indulging in "8 buns, 4 queen-cakes,
2 sausage-rolls, and 6 bottles of Zoëdone." (Poor souls, how thirsty they must have been!)
If BALBUS will kindly try this by his principle of "two assumptions," first assuming that a
bun is 1d. and a queen-cake 2d., and then that a bun is 3d. and a queen-cake 3d., he will bring
out the other two luncheons, on each assumption, as "one-and-nine-pence" and "four-and-ten-pence"
respectively, which harmony of results, he will say, "shows that the answers are correct."
And yet, as a matter of fact, the buns were 2d. each, the queen-cakes 3d., the sausage-rolls
6d., and the Zoëdone 2d. a bottle: so that Clara's third luncheon had cost one-and-sevenpence,
and her thirsty friends had spent four-and-fourpence!

Another remark of BALBUS I will quote and discuss: for I think that it also may yield a moral
for some of my readers. He says "it is the same thing in substance whether in solving this
problem we use words and call it Arithmetic, or use letters and signs and call it Algebra."
Now this does not appear to me a correct description of the two methods: the Arithmetical method
is that of "synthesis" only; it goes from one known fact to another, till it reaches its goal:
whereas the Algebraical method is that of "analysis": it begins with the goal, symbolically
represented, and so goes backwards, dragging its veiled victim with it, till it has reached
the full daylight of known facts, in which it can tear off the veil and say "I know you!"

Take an illustration. Your house has been broken into and robbed, and you appeal to the policeman
who was on duty that night. "Well, Mum, I did see a chap getting out over your garden-wall:
but I was a good bit off, so I didn't chase him, like. I just cut down the short way to the
Chequers, and who should I meet but Bill Sykes, coming full split round the corner. So I just
ups and says 'My lad, you're wanted.' That's all I says. And he says 'I'll go along quiet,
Bobby,' he says, 'without the darbies,' he says." There's your Arithmetical policeman. Now
try the other method. "I seed somebody a running, but he was well gone or ever I got nigh the
place. So I just took a look round in the garden. And I noticed the foot-marks, where the chap
had come right across your flower-beds. They was good big foot-marks sure-ly. And I noticed
as the left foot went down at the heel, ever so much deeper than the other. And I says to myself
'The chap's been a big hulking chap: and he goes lame on his left foot.' And I rubs my hand
on the wall where he got over, and there was soot on it, and no mistake. So I says to myself
'Now where can I light on a big man, in the chimbley-sweep line, what's lame of one foot?'
And I flashes up permiscuous: and I says 'It's Bill Sykes!' says I." There is your Algebraical
policeman--a higher intellectual type, to my thinking, than the other.

LITTLE JACK'S solution calls for a word of praise, as he has written out what really is an
algebraical proof in words, without representing any of his facts as equations. If it is all
his own, he will make a good algebraist in the time to come. I beg to thank SIMPLE SUSAN for
some kind words of sympathy, to the same effect as those received from OLD CAT.

HECLA and MARTREB are the only two who have used a method certain either to produce the answer,
or else to prove it impossible: so they must share between them the highest honours.

CLASS LIST.

I.

   HECLA.
   MARTREB.

II.

§ 1 (2 steps).

   ADELAIDE.
   CLIFTON C....
   E. K. C.
   GUY.
   L'INCONNU.
   LITTLE JACK.
   NIL DESPERANDUM.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   YELLOW-HAMMER.
   WOOLLY ONE.

§ 2 (3 steps).

   A. A.
   A CHRISTMAS CAROL.
   AFTERNOON TEA.
   AN APPRECIATIVE SCHOOLMA'AM.
   BABY.
   BALBUS.
   BOG-OAK.
   THE RED QUEEN.
   WALL-FLOWER.

§ 3 (4 steps).

   HAWTHORN.
   JORAM.
   S. S. G.

§ 4 (5 steps).

   A STEPNEY COACH.

§ 5 (6 steps).

   BAY LAUREL.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.

§ 6 (9 steps).

   OLD KING COLE.

§ 7 (14 steps).

   THESEUS.

ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

I have received several letters on the subjects of Knots II. and VI., which lead me to think
some further explanation desirable.

In Knot II., I had intended the numbering of the houses to begin at one corner of the Square,
and this was assumed by most, if not all, of the competitors. TROJANUS however says "assuming,
in default of any information, that the street enters the square in the middle of each side,
it may be supposed that the numbering begins at a street." But surely the other is the more
natural assumption?

In Knot VI., the first Problem was of course a mere jeu de mots, whose presence I thought excusable
in a series of Problems whose aim is to entertain rather than to instruct: but it has not escaped
the contemptuous criticisms of two of my correspondents, who seem to think that Apollo is in
duty bound to keep his bow always on the stretch. Neither of them has guessed it: and this
is true human nature. Only the other day--the 31st of September, to be quite exact--I met my
old friend Brown, and gave him a riddle I had just heard. With one great effort of his colossal
mind, Brown guessed it. "Right!" said I. "Ah," said he, "it's very neat--very neat. And it
isn't an answer that would occur to everybody. Very neat indeed." A few yards further on, I
fell in with Smith and to him I propounded the same riddle. He frowned over it for a minute,
and then gave it up. Meekly I faltered out the answer. "A poor thing, sir!" Smith growled,
as he turned away. "A very poor thing! I wonder you care to repeat such rubbish!" Yet Smith's
mind is, if possible, even more colossal than Brown's.

The second Problem of Knot VI. is an example in ordinary Double Rule of Three, whose essential
feature is that the result depends on the variation of several elements, which are so related
to it that, if all but one be constant, it varies as that one: hence, if none be constant,
it varies as their product. Thus, for example, the cubical contents of a rectangular tank vary
as its length, if breadth and depth be constant, and so on; hence, if none be constant, it
varies as the product of the length, breadth, and depth.

When the result is not thus connected with the varying elements, the Problem ceases to be Double
Rule of Three and often becomes one of great complexity.

To illustrate this, let us take two candidates for a prize, A and B, who are to compete in
French, German, and Italian:

(a) Let it be laid down that the result is to depend on their relative knowledge of each subject,
so that, whether their marks, for French, be "1, 2" or "100, 200," the result will be the same:
and let it also be laid down that, if they get equal marks on 2 papers, the final marks are
to have the same ratio as those of the 3rd paper. This is a case of ordinary Double Rule of
Three. We multiply A's 3 marks together, and do the same for B. Note that, if A gets a single
"0," his final mark is "0," even if he gets full marks for 2 papers while B gets only one mark
for each paper. This of course would be very unfair on A, though a correct solution under the
given conditions.

(b) The result is to depend, as before, on relative knowledge; but French is to have twice
as much weight as German or Italian. This is an unusual form of question. I should be inclined
to say "the resulting ratio is to be nearer to the French ratio than if we multiplied as in
(a), and so much nearer that it would be necessary to use the other multipliers twice to produce
the same result as in (a):" e.g. if the French Ratio were 9/10, and the others 4/9, 1/9 so
that the ultimate ratio, by method (a), would be 2/45, I should multiply instead by 2/3, 1/3,
giving the result, 1/3 which is nearer to 9/10 than if he had used method (a).

(c) The result is to depend on actual amount of knowledge of the 3 subjects collectively. Here
we have to ask two questions. (1) What is to be the "unit" (i.e. "standard to measure by")
in each subject? (2) Are these units to be of equal, or unequal value? The usual "unit" is
the knowledge shown by answering the whole paper correctly; calling this "100," all lower amounts
are represented by numbers between "0" and "100." Then, if these units are to be of equal value,
we simply add A's 3 marks together, and do the same for B.

(d) The conditions are the same as (c), but French is to have double weight. Here we simply
double the French marks, and add as before.

(e) French is to have such weight, that, if other marks be equal, the ultimate ratio is to
be that of the French paper, so that a "0" in this would swamp the candidate: but the other
two subjects are only to affect the result collectively, by the amount of knowledge shown,
the two being reckoned of equal value. Here I should add A's German and Italian marks together,
and multiply by his French mark.

But I need not go on: the problem may evidently be set with many varying conditions, each requiring
its own method of solution.

What I have said will suffice, I hope, as an answer to BALBUS, who holds that (a) and (c) are
the only possible varieties of the problem, and that to say "We cannot use addition, therefore
we must be intended to use multiplication," is "no more illogical than, from knowledge that
one was not born in the night, to infer that he was born in the daytime"; and also to FIFEE,
who says "I think a little more consideration will show you that our 'error of adding the proportional
numbers together for each candidate instead of multiplying' is no error at all." Why, even
if addition had been the right method to use, not one of the writers (I speak from memory)
showed any consciousness of the necessity of fixing a "unit" for each subject. "No error at
all!" They were positively steeped in error!

One correspondent (I do not name him, as the communication is not quite friendly in tone) writes
thus:--"I wish to add, very respectfully, that I think it would be in better taste if you were
to abstain from the very trenchant expressions which you are accustomed to indulge in when
criticising the answer. That such a tone must not be" ("be not"?) "agreeable to the persons
concerned who have made mistakes may possibly have no great weight with you, but I hope you
will feel that it would be as well not to employ it, unless you are quite certain of being
correct yourself." The only instances the writer gives of the "trenchant expressions" are "hapless"
and "malefactors." I beg to assure him (and any others who may need the assurance: I trust
there are none) that all such words have been used in jest, and with no idea that they could
possibly annoy any one, and that I sincerely regret any annoyance I may have thus inadvertently
given. May I hope that in future they will recognise the distinction between severe language
used in sober earnest, and the "words of unmeant bitterness," which Coleridge has alluded to
in that lovely passage beginning "A little child, a limber elf"? If the writer will refer to
that passage, or to the preface to "Fire, Famine, and Slaughter," he will find the distinction,
for which I plead, far better drawn out than I could hope to do in any words of mine.

The writer's insinuation that I care not how much annoyance I give to my readers I think it
best to pass over in silence; but to his concluding remark I must entirely demur. I hold that
to use language likely to annoy any of my correspondents would not be in the least justified
by the plea that I was "quite certain of being correct." I trust that the knot-untiers and
I are not on such terms as those!

I beg to thank G. B. for the offer of a puzzle--which, however, is too like the old one "Make
four 9's into 100."

ANSWERS TO KNOT VIII.

§ 1. THE PIGS.

Problem.--Place twenty-four pigs in four sties so that, as you go round and round, you may
always find the number in each sty nearer to ten than the number in the last.

Answer.--Place 8 pigs in the first sty, 10 in the second, nothing in the third, and 6 in the
fourth: 10 is nearer ten than 8; nothing is nearer ten than 10; 6 is nearer ten than nothing;
and 8 is nearer ten than 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

This problem is noticed by only two correspondents. BALBUS says "it certainly cannot be solved
mathematically, nor do I see how to solve it by any verbal quibble." NOLENS VOLENS makes Her
Radiancy change the direction of going round; and even then is obliged to add "the pigs must
be carried in front of her"!

§ 2. THE GRURMSTIPTHS.

Problem.--Omnibuses start from a certain point, both ways, every 15 minutes. A traveller, starting
on foot along with one of them, meets one in 12-1/2 minutes: when will he be overtaken by one?

Answer.--In 6-1/4 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Solution.--Let "a" be the distance an omnibus goes in 15 minutes, and "x" the distance from
the starting-point to where the traveller is overtaken. Since the omnibus met is due at the
starting-point in 2-1/2 minutes, it goes in that time as far as the traveller walks in 12-1/2;
i.e. it goes 5 times as fast. Now the overtaking omnibus is "a" behind the traveller when he
starts, and therefore goes "a + x" while he goes "x." Hence a + x = 5x; i.e. 4x = a, and x
= a/4. This distance would be traversed by an omnibus in 15/4 minutes, and therefore by the
traveller in 5 × 15/4. Hence he is overtaken in 18-3/4 minutes after starting, i.e. in 6-1/4
minutes after meeting the omnibus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four answers have been received, of which two are wrong. DINAH MITE rightly states that the
overtaking omnibus reached the point where they met the other omnibus 5 minutes after they
left, but wrongly concludes that, going 5 times as fast, it would overtake them in another
minute. The travellers are 5-minutes-walk ahead of the omnibus, and must walk 1-4th of this
distance farther before the omnibus overtakes them, which will be 1-5th of the distance traversed
by the omnibus in the same time: this will require 1-1/4 minutes more. NOLENS VOLENS tries
it by a process like "Achilles and the Tortoise." He rightly states that, when the overtaking
omnibus leaves the gate, the travellers are 1-5th of "a" ahead, and that it will take the omnibus
3 minutes to traverse this distance; "during which time" the travellers, he tells us, go 1-15th
of "a" (this should be 1-25th). The travellers being now 1-15th of "a" ahead, he concludes
that the work remaining to be done is for the travellers to go 1-60th of "a," while the omnibus
goes l-12th. The principle is correct, and might have been applied earlier.

CLASS LIST.

I.

   BALBUS.
   DELTA.

ANSWERS TO KNOT IX.

§ 1. THE BUCKETS.

Problem.--Lardner states that a solid, immersed in a fluid, displaces an amount equal to itself
in bulk. How can this be true of a small bucket floating in a larger one?

Solution.--Lardner means, by "displaces," "occupies a space which might be filled with water
without any change in the surroundings." If the portion of the floating bucket, which is above
the water, could be annihilated, and the rest of it transformed into water, the surrounding
water would not change its position: which agrees with Lardner's statement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five answers have been received, none of which explains the difficulty arising from the well-known
fact that a floating body is the same weight as the displaced fluid. HECLA says that "only
that portion of the smaller bucket which descends below the original level of the water can
be properly said to be immersed, and only an equal bulk of water is displaced." Hence, according
to HECLA, a solid, whose weight was equal to that of an equal bulk of water, would not float
till the whole of it was below "the original level" of the water: but, as a matter of fact,
it would float as soon as it was all under water. MAGPIE says the fallacy is "the assumption
that one body can displace another from a place where it isn't," and that Lardner's assertion
is incorrect, except when the containing vessel "was originally full to the brim." But the
question of floating depends on the present state of things, not on past history. OLD KING
COLE takes the same view as HECLA. TYMPANUM and VINDEX assume that "displaced" means "raised
above its original level," and merely explain how it comes to pass that the water, so raised,
is less in bulk than the immersed portion of bucket, and thus land themselves--or rather set
themselves floating--in the same boat as HECLA.

I regret that there is no Class-list to publish for this Problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

§ 2. BALBUS' ESSAY.

Problem.--Balbus states that if a certain solid be immersed in a certain vessel of water, the
water will rise through a series of distances, two inches, one inch, half an inch, &c., which
series has no end. He concludes that the water will rise without limit. Is this true?

Solution.--No. This series can never reach 4 inches, since, however many terms we take, we
are always short of 4 inches by an amount equal to the last term taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three answers have been received--but only two seem to me worthy of honours.

TYMPANUM says that the statement about the stick "is merely a blind, to which the old answer
may well be applied, solvitur ambulando, or rather mergendo." I trust TYMPANUM will not test
this in his own person, by taking the place of the man in Balbus' Essay! He would infallibly
be drowned.

OLD KING COLE rightly points out that the series, 2, 1, &c., is a decreasing Geometrical Progression:
while VINDEX rightly identifies the fallacy as that of "Achilles and the Tortoise."

CLASS LIST.

I.

   OLD KING COLE.
   VINDEX.

       *       *       *       *       *

§ 3. THE GARDEN.

Problem.--An oblong garden, half a yard longer than wide, consists entirely of a gravel-walk,
spirally arranged, a yard wide and 3,630 yards long. Find the dimensions of the garden.

Answer.--60, 60-1/2.

Solution.--The number of yards and fractions of a yard traversed in walking along a straight
piece of walk, is evidently the same as the number of square-yards and fractions of a square-yard,
contained in that piece of walk: and the distance, traversed in passing through a square-yard
at a corner, is evidently a yard. Hence the area of the garden is 3,630 square-yards: i.e.,
if x be the width, x (x + 1/2) = 3,630. Solving this Quadratic, we find x = 60. Hence the dimensions
are 60, 60-1/2.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twelve answers have been received--seven right and five wrong.

C. G. L., NABOB, OLD CROW, and TYMPANUM assume that the number of yards in the length of the
path is equal to the number of square-yards in the garden. This is true, but should have been
proved. But each is guilty of darker deeds. C. G. L.'s "working" consists of dividing 3,630
by 60. Whence came this divisor, oh Segiel? Divination? Or was it a dream? I fear this solution
is worth nothing. OLD CROW'S is shorter, and so (if possible) worth rather less. He says the
answer "is at once seen to be 60 × 60-1/2"! NABOB'S calculation is short, but "as rich as a
Nabob" in error. He says that the square root of 3,630, multiplied by 2, equals the length
plus the breadth. That is 60.25 × 2 = 120-1/2. His first assertion is only true of a square
garden. His second is irrelevant, since 60.25 is not the square-root of 3,630! Nay, Bob, this
will not do! TYMPANUM says that, by extracting the square-root of 3,630, we get 60 yards with
a remainder of 30/60, or half-a-yard, which we add so as to make the oblong 60 × 60-1/2. This
is very terrible: but worse remains behind. TYMPANUM proceeds thus:--"But why should there
be the half-yard at all? Because without it there would be no space at all for flowers. By
means of it, we find reserved in the very centre a small plot of ground, two yards long by
half-a-yard wide, the only space not occupied by walk." But Balbus expressly said that the
walk "used up the whole of the area." Oh, TYMPANUM! My tympa is exhausted: my brain is num!
I can say no more.

HECLA indulges, again and again, in that most fatal of all habits in computation--the making
two mistakes which cancel each other. She takes x as the width of the garden, in yards, and
x + 1/2 as its length, and makes her first "coil" the sum of x-1/2, x-1/2, x-1, x-1, i.e. 4x-3:
but the fourth term should be x-1-1/2, so that her first coil is 1/2 a yard too long. Her second
coil is the sum of x-2-1/2, x-2-1/2, x-3, x-3: here the first term should be x-2 and the last
x-3-1/2: these two mistakes cancel, and this coil is therefore right. 

  Heavy scent of the night
  Moved with a weary breath over.
  Bang, I have thought:
  I must die, I'd up even more.

  
  Do you love so much? Why do you
  sing such songs? From
  Veiled Sea Ringing of bells on and dive down.

  
  
  Deep in the dark cathedral
  Swaying incense and hymns ... Like a river of tears It now attracts
lonely through my soul.

  
  
  How we loved so faithfully in those days, Strong
  as the sun was our hearts there. Separately,
  as we had to tell us much, And always said
  one thing: Do you love? Yes! Oh love, can
  you like a dream of nights Passing, that
  you seem endless? I feel as if he remember me from afar And asked:
Do you love me? Say yes as once! OLD KING COLE solves it by an Arithmetical Progression. It is right, but too
lengthy to be worth as much as a Quadratic.

VINDEX proves it very neatly, by pointing out that a yard of walk measured along the middle
represents a square yard of garden, "whether we consider the straight stretches of walk or
the square yards at the angles, in which the middle line goes half a yard in one direction
and then turns a right angle and goes half a yard in another direction."

CLASS LIST.

I.

   VINDEX.

II.

   ALUMNUS ETONÆ.
   OLD KING COLE.

III.

   DINAH MITE.
   JANET.
   MAGPIE.
   TAFFY.

ANSWERS TO KNOT X.

§ 1. THE CHELSEA PENSIONERS.

Answer.--Ten.

Solution.--(I adopt that of POLAR STAR, as being better than my own). Adding the wounds together,
we get 70 + 75 + 80 + 85 = 310, among 100 men; which gives 3 to each, and 4 to 10 men. Therefore
the least percentage is 10.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nineteen answers have been received. One is "5," but, as no working is given with it, it must,
in accordance with the rule, remain "a deed without a name." JANET makes it "35 and 7/10ths."
I am sorry she has misunderstood the question, and has supposed that those who had lost an
ear were 75 per cent. of those who had lost an eye; and so on. Of course, on this supposition,
the percentages must all be multiplied together. This she has done correctly, but I can give
her no honours, as I do not think the question will fairly bear her interpretation, THREE SCORE
AND TEN makes it "19 and 3/8ths." Her solution has given me--I will not say "many anxious days
and sleepless nights," for I wish to be strictly truthful, but--some trouble in making any
sense at all of it. She makes the number of "pensioners wounded once" to be 310 ("per cent.,"
I suppose!): dividing by 4, she gets 77 and a half as "average percentage:" again dividing
by 4, she gets 19 and 3/8ths as "percentage wounded four times." Does she suppose wounds of
different kinds to "absorb" each other, so to speak? Then, no doubt, the data are equivalent
to 77 pensioners with one wound each, and a half-pensioner with a half-wound. And does she
then suppose these concentrated wounds to be transferable, so that 3/4ths of these unfortunates
can obtain perfect health by handing over their wounds to the remaining 1/4th? Granting these
suppositions, her answer is right; or rather, if the question had been "A road is covered with
one inch of gravel, along 77 and a half per cent. of it. How much of it could be covered 4
inches deep with the same material?" her answer would have been right. But alas, that wasn't
the question! DELTA makes some most amazing assumptions: "let every one who has not lost an
eye have lost an ear," "let every one who has not lost both eyes and ears have lost an arm."
Her ideas of a battle-field are grim indeed. Fancy a warrior who would continue fighting after
losing both eyes, both ears, and both arms! This is a case which she (or "it?") evidently considers
possible.

Next come eight writers who have made the unwarrantable assumption that, because 70 per cent.
have lost an eye, therefore 30 per cent. have not lost one, so that they have both eyes. This
is illogical. If you give me a bag containing 100 sovereigns, and if in an hour I come to you
(my face not beaming with gratitude nearly so much as when I received the bag) to say "I am
sorry to tell you that 70 of these sovereigns are bad," do I thereby guarantee the other 30
to be good? Who
  do you like the sea a trophy? A sea
  full of growing fire! It sucks
  out of your wet jet, Your drunken eyes,
  the heavenly flood.

  
  I will not get enough of your heart, Not
  enough of your kisses Glutergießen. I want you,
  as the Christ the Saviour: He may not enjoy the
  Lord's Supper the body. So I want you, oh
  my god, have Buried in my blood, your flesh and
  blood. I will receive your sweet body, To
  you in me and I passed within.

BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE and T. R. do the question in a piecemeal fashion--on the principle that
the 70 per cent. and the 75 per cent., though commenced at opposite ends of the 100, must overlap
by at least 45 per cent.; and so on. This is quite correct working, but not, I think, quite
the best way of doing it.

The other five competitors will, I hope, feel themselves sufficiently glorified by being placed
in the first class, without my composing a Triumphal Ode for each!

CLASS LIST.

I.

   OLD CAT.
   OLD HEN.
   POLAR STAR.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   WHITE SUGAR.

II.

   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   T. R.

III.

   ALGERNON BRAY.
   DINAH MITE.
   G. S. C.
   JANE E.
   J. D. W.
   MAGPIE.
   S. S. G.
   TOKIO.

§ 2. CHANGE OF DAY.

I must postpone, sine die, the geographical problem--partly because I have not yet received
the statistics I am hoping for, and partly because I am myself so entirely puzzled by it; and
when an examiner is himself dimly hovering between a second class and a third how is he to
decide the position of others?

§ 3. THE SONS' AGES.

Problem.--"At first, two of the ages are together equal to the third. A few years afterwards,
two of them are together double of the third. When the number of years since the first occasion
is two-thirds of the sum of the ages on that occasion, one age is 21. What are the other two?

Answer.--"15 and 18."

       *       *       *       *       *

Solution.--Let the ages at first be x, y, (x + y). 

  Infinity wine solves the day in pain.
  The reaper rushing work, the hours, The dancing,
  lyrical love and madness and wounds, Was it today?
  Was it years ago? Was it ever?

  
  This is the hour when in a distant land, If it
  beats restlessly from your roof tube And hum to the clock quickly
the pointer

And Begrabne lives and flits in the sand, You call my
name and I do not hear.

  And I heard it, I must tremble and fall silent.

Look
  at me, the sea, which surged to you feet,
  Let her embrace, melting kiss, come on!

  How Well storming after wave climbed up, Are you
  a god, wearing element.
  
  Umgleiten let your body from my body!

  No nap, no breath, no more jet that separates
  us. One of the writers merely asserts that the first occasion
was 12 years ago, that the ages were then 9, 6, and 3; and that on the second occasion they
were 14, 11, and 8! As a Roman father, I ought to withhold the name of the rash writer; but
respect for age makes me break the rule: it is THREE SCORE AND TEN. JANE E. also asserts that
the ages at first were 9, 6, 3: then she calculates the present ages, leaving the second occasion
unnoticed. OLD HEN is nearly as bad; she "tried various numbers till I found one that fitted
all the conditions"; but merely scratching up the earth, and pecking about, is not the way
to solve a problem, oh venerable bird! And close after OLD HEN prowls, with hungry eyes, OLD
CAT, who calmly assumes, to begin with, that the son who comes of age is the eldest. Eat your
bird, Puss, for you will get nothing from me!

There are yet two zeroes to dispose of. MINERVA assumes that, on every occasion, a son comes
of age; and that it is only such a son who is "tipped with gold." Is it wise thus to interpret
"now, my boys, calculate your ages, and you shall have the money"? BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE says
"let" the ages at first be 9, 6, 3, then assumes that the second occasion was 6 years afterwards,
and on these baseless assumptions brings out the right answers. Guide future travellers, an
thou wilt: thou art no Bradshaw for this Age!

Of those who win honours, the merely "honourable" are two. DINAH MITE ascertains (rightly)
the relationship between the three ages at first, but then assumes one of them to be "6," thus
making the rest of her solution tentative. M. F. C. does the algebra all right up to the conclusion
that the present ages are 5z, 6z, and 7z; it then assumes, without giving any reason, that 7z = 21.

Of the more honourable, DELTA attempts a novelty--to discover which son comes of age by elimination:
it assumes, successively, that it is the middle one, and that it is the youngest; and in each
case it apparently brings out an absurdity. Still, as the proof contains the following bit
of algebra, "63 = 7x + 4y; [** therefore] 21 = x + 4 sevenths of y," I trust it will admit
that its proof is not quite conclusive. The rest of its work is good. MAGPIE betrays the deplorable
tendency of her tribe--to appropriate any stray conclusion she comes across, without having
any strict logical right to it. Assuming A, B, C, as the ages at first, and D as the number
of the years that have elapsed since then, she finds (rightly) the 3 equations, 2A = B, C =
B + A, D = 2B. She then says "supposing that A = 1, then B = 2, C = 3, and D = 4. Therefore
for A, B, C, D, four numbers are wanted which shall be to each other as 1:2:3:4." It is in
the "therefore" that I detect the unconscientiousness of this bird. The conclusion is true,
but this is only because the equations are "homogeneous" (i.e. having one "unknown" in each
term), a fact which I strongly suspect had not been grasped--I beg pardon, clawed--by her.
Were I to lay this little pitfall, "A + 1 = B, B + 1 = C; supposing A = 1, then B = 2 and C
= 3. Therefore for A, B, C, three numbers are wanted which shall be to one another as 1:2:3,"
would you not flutter down into it, oh MAGPIE, as amiably as a Dove? SIMPLE SUSAN is anything
but simple to me. After ascertaining that the 3 ages at first are as 3:2:1, she says "then,
as two-thirds of their sum, added to one of them, = 21, the sum cannot exceed 30, and consequently
the highest cannot exceed 15." I suppose her (mental) argument is something like this:--"two-thirds
of sum, + one age, = 21; [** therefore] sum, + 3 halves of one age, = 31 and a half. But 3
halves of one age cannot be less than 1 and-a-half (here I perceive that SIMPLE SUSAN would
on no account present a guinea to a new-born baby!) hence the sum cannot exceed 30." This is
ingenious, but her proof, after that, is (as she candidly admits) "clumsy and roundabout."
She finds that there are 5 possible sets of ages, and eliminates four of them. Suppose that,
instead of 5, there had been 5 million possible sets? Would SIMPLE SUSAN have courageously
ordered in the necessary gallon of ink and ream of paper?

The solution sent in by C. R. is, like that of SIMPLE SUSAN, partly tentative, and so does
not rise higher than being Clumsily Right.

Among those who have earned the highest honours, ALGERNON BRAY solves the problem quite correctly,
but adds that there is nothing to exclude the supposition that all the ages were fractional.
This would make the number of answers infinite. Let me meekly protest that I never intended
my readers to devote the rest of their lives to writing out answers! E. M. RIX points out that,
if fractional ages be admissible, any one of the three sons might be the one "come of age";
but she rightly rejects this supposition on the ground that it would make the problem indeterminate.
WHITE SUGAR is the only one who has detected an oversight of mine: I had forgotten the possibility
(which of course ought to be allowed for) that the son, who came of age that year, need not
have done so by that day, so that he might be only 20. This gives a second solution, viz.,
20, 24, 28. Well said, pure Crystal! Verily, thy "fair discourse hath been as sugar"!

CLASS LIST.

I.

   ALGERNON BRAY.
   AN OLD FOGEY. 

The Englishman now walked toward the Americans.

"I do not stay here the less that it is the melody of"

Rule Britannia was, "he said.

- No, the "Yankee Doodle," "replied the other.

The dispute seemed to erupt anew to be, when one of the witnesses - without doubt in the interest
of grazing cattle - interfered with the words:

"Suppose it was the" Rule Doodle "and" Yankee Britannia was, "and
we go us now for breakfast. "

This compromise between the two national
songs of America and Britain became the general meeting adopted. Along
the left bank of Niagara back walking hurried Americans and British,
at the welcoming table of the hotel on Goat Iceland - a neutral areas
between the two cases - take place.

I take this opportunity of thanking those who have sent, along with their answers to the Tenth
Knot, regrets that there are no more Knots to come, or petitions that I should recall my resolution
to bring them to an end. I am most grateful for their kind words; but I think it wisest to
end what, at best, was but a lame attempt. "The stretched metre of an antique song" is beyond
my compass; and my puppets were neither distinctly in my life (like those I now address), nor
yet (like Alice and the Mock Turtle) distinctly out of it. Yet let me at least fancy, as I
lay down the pen, that I carry with me into my silent life, dear reader, a farewell smile from
your unseen face, and a kindly farewell pressure from your unfelt hand!

THE END

LONDON: RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, PRINTERS.

[TURN OVER.

WORKS BY LEWIS CARROLL. Seventy-fifth Thousand. Fifty-sixth Thousand.

RHYME? AND REASON? With Sixty-five Illustrations by ARTHUR B. FROST, and Nine by HENRY HOLIDAY.
(This book is a reprint, with a few additions, of the comic portion of "Phantasmagoria and
other Poems," and of "The Hunting of the Snark." Mr. Frost's pictures are new.) Crown 8vo,
cloth, coloured edges, price 7s. Fifty Thousand.

A TANGLED TALE. Reprinted from The Monthly Packet. With Six Illustrations by Arthur B. Frost.
Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d. A cow that just at the distance of fifty steps
trotted over, got a ball into the backbone ... and it was the thing but nothing on.

Of the two opponents had not been made.

Who were those two gentlemen? In selling them to the Public (for cash only) they will
allow 10 per cent. discount.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. LEWIS CARROLL, having been requested to allow "AN EASTER GREETING" (a leaflet, addressed
to children, and frequently given with his books) to be sold separately, has arranged with
Messrs. Harrison, of 59, Pall Mall, who will supply a single copy for 1d., or 12 for 9d., or
100 for 5s.

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.

LONDON: RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, PRINTERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following changes have been made to the text:

Page 88: "he corners of the" changed to "the corners of the".

Page 95: "Aix-le-Bains" changed to "Aix-les-Bains".

Page 108: "3/5, 2, 1/3" changed to "3/5, 2/3, 1/3".

Page 114:  "10 of the 12 cases" changed to "10 of the 13 cases".

Page 121: "four-and fourpence" changed to "four-and-fourpence".

Last page: "Fifth Thousand" changed to "Fifty Thousand".

