Going abroad! Foreign parts! This was more terrible than anything I had imagined. I would go
to Mr. Havelot that very evening, the only time which I would be certain to find him at home,
and talk to him in a way which would be sure to bring him to his senses, if he had any. And
if I should find that he had no sense of propriety or justice, no sense of his duty to his
fellow-man and to his offspring, then I would begin a bold fight for Agnes, a fight which I
would not give up until, with her own lips, she told me that it would be useless. I would follow
her to Kentucky, to Europe, to the uttermost ends of the earth. I could do it now. The frozen
deposits in my terminal moraine would furnish me with the means. I walked away and left the
old farmer standing grinning. No doubt my improvements and renovations had been the subject
of gossip in the neighborhood, and he had come over to see if he could find out anything definite
in regard to the object of them. He had succeeded, but he had done more: he had nerved me to
instantly begin the conquest of Agnes, whether by diplomacy or war.

I was so anxious to begin this conquest that I could scarcely wait for the evening to come.
At the noon hour, when the ice-works were deserted, I walked down the shaft and into the ice-chamber
to see what had been done since my last visit. I decided to insist that operations upon a larger
scale should be immediately begun, in order that I might have plenty of money with which to
carry on my contemplated campaign. Whether it was one of peace or war, I should want all the
money I could get.

I took with me a lantern and went around the chamber, which was now twenty-five or thirty feet
in diameter, examining the new inroads which had been made upon its walls. There was a tunnel
commenced opposite the one by which the chamber was entered, but it had not been opened more
than a dozen feet, and it seemed to me that the men had not been working with any very great
energy. I wanted to see a continuous stream of ice-blocks from that chamber to the mouth of
the shaft.

While grumbling thus I heard behind me a sudden noise like thunder and the crashing of walls,
and, turning quickly, I saw that a portion of the roof of the chamber had fallen in. Nor had
it ceased to fall. As I gazed, several great masses of ice came down from above and piled themselves
upon that which had already fallen.

Startled and frightened, I sprang toward the opening of the entrance tunnel; but, alas! I found
that that was the point where the roof had given way, and between me and the outer world was
a wall of solid ice through which it would be as impossible for me to break as if it were a
barrier of rock. With the quick instinct which comes to men in danger I glanced about to see
if the workmen had left their tools; but there were none.

They had been taken outside. Then I stood and gazed stupidly at the mass of fallen ice, which,
even as I looked upon it, was cracking and snapping, pressed down by the weight above it, and
forming itself into an impervious barrier without crevice or open seam.

Then I madly shouted. But of what avail were shouts down there in the depths of the earth?
I soon ceased this useless expenditure of strength, and, with my lantern in my hand, began
to walk around the chamber, throwing the light upon the walls and the roof. I became impressed
with the fear that the whole cavity might cave in at once and bury me here in a tomb of ice.
But I saw no cracks, nor any sign of further disaster. But why think of anything more? Was
not this enough? For, before that ice-barrier could be cleared away, would I not freeze to death?

I now continued to walk, not because I expected to find anything or do anything, but simply
to keep myself warm by action. As long as I could move about I believed that there was no immediate
danger of succumbing to the intense cold; for, when a young man, traveling in Switzerland,
I had been in the cave of a glacier, and it was not cold enough to prevent some old women from
sitting there to play the zither for the sake of a few coppers from visitors. I could not expect
to be able to continue walking until I should be rescued, and if I sat down, or by chance slept
from exhaustion, I must perish.

The more I thought of it, the more sure I became that in any case I must perish, A man in a
block of ice could have no chance of life. And Agnes! Oh, Heavens! what demon of the ice had
leagued with old Havelot to shut me up in this frozen prison? For a long time I continued to
walk, beat my body with my arms and stamp my feet. The instinct of life was strong within me.
I would live as long as I could, and think of Agnes. When I should be frozen I could not think
of her.

Sometimes I stopped and listened. I was sure I could hear noises, but I could not tell whether
they were above me or not. In the centre of the ice-barrier, about four feet from the ground,
was a vast block of the frozen substance which was unusually clear and seemed to have nothing
on the other side of it; for through it I could see flickers of light, as though people were
going about with lanterns. It was quite certain that the accident had been discovered; for,
had not the thundering noise been heard by persons outside, the workmen would have seen what
had happened as soon as they came into the tunnel to begin their afternoon operations.

At first I wondered why they did not set to work with a will and cut away this barrier and
let me out. But there suddenly came to my mind a reason for this lack of energy which was more
chilling than the glistening walls around me: Why should they suppose that I was in the ice-chamber?
I was not in the habit of coming here very often, but I was in the habit of wandering off by
myself at all hours of the day. This thought made me feel that I might as well lie down on
the floor of this awful cave and die at once. The workmen might think it unsafe to mine any
further in this part of the glacier, and begin operations at some other point. I did sit down
for a moment, and then I rose involuntarily and began my weary round. Suddenly I thought of
looking at my watch. It was nearly five o'clock. I had been more than four hours in that dreadful
place, and I did not believe that I could continue to exercise my limbs very much longer. The
lights I had seen had ceased. It was quite plain that the workmen had no idea that any one
was imprisoned in the cave.

But soon after I had come to this conclusion I saw through the clear block of ice a speck of
light, and it became stronger and stronger, until I believed it to be close to the other side
of the block. There it remained stationary; but there seemed to be other points of light which
moved about in a strange way, and near it. Now I stood by the block watching. When my feet
became very cold, I stamped them; but there I stood fascinated, for what I saw was truly surprising.
A large coal of fire appeared on the other side of the block; then it suddenly vanished and
was succeeded by another coal. This disappeared, and another took its place, each one seeming
to come nearer and nearer to me. Again and again did these coals appear. They reached the centre
of the block; they approached my side of it. At last one was so near to me that I thought it
was about to break through, but it vanished. Then there came a few quick thuds and the end
of a piece of iron protruded from the block. This was withdrawn, and through the aperture there
came a voice which said: "Mr. Cuthbert, are you in there?" It was the voice of Agnes!

Weak and cold as I was, fire and energy rushed through me at these words. "Yes," I exclaimed,
my mouth to the hole; "Agnes, is that you?"

"Wait a minute," came from the other side of the aperture. "I must make it bigger. I must keep
it from closing up."

Again came the coals of fire, running backward and forward through the long hole in the block
of ice. I could see now what they were. They were irons used by plumbers for melting solder
and that sort of thing, and Agnes was probably heating them in a little furnace outside, and
withdrawing them as fast as they cooled. It was not long before the aperture was very much
enlarged; and then there came grating through it a long tin tube nearly two inches in diameter,
which almost, but not quite, reached my side of the block.

Now came again the voice of Agnes: "Oh, Mr. Cuthbert, are you truly there? Are you crushed?
Are you wounded? Are you nearly frozen? Are you starved? Tell me quickly if you are yet safe."

Had I stood in a palace padded with the softest silk and filled with spicy odors from a thousand
rose gardens, I could not have been better satisfied with my surroundings than I was at that
moment. Agnes was not two feet away! She was telling me that she cared for me! In a very few
words I assured her that I was uninjured. Then I was on the point of telling her I loved her,
for I believed that not a moment should be lost in making this avowal. I could not die without
her knowing that. But the appearance of a mass of paper at the other end of the tube prevented
the expression of my sentiments. This was slowly pushed on until I could reach it. Then there
came the words: "Mr. Cuthbert, these are sandwiches. Eat them immediately and walk about while
you are doing it. You must keep yourself warm until the men get to you."

Obedient to the slightest wish of this dear creature, I went twice around the cave, devouring
the sandwiches as I walked. They were the most delicious food that I had ever tasted. They
were given to me by Agnes. I came back to the opening. I could not immediately begin my avowal.
I must ask a question first. "Can they get to me?" I inquired. "Is anybody trying to do that?
Are they working there by you? I do not hear them at all."

"Oh, no," she answered; "they are not working here. They are on top of the bluff, trying to
dig down to you. They were afraid to meddle with the ice here for fear that more of it might
come down and crush you and the men, too. Oh, there has been a dreadful excitement since it
was found that you were in there!"

"How could they know I was here?" I asked.

"It was your old Susan who first thought of it. She saw you walking toward the shaft about
noon, and then she remembered that she had not seen you again; and when they came into the
tunnel here they found one of the lanterns gone and the big stick you generally carry lying
where the lantern had been. Then it was known that you must be inside. Oh, then there was an
awful time! The foreman of the ice-men examined everything, and said they must dig down to
you from above. He put his men to work; but they could do very little, for they had hardly
any spades. Then they sent into town for help and over to the new park for the Italians working
there. From the way these men set to work you might have thought that they would dig away the
whole bluff in about five minutes; but they didn't. Nobody seemed to know what to do, or how
to get to work; and the hole they made when they did begin was filled up with men almost as
fast as they even threw out the stones and gravel. I don't believe anything would have been
done properly if your friend, Mr. Burton, hadn't happened to come with two scientific gentlemen,
and since that he has been directing everything. You can't think what a splendid fellow he
is! I fairly adored him when I saw him giving his orders and making everybody skip around in
the right way."

"Tom is a very good man," said I; "but it is his business to direct that sort of work, and
it is not surprising that he knows how to do it. But, Agnes, they may never get down to me,
and we do not know that this roof may not cave in upon me at any moment; and before this or
anything else happens I want to tell you--"

"Mr. Cuthbert," said Agnes, "is there plenty of oil in your lantern? It would be dreadful if
it were to go out and leave you there in the dark. I thought of that and brought you a little
bottle of kerosene so that you can fill it. I am going to push the bottle through now, if you
please." And with this a large phial, cork end foremost, came slowly through the tube, propelled
by one of the soldering irons. Then came Agnes's voice: "Please fill your lantern immediately,
because if it goes out you can not find it in the dark; and then walk several times around
the cave, for you have been standing still too long already."

I obeyed these injunctions, but in two or three minutes was again at the end of the tube. "Agnes,"
said I, "how did you happen to come here? Did you contrive in your own mind this method of
communicating with me?"

"Oh, yes; I did," she said. "Everybody said that this mass of ice must not be meddled with,
but I knew very well it would not hurt it to make a hole through it."

"But how did you happen to be here?" I asked.

"Oh, I ran over as soon as I heard of the accident. Everybody ran here. The whole neighborhood
is on top of the bluff; but nobody wanted to come into the tunnel, because they were afraid
that more of it might fall in. So I was able to work here all by myself, and I am very glad
of it. I saw the soldering iron and the little furnace outside of your house where the plumbers
had been using them, and I brought them here myself. Then I thought that a simple hole through
the ice might soon freeze up again, and if you were alive inside I could not do anything to
help you; and so I ran home and got my diploma case, that had had one end melted out of it,
and I brought that to stick in the hole. I'm so glad that it is long enough, or almost."

"Oh, Agnes," I cried, "you thought of all this for me?"

"Why, of course, Mr. Cuthbert," she answered, before I had a chance to say anything more. "You
were in great danger of perishing before the men got to you, and nobody seemed to think of
any way to give you immediate relief. And don't you think that a collegiate education is a
good thing for girls--at least, that it was for me?"

"Agnes," I exclaimed, "please let me speak. I want to tell you, I must tell you--"

But the voice of Agnes was clearer than mine and it overpowered my words. "Mr. Cuthbert," she
said, "we can not both speak through this tube at the same time in opposite directions. I have
here a bottle of water for you, but I am very much afraid it will not go through the diploma case."

"Oh, I don't want any water," I said. "I can eat ice if I am thirsty. What I want is to tell you-"

"Mr. Cuthbert," said she, "you must not eat that ice. Water that was frozen countless ages
ago may be very different from the water of modern times, and might not agree with you. Don't
touch it, please. I am going to push the bottle through if I can. I tried to think of everything
that you might need and brought them all at once; because, if I could not keep the hole open,
I wanted to get them to you without losing a minute."

Now the bottle came slowly through. It was a small beer-bottle, I think, and several times
I was afraid it was going to stick fast and cut off communication between me and the outer
world--that is to say, between me and Agnes. But at last the cork and the neck appeared, and
I pulled it through. I did not drink any of it, but immediately applied my mouth to the tube.

"Agnes," I said, "my dear Agnes, really you must not prevent me from speaking. I can not delay
another minute. This is an awful position for me to be in, and as you don't seem to realize--"

