It is evident from what we have said, that the theory of the origin of myth has of late made
real and important progress in different directions; it has been constituted by fitting methods,
and with dispassionate research, laying aside fanciful hypotheses and systems more or less
prompted by a desire to support or confute principles which have no connection with science.
We have now in great measure arrived at the fundamental facts whence myth is derived, although,
if I do not deceive myself, the ultimate fact, and the cause of this fact, have not yet been
ascertained; namely, for what reason man personifies all phenomena, first vaguely projecting
himself into them, and then exercising a distinct purpose of anthropomorphism, until in this
way he has gradually modified the world according to his own image.

If we are able to solve this difficult problem, a fact most important to science and to the
advancement of these special studies must result from it: the assimilation and concentration
of all the sources of myth into a single act, whether normal or abnormal to humanity. That functionary
rose from his own chair, and with loudly creaking boots carried it across the room for my
acceptance. I sat down, covered with confusion. The butler returned; and two footmen, who
were sitting on a little form, made reluctant room for him. To attain our object, it is necessary that the direct personification
of natural phenomena, as well as the indirect personification of metaphor; the infusion of
life into a man's own shadow, into reflex images and dreams; the belief in the reality of normal
illusions, as well as of the abnormal hallucinations of delirium, of madness, and of all forms
of nervous affections; all these things must be resolved into a single generating act which
explains and includes them. It must be shown how and why there is found in man the possibility
of modifying all these mythical forms into an image supposed to be external to himself, living
and personal. For if we are enabled to reply scientifically to such inquiries, we shall not
only have concentrated in a single fact all the most diverse normal and abnormal forms of myth
peculiar to man, but we shall also have given an ulterior and analytic explanation of this fact.

I certainly do not presume to declare myself competent to effect so much, and I am more conscious
than my critics how far I fall short of my high aim; but the modest attempt, made with the
resolution to accept all criticism offered with courtesy and good faith, does not imply culpable
presumption nor excessive vanity.

I regret to say that it is not on this point only that my theory of myth differs from that
of others; I shall not be satisfied if I only succeed in discovering in man the primitive act
which issues the general animism of things, which becomes the substance of the ulterior myths
in their intellectual and historical evolution. It is evident, at least to those who do not
cling obstinately to old traditions, that man is evolved from the animal kingdom. The comparative
anatomy, physiology, and psychology of man and other animals distinctly show their intimate
connection in conformation, tissues, organs, and functions, and above all, in consciousness
and intelligence. This truth, deduced from simple observation and experiment, must lead to
the conviction that all issued from the same germ, and had the same genesis.

For those who do not cherish pedantic and sectarian prejudices, this hypothesis is changed
into assurance by modern discoveries; it is shown in the transformations and transitions of
paleontological forms; in the embryogenic evolution of so many animals, man included, which,
according to their various species, reveals the lower types whence they issued; in the successive
forms taken by the foetus; in the powerful and indisputable laws of selection; in the modifications
by adaptation of the different organisms, and in the effects of isolation. This is the only
rational explanation, confirmed as it is by fresh facts every day, of the multiplicity and
variety of organic forms in the lapse of time; unless, indeed, we ascribe such variety to a
miracle, even more difficult to accept than the difficulties of the opposite-theory.

I admit that evidence for the complete demonstration of this theory is sometimes wanting; the
gaps between the fossil fauna and flora and those of modern times are neither few nor unimportant;
but on the other hand, such proofs are accumulating, and the gaps are filled up every day,
so that we may almost assert that in some way or other, by means somewhat different from those
on which we now rely, the great rational principle of evolution will be successfully and permanently
established.

It is more than twenty years since, in ways and by study peculiar to ourselves, we first devoted
ourselves to this theory, and while we gave a conscientious consideration to opposite theories,
so as to estimate with sincerity their importance and value, we could not relinquish our conviction
that every advance in physical, biological, and social science served to confirm the theory
of evolution.

It must not be supposed that I make any dogmatic assertion, which might possibly be erroneous,
when I say that the evidence of facts does not contradict the assumptions of modern science.
Sincere convictions should offend no one, nor do they indicate an a priori conflict with other
beliefs. Every one is justified in thinking his own thoughts when he speaks with moderation
and supports his peculiar opinions with a certain amount of learning.

It is not denied, even by those who oppose modern theories respecting the genesis of organisms,
that there are, excluding some psychical elements, many and important points of resemblance
between man and animals in the exercise of their consciousness, intelligence, and emotions,
if indeed they are not identically the same. The comparative psychology of man and animals
plainly shows that the perceptions, both in their respective organs and in their mode of action,
act in the same way, especially in the higher animals; and the origin, movements, and associations
of the imagination and the emotions are likewise identical. Nor will it be disputed that we
find in animals implicit memory, judgment, and reasoning, the inductions and deductions from
one special fact to another, the passions, the physiological language of gestures, expressive
of internal emotions, and even, in the case of gregarious animals, the combined action to effect
certain purposes; so that, as far as their higher orders are concerned, animals may be regarded
as a simple and undeveloped form of man, while man, by his later psychical and organic evolution,
has become a developed and complex animal.[4]

In my book on the fundamental law of intelligence in the animal kingdom, I attempted to show
this great truth, and to formulate a principle common to all animals in the exercise of their
psychical emotions, by setting forth the essential elements as they are generally displayed. Yes,
but how inevitable! If the beauty and the joy of the world gave one assurance in dark hours that
all was certainly well, the pilgrimage would be an easy one. But can one be optimistic by resolving
to be? One can of course control oneself, one can let no murmur of pain escape one, one can even enunciate
deep and courageous maxims, because one would not trouble the peace of others, waiting patiently
till the golden mood returns. But what if the desolate conviction
forces itself upon the mind that sorrow is the truer thing? I hold the complete identity between man and animals to be established by the
adequate consideration of the faculties, the psychical elements of consciousness and intelligence,
and the mode of their spontaneous exercise; and I believe the superiority of man to consist
not so much in new faculties as in the reflex effect upon themselves of those he possesses
in common with the animals. The old adage confirms this theory: Homo duplex.

No one now doubts that animals feel, hear, remember, and the like, while man is able to exercise
his will, to feel, to remember, deliberately to consider all his actions and functions, because
he not only possesses the direct and spontaneous intuition with respect to himself and things
in general which he has in common with animals, but he has an intuitive knowledge of that intuition
itself, and in this way he multiplies within himself the exercise of his whole psychical life.
We find the ultimate cause of this return upon himself, and his intuition of things, in his
deliberate will, which does not only immediately command his body and his manifold relative
functions, but also the complex range of his psychical acts. This fact, which as I believe
has not been observed before, is of great importance. It is manifest that the difference between
man and other animals does not consist in the diversity or discrepancy of the elements of the
intelligence, but in its reflex action on itself; an action which certainly has its conditions
fixed by the organic and physiological composition of the brain.

If it should be said that the traditional opinion of science, as well as the general sentence
of mankind, have always regarded reflection as the basis of the difference between animals
and man, so that there is no novelty in our principle, the assertion is erroneous. Reflection,
as an inward psychical fact, has certainly been observed by psychologists and philosophers
in all civilized times, and instinctively by every one; nor could it be otherwise, since reflection
is one of the facts most evident to human consciousness. But although the fact, or the intrinsic
and characteristic action of human thought has been observed, and has often been discussed
and analyzed in some of its elements, yet its genesis has not been declared, nor has its ultimate
cause been discovered. We propose to discover this ultimate cause, and we refer it to the exercise
of the will over all the elements and acts which constitute human intelligence; an intelligence
only differing from that of animals by this inward and deliberate fact, which enables man to
consider and examine all his acts, thus logically doubling their range. This intelligence has
in animals a simple and direct influence on their bodies and on the external world, in proportion
to their diverse forms and inherited instincts; while in man, owing to his commanding attitude,
it falls back upon itself, and gives rise to the inquiring and reflective habit of science.

We do not, therefore, divide man from other animals, but rather assert that many proofs and
subtle analyses show the identity of their intelligence in its fundamental elements, while
the difference is only the result of a reaction of the same intelligence on itself. Such a
theory does not in any way interrupt the natural evolution and genesis of the animal kingdom,
while the distinctive peculiarity of man is shown in an act which, as I believe, clearly explains
the new faculty of reason acquired by him.

I must admit that in speaking of the psychical faculty as a force which possesses laws peculiar
to itself, it has appeared to a learned and competent judge that I have conceded a real existence
to this faculty, independently of the physiological conditions through which it manifests itself,
which might be called a mythical personality in the constitution of the world. We have the lyric,
the epic, the satire, the narrative, the letter, the diary, conversation, all embalmed in art. But there
is probably some other medium possible which will become perfectly obvious the moment it is seized
upon and used. I must blame myself
for not having, in my desire to be brief, sufficiently defined my conception.

I hold the psychical manifestation to be not only conditioned by the organism, to speak scientifically,
and to be rendered physiologically possible by these conditions, but I consider it to be of
the same nature as the other so-called forces of the universe; such, for example, as the manifestations
of light, of electricity, of magnetism, and the like. Renounce the threshold of knowledge. There
every new proselyte can meet you. Boast of your acquaintance with the sanctum, and not one in
ten thousand can dispute it with you. Have you read Monsieur de C--'s pamphlet?"
"Really," said I, "I have been so busy." It is well known that such expressions are used to signify
the appearance under certain circumstances of some special phenomena which group themselves
by their mode and power of manifestation into one generic conception as a summary of the whole.
They always take place, relatively to these circumstances, in the same mode and with the same
power, so that they may at once be experimentally distinguished from others which have been
grouped together in like manner.

Such manifestations do not imply a real cosmic entity of these forces, as if they were independent
of the matter whence they issue; they are simply determinate and determinate modes of motions,
of actions, and reactions in the elements of the world. For if magnetism appears to reveal
itself in determinate elements, its modes of manifestation are peculiar to itself, and its
efficacy with respect to other forces is also peculiar; yet it by no means follows that it
possesses a substantial entity, or, as it were, displays personal activity among phenomena;
it rather indicates that the elements of the world will, under given circumstances, act reciprocally
in such a manner that we perceive phenomena which group themselves together and which we call
magnetic or magnetism. And this explanation applies to other cases.

I therefore, speaking of psychical force in general, used the same terms; I certainly did not
wish to constitute it into a personal and material entity of the universe, but I intended to
assert that among the manifestations of the various forces of the world, defined as above,
there is also this psychical force, characterized by phenomena and laws peculiar to itself,
and which, as I have shown, is when exercised one of the greatest factors of the world. I repeat
that if this force varies with the greater or less perfection of the organisms in which, it
is manifested, yet it possesses a law and fundamental elements by which it is so constituted
that the same results will ensue in the simplest as in the most complex form. This is the case
with all the other forces of nature; they may be modified by existing circumstances, and yet
they have laws and definite elements to distinguish them from all others. These forces, however,
while they are distinct in their peculiar manifestations, and take effect through special qualities,
quantities, and rhythmic movements, are all fused together in the infinite and eternal unity
which constitutes the life of the universe. Neither here nor in my former work is there any
question of that most difficult problem, the individual personality of man.[5]

