'Next we 'ave a view of the dining-hall at the Topside Hotel in London, where we see the tables
set for a millionaires' banquet.  The forks and spoons is made of solid gold and the plates
is made of silver.  The flowers that you see on the tables and 'angin' down from the ceilin'
and on the walls is worth £2,000 and it cost the bloke wot give the supper over £30,000 for
this one beano. The only cause of complaint I have is his invariable custom of destroying every
babe to which I give birth on the third day after my delivery. He says it is for my sake, and
for their sakes, that he does so, and he knows best."

She sighed heavily as she said this.

"And now," resumed the lady, "I must give you one piece of advice, which, if you would keep
your life, you must implicitly adopt. My husband will return. Be on your guard, I bid you.
He will offer you gold, he will pour out the countless treasures he possesses before you, he
will proffer you diamonds and pearls and priceless gems, but--heed
well what I say to you--take nothing more from him than you would
from any other person.

Take the exact sum you are wont to receive on earth, and take not
a kreutzer more, or your life is not worth a moment's purchase.

It is forfeit."

"He must be a cruel being, indeed," ejaculated the midwife. "God deliver me from this dread
and great danger."

"See you yon sealed vessels?" spake the lady, without seeming to heed her fright, or hear her
ejaculations.

The midwife looked, and saw ranged on an upper shelf of the apartment about a dozen small pots,
like pipkins, all fast sealed, and labelled in unknown characters.

"These pots," pursued she, "contain the souls of those who have been, like you, my attendants
in childbirth, but who, for slighting the advice I gave them, as I now give you, and permitting
a spirit of unjust gain to take possession of their hearts, were deprived of life by my husband.
Heed well what I say. He comes. Be silent and discreet."

As she spake the water spirit entered. He first asked his wife how she did, and his tones were
like the rushing sound of a current heard far off. Learning from her own lips that all was well
with her, he turned to the midwife and thanked her most graciously.

"Now, come with me," he said, "I must pay thee for thy services."

She followed him from the sick-chamber to the treasury of the palace. It was a spacious crystal
vault, lighted up, like the rest of the palace, from without, but
within it was resplendent with treasures of all kinds.

        He led her to a huge heap of shining
        gold which ran the whole length of the chamber.

"Here," said he,
"take what you will. I put no stint upon you."

The trembling woman
picked up a single piece of the smallest coin she could find upon
the heap.

"This is my fee," she spake. "I ask no more than a fair
remuneration for my labour."

The water spirit's brow blackened like
a tempestuous night, and he showed his green teeth for a moment as
if in great ire, but the feeling, whatever it was, appeared to pass
away as quickly as it came, and he led her to a huge heap of pearls.

"Here,"
he said, "take what you will. Perhaps you like these better? They
are all pearls of great price, or may be you would wish for some memento
of me. Take what you will."

But she still declined to take anything
more, although he tempted her with all his treasures. She had not
forgotten the advice of her patient.
        We've both been there before,
        Many a time!
        Where many a gallon of beer has gone.
        To colour his nose and mine,
        We've both been there before,
        Many a time, many a time!'

At the conclusion of the singing, Bert turned another picture into view.

''Ere we 'ave another election scene.  At each side we see the two candidates the same as in
the last pitcher.  In the middle of the road we see a man lying on the ground, covered with
blood, with a lot of Liberal and Tory working men kickin' 'im, jumpin' on 'im, and stampin'
on 'is face with their 'obnailed boots.  Directly the children saw it--without waiting for
the band--they gave three cheers and began to sing the chorus of the National Anthem.

A round of applause for Bert concluded the Pandorama performance; the lamp and the candles
of the Christmas tree were relit--for although all the toys had been taken off, the tree still
made a fine show with the shining glass ornaments--and then they had some more games; blind
man's buff, a tug-of-war--in which Philpot was defeated with great laughter--and a lot of other
games.  And when they were tired of these, each child 'said a piece' or sung a song, learnt
specially for the occasion.  The only one who had not come prepared in this respect was little
Rosie, and even she--so as to be the same as the others--insisted on reciting the only piece
she knew.

Most of them were by this time quite tired out, so after some supper the party broke up.  Although
they were nearly all very sleepy, none of them were very willing to go, but they were consoled
by the thought of another entertainment to which they were going later on in the week--the
Band of Hope Tea and Prize Distribution at the Shining Light Chapel.

Bert undertook to see Elsie and Charley safely home, and Philpot volunteered to accompany Nellie
and Tommy Newman, and to carry Rosie, who was so tired that she fell asleep on his shoulder
before they left the house.

As they were going down the stairs Frankie held a hurried consultation with his mother, with
the result that he was able to shout after them an invitation to come again next Christmas.

Chapter 30

The Brigands hold a Council of War

It being now what is usually called the festive season--possibly because at this period of
the year a greater number of people are suffering from hunger and cold than at any other time--the
reader will not be surprised at being invited to another little party which took place on the
day after the one we have just left.  The scene was Mr Sweater's office.  Mr Sweater was seated
at his desk, but with his chair swung round to enable him to face his guests--Messrs Rushton,
Didlum, and Grinder, who were also seated.

'Something will 'ave to be done, and that very soon,' Grinder was saying.  'We can't go on
much longer as we're doing at present.  For my part, I think the best thing to do is to chuck
up the sponge at once; the company is practically bankrupt now, and the longer we waits the
worser it will be.'

'That's just my opinion,' said Didlum dejectedly.  'If we could supply the electric light at
the same price as gas, or a little cheaper, we might have some chance; but we can't do it.
The fact is that the machinery we've got is no dam good; it's too small and it's wore out,
consequently the light we supply is inferior to gas and costs more.'

'Yes, I think we're fairly beaten this time,' said Rushton.  'Why, even if the Gas Coy hadn't
moved their works beyond the borough boundary, still we shouldn't 'ave been hable to compete
with 'em.'

'Of course not,' said Grinder.  'The truth of the matter is just wot Didlum says.  Our machinery
is too small, it's worn hout, and good for nothing but to be throwed on the scrap-heap.  So
there's only one thing left to do and that is--go into liquidation.'

'I don't see it,' remarked Sweater.

'Well, what do you propose, then?' demanded Grinder.  'Reconstruct the company?  Ask the shareholders
for more money?  Pull down the works and build fresh, and buy some new machinery?  And then
most likely not make a do of it after all?  Not for me, old chap!  I've 'ad enough. You won't
catch me chuckin' good money after bad in that way.'

'Nor me neither,' said Rushton.

'Dead orf!' remarked Didlum, very decidedly.

Sweater laughed quietly.  'I'm not such a fool as to suggest anything of that sort,' he said.
'You seem to forget that I am one of the largest shareholders myself.  No.  What I propose
is that we Sell Out.'

'Sell out!' replied Grinder with a contemptuous laugh in which the others joined.  'Who's going
to buy the shares of a concern that's practically bankrupt and never paid a dividend?'

'I've tried to sell my little lot several times already,' said Didlum with a sickly smile,
'but nobody won't buy 'em.'

'Who's to buy?' repeated Sweater, replying to Grinder.  'The municipality of course!  The ratepayers.
Why shouldn't Mugsborough go in for Socialism as well as other towns?'

Rushton, Didlum and Grinder fairly gasped for breath: the audacity of the chief's proposal
nearly paralysed them.

'I'm afraid we should never git away with it,' ejaculated Didlum, as soon as he could speak.
'When the people tumbled to it, there'd be no hend of a row.'

'PEOPLE!  ROW!' replied Sweater, scornfully.  'The majority of the people will never know anything
about it! Listen to me--'

'Are you quite sure as we can't be over'eard?' interrupted Rushton, glancing nervously at the
door and round the office.

'It's all right,' answered Sweater, who nevertheless lowered his voice almost to a whisper,
and the others drew their chairs closer and bent forward to listen.

'You know we still have a little money in hand: well, what I propose is this: At the annual
meeting, which, as you know, comes off next week, we'll arrange for the Secretary to read a
highly satisfactory report, and we'll declare a dividend of 15 per cent--we can arrange it
somehow between us.  Of course, we'll have to cook the accounts a little, but I'll see that
it's done properly.  The other shareholders are not going to ask any awkward questions, and
we all understand each other.'

Sweater paused, and regarded the other three brigands intently.  'Do you follow me?' he asked.

'Yes, yes,' said Didlum eagerly.  'Go on with it.'  And Rushton and Grinder nodded assent.

'Afterwards,' resumed Sweater, 'I'll arrange for a good report of the meeting to appear in
the Weekly Ananias.  I'll instruct the Editor to write it himself, and I'll tell him just what
to say.  I'll also get him to write a leading article about it, saying that electricity is
sure to supersede gas for lighting purposes in the very near future. Then the article will
go on to refer to the huge profits made by the Gas Coy and to say how much better it would
have been if the town had bought the gasworks years ago, so that those profits might have been
used to reduce the rates, the same as has been done in other towns. Finally, the article will
declare that it's a great pity that the Electric Light Supply should be in the hands of a private
company, and to suggest that an effort be made to acquire it for the town.

'In the meantime we can all go about--in a very quiet and judicious way, of course--bragging
about what a good thing we've got, and saying we don't mean to sell.  We shall say that we've
overcome all the initial expenses and difficulties connected with the installation of the works--that
we are only just beginning to reap the reward of our industry and enterprise, and so on.

'Then,' continued the Chief, 'we can arrange for it to be proposed in the Council that the
Town should purchase the Electric Light Works.'

'But not by one of us four, you know,' said Grinder with a cunning leer.

'Certainly not; that would give the show away at once.  There are, as you know--several members
of the Band who are not shareholders in the company; we'll get some of them to do most of the
talking.  We, being the directors of the company, must pretend to be against selling, and stick
out for our own price; and when we do finally consent we must make out that we are sacrificing
our private interests for the good of the Town.  We'll get a committee appointed--we'll have
an expert engineer down from London--I know a man that will suit our purpose admirably--we'll
pay him a trifle and he'll say whatever we tell him to--and we'll rush the whole business through
before you can say "Jack Robinson", and before the rate-payers have time to realize what's
being done.  Not that we need worry ourselves much about them. Most of them take no interest
in public affairs, but even if there is something said, it won't matter much to us once we've
got the money. It'll be a nine days' wonder and then we'll hear no more of it.'

As the Chief ceased speaking, the other brigands also remained silent, speechless with admiration
of his cleverness.

'Well, what do you think of it?' he asked.

'Think of it!' cried Grinder, enthusiastically.  'I think it's splendid!  Nothing could be
better.  If we can honly git away with it, I reckon it'll be one of the smartest thing we've
ever done.'

'Smart ain't the word for it,' observed Rushton.

'There's no doubt it's a grand idear!' exclaimed Didlum, 'and I've just thought of something
else that might be done to help it along. We could arrange to 'ave a lot of letters sent "To
the Editor of the Obscurer" and "To the Editor of the Ananias," and "To the Editor of the Weekly
Chloroform" in favour of the scheme.'

'Yes, that's a very good idea,' said Grinder.  'For that matter the editors could write them
to themselves and sign them "Progress", "Ratepayer", "Advance Mugsborough", and sich-like.'

'Yes, that's all right,' said the Chief, thoughtfully, 'but we must be careful not to overdo
it; of course there will have to be a certain amount of publicity, but we don't want to create
too much interest in it.'

'Come to think of it,' observed Rushton arrogantly, 'why should we trouble ourselves about
the opinion of the ratepayers at all?  Why should we trouble to fake the books, or declare
a dividend or 'ave the harticles in the papers or anything else?  We've got the game in our
own 'ands; we've got a majority in the Council, and, as Mr Sweater ses, very few people even
take the trouble to read the reports of the meetings.'

'Yes, that's right enough,' said Grinder.  'But it's just them few wot would make a lot of
trouble and talk; THEY'RE the very people we 'as to think about.  If we can only manage to
put THEM in a fog we'll be all right, and the way to do it is as Mr Sweater proposes.'

'Yes, I think so,' said the Chief.  'We must be very careful.  I can work it all right in the
Ananias and the Chloroform, and of course you'll see that the Obscurer backs us up.'

'I'll take care of that,' said Grinder, grimly.

The three local papers were run by limited companies.  Sweater held nearly all the shares of
the Ananias and of the Weekly Chloroform, and controlled their policy and contents.  Grinder
occupied the same position with regard to the Obscurer.  The editors were a sort of marionettes
who danced as Sweater and Grinder pulled the strings.

'I wonder how Dr Weakling will take it?' remarked Rushton.

'That's the very thing I was just thinkin' about,' cried Didlum. 'Don't you think it would
be a good plan if we could arrange to 'ave somebody took bad--you know, fall down in a fit
or something in the street just outside the Town 'All just before the matter is brought forward
in the Council, and then 'ave someone to come and call 'im out to attend to the party wot's
ill, and keep 'im out till the business is done.'

'Yes, that's a capital idear,' said Grinder thoughtfully.  'But who could we get to 'ave the
fit?  It would 'ave to be someone we could trust, you know.'

''Ow about Rushton?  You wouldn't mind doin' it, would yer?' inquired Didlum.

'I should strongly object,' said Rushton haughtily.  He regarded the suggestion that he should
act such an undignified part, as a kind of sacrilege.

'Then I'll do it meself if necessary,' said Didlum.  'I'm not proud when there's money to be
made; anything for an honest living.'

'Well, I think we're all agreed, so far,' remarked Sweater.  The others signified assent.

'And I think we all deserve a drink,' the Chief continued, producing a decanter and a box of
cigars from a cupboard by the side of his desk. 'Pass that water bottle from behind you, Didlum.'

'I suppose nobody won't be comin' in?' said the latter, anxiously. 'I'm a teetotaler, you know.'

'Oh, it's all right,' said Sweater, taking four glasses out of the cupboard and pouring out
the whisky.  'I've given orders that we're not to be disturbed for anyone.  Say when.'

'Well, 'ere's success to Socialism,' cried Grinder, raising his glass, and taking a big drink.

'Amen--'ear, 'ear, I mean,' said Didlum, hastily correcting himself.

'Wot I likes about this 'ere business is that we're not only doin' ourselves a bit of good,'
continued Grinder with a laugh, 'we're not only doin' ourselves a bit of good, but we're likewise
doin' the Socialists a lot of 'arm.  When the ratepayers 'ave bought the Works, and they begins
to kick up a row because they're losin' money over it--we can tell 'em that it's Socialism!
And then they'll say that if that's Socialism they don't want no more of it.'

The other brigands laughed gleefully, and some of Didlum's whisky went down the wrong way and
nearly sent him into a fit.

'You might as well kill a man at once,' he protested as he wiped the tears from his eyes, 'you
might as well kill a man at once as choke 'im to death.'

'And now I've got a bit of good news for you,' said the Chief as he put his empty glass down.

The others became serious at once.

'Although we've had a very rough time of it in our contest with the Gasworks Company, and although
we've got the worst of it, it hasn't been all lavender for them, you know.  They've not enjoyed
themselves either: we hit them pretty hard when we put up the coal dues.'

'A damn good job too,' said Grinder malignantly.

'Well,' continued Sweater, 'they're just as sick of the fight as they want to be, because of
course they don't know exactly how badly we've been hit.  For all they know, we could have
continued the struggle indefinitely: and--well, to make a long story short, I've had a talk
with the managing director and one or two others, and they're willing to let us in with them.
So that we can put the money we get for the Electric Light Works into gas shares!'

This was such splendid news that they had another drink on the strength of it, and Didlum said
that one of the first things they would have to do would be to totally abolish the Coal Dues,
because they pressed so hard on the poor.

Chapter 31

The Deserter

About the end of January, Slyme left Easton's.  The latter had not succeeded in getting anything
to do since the work at 'The Cave' was finished, and latterly the quality of the food had been
falling off. The twelve shillings Slyme paid for his board and lodging was all that Ruth had
to keep house with.  She had tried to get some work to do herself, but generally without success;
there were one or two jobs that she might have had if she had been able to give her whole time
to them, but of course that was not possible; the child and the housework had to be attended
to, and Slyme's meals had to be prepared. Nevertheless, she contrived to get away several times
when she had a chance of earning a few shillings by doing a day's charing for some lady or
other, and then she left everything in such order at home that Easton was able to manage all
right while she was away.  On these occasions, she usually left the baby with Owen's wife,
who was an old schoolmate of hers. Nora was the more willing to render her this service because
Frankie used to be so highly delighted whenever it happened.  He never tired of playing with
the child, and for several days afterwards he used to worry his mother with entreaties to buy
a baby of their own.

Easton earned a few shillings occasionally; now and then he got a job to clean windows, and
once or twice he did a few days' or hours' work with some other painter who had been fortunate
enough to get a little job 'on his own'--such as a ceiling to wash and whiten, or a room or
two to paint; but such jobs were few.

Sometimes, when they were very hard up, they sold something; the Bible that used to lie on
the little table in the bay window was one of the first things to be parted with.  Ruth erased
the inscription from the fly-leaf and then they sold the book at a second-hand shop for two
shillings.  As time went on, they sold nearly everything that was saleable, except of course,
the things that were obtained on the hire system.

Slyme could see that they were getting very much into debt and behind with the rent, and on
two occasions already Easton had borrowed five shillings from him, which he might never be
able to pay back.  Another thing was that Slyme was always in fear that Ruth--who had never
wholly abandoned herself to wrongdoing--might tell Easton what had happened; more than once
she had talked of doing so, and the principal reason why she refrained was that she knew that
even if he forgave her, he could never think the same of her as before.  Slyme repeatedly urged
this view upon her, pointing out that no good could result from such a confession.

Latterly the house had become very uncomfortable.  It was not only that the food was bad and
that sometimes there was no fire, but Ruth and Easton were nearly always quarrelling about
something or other. She scarcely spoke to Slyme at all, and avoided sitting at the table with
him whenever possible.  He was in constant dread that Easton might notice her manner towards
him, and seek for some explanation. Altogether the situation was so unpleasant that Slyme determined
to clear out.  He made the excuse that he had been offered a few weeks' work at a place some
little distance outside the town.  After he was gone they lived for several weeks in semi-starvation
on what credit they could get and by selling the furniture or anything else they possessed
that could be turned into money.  The things out of Slyme's room were sold almost directly he left.

Chapter 32

The Veteran

Old Jack Linden had tried hard to earn a little money by selling bloaters, but they often went
bad, and even when he managed to sell them all the profit was so slight that it was not worth
doing.

Before the work at 'The Cave' was finished, Philpot was a good friend to them; he frequently
gave old Jack sixpence or a shilling and often brought a bag off cakes or buns for the children.
Sometimes he came to tea with them on Sundays as an excuse for bringing a tin of salmon.

Elsie and Charley frequently went to Owen's house to take tea with Frankie; in fact, whilst
Owen had anything to do, they almost lived there, for both Owen and Nora, knowing that the
Lindens had nothing to live on except the earnings of the young woman, encouraged the children
to come often.

Old Jack made some hopeless attempts to get work--work of any kind, but nobody wanted him;
and to make things worse, his eyesight, which had been failing for a long time, became very
bad.  Once he was given a job by a big provision firm to carry an advertisement about the streets.
The man who had been carrying it before--an old soldier--had been sacked the previous day for
getting drunk while on duty.  The advertisement was not an ordinary pair of sandwich boards,
but a sort of box without any bottom or lid, a wooden frame, four sides covered with canvas,
an which were pasted printed bills advertising margarine. Each side of this box or frame was
rather larger than an ordinary sandwich board.

Old Linden had to get inside this thing and carry it about the streets; two straps fixed across
the top of the frame and passing one over each of his shoulders enabled him to carry it.  It
swayed about a good deal as he walked along, especially when the wind caught it, but there
were two handles inside to hold it steady by.  The pay was eighteenpence a day, and he had
to travel a certain route, up and down the busiest streets.

At first the frame did not feel very heavy, but the weight seemed to increase as the time went
on, and the straps hurt his shoulders.  He felt very much ashamed, also, whenever he encountered
any of his old mates, some of whom laughed at him.

In consequence of the frame requiring so much attention to keep it steady, and being unused
to the work, and his sight so bad, he several times narrowly escaped being run over.  Another
thing that added to his embarrassment was the jeering of the other sandwichmen, the loafers
outside the public houses, and the boys, who shouted 'old Jack in the box' after him.  Sometimes
the boys threw refuse at the frame, and once a decayed orange thrown by one of them knocked
his hat off.

By the time evening came he was scarcely able to stand for weariness. His shoulders, his legs
and his feet ached terribly, and as he was taking the thing back to the shop he was accosted
by a ragged, dirty-looking, beer-sodden old man whose face was inflamed with drink and fury.
'This was the old soldier who had been discharged the previous day.  He cursed and swore in
the most awful manner and accused Linden of 'taking the bread out of his mouth', and, shaking
his fist fiercely at him, shouted that he had a good mind to knock his face through his head
and out of the back of his neck.  He might possibly have tried to put this threat into practice
but for the timely appearance of a policeman, when he calmed down at once and took himself off.

Jack did not go back the next day; he felt that he would rather starve than have any more of
the advertisement frame, and after this he seemed to abandon all hope of earning money: wherever
he went it was the same--no one wanted him.  So he just wandered about the streets aimlessly,
now and then meeting an old workmate who asked him to have a drink, but this was not often,
for nearly all of them were out of work and penniless.

Chapter 33

The Soldier's Children

During most of this time, Jack Linden's daughter-in-law had 'Plenty of Work', making blouses
and pinafores for Sweater & Co.  She had so much to do that one might have thought that the
Tory Millennium had arrived, and that Tariff Reform was already an accomplished fact.

She had Plenty of Work.

At first they had employed her exclusively on the cheapest kind of blouses--those that were
paid for at the rate of two shillings a dozen, but they did not give her many of that sort
now.  She did the work so neatly that they kept her busy on the better qualities, which did
not pay her so well, because although she was paid more per dozen, there was a great deal more
work in them than in the cheaper kinds. Once she had a very special one to make, for which
she was paid six shillings; but it took her four and a half days--working early and late--to
do it. The lady who bought this blouse was told that it came from Paris, and paid three guineas
for it.  But of course Mrs Linden knew nothing of that, and even if she had known, it would
have made no difference to her.

Most of the money she earned went to pay the rent, and sometimes there was only two or three
shillings left to buy food for all of them: sometimes not even so much, because although she
had Plenty of Work she was not always able to do it.  There were times when the strain of working
the machine was unendurable: her shoulders ached, her arms became cramped, and her eyes pained
so that it was impossible to continue.  Then for a change she would leave the sewing and do
some housework.

Once, when they owed four weeks' rent, the agent was so threatening that they were terrified
at the thought of being sold up and turned out of the house, and so she decided to sell the
round mahogany table and some of the other things out of the sitting-room.  Nearly all the
furniture that was in the house now belonged to her, and had formed her home before her husband
died.  The old people had given most of their things away at different times to their other
sons since she had come to live there.  These men were all married and all in employment. One
was a fitter at the gasworks; the second was a railway porter, and the other was a butcher;
but now that the old man was out of work they seldom came to the house.  The last time they
had been there was on Christmas Eve, and then there had been such a terrible row between them
that the children had been awakened by it and frightened nearly out of their lives.  The cause
of the row was that some time previously they had mutually agreed to each give a shilling a
week to the old people. They had done this for three weeks and after that the butcher had stopped
his contribution: it had occurred to him that he was not to be expected to help to keep his
brother's widow and her children.  If the old people liked to give up the house and go to live
in a room somewhere by themselves, he would continue paying his shilling a week, but not otherwise.
Upon this the railway porter and the gas-fitter also ceased paying.  They said it wasn't fair
that they should pay a shilling a week each when the butcher--who was the eldest and earned
the best wages--paid nothing.  Provided he paid, they would pay; but if he didn't pay anything,
neither would they.  On Christmas Eve they all happened to come to the house at the same time;
each denounced the others, and after nearly coming to blows they all went away raging and cursing
and had not been near the place since.

As soon as she decided to sell the things, Mary went to Didlum's second-hand furniture store,
and the manager said he would ask Mr Didlum to call and see the table and other articles. 
She waited anxiously all the morning, but he did not appear, so she went once more to the shop
to remind him.  When he did come at last he was very contemptuous of the table and of everything
else she offered to sell. Five shillings was the very most he could think of giving for the
table, and even then he doubted whether he would ever get his money back.  Eventually he gave
her thirty shillings for the table, the overmantel, the easy chair, three other chairs and
the two best pictures--one a large steel engraving of 'The Good Samaritan' and the other 'Christ
Blessing Little Children'.

He paid the money at once; half an hour afterwards the van came to take the things away, and
when they were gone, Mary sank down on the hearthrug in the wrecked room and sobbed as if her
heart would break.

This was the first of several similar transactions.  Slowly, piece by piece, in order to buy
food and to pay the rent, the furniture was sold.  Every time Didlum came he affected to be
doing them a very great favour by buying the things at all.  Almost an act of charity. He did
not want them.  Business was so bad: it might be years before he could sell them again, and
so on.  Once or twice he asked Mary if she did not want to sell the clock--the one that her
late husband had made for his mother, but Mary shrank from the thought of selling this, until
at last there was nothing else left that Didlum would buy, and one week, when Mary was too
ill to do any needlework--it had to go. He gave them ten shillings for it.

Mary had expected the old woman to be heartbroken at having to part with this clock, but she
was surprised to see her almost indifferent. The truth was, that lately both the old people
seemed stunned, and incapable of taking an intelligent interest in what was happening around
them, and Mary had to attend to everything.

From time to time nearly all their other possessions--things of inferior value that Didlum
would not look at, she carried out and sold at small second-hand shops in back streets or pledged
at the pawn-broker's.  The feather pillows, sheets, and blankets: bits of carpet or oilcloth,
and as much of their clothing as was saleable or pawnable.  They felt the loss of the bedclothes
more than anything else, for although all the clothes they wore during the day, and all the
old clothes and dresses in the house, and even an old coloured tablecloth, were put on the
beds at night, they did not compensate for the blankets, and they were often unable to sleep
on account of the intense cold.

A lady district visitor who called occasionally sometimes gave Mary an order for a hundredweight
of coal or a shillingsworth of groceries, or a ticket for a quart of soup, which Elsie fetched
in the evening from the Soup Kitchen.  But this was not very often, because, as the lady said,
there were so many cases similar to theirs that it was impossible to do more than a very little
for any one of them.

Sometimes Mary became so weak and exhausted through overwork, worry, and lack of proper food
that she broke down altogether for the time being, and positively could not do any work at
all.  Then she used to lie down on the bed in her room and cry.

Whenever she became like this, Elsie and Charley used to do the housework when they came home
from school, and make tea and toast for her, and bring it to the bedside on a chair so that
she could eat lying down.  When there was no margarine or dripping to put on the toast, they
made it very thin and crisp and pretended it was biscuit.

The children rather enjoyed these times; the quiet and leisure was so different from other
days when their mother was so busy she had no time to speak to them.

They would sit on the side of the bed, the old grandmother in her chair opposite with the cat
beside her listening to the conversation and purring or mewing whenever they stroked it or
spoke to it.  They talked principally of the future.  Elsie said she was going to be a teacher
and earn a lot of money to bring home to her mother to buy things with. Charley was thinking
of opening a grocer's shop and having a horse and cart.  When one has a grocer's shop, there
is always plenty to eat; even if you have no money, you can take as much as you like out of
your shop--good stuff, too, tins of salmon, jam, sardines, eggs, cakes, biscuits and all those
sorts of things--and one was almost certain to have some money every day, because it wasn't
likely that a whole day would go by without someone or other coming into the shop to buy something.
When delivering the groceries with the horse and cart, he would give rides to all the boys
he knew, and in the summertime, after the work was done and the shop shut up, Mother and Elsie
and Granny could also come for long rides into the country.

The old grandmother--who had latterly become quite childish--used to sit and listen to all
this talk with a superior air.  Sometimes she argued with the children about their plans, and
ridiculed them.  She used to say with a chuckle that she had heard people talk like that before--lots
of times--but it never came to nothing in the end.

One week about the middle of February, when they were in very sore straits indeed, old Jack
applied to the secretary of the Organized Benevolence Society for assistance.  It was about
eleven o'clock in the morning when he turned the corner of the street where the office of the
society was situated and saw a crowd of about thirty men waiting for the doors to be opened
in order to apply for soup tickets. Some of these men were of the tramp or the drunken loafer
class; some were old, broken-down workmen like himself, and others were labourers wearing corduroy
or moleskin trousers with straps round their legs under their knees.

Linden waited at a distance until all these were gone before he went in.  The secretary received
him sympathetically and gave him a big form to fill up, but as Linden's eyes were so bad and
his hand so unsteady the secretary very obligingly wrote in the answers himself, and informed
him that he would inquire into the case and lay his application before the committee at the
next meeting, which was to be held on the following Thursday--it was then Monday.

Linden explained to him that they were actually starving.  He had been out of work for sixteen
weeks, and during all that time they had lived for the most part on the earnings of his daughter-in-law,
but she had not done anything for nearly a fortnight now, because the firm she worked for had
not had any work for her to do.  There was no food in the house and the children were crying
for something to eat.  All last week they had been going to school hungry, for they had had
nothing but dry bread and tea every day: but this week--as far as he could see--they would
not get even that.  After some further talk the secretary gave him two soup tickets and an
order for a loaf of bread, and repeated his promise to inquire into the case and bring it before
the committee.

As Jack was returning home he passed the Soup Kitchen, where he saw the same lot of men who
had been to the office of the Organized Benevolence Society for the soup tickets.  They were
waiting in a long line to be admitted.  The premises being so small, the proprietor served
them in batches of ten at a time.

On Wednesday the secretary called at the house, and on Friday Jack received a letter from him
to the effect that the case had been duly considered by the committee, who had come to the
conclusion that as it was a 'chronic' case they were unable to deal with it, and advised him
to apply to the Board of Guardians.  This was what Linden had hitherto shrunk from doing, but
the situation was desperate.  They owed five weeks' rent, and to crown their misfortune his
eyesight had become so bad that even if there had been any prospect of obtaining work it was
very doubtful if he could have managed to do it.  So Linden, feeling utterly crushed and degraded,
swallowed all that remained of his pride and went like a beaten dog to see the relieving officer,
who took him before the Board, who did not think it a suitable case for out-relief, and after
some preliminaries it was arranged that Linden and his wife were to go into the workhouse,
and Mary was to be allowed three shillings a week to help her to support herself and the two
children. As for Linden's sons, the Guardians intimated their Intention of compelling them
to contribute towards the cost of their parents' maintenance.

Mary accompanied the old people to the gates of their future dwelling-place, and when she returned
home she found there a letter addressed to J. Linden.  It was from the house agent and contained
a notice to leave the house before the end of the ensuing week.  Nothing was said about the
rent that was due.  Perhaps Mr Sweater thought that as he had already received nearly six hundred
pounds in rent from Linden he could afford to be generous about the five weeks that were still
owing--or perhaps he thought there was no possibility of getting the money.  However that may
have been, there was no reference to it in the letter--it was simply a notice to clear out,
addressed to Linden, but meant for Mary.

It was about half past three o'clock in the afternoon when she returned home and found this
letter on the floor in the front passage. She was faint with fatigue and hunger, for she had
had nothing but a cup of tea and a slice of bread that day, and her fare had not been much
better for many weeks past.  The children were at school, and the house--now almost destitute
of furniture and without carpets or oilcloth on the floors--was deserted and cold and silent
as a tomb. On the kitchen table were a few cracked cups and saucers, a broken knife, some lead
teaspoons, a part of a loaf, a small basin containing some dripping and a brown earthenware
teapot with a broken spout. Near the table were two broken kitchen chairs, one with the top
cross-piece gone from the back, and the other with no back to the seat at all.  The bareness
of the walls was relieved only by a coloured almanac and some paper pictures which the children
had tacked upon them, and by the side of the fireplace was the empty wicker chair where the
old woman used to sit. There was no fire in the grate, and the cold hearth was untidy with
an accumulation of ashes, for during the trouble of these last few days she had not had time
or heart to do any housework.  The floor was unswept and littered with scraps of paper and
dust: in one corner was a heap of twigs and small branches of trees that Charley had found
somewhere and brought home for the fire.

The same disorder prevailed all through the house: all the doors were open, and from where
she stood in the kitchen she could see the bed she shared with Elsie, with its heterogeneous
heap of coverings.  The sitting-room contained nothing but a collection of odds and ends of
rubbish which belonged to Charley--his 'things' as he called them--bits of wood, string and
rope; one wheel of a perambulator, a top, an iron hoop and so on.  Through the other door was
visible the dilapidated bedstead that had been used by the old people, with a similar lot of
bedclothes to those on her own bed, and the torn, ragged covering of the mattress through the
side of which the flock was protruding and falling in particles on to the floor.

As she stood there with the letter in her hand--faint and weary in the midst of all this desolation,
it seemed to her as if the whole world were falling to pieces and crumbling away all around her.

Chapter 34

The Beginning of the End

During the months of January and February, Owen, Crass, Slyme and Sawkins continued to work
at irregular intervals for Rushton & Co., although--even when there was anything to do--they
now put in only six hours a day, commencing in the morning and leaving off at four, with an
hour's interval for dinner between twelve and one.  They finished the 'plant' and painted the
front of Rushton's shop.  When all this was completed, as no other work came in, they all had
to 'stand off' with the exception of Sawkins, who was kept on because he was cheap and able
to do all sorts of odd jobs, such as unstopping drains, repairing leaky roofs, rough painting
or lime-washing, and he was also useful as a labourer for the plumbers, of whom there were
now three employed at Rushton's, the severe weather which had come in with January having made
a lot of work in that trade.  With the exception of this one branch, practically all work was
at a standstill.

During this time Rushton & Co. had had several 'boxing-up' jobs to do, and Crass always did
the polishing of the coffins on these occasions, besides assisting to take the 'box' home when
finished and to 'lift in' the corpse, and afterwards he always acted as one of the bearers
at the funerals.  For an ordinary class funeral he usually put in about three hours for the
polishing; that came to one and nine. Taking home the coffin and lifting in the corpse, one
shilling--usually there were two men to do this besides Hunter, who always accompanied them
to superintend the work--attending the funeral and acting as bearer, four shillings: so that
altogether Crass made six shillings and ninepence out of each funeral, and sometimes a little
more.  For instance, when there was an unusually good-class corpse they had a double coffin
and then of course there were two 'lifts in', for the shell was taken home first and the outer
coffin perhaps a day or two later: this made another shilling.  No matter how expensive the
funeral was, the bearers never got any more money.  Sometimes the carpenter and Crass were
able to charge an hour or two more on the making and polishing of a coffin for a good job,
but that was all. Sometimes, when there was a very cheap job, they were paid only three shillings
for attending as bearers, but this was not often: as a rule they got the same amount whether
it was a cheap funeral or an expensive one.  Slyme earned only five shillings out of each funeral,
and Owen only one and six--for writing the coffin plate.

Sometimes there were three or four funerals in a week, and then Crass did very well indeed.
He still had the two young men lodgers at his house, and although one of them was out of work
he was still able to pay his way because he had some money in the bank.

One of the funeral jobs led to a terrible row between Crass and Sawkins.  The corpse was that
of a well-to-do woman who had been ill for a long time with cancer of the stomach, and after
the funeral Rushton & Co. had to clean and repaint and paper the room she had occupied during
her illness.  Although cancer is not supposed to be an infectious disease, they had orders
to take all the bedding away and have it burnt.  Sawkins was instructed to take a truck to
the house and get the bedding and take it to the town Refuse Destructor to be destroyed.  There
were two feather beds, a bolster and two pillows: they were such good things that Sawkins secretly
resolved that instead of taking them to the Destructor he would take them to a second-hand
dealer and sell them.

As he was coming away from the house with the things he met Hunter, who told him that he wanted
him for some other work; so he was to take the truck to the yard and leave it there for the
present; he could take the bedding to the Destructor later on in the day.  Sawkins did as Hunter
ordered, and in the meantime Crass, who happened to be working at the yard painting some venetian
blinds, saw the things on the truck, and, hearing what was to be done with them, he also thought
it was a pity that such good things should be destroyed: so when Sawkins came in the afternoon
to take them away Crass told him he need not trouble; 'I'm goin' to 'ave that lot, he said;
'they're too good to chuck away; there's nothing wrong with 'em.'

This did not suit Sawkins at all.  He said he had been told to take them to the Destructor,
and he was going to do so.  He was dragging the cart out of the yard when Crass rushed up and
lifted the bundle off and carried it into the paint-shop.  Sawkins ran after him and they began
to curse and swear at each other; Crass accusing Sawkins of intending to take the things to
the marine stores and sell them. Sawkins seized hold of the bundle with the object of replacing
it on the cart, but Crass got hold of it as well and they had a tussle for it--a kind of tug
of war--reeling and struggling all over the shop. cursing and swearing horribly all the time.
Finally, Sawkins--being the better man of the two--succeeded in wrenching the bundle away and
put it on the cart again, and then Crass hurriedly put on his coat and said he was going to
the office to ask Mr Rushton if he might have the things. Upon hearing this, Sawkins became
so infuriated that he lifted the bundle off the cart and, throwing it upon the muddy ground,
right into a pool of dirty water, trampled it underfoot; and then, taking out his clasp knife,
began savagely hacking and ripping the ticking so that the feathers all came falling out. 
In a few minutes he had damaged the things beyond hope of repair, while Crass stood by, white
and trembling, watching the proceedings but lacking the courage to interfere.

'Now go to the office and ask Rushton for 'em, if you like!' shouted Sawkins.  'You can 'ave
'em now, if you want 'em.'

Crass made no answer and, after a moment's hesitation, went back to his work, and Sawkins piled
the things on the cart once more and took them away to the Destructor.  He would not be able
to sell them now, but at any rate he had stopped that dirty swine Crass from getting them.

When Crass went back to the paint-shop he found there one of the pillows which had fallen out
of the bundle during the struggle.  He took it home with him that evening and slept upon it.
It was a fine pillow, much fuller and softer and more cosy than the one he had been accustomed to.

A few days afterwards when he was working at the room where the woman died, they gave him some
other things that had belonged to her to do away with, and amongst them was a kind of wrap
of grey knitted wool. Crass kept this for himself: it was just the thing to wrap round one's
neck when going to work on a cold morning, and he used it for that purpose all through the
winter.  In addition to the funerals, there was a little other work: sometimes a room or two
to be painted and papered and ceilings whitened, and once they had the outside of two small
cottages to paint--doors and windows--two coats.  All four of them worked at this job and it
was finished in two days.  And so they went on.

Some weeks Crass earned a pound or eighteen shillings; sometimes a little more, generally less
and occasionally nothing at all.

There was a lot of jealousy and ill-feeling amongst them about the work.  Slyme and Crass were
both aggrieved about Sawkins whenever they were idle, especially if the latter were painting
or whitewashing, and their indignation was shared by all the others who were 'off'.  Harlow
swore horribly about it, and they all agreed that it was disgraceful that a bloody labourer
should be employed doing what ought to be skilled work for fivepence an hour, while properly
qualified men were 'walking about'.  These other men were also incensed against Slyme and Crass
because the latter were given the preference whenever there was a little job to do, and it
was darkly insinuated that in order to secure this preference these two were working for sixpence
an hour. There was no love lost between Crass and Slyme either: Crass was furious whenever
it happened that Slyme had a few hours' work to do if he himself were idle, and if ever Crass
was working while Slyme was 'standing still' the latter went about amongst the other unemployed
men saying ugly things about Crass, whom he accused of being a 'crawler'.  Owen also came in
for his share of abuse and blame: most of them said that a man like him should stick out for
higher wages whether employed on special work or not, and then he would not get any preference.
But all the same, whatever they said about each other behind each other's backs, they were
all most friendly to each other when they met face to face.

Once or twice Owen did some work--such as graining a door or writing a sign--for one or other
of his fellow workmen who had managed to secure a little job 'on his own', but putting it all
together, the coffin-plates and other work at Rushton's and all, his earnings had not averaged
ten shillings a week for the last six weeks.  Often they had no coal and sometimes not even
a penny to put into the gas meter, and then, having nothing left good enough to pawn, he sometimes
obtained a few pence by selling some of his books to second-hand book dealers. However, bad
as their condition was, Owen knew that they were better off than the majority of the others,
for whenever he went out he was certain to meet numbers of men whom he had worked with at different
times, who said--some of them--that they had been idle for ten, twelve, fifteen and in some
cases for twenty weeks without having earned a shilling.

Owen used to wonder how they managed to continue to exist.  Most of them were wearing other
people's cast-off clothes, hats, and boots, which had in some instances been given to their
wives by 'visiting ladies', or by the people at whose houses their wives went to work, charing.
As for food, most of them lived on such credit as they could get, and on the scraps of broken
victuals and meat that their wives brought home from the places they worked at.  Some of them
had grown-up sons and daughters who still lived with them and whose earnings kept their homes
together, and the wives of some of them eked out a miserable existence by letting lodgings.

The week before old Linden went into the workhouse Owen earned nothing, and to make matters
worse the grocer from whom they usually bought their things suddenly refused to let them have
any more credit. Owen went to see him, and the man said he was very sorry, but he could not
let them have anything more without the money; he did not mind waiting a few weeks for what
was already owing, but he could not let the amount get any higher; his books were full of bad
debts already. In conclusion, he said that he hoped Owen would not do as so many others had
done and take his ready money elsewhere.  People came and got credit from him when they were
hard up, and afterwards spent their ready money at the Monopole Company's stores on the other
side of the street, because their goods were a trifle cheaper, and it was not fair. Owen admitted
that it was not fair, but reminded him that they always bought their things at his shop.  The
grocer, however, was inexorable; he repeated several times that his books were full of bad
debts and his own creditors were pressing him.  During their conversation the shopkeeper's
eyes wandered continually to the big store on the other side of the street; the huge, gilded
letters of the name 'Monopole Stores' seemed to have an irresistible attraction for him.  Once
he interrupted himself in the middle of a sentence to point out to Owen a little girl who was
just coming out of the Stores with a small parcel in her hand.

'Her father owes me nearly thirty shillings,' he said, 'but they spend their ready money there.'

The front of the grocer's shop badly needed repainting, and the name on the fascia, 'A. Smallman',
was so faded as to be almost indecipherable. It had been Owen's intention to offer to do this
work--the cost to go against his account--but the man appeared to be so harassed that Owen
refrained from making the suggestion.

They still had credit at the baker's, but they did not take much bread: when one has had scarcely
anything else but bread to eat for nearly a month one finds it difficult to eat at all.  That
same day, when he returned home after his interview with the grocer, they had a loaf of beautiful
fresh bread, but none of them could eat it, although they were hungry: it seemed to stick in
their throats, and they could not swallow it even with the help of a drink of tea.  But they
drank the tea, which was the one thing that enabled them to go on living.

The next week Owen earned eight shillings altogether: a few hours he put in assisting Crass
to wash off and whiten a ceiling and paint a room, and there was one coffin-plate.  He wrote
the latter at home, and while he was doing it he heard Frankie--who was out in the scullery
with Nora--say to her:

'Mother, how many more days to you think we'll have to have only dry bread and tea?'

Owen's heart seemed to stop as he heard the child's question and listened for Nora's answer,
but the question was not to be answered at all just then, for at that moment they heard someone
running up the stairs and presently the door was unceremoniously thrown open and Charley Linden
rushed into the house, out of breath, hatless, and crying piteously.  His clothes were old
and ragged; they had been patched at the knees and elbows, but the patches were tearing away
from the rotting fabric into which they had been sewn.  He had on a pair of black stockings
full of holes through which the skin was showing.  The soles of his boots were worn through
at one side right to the uppers, and as he walked the sides of his bare heels came into contact
with the floor, the front part of the sole of one boot was separated from the upper, and his
bare toes, red with cold and covered with mud, protruded through the gap.  Some sharp substance--a
nail or a piece of glass or flint--had evidently lacerated his right foot, for blood was oozing
from the broken heel of his boot on to the floor.

They were unable to make much sense of the confused story he told them through his sobs as
soon as he was able to speak.  All that was clear was that there was something very serious
the matter at home: he thought his mother must be either dying or dead, because she did not
speak or move or open her eyes, and 'please, please, please will you come home with me and
see her?'

While Nora was getting ready to go with the boy, Owen made him sit on a chair, and having removed
the boot from the foot that was bleeding, washed the cut with some warm water and bandaged
it with a piece of clean rag, and then they tried to persuade him to stay there with Frankie
while Nora went to see his mother, but the boy would not hear of it.  So Frankie went with
them instead.  Owen could not go because he had to finish the coffin-plate, which was only
just commenced.

It will be remembered that we left Mary Linden alone in the house after she returned from seeing
the old people away.  When the children came home from school, about half an hour afterwards,
they found her sitting in one of the chairs with her head resting on her arms on the table,
unconscious.  They were terrified, because they could not awaken her and began to cry, but
presently Charley thought of Frankie's mother and, telling his sister to stay there while he
was gone, he started off at a run for Owen's house, leaving the front door wide open after him.

When Nora and the two boys reached the house they found there two other women neighbours, who
had heard Elsie crying and had come to see what was wrong.  Mary had recovered from her faint
and was lying down on the bed. Nora stayed with her for some time after the other women went
away.  She lit the fire and gave the children their tea--there was still some coal and food
left of what had been bought with the three shillings obtained from the Board of Guardians--and
afterwards she tidied the house.

Mary said that she did not know exactly what she would have to do in the future.  If she could
get a room somewhere for two or three shillings a week, her allowance from the Guardians would
pay the rent, and she would be able to earn enough for herself and the children to live on.

This was the substance of the story that Nora told Owen when she returned home.  He had finished
writing the coffin-plate, and as it was now nearly dry he put on his coat and took it down
to the carpenter's shop at the yard.

On his way back he met Easton, who had been hanging about in the vain hope of seeing Hunter
and finding out if there was any chance of a job. As they walked along together, Easton confided
to Owen that he had earned scarcely anything since he had been stood off at Rushton's, and
what he had earned had gone, as usual, to pay the rent.  Slyme had left them some time ago.
Ruth did not seem able to get on with him; she had been in a funny sort of temper altogether,
but since he had gone she had had a little work at a boarding-house on the Grand Parade.  But
things had been going from bad to worse. They had not been able to keep up the payments for
the furniture they had hired, so the things had been seized and carted off.  They had even
stripped the oilcloth from the floor.  Easton remarked he was sorry he had not tacked the bloody
stuff down in such a manner that they would not have been able to take it up without destroying
it.  He had been to see Didlum, who said he didn't want to be hard on them, and that he would
keep the things together for three months, and if Easton had paid up arrears by that time he
could have them back again, but there was, in Easton's opinion, very little chance of that.

Owen listened with contempt and anger.  Here was a man who grumbled at the present state of
things, yet took no trouble to think for himself and try to alter them, and who at the first
chance would vote for the perpetuation of the System which produced his misery.

'Have you heard that old Jack Linden and his wife went to the workhouse today,' he said.

'No,' replied Easton, indifferently.  'It's only what I expected.'

Owen then suggested it would not be a bad plan for Easton to let his front room, now that it
was empty, to Mrs Linden, who would be sure to pay her rent, which would help Easton to pay
his.  Easton agreed and said he would mention it to Ruth, and a few minutes later they parted.

The next morning Nora found Ruth talking to Mary Linden about the room and as the Eastons lived
only about five minutes' walk away, they all three went round there in order that Mary might
see the room.  The appearance of the house from outside was unaltered: the white lace curtains
still draped the windows of the front room; and in the centre of the bay was what appeared
to be a small round table covered with a red cloth, and upon it a geranium in a flowerpot standing
in a saucer with a frill of coloured tissue paper round it.  These things and the curtains,
which fell close together, made it impossible for anyone to see that the room was, otherwise,
unfurnished.  The 'table' consisted of an empty wooden box--procured from the grocer's--stood
on end, with the lid of the scullery copper placed upside down upon it for a top and covered
with an old piece of red cloth.  The purpose of this was to prevent the neighbours from thinking
that they were hard up; although they knew that nearly all those same neighbours were in more
or less similar straits.

It was not a very large room, considering that it would have to serve all purposes for herself
and the two children, but Mrs Linden knew that it was not likely that she would be able to
get one as good elsewhere for the same price, so she agreed to take it from the following Monday
at two shillings a week.

As the distance was so short they were able to carry most of the smaller things to their new
home during the next few days, and on the Monday evening, when it was dark.  Owen and Easton
brought the remainder on a truck they borrowed for the purpose from Hunter.

During the last weeks of February the severity of the weather increased.  There was a heavy
fall of snow on the 20th followed by a hard frost which lasted several days.

About ten o'clock one night a policeman found a man lying unconscious in the middle of a lonely
road.  At first he thought the man was drunk, and after dragging him on to the footpath out
of the way of passing vehicles he went for the stretcher.  They took the man to the station
and put him into a cell, which was already occupied by a man who had been caught in the act
of stealing a swede turnip from a barn. When the police surgeon came he pronounced the supposed
drunken man to be dying from bronchitis and want of food; and he further said that there was
nothing to indicate that the man was addicted to drink. When the inquest was held a few days
afterwards, the coroner remarked that it was the third case of death from destitution that
had occurred in the town within six weeks.

The evidence showed that the man was a plasterer who had walked from London with the hope of
finding work somewhere in the country.  He had no money in his possession when he was found
by the policeman; all that his pockets contained being several pawn-tickets and a letter from
his wife, which was not found until after he died, because it was in an inner pocket of his
waistcoat.  A few days before this inquest was held, the man who had been arrested for stealing
the turnip had been taken before the magistrates.  The poor wretch said he did it because he
was starving, but Aldermen Sweater and Grinder, after telling him that starvation was no excuse
for dishonesty, sentenced him to pay a fine of seven shillings and costs, or go to prison for
seven days with hard labour.  As the convict had neither money nor friends, he had to go to
jail, where he was, after all, better off than most of those who were still outside because
they lacked either the courage or the opportunity to steal something to relieve their sufferings.

As time went on the long-continued privation began to tell upon Owen and his family.  He had
a severe cough: his eyes became deeply sunken and of remarkable brilliancy, and his thin face
was always either deathly pale or dyed with a crimson flush.

Frankie also began to show the effects of being obliged to go so often without his porridge
and milk; he became very pale and thin and his long hair came out in handfuls when his mother
combed or brushed it. This was a great trouble to the boy, who, since hearing the story of
Samson read out of the Bible at school, had ceased from asking to have his hair cut short,
lest he should lose his strength in consequence. He used to test himself by going through a
certain exercise he had himself invented, with a flat iron, and he was always much relieved
when he found that, notwithstanding the loss of the porridge, he was still able to lift the
iron the proper number of times.  But after a while, as he found that it became increasingly
difficult to go through the exercise, he gave it up altogether, secretly resolving to wait
until 'Dad' had more work to do, so that he could have the porridge and milk again.  He was
sorry to have to discontinue the exercise, but he said nothing about it to his father or mother
because he did not want to 'worry' them...

Sometimes Nora managed to get a small job of needlework.  On one occasion a woman with a small
son brought a parcel of garments belonging to herself or her husband, an old ulster, several
coats, and so on--things that although they were too old-fashioned or shabby to wear, yet might
look all right if turned and made up for the boy.

Nora undertook to do this, and after working several hours every day for a week she earned
four shillings: and even then the woman thought it was so dear that she did not bring any more.

Another time Mrs Easton got her some work at a boarding-house where she herself was employed.
The servant was laid up, and they wanted some help for a few days.  The pay was to be two shillings
a day, and dinner.  Owen did not want her to go because he feared she was not strong enough
to do the work, but he gave way at last and Nora went. She had to do the bedrooms, and on the
evening of the second day, as a result of the constant running up and down the stairs carrying
heavy cans and pails of water, she was in such intense pain that she was scarcely able to walk
home, and for several days afterwards had to lie in bed through a recurrence of her old illness,
which caused her to suffer untold agony whenever she tried to stand.

Owen was alternately dejected and maddened by the knowledge of his own helplessness: when he
was not doing anything for Rushton he went about the town trying to find some other work, but
usually with scant success.  He did some samples of showcard and window tickets and endeavoured
to get some orders by canvassing the shops in the town, but this was also a failure, for these
people generally had a ticket-writer to whom they usually gave their work.  He did get a few
trifling orders, but they were scarcely worth doing at the price he got for them.  He used
to feel like a criminal when he went into the shops to ask them for the work, because he realized
fully that, in effect, he was saying to them: 'Take your work away from the other man, and
employ me.'  He was so conscious of this that it gave him a shamefaced manner, which, coupled
as it was with his shabby clothing, did not create a very favourable impression upon those
he addressed, who usually treated him with about as much courtesy as they would have extended
to any other sort of beggar.  Generally, after a day's canvassing, he returned home unsuccessful
and faint with hunger and fatigue.

Once, when there was a bitterly cold east wind blowing, he was out on one of these canvassing
expeditions and contracted a severe cold: his chest became so bad that he found it almost impossible
to speak, because the effort to do so often brought on a violent fit of coughing. It was during
this time that a firm of drapers, for whom he had done some showcards, sent him an order for
one they wanted in a hurry, it had to be delivered the next morning, so he stayed up by himself
till nearly midnight to do it.  As he worked, he felt a strange sensation in his chest: it
was not exactly a pain, and he would have found it difficult to describe it in words--it was
just a sensation.  He did not attach much importance to it, thinking it an effect of the cold
he had taken, but whatever it was he could not help feeling conscious of it all the time.

Frankie had been put to bed that evening at the customary hour, but did not seem to be sleeping
as well as usual.  Owen could hear him twisting and turning about and uttering little cries
in his sleep.

He left his work several times to go into the boy's room and cover him with the bedclothes
which his restless movements had disordered.  As the time wore on, the child became more tranquil,
and about eleven o'clock, when Owen went in to look at him, he found him in a deep sleep, lying
on his side with his head thrown back on the pillow, breathing so softly through his slightly
parted lips that the sound was almost imperceptible.  The fair hair that clustered round his
forehead was damp with perspiration, and he was so still and pale and silent that one might
have thought he was sleeping the sleep that knows no awakening.

About an hour later, when he had finished writing the showcard, Owen went out into the scullery
to wash his hands before going to bed: and whilst he was drying them on the towel, the strange
sensation he had been conscious of all the evening became more intense, and a few seconds afterwards
he was terrified to find his mouth suddenly filled with blood.

For what seemed an eternity he fought for breath against the suffocating torrent, and when
at length it stopped, he sank trembling into a chair by the side of the table, holding the
towel to his mouth and scarcely daring to breathe, whilst a cold sweat streamed from every
pore and gathered in large drops upon his forehead.

Through the deathlike silence of the night there came from time to time the chimes of the clock
of a distant church, but he continued to sit there motionless, taking no heed of the passing
hours, and possessed with an awful terror.

So this was the beginning of the end!  And afterwards the other two would be left by themselves
at the mercy of the world.  In a few years' time the boy would be like Bert White, in the clutches
of some psalm-singing devil like Hunter or Rushton, who would use him as if he were a beast
of burden.  He imagined he could see him now as he would be then: worked, driven, and bullied,
carrying loads, dragging carts, and running here and there, trying his best to satisfy the
brutal tyrants, whose only thought would be to get profit out of him for themselves.  If he
lived, it would be to grow up with his body deformed and dwarfed by unnatural labour and with
his mind stultified, degraded and brutalized by ignorance and poverty.  As this vision of the
child's future rose before him, Owen resolved that it should never be!  He would not leave
them alone and defenceless in the midst of the 'Christian' wolves who were waiting to rend
them as soon as he was gone.  If he could not give them happiness, he could at least put them
out of the reach of further suffering.  If he could not stay with them, they would have to
come with him.  It would be kinder and more merciful.

Chapter 35

Facing the 'Problem'

Nearly every other firm in the town was in much the same plight as Rushton & Co.; none of them
had anything to speak of to do, and the workmen no longer troubled to go to the different shops
asking for a job.  They knew it was of no use.  Most of them just walked about aimlessly or
stood talking in groups in the streets, principally in the neighbourhood of the Wage Slave
Market near the fountain on the Grand Parade.  They congregated here in such numbers that one
or two residents wrote to the local papers complaining of the 'nuisance', and pointing out
that it was calculated to drive the 'better-class' visitors out of the town.  After this two
or three extra policemen were put on duty near the fountain with instructions to 'move on'
any groups of unemployed that formed.  They could not stop them from coming there, but they
prevented them standing about.

The processions of unemployed continued every day, and the money they begged from the public
was divided equally amongst those who took part. Sometimes it amounted to one and sixpence
each, sometimes it was a little more and sometimes a little less.  These men presented a terrible
spectacle as they slunk through the dreary streets, through the rain or the snow, with the
slush soaking into their broken boots, and, worse still, with the bitterly cold east wind penetrating
their rotten clothing and freezing their famished bodies.

The majority of the skilled workers still held aloof from these processions, although their
haggard faces bore involuntary testimony to their sufferings.  Although privation reigned supreme
in their desolate homes, where there was often neither food nor light nor fire, they were too
'proud' to parade their misery before each other or the world. They secretly sold or pawned
their clothing and their furniture and lived in semi-starvation on the proceeds, and on credit,
but they would not beg.  Many of them even echoed the sentiments of those who had written to
the papers, and with a strange lack of class-sympathy blamed those who took part in the processions.
They said it was that sort of thing that drove the 'better class' away, injured the town, and
caused all the poverty and unemployment. However, some of them accepted charity in other ways;
district visitors distributed tickets for coal and groceries.  Not that that sort of thing
made much difference; there was usually a great deal of fuss and advice, many quotations of
Scripture, and very little groceries.  And even what there was generally went to the least-deserving
people, because the only way to obtain any of this sort of 'charity' is by hypocritically pretending
to be religious: and the greater the hypocrite, the greater the quantity of coal and groceries.
These 'charitable' people went into the wretched homes of the poor and--in effect--said: 'Abandon
every particle of self-respect: cringe and fawn: come to church: bow down and grovel to us,
and in return we'll give you a ticket that you can take to a certain shop and exchange for
a shillingsworth of groceries.  And, if you're very servile and humble we may give you another
one next week.'

They never gave the 'case' the money.  The ticket system serves three purposes.  It prevents
the 'case' abusing the 'charity' by spending the money on drink.  It advertises the benevolence
of the donors: and it enables the grocer--who is usually a member of the church--to get rid
of any stale or damaged stock he may have on hand.

When these visiting ladies' went into a workman's house and found it clean and decently furnished,
and the children clean and tidy, they came to the conclusion that those people were not suitable
'cases' for assistance.  Perhaps the children had had next to nothing to eat, and would have
been in rags if the mother had not worked like a slave washing and mending their clothes. 
But these were not the sort of cases that the visiting ladies assisted; they only gave to those
who were in a state of absolute squalor and destitution, and then only on condition that they
whined and grovelled.

In addition to this district visitor business, the well-to-do inhabitants and the local authorities
attempted--or rather, pretended--to grapple with the poverty 'problem' in many other ways,
and the columns of the local papers were filled with letters from all sorts of cranks who suggested
various remedies.  One individual, whose income was derived from brewery shares, attributed
the prevailing distress to the drunken and improvident habits of the lower orders. Another
suggested that it was a Divine protest against the growth of Ritualism and what he called 'fleshly
religion', and suggested a day of humiliation and prayer.  A great number of well-fed persons
thought this such an excellent proposition that they proceeded to put it into practice.  They
prayed, whilst the unemployed and the little children fasted.

If one had not been oppressed by the tragedy of Want and Misery, one might have laughed at
the farcical, imbecile measures that were taken to relieve it.  Several churches held what
they called 'Rummage' or 'jumble' sales.  They sent out circulars something like this:

                              JUMBLE SALE
                       in aid of the Unemployed.

    If you have any articles of any description which are of no
    further use to you, we should be grateful for them, and if you
    will kindly fill in annexed form and post it to us, we will send
    and collect them.

On the day of the sale the parish room was transformed into a kind of Marine Stores, filled
with all manner of rubbish, with the parson and the visiting ladies grinning in the midst.
The things were sold for next to nothing to such as cared to buy them, and the local rag-and-bone
man reaped a fine harvest.  The proceeds of these sales were distributed in 'charity' and it
was usually a case of much cry and little wool.

There was a religious organization, called 'The Mugsborough Skull and Crossbones Boys', which
existed for the purpose of perpetuating the great religious festival of Guy Fawkes.  This association
also came to the aid of the unemployed and organized a Grand Fancy Dress Carnival and Torchlight
Procession.  When this took place, although there was a slight sprinkling of individuals dressed
in tawdry costumes as cavaliers of the time of Charles I, and a few more as highwaymen or footpads,
the majority of the processionists were boys in women's clothes, or wearing sacks with holes
cut in them for their heads and arms, and with their faces smeared with soot.  There were also
a number of men carrying frying-pans in which they burnt red and blue fire.  The procession--or
rather, mob--was headed by a band, and the band was headed by two men, arm in arm, one very
tall, dressed to represent Satan, in red tights, with horns on his head, and smoking a large
cigar, and the other attired in the no less picturesque costume of a bishop of the Established
Church.

This crew paraded the town, howling and dancing, carrying flaring torches, burning the blue
and red fire, and some of them singing silly or obscene songs; whilst the collectors ran about
with the boxes begging for money from people who were in most cases nearly as poverty-stricken
as the unemployed they were asked to assist.  The money thus obtained was afterwards handed
over to the Secretary of the Organized Benevolence Society, Mr Sawney Grinder.

Then there was the Soup Kitchen, which was really an inferior eating-house in a mean street.
The man who ran this was a relative of the secretary of the OBS.  He cadged all the ingredients
for the soup from different tradespeople: bones and scraps of meat from butchers: pea meal
and split peas from provision dealers: vegetables from greengrocers: stale bread from bakers,
and so on.  Well-intentioned, charitable old women with more money than sense sent him donations
in cash, and he sold the soup for a penny a basin--or a penny a quart to those who brought jugs.

He had a large number of shilling books printed, each containing thirteen penny tickets.  The
Organized Benevolence Society bought a lot of these books and resold them to benevolent persons,
or gave them away to 'deserving cases'.  It was this connection with the OBS that gave the
Soup Kitchen a semi-official character in the estimation of the public, and furnished the proprietor
with the excuse for cadging the materials and money donations.

In the case of the Soup Kitchen, as with the unemployed processions, most of those who benefited
were unskilled labourers or derelicts: with but few exceptions the unemployed artisans--although
their need was just as great as that of the others--avoided the place as if it were infected
with the plague.  They were afraid even to pass through the street where it was situated lest
anyone seeing them coming from that direction should think they had been there.  But all the
same, some of them allowed their children to go there by stealth, by night, to buy some of
this charity-tainted food.

Another brilliant scheme, practical and statesmanlike, so different from the wild projects
of demented Socialists, was started by the Rev. Mr Bosher, a popular preacher, the Vicar of
the fashionable Church of the Whited Sepulchre.  He collected some subscriptions from a number
of semi-imbecile old women who attended his church.  With some of this money he bought a quantity
of timber and opened what he called a Labour Yard, where he employed a number of men sawing
firewood.  Being a clergyman, and because he said he wanted it for a charitable purpose, of
course he obtained the timber very cheaply--for about half what anyone else would have had
to pay for it.

The wood-sawing was done piecework.  A log of wood about the size of a railway sleeper had
to be sawn into twelve pieces, and each of these had to be chopped into four.  For sawing and
chopping one log in this manner the worker was paid ninepence.  One log made two bags of firewood,
which were sold for a shilling each--a trifle under the usual price.  The men who delivered
the bags were paid three half-pence for each two bags.

As there were such a lot of men wanting to do this work, no one was allowed to do more than
three lots in one day--that came to two shillings and threepence--and no one was allowed to
do more than two days in one week.

The Vicar had a number of bills printed and displayed in shop windows calling attention to
what he was doing, and informing the public that orders could be sent to the Vicarage by post
and would receive prompt attention and the fuel could be delivered at any address--Messrs Rushton
& Co. having very kindly lent a handcart for the use of the men employed at the Labour Yard.

As a result of the appearance of this bill, and of the laudatory notices in the columns of
the Ananias, the Obscurer, and the Chloroform--the papers did not mind giving the business
a free advertisement, because it was a charitable concern--many persons withdrew their custom
from those who usually supplied them with firewood, and gave their orders to the Yard; and
they had the satisfaction of getting their fuel cheaper than before and of performing a charitable
action at the same time.

As a remedy for unemployment this scheme was on a par with the method of the tailor in the
fable who thought to lengthen his cloth by cutting a piece off one end and sewing it on to
the other; but there was one thing about it that recommended it to the Vicar--it was self-supporting.
He found that there would be no need to use all the money he had extracted from the semi-imbecile
old ladies for timber, so he bought himself a Newfoundland dog, an antique set of carved ivory
chessmen, and a dozen bottles of whisky with the remainder of the cash.

The reverend gentleman hit upon yet another means of helping the poor. He wrote a letter to
the Weekly Chloroform appealing for cast-off boots for poor children.  This was considered
such a splendid idea that the editors of all the local papers referred to it in leading articles,
and several other letters were written by prominent citizens extolling the wisdom and benevolence
of the profound Bosher.  Most of the boots that were sent in response to this appeal had been
worn until they needed repair--in a very large proportion of instances, until they were beyond
repair.  The poor people to whom they were given could not afford to have them mended before
using them, and the result was that the boots generally began to fall to pieces after a few
days' wear.

This scheme amounted to very little.  It did not increase the number of cast-off boots, and
most of the people who 'cast off' their boots generally gave them to someone or other.  The
only difference It can have made was that possibly a few persons who usually threw their boots
away or sold them to second-hand dealers may have been induced to send them to Mr Bosher instead.
But all the same nearly everybody said it was a splendid idea: its originator was applauded
as a public benefactor, and the pettifogging busybodies who amused themselves with what they
were pleased to term 'charitable work' went into imbecile ecstasies over him.

Chapter 36

The OBS

One of the most important agencies for the relief of distress was the Organized Benevolence
Society.  This association received money from many sources.  The proceeds of the fancy-dress
carnival; the collections from different churches and chapels which held special services in
aid of the unemployed; the weekly collections made by the employees of several local firms
and business houses; the proceeds of concerts, bazaars, and entertainments, donations from
charitable persons, and the subscriptions of the members.  The society also received large
quantities of cast-off clothing and boots, and tickets of admission to hospitals, convalescent
homes and dispensaries from subscribers to those institutions, or from people like Rushton
& Co., who had collecting-boxes in their workshops and offices.

Altogether during the last year the Society had received from various sources about three hundred
pounds in hard cash.  This money was devoted to the relief of cases of distress.

The largest item in the expenditure of the Society was the salary of the General Secretary,
Mr Sawney Grinder--a most deserving case--who was paid one hundred pounds a year.

After the death of the previous secretary there were so many candidates for the vacant post
that the election of the new secretary was a rather exciting affair.  The excitement was all
the more intense because it was restrained.  A special meeting of the society was held: the
Mayor, Alderman Sweater, presided, and amongst those present were Councillors Rushton, Didlum
and Grinder, Mrs Starvem, Rev. Mr Bosher, a number of the rich, semi-imbecile old women who
had helped to open the Labour Yard, and several other 'ladies'. III. CANTO I. l. 302.

The great and repeated explosions of volcanoes are shown by Mr. Mitchell in the Philosoph.
Transact. to arise from their communication with the sea, or with rivers, or inundations; and
that after a chink or crack is made, the water rushing into an immense burning cavern, and
falling on boiling lava, is instantly expanded into steam, and produces irresistible explosions.

As
the first volcanic fires had no previous vent, and were probably more central, and larger
in quantity, before they burst the crust of the earth then intire, and as the sea covered the whole,
it must rapidly sink down into every opening chink; whence these primeval earthquakes were
of much greater extent, and of much greater force, than those which occur in the present era.

It should be added, that there may be other elastic vapours produced by great heat from whatever
will evaporate, as mercury, and even diamonds; which may be more elastic, and consequently
exert greater force than the steam of water even though heated red hot. Which may thence exert a sufficient
power to raise islands and continents, and even to throw the moon from the earth.

If the moon be supposed to have been thus thrown out of the great cavity which now contains the
South Sea, the immense quantity of water flowing in from the primeval ocean, which then covered
the earth, would much contribute to leave the continents and islands, which might be raised
at the same time above the surface of the water. In later days there are accounts of large
stones falling from the sky, which may have been thus thrown by explosion from some distant
earthquake, without sufficient force to cause them to circulate round the earth, and thus
produce numerous small moons or satellites.

Mr. Mitchell observes, that the agitations of the earth from the great earthquake at Lisbon were felt
in this country about the same time after the shock, as sound would
have taken in passing from Lisbon hither; and thence ascribes these
agitations to the vibrations of the solid earth, and not to subterraneous
caverns of communication; Philos.

Transact. But from the existence of warm springs at Bath and Buxton, there must certainly
be unceasing subterraneous fires at some great depth beneath those parts of this island; see
on this subject Botanic Garden, Vol. II. Canto IV. l. 79, note.

For an account of the noxious vapours emitted from volcanoes, see Botanic Garden, Vol. II.
Cant. IV. l. 328, note. For the milder effects of central fires, see Botanic Garden, Vol. I. Cant.
I. l. 139, and Additional Note VI.

ADDITIONAL NOTES. IV. CANTO I. l. 327.

The gnat, or musquito, culex pipiens. The larva of this insect lives chiefly in water, and the
pupa moves with great agility.

It is fished for by ducks; and, when it becomes a fly, is the food of the young of partridges, quails,
sparrows, swallows, and other small birds. The females wound us, and leave a red point; and
in India their bite is more venomous. The male has its antennæ and feelers feathered, and seldom
bites or sucks blood; Lin. Syst. Nat.

It may be driven away by smoke, especially by that from inula helenium, elecampane; and by
that of cannabis, hemp. Kalm.

It is said that a light in a chamber will prevent their attack on sleeping persons.

The gnats of this country are produced in greater numbers in some years than others, and are
then seen in swarms for many evenings near the lakes or rivers whence they arise; and, I suppose,
emigrate to upland situations, where fewer of them are produced. About thirty years ago such
a swarm was observed by Mr. Whitehurst for a day or two about the lofty tower of Derby church,
as to give a suspicion of the fabric being on fire.

Many other kinds of flies have their origin in the water, as perhaps the whole class of neuroptera.
Thus the libellula, dragon fly: the larva of which hurries amid the water, and is the cruel
crocodile of aquatic insects. After they become flies, they prey principally on the class of
insects termed lepidoptera, and diptera of Linneus.

                            The ephemera is another
                 of this order, which rises from the lakes
                      in such quantities in some countries, that the rustics have carried
cart-loads of them to manure their corn lands; the larva swims in
the water: in its fly-state the pleasures of life are of short duration,
as its marriage, production of its progeny, and funeral, are often
celebrated in one day.

           The phryganea is another fly of this order; the larva lies concealed
under the water in moveable cylindrical tubes of their own making.

    In the fly-state they institute evening dances in the air in swarms,
    and are fished for by the swallows.
    
    Many other flies, who do not leave their eggs in water, contrive
    to lay them in moist places, as the oestros bovis; the larvæ
    of which exist in the bodies of cattle, where they are nourished
    during the winter, and are occasionally extracted by a bird of the
    crow-kind called buphaga. These larvæ are also found in the stomachs
    of horses, whom they sometimes destroy; another species of them adhere
to the anus of horses, and creep into the lowest bowel, and are called
botts; and another species enters the frontal sinus of sheep, occasioning
a vertigo called the turn.

    The musca pendula lives in stagnant water; the larva is suspended
    by a thread-form respiratory tube; of the musca chamæleon, the larva
lives in fountains, and the fly occasionally walks upon the water.

    The musca vomitoria is produced in carcases; three of these
    flies consume the dead body of a horse as soon as a lion. Lin. Syst.
    Nat.
    
    ADDITIONAL NOTE. V.
    
    AMPHIBIOUS ANIMALS.
    
    So still the Diodons, amphibious tribe, With twofold lungs the sea
    and air imbibe. CANT. I. l. 331.
    
    D. D. Garden dissected the amphibious creature called diodon by
    Linneus, and was amazed to find that it possessed both external gills
    and internal lungs, which he described and prepared and sent to Linneus;
who thence put this animal into the order nantes of his class amphibia.

He adds also, in his account of polymorpha before the class amphibia, that some of this class breathe
by lungs only, and others by both lungs and gills.

Some amphibious quadrupeds, as the beaver, water rat, and otter, are said to have the foramen
ovale of the heart open, which communicates from one cavity of it to the other; and that, during
their continuance under water, the blood can thus for a time circulate without passing through
the lungs; but as it cannot by these means acquire oxygen either
from the air or water, these creatures find it frequently necessary
to rise to the surface to respire.

As this foramen ovale is always open in the foetus of quadrupeds, till after its birth that it begins
to respire, it has been proposed by some to keep young puppies three or four times a day for
a minute or two under warm water to prevent this communication from one cavity of the heart
to the other from growing up; whence it has been thought such dogs might become amphibious.
It is also believed that this circumstance has existed in some divers
for pearl; whose children are said to have been thus kept under water
in their early infancy to enable them afterwards to succeed in their
employment.

But the most frequent distinction of the amphibious animals, that live much in the water, is,
that their heart consists but of one cell; and as they are pale creatures with but little blood,
and that colder and darker coloured, as frogs and lizards, they require less oxygen than the
warmer animals with a greater quantity and more scarlet blood; and thence, though they have only
lungs, they can stay long under water without great inconvenience;
but are all of them, like frogs, and crocodiles, and whales, necessitated
frequently to rise above the surface for air.

In this circumstance of their possessing a one-celled heart, and colder and darker blood, they
approach to the state of fish; which thus appear not to acquire so much oxygen by their gills
from the water as terrestrial animals do by their lungs from the atmosphere; whence it may be concluded
that the gills of fish do not decompose the water which passes through them, and which contains
so much more oxygen than the air, but that they only procure a small quantity of oxygen from the
air which is diffused in the water; which also is further confirmed by an experiment with the
air-pump, as fish soon die when put in a glass of water into the
exhausted receiver, which they would not do if their gills had power
to decompose the water and obtain the oxygen from it.

The lamprey, petromyzon, is put by Linneus amongst the nantes, which are defined to possess
both gills and lungs. It has seven spiracula, or breathing holes, on each side of the neck,
and by its more perfect lungs approaches to the serpent kind; Syst. Nat. The means by which
it adheres to stones, even in rapid streams, is probably owing to a partial vacuum made by
its respiring organs like sucking, and may be compared to the ingenious method by which boys
are seen to lift large stones in the street, by applying to them a piece of strong moist leather
with a string through the centre of it; which, when it is forcibly
drawn upwards, produces a partial vacuum under it, and thus the stone
is supported by the pressure of the atmosphere.

The leech, hirudo, and the remora, echeneis, adhere strongly to objects probably by a similar
method. I once saw ten or twelve leeches adhere to each foot of an old horse a little above his
hoofs, who was grazing in a morass, and which did not lose their hold when he moved about. The bare-legged
travellers in Ceylon are said to be much infested by leeches; and the sea-leech, hirudo muricata,
is said to adhere to fish, and the remora is said to adhere to ships in such numbers as to
retard their progress.

The respiratory organ of the whale, I suppose, is pulmonary in part, as he is obliged to come
frequently to the surface, whence he can be pursued after he is struck with the harpoon; and
may nevertheless be in part like the gills of other fish, as he seems to draw in water when he
is below the surface, and emits it again when he rises above it.

ADDITIONAL NOTE. VI.

HIEROGLYPHIC CHARACTERS.

So erst as Egypt's rude designs explain. CANTO I. l. 351.

The outlines of animal bodies, which gave names to the constellations, as well as the characters
used in chemistry for the metals, and in astronomy for the planets, were originally hieroglyphic
figures, used by the magi of Egypt before the invention of letters, to record their discoveries
in those sciences.

Other hieroglyphic figures seem to have been designed to perpetuate the events of history, the
discoveries in other arts, and the opinions of those ancient philosophers on other subjects. Thus
their figures of Venus for beauty, Minerva for wisdom, Mars and Bellona for war, Hercules for strength,
and many others, became afterwards the deities of Greece and Rome; and together with the figures
of Time, Death, and Fame, constitute the language of the painters to this day.

From the similarity of the characters which designate the metals in chemistry, and the planets
in astronomy, it may be concluded that these parts of science were then believed to be connected;
whence astrology seems to have been a very early superstition.

These, so far, constitute an universal visible language in those sciences.

So the glory, or halo, round the head is a part of the universal language of the eye, designating
a holy person; wings on the shoulders denote a good angel; and a
tail and hoof denote the figure of an evil demon; to which may be
added the cap of liberty and the tiara of popedom.

It is to be wished that many other universal characters could be introduced into practice,
which might either constitute a more comprehensive language for painters, or for other arts; as those
of ciphers and signs have done for arithmetic and algebra, and crotchets for music, and the alphabets
for articulate sounds; so a zigzag line made on white paper by a black-lead pencil, which communicates
with the surface of the mercury in the barometer, as the paper itself is made constantly to move
laterally by a clock, and daily to descend through the space necessary, has ingeniously produced
a most accurate visible account of the rise and fall of the mercury in the barometer every
hour in the year.

Mr. Grey's Memoria Technica was designed as an artificial language
to remember numbers, as of the eras, or dates of history.

This was done by substituting one consonant and one vowel for each figure of the ten cyphers used
in arithmetic, and by composing words of these letters; which words
Mr. Grey makes into hexameter verses, and produces an audible jargon,
which is to be committed to memory, and occasionally analysed into
numbers when required.

An ingenious French botanist, Monsieur Bergeret, has proposed to apply this idea of Mr. Grey
to a botanical nomenclature, by making the name of each plant to
consist of letters, which, when analysed, were to signify the number
of the class, order, genus, and species, with a description also of
some particular part of the plant, which was designed to be both an
audible and visible language.

Bishop Wilkins in his elaborate "Essay towards a Real Character and
a Philosophical Language," has endeavoured to produce, with the greatest
simplicity, and accuracy, and conciseness, an universal language both
to be written and spoken, for the purpose of the communication of
all our ideas with greater exactness and less labour than is done
in common languages, as they are now spoken and written.

But we have to lament that the progress of general science is yet too limited both for his purpose,
and for that even of a nomenclature for botany; and that the science
of grammar, and even the number and manner of the pronunciation of
the letters of the alphabet, are not yet determined with such accuracy
as would be necessary to constitute Bishop Wilkins's grand design
of an universal language, which might facilitate the acquirement of
knowledge, and thus add to the power and happiness of mankind.

ADDITIONAL NOTE. VII.

OLD AGE AND DEATH. CANTO II. l. 4

I. Effects of Age.

The immediate cause of the infirmities of age, or of the progress of life to death, has not yet
been well ascertained.

The answer to the question, why animals become feeble and diseased after a time, though nourished
with the same food which increased their growth from infancy, and
afterwards supported them for many years in unimpaired health and
strength, must be sought for from the laws of animal excitability,
which, though at first increased, is afterwards diminished by frequent
repetitions of its adapted stimulus, and at length ceases to obey it.

1. I. Sect. II. 13.

Many of the motions of the organic system, which are necessary to
life, are excited by more than one of these stimuli at the same time,
and some of them occasionally by them all.

Thus respiration is generally caused by the stimulus of blood in
the lungs, or by the sensation of the want of oxygen; but is also
occasionally voluntary.

The actions of the heart also, though generally owing to the stimulus
of the blood, are also inflamed by the association of its motions
with those of the stomach, whence sometimes arises an inequality of
the pulse, and with other parts of the system, as with the capillaries,
whence heat of the skin in fevers with a feeble pulse, see Zoonomia.

They are also occasionally influenced by sensation, as is seen in the paleness occasioned by
fear, or the blush of shame and anger; and lastly the motions of the heart are sometimes assisted
by volition; thus in those who are much weakened by fevers, the pulse is liable to stop during
their sleep, and to induce great distress; which is owing at that time to the total suspension
of voluntary power; the same occurs during sleep in some asthmatic
patients.

2. The debility of approaching age appears to be induced by the inactivity of many parts of
the system, or their disobedience to their usual kinds and quantities
of stimulus: thus the pallid appearance of the skin of old age is
owing to the inactivity of the heart, which ceases to obey the irritation
caused by the stimulus of the blood, or its association with other
moving organs with its former energy; whence the capillary arteries
are not sufficiently distended in their diastole, and consequently
contract by their elasticity, so as to close the canal, and their
sides gradually coalesce.

Of these, those which are most distant from the heart, and of the smallest diameters, will
soonest close, and become impervious; hence the hard pulse of aged
patients is occasioned by the coalescence of the sides of the vasa
vasorum, or capillary arteries of the coats of the other arteries.

The veins of elderly people become turgid or distended with blood, and stand prominent on the
skin; for as these do not possess the elasticity of the arteries, they become distended with accumulation
of blood; when the heart by its lessened excitability does not contract
sufficiently forcibly, or frequently, to receive, as fast as usual,
the returning blood; and their apparent prominence on the skin is
occasioned by the deficient secretion of fat or mucus in the cellular
membrane; and also to the contraction and coalescence and consequent
less bulk of many capillary arteries.

3. Not only the muscular fibres lose their degree of excitability from age, as in the above
examples; and as may be observed in the tremulous hands and feeble step of elderly persons; but
the organs of sense become less excitable by the stimulus of external objects; whence the
sight and hearing become defective; the stimulus of the sensorial power of sensation also less
affects the aged, who grieve less for the loss of friends or for other disappointments; it should nevertheless
be observed, that when the sensorial power of irritation is much
exhausted, or its production much diminished; the sensorial power
of sensation appears for a time to be increased; as in intoxication
there exists a kind of delirium and quick flow of ideas, and yet the
person becomes so weak as to totter as he walks; but this delirium
is owing to the defect of voluntary power to correct the streams of
ideas by intuitive analogy, as in dreams: see Zoonomia: and thus also
those who are enfeebled by habits of much vinous potation, or even
by age alone, are liable to weep at shaking hands with a friend, whom
they have not lately seen; which is owing to defect of voluntary power
to correct their trains of ideas caused by sensation, and not to the
increased quantity of sensation, as I formerly supposed.

The same want of voluntary power to keep the trains of sensitive ideas
consistent, and to compare them by intuitive analogy with the order
of nature, is the occasion of the starting at the clapping to of a
door, or the fall of a key, which occasions violent surprise with
fear and sometimes convulsions, in very feeble hysterical patients,
and is not owing I believe (as I formerly supposed) to increased sensation;
as they are less sensible to small stimuli than when in health.

Old people are less able also to perform the voluntary exertions of exercise or of reasoning, and lastly
the association of their ideas becomes more imperfect, as they are forgetful of the names of
persons and places; the associations of which are less permanent, than those of the other words
of a language, which are more frequently repeated.

4.
  The tea was served in the schoolrooms and
each child was presented with a gilt-edged card on which was a printed portrait of the little
hostess, with 'From your loving little friend, Honoria D'Encloseland', in gold letters. During
the evening the little girl, accompanied by Sir Graball and Lady D'Encloseland, motored round
to all the schools where the tea was being consumed: the Baronet made a few remarks, and Honoria
made a pretty little speech, specially learnt for the occasion, at each place, and they were
loudly cheered and greatly admired in response. The enthusiasm was not confined to the boys
and girls, for while the speechmaking was going on inside, a little crowd of grown-up children
were gathered round outside the entrance, worshipping the motor car: and when the little party
came out the crowd worshipped them also, going into imbecile ecstasies of admiration of their
benevolence and their beautiful clothes.

For several weeks everybody in the town was in raptures over this tea--or, rather, everybody
except a miserable little minority of Socialists, who said it was bribery, an electioneering
dodge, that did no real good, and who continued to clamour for a halfpenny rate.

Another specious fraud was the 'Distress Committee'.  This body--or corpse, for there was not
much vitality in it--was supposed to exist for the purpose of providing employment for 'deserving
cases'.  One might be excused for thinking that any man--no matter what his past may have been--who
is willing to work for his living is a 'deserving case': but this was evidently not the opinion
of the persons who devised the regulations for the working of this committee.  Every applicant
for work was immediately given a long job, and presented with a double sheet of foolscap paper
to do it with.  Now, if the object of the committee had been to furnish the applicant with
material for the manufacture of an appropriate headdress for himself, no one could reasonably
have found fault with them: but the foolscap was not to be utilized in that way; it was called
a 'Record Paper', three pages of it were covered with insulting, inquisitive, irrelevant questions
concerning the private affairs and past life of the 'case' who wished to be permitted to work
for his living, and all these had to be answered to the satisfaction of Messrs D'Encloseland,
Bosher, Sweater, Rushton, Didlum, Grinder and the other members of the committee, before the
case stood any chance of getting employment.

However, notwithstanding the offensive nature of the questions on the application form, during
the five months that this precious committee was in session, no fewer than 1,237 broken-spirited
and humble 'lion's whelps' filled up the forms and answered the questions as meekly as if they
had been sheep.  The funds of the committee consisted of £500, obtained from the Imperial Exchequer,
and about £250 in charitable donations.  This money was used to pay wages for certain work--some
of which would have had to be done even if the committee had never existed--and if each of
the 1,237 applicants had had an equal share of the work, the wages they would have received
would have amounted to about twelve shillings each.  This was what the 'practical' persons,
the 'business-men', called 'dealing with the problem of unemployment'. Imagine having to keep
your family for five months with twelve shillings!

And, if you like, imagine that the Government grant had been four times as much as it was,
and that the charity had amounted to four times as much as it did, and then fancy having to
keep your family for five months with two pounds eight shillings!

It is true that some of the members of the committee would have been very glad if they had
been able to put the means of earning a living within the reach of every man who was willing
to work; but they simply did not know what to do, or how to do it.  They were not ignorant
of the reality of the evil they were supposed to be 'dealing with'--appalling evidences of
it faced them on every side, and as, after all, these committee men were human beings and not
devils, they would have been glad to mitigate it if they could have done so without hurting
themselves: but the truth was that they did not know what to do!

These are the 'practical' men; the monopolists of intelligence, the wise individuals who control
the affairs of the world: it is in accordance with the ideas of such men as these that the
conditions of human life are regulated.

This is the position:

It is admitted that never before in the history of mankind was it possible to produce the necessaries
of life in such abundance as at present.

The management of the affairs of the world--the business of arranging the conditions under
which we live--is at present in the hands of Practical, Level-headed, Sensible Business-men.

The result of their management is, that the majority of the people find it a hard struggle
to live.  Large numbers exist in perpetual poverty: a great many more periodically starve:
many actually die of want: hundreds destroy themselves rather than continue to live and suffer.

When the Practical, Level-headed, Sensible Business-men are asked why they do not remedy this
state of things, they reply that they do not know what to do! or, that it is impossible to
remedy it!

And yet it is admitted that it is now possible to produce the necessaries of life, in greater
abundance than ever before!

With lavish kindness, the Supreme Being had provided all things necessary for the existence
and happiness of his creatures.  To suggest that it is not so is a blasphemous lie: it is to
suggest that the Supreme Being is not good or even just.  On every side there is an overflowing
superfluity of the materials requisite for the production of all the necessaries of life: from
these materials everything we need may be produced in abundance--by Work.  Here was an army
of people lacking the things that may be made by work, standing idle. Willing to work; clamouring
to be allowed to work, and the Practical, Level-headed, Sensible Business-men did not know
what to do!

Of course, the real reason for the difficulty is that the raw materials that were created for
the use and benefit of all have been stolen by a small number, who refuse to allow them to
be used for the purposes for which they were intended.  This numerically insignificant minority
refused to allow the majority to work and produce the things they need; and what work they
do graciously permit to be done is not done with the object of producing the necessaries of
life for those who work, but for the purpose of creating profit for their masters.

And then, strangest fact of all, the people who find it a hard struggle to live, or who exist
in dreadful poverty and sometimes starve, instead of trying to understand the causes of their
misery and to find out a remedy themselves, spend all their time applauding the Practical,
Sensible, Level-headed Business-men, who bungle and mismanage their affairs, and pay them huge
salaries for doing so.  Sir Graball D'Encloseland, for instance, was a 'Secretary of State'
and was paid £5,000 a year.  When he first got the job the wages were only a beggarly £2,000,
but as he found it impossible to exist on less than £100 a week he decided to raise his salary
to that amount; and the foolish people who find it a hard struggle to live paid it willingly,
and when they saw the beautiful motor car and the lovely clothes and jewellery he purchased
for his wife with the money, and heard the Great Speech he made--telling them how the shortage
of everything was caused by Over-production and Foreign Competition, they clapped their hands
and went frantic with admiration.  Their only regret was that there were no horses attached
to the motor car, because if there had been, they could have taken them out and harnessed themselves
to it instead.

Nothing delighted the childish minds of these poor people so much as listening to or reading
extracts from the speeches of such men as these; so in order to amuse them, every now and then,
in the midst of all the wretchedness, some of the great statesmen made 'great speeches' full
of cunning phrases intended to hoodwink the fools who had elected them.  The very same week
that Sir Graball's salary was increased to £5,000 a year, all the papers were full of a very
fine one that he made.  They appeared with large headlines like this:

             GREAT SPEECH BY SIR GRABALL D'ENCLOSELAND

                          Brilliant Epigram!

    None should have more than they need, whilst any have less than
    they need!

The hypocrisy of such a saying in the mouth of a man who was drawing a salary of five thousand
pounds a year did not appear to occur to anyone.  On the contrary, the hired scribes of the
capitalist Press wrote columns of fulsome admiration of the miserable claptrap, and the working
men who had elected this man went into raptures over the 'Brilliant Epigram' as if it were
good to eat.  They cut it out of the papers and carried it about with them: they showed it
to each other: they read it and repeated it to each other: they wondered at it and were delighted
with it, grinning and gibbering at each other in the exuberance of their imbecile enthusiasm.

The Distress Committee was not the only body pretending to 'deal' with the poverty 'problem':
its efforts were supplemented by all the other agencies already mentioned--the Labour Yard,
the Rummage Sales, the Organized Benevolence Society, and so on, to say nothing of a most benevolent
scheme originated by the management of Sweater's Emporium, who announced in a letter that was
published in the local Press that they were prepared to employ fifty men for one week to carry
sandwich boards at one shilling--and a loaf of bread--per day.

They got the men; some unskilled labourers, a few old, worn out artisans whom misery had deprived
of the last vestiges of pride or shame; a number of habitual drunkards and loafers, and a non-descript
lot of poor ragged old men--old soldiers and others of whom it would be impossible to say what
they had once been.

The procession of sandwich men was headed by the Semi-drunk and the Besotted Wretch, and each
board was covered with a printed poster: 'Great Sale of Ladies' Blouses now Proceeding at Adam
Sweater's Emporium.'

Besides this artful scheme of Sweater's for getting a good advertisement on the cheap, numerous
other plans for providing employment or alleviating the prevailing misery were put forward
in the columns of the local papers and at the various meetings that were held. Any foolish,
idiotic, useless suggestion was certain to receive respectful attention; any crafty plan devised
in his own interest or for his own profit by one or other of the crew of sweaters and landlords
who controlled the town was sure to be approved of by the other inhabitants of Mugsborough,
the majority of whom were persons of feeble intellect who not only allowed themselves to be
robbed and exploited by a few cunning scoundrels, but venerated and applauded them for doing it.

Chapter 38

The Brigands' Cave

One evening in the drawing-room at 'The Cave' there was a meeting of a number of the 'Shining
Lights' to arrange the details of a Rummage Sale, that was to be held in aid of the unemployed.
It was an informal affair, and while they were waiting for the other luminaries, the early
arrivals, Messrs Rushton, Didlum and Grinder, Mr Oyley Sweater, the Borough Surveyor, Mr Wireman,
the electrical engineer who had been engaged as an 'expert' to examine and report on the Electric
Light Works, and two or three other gentlemen--all members of the Band--took advantage of the
opportunity to discuss a number of things they were mutually interested in, which were to be
dealt with at the meeting of the Town Council the next day.  First, there was the affair of
the untenanted Kiosk on the Grand Parade.  This building belonged to the Corporation, and 'The
Cosy Corner Refreshment Coy.' of which Mr Grinder was the managing director, was thinking of
hiring it to open as a high-class refreshment lounge, provided the Corporation would make certain
alterations and let the place at a reasonable rent. Another item which was to be discussed
at the Council meeting was Mr Sweater's generous offer to the Corporation respecting the new
drain connecting 'The Cave' with the Town Main.

The report of Mr Wireman, the electrical expert, was also to be dealt with, and afterwards
a resolution in favour of the purchase of the Mugsborough Electric light and Installation Co.
Ltd by the town, was to be proposed.

In addition to these matters, several other items, including a proposal by Mr Didlum for an
important reform in the matter of conducting the meetings of the Council, formed subjects for
animated conversation between the brigands and their host.

During this discussion other luminaries arrived, including several ladies and the Rev. Mr Bosher,
of the Church of the Whited Sepulchre.

The drawing-room of 'The Cave' was now elaborately furnished.  A large mirror in a richly gilt
frame reached from the carved marble mantelpiece to the cornice.  A magnificent clock in an
alabaster case stood in the centre of the mantelpiece and was flanked by two exquisitely painted
and gilded vases of Dresden ware.  The windows were draped with costly hangings, the floor
was covered with a luxurious carpet and expensive rugs.  Sumptuously upholstered couches and
easy chairs added to the comfort of the apartment, which was warmed by the immense fire of
coal and oak logs that blazed and crackled in the grate.

The conversation now became general and at times highly philosophical in character, although
Mr Bosher did not take much part, being too busily engaged gobbling up the biscuits and tea,
and only occasionally spluttering out a reply when a remark or question was directly addressed
to him.

This was Mr Grinder's first visit at the house, and he expressed his admiration of the manner
in which the ceiling and the walls were decorated, remarking that he had always liked this
'ere Japanese style.

Mr Bosher, with his mouth full of biscuit, mumbled that it was sweetly pretty--charming--beautifully
done--must have cost a lot of money.

'Hardly wot you'd call Japanese, though, is it?' observed Didlum, looking round with the air
of a connoisseur.  'I should be inclined to say it was rather more of the--er--Chinese or Egyptian.'

'Moorish,' explained Mr Sweater with a smile.  'I got the idear at the Paris Exhibition.  It's
simler to the decorations in the "Halambara", the palace of the Sultan of Morocco.  That clock
there is in the same style.'

The case of the clock referred to--which stood on a table in a corner of the room--was of fretwork,
in the form of an Indian Mosque, with a pointed dome and pinnacles.  This was the case that
Mary Linden had sold to Didlum; the latter had had it stained a dark colour and polished and
further improved it by substituting a clock of more suitable design than the one it originally
held.  Mr Sweater had noticed it in Didlum's window and, seeing that the design was similar
in character to the painted decorations on the ceiling and walls of his drawing-room, had purchased
it.

'I went to the Paris Exhibition meself,' said Grinder, when everyone had admired the exquisite
workmanship of the clock-case.  'I remember 'avin' a look at the moon through that big telescope.
I was never so surprised in me life: you can see it quite plain, and it's round!'

'Round?' said Didlum with a puzzled look.  'Round?  Of course it's round!  You didn't used
to think it was square, did yer?'

'No, of course not, but I always used to think it was flat--like a plate, but it's round like
a football.'

'Certainly: the moon is a very simler body to the earth,' explained Didlum, describing an aerial
circle with a wave of his hand.  They moves through the air together, but the earth is always
nearest to the sun and consequently once a fortnight the shadder of the earth falls on the
moon and darkens it so that it's invisible to the naked eye. The new moon is caused by the
moon movin' a little bit out of the earth's shadder, and it keeps on comin' more and more until
we gets the full moon; and then it goes back again into the shadder; and so it keeps on.'

For about a minute everyone looked very solemn, and the profound silence was disturbed only
the the crunching of the biscuits between the jaws of Mr Bosher, and by certain gurglings in
the interior of that gentleman.

'Science is a wonderful thing,' said Mr Sweater at length, wagging his head gravely, 'wonderful!'

'Yes: but a lot of it is mere theory, you know,' observed Rushton. 'Take this idear that the
world is round, for instance; I fail to see it!  And then they say as Hawstralia is on the
other side of the globe, underneath our feet. In my opinion it's ridiculous, because if it
was true, wot's to prevent the people droppin' orf?'

'Yes: well, of course it's very strange,' admitted Sweater.  'I've often thought of that myself.
If it was true, we ought to be able to walk on the ceiling of this room, for instance; but
of course we know that's impossible, and I really don't see that the other is any more reasonable.'

'I've often noticed flies walkin' on the ceilin',' remarked Didlum, who felt called upon to
defend the globular theory.

'Yes; but they're different,' replied Rushton.  'Flies is provided by nature with a gluey substance
which oozes out of their feet for the purpose of enabling them to walk upside down.'

'There's one thing that seems to me to finish that idear once for all,' said Grinder, 'and
that is--water always finds its own level. You can't get away from that; and if the world was
round, as they want us to believe, all the water would run off except just a little at the
top. To my mind, that settles the whole argymint.'

'Another thing that gets over me,' continued Rushton, 'is this: according to science, the earth
turns round on its axle at the rate of twenty miles a minit.  Well, what about when a lark
goes up in the sky and stays there about a quarter of an hour?  Why, if it was true that the
earth was turnin' round at that rate all the time, when the bird came down it would find itself
'undreds of miles away from the place where it went up from!  But that doesn't 'appen at all;
the bird always comes down in the same spot.'

'Yes, and the same thing applies to balloons and flyin' machines,' said Grinder.  'If it was
true that the world is spinnin' round on its axle so quick as that, if a man started out from
Calais to fly to Dover, by the time he got to England he'd find 'imself in North America, or
p'r'aps farther off still.'

'And if it was true that the world goes round the sun at the rate they makes out, when a balloon
went up, the earth would run away from it! They'd never be able to get back again!' remarked
Rushton.

This was so obvious that nearly everyone said there was probably something in it, and Didlum
could think of no reply.  Mr Bosher upon being appealed to for his opinion, explained that
science was alright in its way, but unreliable: the things scientists said yesterday they contradicted
today, and what they said today they would probably repudiate tomorrow.  It was necessary to
be very cautious before accepting any of their assertions.

'Talking about science,' said Grinder, as the holy man relapsed into silence and started on
another biscuit and a fresh cup of tea. 'Talking about science reminds me of a conversation
I 'ad with Dr Weakling the other day.  You know, he believes we're all descended from monkeys.'

Everyone laughed; the thing was so absurd: the idea of placing intellectual beings on a level
with animals!

'But just wait till you hear how nicely I flattened 'im out,' continued Grinder.  'After we'd
been arguin' a long time about wot 'e called everlution or some sich name, and a lot more tommy-rot
that I couldn't make no 'ead or tail of--and to tell you the truth I don't believe 'e understood
'arf of it 'imself--I ses to 'im, "Well," I ses, "if it's true that we're hall descended from
monkeys," I ses, "I think your famly must 'ave left orf where mine begun."'

In the midst of the laughter that greeted the conclusion of Grinder's story it was seen that
Mr Bosher had become black in the face.  He was waving his arms and writhing about like one
in a fit, his goggle eyes bursting from their sockets, whilst his huge stomach quivering spasmodically,
alternately contracted and expanded as if it were about to explode.

In the exuberance of his mirth, the unfortunate disciple had swallowed two biscuits at once.
Everybody rushed to his assistance, Grinder and Didlum seized an arm and a shoulder each and
forced his head down. Rushton punched him in the back and the ladies shrieked with alarm. They
gave him a big drink of tea to help to get the biscuits down, and when he at last succeeded
in swallowing them he sat in the armchair with his eyes red-rimmed and full of tears, which
ran down over his white, flabby face.

The arrival of the other members of the committee put an end to the interesting discussion,
and they shortly afterwards proceeded with the business for which the meeting had been called--the
arrangements for the forthcoming Rummage Sale.

Chapter 39

The Brigands at Work

The next day, at the meeting of the Town Council, Mr Wireman's report concerning the Electric
Light Works was read.  The expert's opinion was so favourable--and it was endorsed by the Borough
Engineer, Mr Oyley Sweater--that a resolution was unanimously carried in favour of acquiring
the Works for the town, and a secret committee was appointed to arrange the preliminaries.
Alderman Sweater then suggested that a suitable honorarium be voted to Mr Wireman for his services.
This was greeted with a murmur of approval from most of the members, and Mr Didlum rose with
the intention of proposing a resolution to that effect when he was interrupted by Alderman
Grinder, who said he couldn't see no sense in giving the man a thing like that.  'Why not give
him a sum of money?'

Several members said 'Hear, hear,' to this, but some of the others laughed.

'I can't see nothing to laugh at,' cried Grinder angrily.  'For my part I wouldn't give you
tuppence for all the honorariums in the country.  I move that we pay 'im a sum of money.'

'I'll second that,' said another member of the Band--one of those who had cried 'Hear, Hear.'

Alderman Sweater said that there seemed to be a little misunderstanding and explained that
an honorarium WAS a sum of money.

'Oh, well, in that case I'll withdraw my resolution,' said Grinder. 'I thought you wanted to
give 'im a 'luminated address or something like that.'

Didlum now moved that a letter of thanks and a fee of fifty guineas be voted to Mr Wireman,
and this was also unanimously agreed to.  Dr Weakling said that it seemed rather a lot, but
he did not go so far as to vote against it.

The next business was the proposal that the Corporation should take over the drain connecting
Mr Sweater's house with the town main.  Mr Sweater--being a public-spirited man--proposed to
hand this connecting drain--which ran through a private road--over to the Corporation to be
theirs and their successors for ever, on condition that they would pay him the cost of construction--£55--and
agreed to keep it in proper repair.  After a brief discussion it was decided to take over the
drain on the terms offered, and then Councillor Didlum proposed a vote of thanks to Alderman
Sweater for his generosity in the matter: this was promptly seconded by Councillor Rushton
and would have been carried nem. con., but for the disgraceful conduct of Dr Weakling, who
had the bad taste to suggest that the amount was about double what the drain could possibly
have cost to construct, that it was of no use to the Corporation at all, and that they would
merely acquire the liability to keep it in repair.

However, no one took the trouble to reply to Weakling, and the Band proceeded to the consideration
of the next business, which was Mr Grinder's offer--on behalf of the 'Cosy Corner Refreshment
Company'--to take the Kiosk on the Grand Parade.  Mr Grinder submitted a plan of certain alterations
that he would require the Corporation to make at the Kiosk, and, provided the Council agreed
to do this work he was willing to take a lease of the place for five years at £20 per year.

Councillor Didlum proposed that the offer of the 'Cosy Corner Refreshment Co. Ltd' be accepted
and the required alterations proceeded with at once.  The Kiosk had brought in no rent for
nearly two years, but, apart from that consideration, if they accepted this offer they would
be able to set some of the unemployed to work. (Applause.)

Councillor Rushton seconded.

Dr Weakling pointed out that as the proposed alterations would cost about £175--according to
the estimate of the Borough Engineer--and, the rent being only £20 a year, it would mean that
the Council would be £75 out of pocket at the end of the five years; to say nothing of the
expense of keeping the place in repair during all that time. (Disturbance.)  He moved as an
amendment that the alterations be made, and that they then invite tenders, and let the place
to the highest bidder.  (Great uproar.)

Councillor Rushton said he was disgusted with the attitude taken up by that man Weakling. 
(Applause.)  Perhaps it was hardly right to call him a man.  (Hear! Hear!)  In the matter of
these alterations they had had the use of Councillor Grinder's brains: it was he who first
thought of making these improvements in the Kiosk, and therefore he--or rather the company
he represented--had a moral right to the tenancy.  (Loud cheers.)

Dr Weakling said that he thought it was understood that when a man was elected to that Council
it was because he was supposed to be willing to use his brains for the benefit of his constituents.
(Sardonic laughter.)

The Mayor asked if there was any seconder to Weakling's amendment, and as there was not the
original proposition was put and carried.

Councillor Rushton suggested that a large shelter with seating accommodation for about two
hundred persons should be erected on the Grand Parade near the Kiosk.  The shelter would serve
as a protection against rain, or the rays of the sun in summer.  It would add materially to
the comfort of visitors and would be a notable addition to the attractions of the town.

Councillor Didlum said it was a very good idear, and proposed that the Surveyor be instructed
to get out the plans.

Dr Weakling opposed the motion.  (Laughter.)  It seemed to him that the object was to benefit,
not the town, but Mr Grinder. (Disturbance.)  If this shelter were erected, it would increase
the value of the Kiosk as a refreshment bar by a hundred per cent.  If Mr Grinder wanted a
shelter for his customers he should pay for it himself.  (Uproar.)  He (Dr Weakling) was sorry
to have to say it, but he could not help thinking that this was a Put-up job.  (Loud cries
of 'Withdraw' 'Apologize' 'Cast 'im out' and terrific uproar.)

Weakling did not apologize or withdraw, but he said no more.  Didlum's proposition was carried,
and the 'hand' went on to the next item on the agenda, which was a proposal by Councillor Didlum
to increase the salary of Mr Oyley Sweater, the Borough Engineer, from fifteen pounds to seventeen
pounds per week.

Councillor Didlum said that when they had a good man they ought to appreciate him.  (Applause.)
Compared with other officials, the Borough Engineer was not fairly paid.  (Hear, hear.)  The
magistrates' clerk received seventeen pounds a week.  The Town Clerk seventeen pounds per week.
He did not wish it to be understood that he thought those gentlemen were overpaid--far from
it.  (Hear, hear.)  It was not that they got too much but that the Engineer got too little.
How could they expect a man like that to exist on a paltry fifteen pounds a week? Why, it was
nothing more or less than sweating!  (Hear, hear.)  He had much pleasure in moving that the
Borough Engineer's salary be increased to seventeen pounds a week, and that his annual holiday
be extended from a fortnight to one calendar month with hard la--he begged pardon--with full
pay.  (Loud cheers.)

Councillor Rushton said that he did not propose to make a long speech--it was not necessary.
He would content himself with formally seconding Councillor Didlum's excellent proposition.
(Applause.)

Councillor Weakling, whose rising was greeted with derisive laughter, said he must oppose the
resolution.  He wished it to be understood that he was not actuated by any feeling of personal
animosity towards the Borough Engineer, but at the same time he considered it his duty to say
that in his (Dr Weakling's) opinion, that official would be dear at half the price they were
now paying him.  (Disturbance.)  He did not appear to understand his business, nearly all the
work that was done cost in the end about double what the Borough Engineer estimated it could
be done for.  (Liar.)  He considered him to be a grossly incompetent person (uproar) and was
of opinion that if they were to advertise they could get dozens of better men who would be
glad to do the work for five pounds a week.  He moved that Mr Oyley Sweater be asked to resign
and that they advertise for a man at five pounds a week.  (Great uproar.)

Councillor Grinder rose to a point of order. He appealed to the Chairman to squash the amendment.
(Applause.)

Councillor Didlum remarked that he supposed Councillor Grinder meant 'quash': in that case,
he would support the suggestion.

Councillor Grinder said it was about time they put a stopper on that feller Weakling.  He (Grinder)
did not care whether they called it squashing or quashing; it was all the same so long as they
nipped him in the bud.  (Cheers.)  The man was a disgrace to the Council; always interfering
and hindering the business.

The Mayor--Alderman Sweater--said that he did not think it consistent with the dignity of that
Council to waste any more time over this scurrilous amendment.  (Applause.)  He was proud to
say that it had never even been seconded, and therefore he would put Mr Didlum's resolution--a
proposition which he had no hesitation in saying reflected the highest credit upon that gentleman
and upon all those who supported it.  (Vociferous cheers.)

All those who were in favour signified their approval in the customary manner, and as Weakling
was the only one opposed, the resolution was carried and the meeting proceeded to the next
business.

Councillor Rushton said that several influential ratepayers and employers of labour had complained
to him about the high wages of the Corporation workmen, some of whom were paid sevenpence-halfpenny
an hour.  Sevenpence an hour was the maximum wage paid to skilled workmen by private employers
in that town, and he failed to see why the Corporation should pay more.  (Hear, hear.)  It
had a very bad effect on the minds of the men in the employment of private firms, tending to
make them dissatisfied with their wages.  The same state of affairs prevailed with regard to
the unskilled labourers in the Council's employment.  Private employers could get that class
of labour for fourpence-halfpenny or fivepence an hour, and yet the corporation paid fivepence-halfpenny
and even sixpence for the same class of work. (Shame.)  It was not fair to the ratepayers.
(Hear, hear.) Considering that the men in the employment of the Corporation had almost constant
work, if there was to be a difference at all, they should get not more, but less, than those
who worked for private firms.  (Cheers.)  He moved that the wages of the Corporation workmen
be reduced in all cases to the same level as those paid by private firms.

Councillor Grinder seconded.  He said it amounted to a positive scandal.  Why, in the summer-time
some of these men drew as much as 35/- in a single week!  (Shame.) and it was quite common
for unskilled labourers--fellers who did nothing but the very hardest and most laborious work,
sich as carrying sacks of cement, or digging up the roads to get at the drains, and sich-like
easy jobs--to walk off with 25/- a week!  (Sensation.)  He had often noticed some of these
men swaggering about the town on Sundays, dressed like millionaires and cigared up!  They seemed
quite a different class of men from those who worked for private firms, and to look at the
way some of their children was dressed you'd think their fathers was Cabinet Minstrels! No
wonder the ratepayers complained ot the high rates.  Another grievance was that all the Corporation
workmen were allowed two days' holiday every year, in addition to the Bank Holidays, and were
paid for them!  (Cries of 'shame', 'Scandalous', 'Disgraceful', etc.)  No private contractor
paid his men for Bank Holidays, and why should the Corporation do so? He had much pleasure
in seconding Councillor Rushton's resolution.

Councillor Weakling opposed the motion. He thought that 35/- a week was little enough for a
man to keep a wife and family with (Rot), even if all the men got it regularly, which they
did not.  Members should consider what was the average amount per week throughout the whole
year, not merely the busy time, and if they did that they would find that even the skilled
men did not average more than 25/- a week, and in many cases not so much.  If this subject
had not been introduced by Councillor Rushton, he (Dr Weakling) had intended to propose that
the wages of the Corporation workmen should be increased to the standard recognized by the
Trades Unions.  (Loud laughter.)  It had been proved that the notoriously short lives of the
working people--whose average span of life was about twenty years less than that of the well-to-do
classes--their increasingly inferior physique, and the high rate of mortality amongst their
children was caused by the wretched remuneration they received for hard and tiring work, the
excessive number of hours they have to work, when employed, the bad quality of their food,
the badly constructed and insanitary homes their poverty compels them to occupy, and the anxiety,
worry, and depression of mind they have to suffer when out of employment.  (Cries of 'Rot',
'Bosh', and loud laughter.)  Councillor Didlum said, 'Rot'.  It was a very good word to describe
the disease that was sapping the foundations of society and destroying the health and happiness
and the very lives of so many of their fellow countrymen and women.  (Renewed merriment and
shouts of 'Go and buy a red tie.')  He appealed to the members to reject the resolution.  He
was very glad to say that he believed it was true that the workmen in the employ of the Corporation
were a little better off than those in the employ of private contractors, and if it were so,
it was as it should be.  They had need to be better off than the poverty-stricken, half-starved
poor wretches who worked for private firms.

Councillor Didlum said that it was very evident that Dr Weakling had obtained his seat on that
Council by false pretences.  If he had told the ratepayers that he was a Socialist, they would
never have elected him.  (Hear, hear.)  Practically every Christian minister in the country
would agree with him (Didlum) when he said that the poverty of the working classes was caused
not by the 'wretched remuneration they receive as wages', but by Drink.  (Loud applause.) 
And he was very sure that the testimony of the clergy of all denominations was more to be relied
upon than the opinion of a man like Dr Weakling.  (Hear, hear.)

Dr Weakling said that if some of the clergymen referred to or some of the members of the council
had to exist and toil amid the same sordid surroundings, overcrowding and ignorance as some
of the working classes, they would probably seek to secure some share of pleasure and forgetfulness
in drink themselves!  (Great uproar and shouts of 'Order', 'Withdraw', 'Apologize'.)

Councillor Grinder said that even if it was true that the haverage lives of the working classes
was twenty years shorter than those of the better classes, he could not see what it had got
to do with Dr Weakling.  (Hear, hear.)  So long as the working class was contented to die twenty
years before their time, he failed to see what it had got to do with other people.  They was
not runnin' short of workers, was they? There was still plenty of 'em left.  (Laughter.)  So
long as the workin' class was satisfied to die orf--let 'em die orf!  It was a free country.
(Applause.)  The workin' class adn't arst Dr Weakling to stick up for them, had they?  If they
wasn't satisfied, they would stick up for theirselves!  The working men didn't want the likes
of Dr Weakling to stick up for them, and they would let 'im know it when the next election
came round.  If he (Grinder) was a wordly man, he would not mind betting that the workin' men
of Dr Weakling's ward would give him 'the dirty kick out' next November.  (Applause.)

Councillor Weakling, who knew that this was probably true, made no further protest.  Rushton's
proposition was carried, and then the Clerk announced that the next item was the resolution
Mr Didlum had given notice of at the last meeting, and the Mayor accordingly called upon that
gentleman.

Councillor Didlum, who was received with loud cheers, said that unfortunately a certain member
of that Council seemed to think he had a right to oppose nearly everything that was brought
forward.

(The majority of the members of the Band glared malignantly at Weakling.)

He hoped that for once the individual he referred to would have the decency to restrain himself,
because the resolution he (Didlum) was about to have the honour of proposing was one that he
believed no right-minded man--no matter what his politics or religious opinions--could possibly
object to; and he trusted that for the credit of the Council it would be entered on the records
as an unopposed motion. The resolution was as follows:

'That from this date all the meetings of this Council shall be opened with prayer and closed
with the singing of the Doxology.' (Loud applause.)

Councillor Rushton seconded the resolution, which was also supported by Mr Grinder, who said
that at a time like the present, when there was sich a lot of infiddles about who said that
we all came from monkeys, the Council would be showing a good example to the working classes
by adopting the resolution.

Councillor Weakling said nothing, so the new rule was carried nem. con., and as there was no
more business to be done it was put into operation for the first time there and then.  Mr Sweater
conducting the singing with a roll of paper--the plan of the drain of 'The Cave'--and each
member singing a different tune.

Weakling withdrew during the singing, and afterwards, before the Band dispersed, it was agreed
that a certain number of them were to meet the Chief at the Cave, on the following evening
to arrange the details of the proposed raid on the finances of the town in connection with
the sale of the Electric Light Works.

Chapter 40

Vive la System!

The alterations which the Corporation had undertaken to make in the Kiosk on the Grand Parade
provided employment for several carpenters and plasterers for about three weeks, and afterwards
for several painters.  This fact was sufficient to secure the working men's unqualified approval
of the action of the Council in letting the place to Grinder, and Councillor Weakling's opposition--the
reasons of which they did not take the trouble to inquire into or understand--they as heartily
condemned.  All they knew or cared was that he had tried to prevent the work being done, and
that he had referred in insulting terms to the working men of the town.  What right had he
to call them half-starved, poverty-stricken, poor wretches?  If it came to being poverty-stricken,
according to all accounts, he wasn't any too well orf hisself.  Some of those blokes who went
swaggering about in frock-coats and pot-'ats was just as 'ard up as anyone else if the truth
was known.

As for the Corporation workmen, it was quite right that their wages should be reduced.  Why
should they get more money than anyone else?

'It's us what's got to find the money,' they said.  'We're the ratepayers, and why should we
have to pay them more wages than we get ourselves?  And why should they be paid for holidays
any more than us?'

During the next few weeks the dearth of employment continued, for, of course, the work at the
Kiosk and the few others jobs that were being done did not make much difference to the general
situation.  Groups of workmen stood at the corners or walked aimlessly about the streets. Most
of them no longer troubled to go to the different firms to ask for work, they were usually
told that they would be sent for if wanted.

During this time Owen did his best to convert the other men to his views.  He had accumulated
a little library of Socialist books and pamphlets which he lent to those he hoped to influence.
Some of them took these books and promised, with the air of men who were conferring a great
favour, that they would read them.  As a rule, when they returned them it was with vague expressions
of approval, but they usually evinced a disinclination to discuss the contents in detail because,
in nine instances out of ten, they had not attempted to read them.  As for those who did make
a half-hearted effort to do so, in the majority of cases their minds were so rusty and stultified
by long years of disuse, that, although the pamphlets were generally written in such simple
language that a child might have understood, the argument was generally too obscure to be grasped
by men whose minds were addled by the stories told them by their Liberal and Tory masters.
Some, when Owen offered to lend them some books or pamphlets refused to accept them, and others
who did him the great favour of accepting them, afterwards boasted that they had used them
as toilet paper.

Owen frequently entered into long arguments with the other men, saying that it was the duty
of the State to provide productive work for all those who were willing to do it.  Some few
of them listened like men who only vaguely understood, but were willing to be convinced.

'Yes, mate. It's right enough what you say,' they would remark. 'Something ought to be done.'

Others ridiculed this doctrine of State employment: It was all very fine, but where was the
money to come from?  And then those who had been disposed to agree with Owen could relapse
into their old apathy.

There were others who did not listen so quietly, but shouted with many curses that it was the
likes of such fellows as Owen who were responsible for all the depression in trade.  All this
talk about Socialism and State employment was frightening Capital out of the country.  Those
who had money were afraid to invest it in industries, or to have any work done for fear they
would be robbed.  When Owen quoted statistics to prove that as far as commerce and the quantity
produced of commodities of all kinds was concerned, the last year had been a record one, they
became more infuriated than ever, and talked threateningly of what they would like to do to
those bloody Socialists who were upsetting everything.

One day Crass, who was one of these upholders of the existing system, scored off Owen finely.
A little group of them were standing talking in the Wage Slave Market near the Fountain.  In
the course of the argument, Owen made the remark that under existing conditions life was not
worth living, and Crass said that if he really thought so, there was no compulsion about it;
if he wasn't satisfied--if he didn't want to live--he could go and die.  Why the hell didn't
he go and make a hole in the water, or cut his bloody throat?

On this particular occasion the subject of the argument was--at first--the recent increase
of the Borough Engineer's salary to seventeen pounds per week.  Owen had said it was robbery,
but the majority of the others expressed their approval of the increase.  They asked Owen if
he expected a man like that to work for nothing!  It was not as if he were one of the likes
of themselves.  They said that, as for it being robbery, Owen would be very glad to have the
chance of getting it himself.  Most of them seemed to think the fact that anyone would be glad
to have seventeen pounds a week, proved that it was right for them to pay that amount to the
Borough Engineer!

Usually whenever Owen reflected upon the gross injustices, and inhumanity of the existing social
disorder, he became convinced that it could not possibly last; it was bound to fall to pieces
because of its own rottenness.  It was not just, it was not common sense, and therefore it
could not endure.  But always after one of these arguments--or, rather, disputes--with his
fellow workmen, he almost relapsed into hopelessness and despondency, for then he realized
how vast and how strong are the fortifications that surround the present system; the great
barriers and ramparts of invincible ignorance, apathy and self-contempt, which will have to
be broken down before the system of society of which they are the defences, can be swept away.

At other times as he thought of this marvellous system, it presented itself to him in such
an aspect of almost comical absurdity that he was forced to laugh and to wonder whether it
really existed at all, or if it were only an illusion of his own disordered mind.

One of the things that the human race needed in order to exist was shelter; so with much painful
labour they had constructed a large number of houses.  Thousands of these houses were now standing
unoccupied, while millions of the people who had helped to build the houses were either homeless
or herding together in overcrowded hovels.

These human beings had such a strange system of arranging their affairs that if anyone were
to go and burn down a lot of the houses he would be conferring a great boon upon those who
had built them, because such an act would 'Make a lot more work!'

Another very comical thing was that thousands of people wore broken boots and ragged clothes,
while millions of pairs of boots and abundance of clothing, which they had helped to make,
were locked up in warehouses, and the System had the keys. But the System prevented them from
so doing.

If anyone asked the System why it prevented these people from producing the things of which
they were in want, the System replied:

'Because they have already produced too much.  The markets are glutted. The warehouses are
filled and overflowing, and there is nothing more for them to do.'

There was in existence a huge accumulation of everything necessary.  A great number of the
people whose labour had produced that vast store were now living in want, but the System said
that they could not be permitted to partake of the things they had created.  Then, after a
time, when these people, being reduced to the last extreme of misery, cried out that they and
their children were dying of hunger, the System grudgingly unlocked the doors of the great
warehouses, and taking out a small part of the things that were stored within, distributed
it amongst the famished workers, at the same time reminding them that it was Charity, because
all the things in the warehouses, although they had been made by the workers, were now the
property of the people who do nothing.

And then the starving, bootless, ragged, stupid wretches fell down and worshipped the System,
and offered up their children as living sacrifices upon its altars, saying:

'This beautiful System is the only one possible, and the best that human wisdom can devise.
May the System live for ever!  Cursed be those who seek to destroy the System!'

As the absurdity of the thing forced itself upon him, Owen, in spite of the unhappiness he
felt at the sight of all the misery by which he was surrounded, laughed aloud and said to himself
that if he was sane, then all these people must be mad.

In the face of such colossal imbecility it was absurd to hope for any immediate improvement.
The little already accomplished was the work of a few self-sacrificing enthusiasts, battling
against the opposition of those they sought to benefit, and the results of their labours were,
in many instances, as pearls cast before the swine who stood watching for opportunities to
fall upon and rend their benefactors.

There was only one hope.  It was possible that the monopolists, encouraged by the extraordinary
stupidity and apathy of the people would proceed to lay upon them even greater burdens, until
at last, goaded by suffering, and not having sufficient intelligence to understand any other
remedy, these miserable wretches would turn upon their oppressors and drown both them and their
System in a sea of blood.

Besides the work at the Kiosk, towards the end of March things gradually began to improve in
other directions.  Several firms began to take on a few hands.  Several large empty houses
that were relet had to be renovated for their new tenants, and there was a fair amount of inside
work arising out of the annual spring-cleaning in other houses. There was not enough work to
keep everyone employed, and most of those who were taken on as a rule only managed to make
a few hours a week, but still it was better than absolute idleness, and there also began to
be talk of several large outside jobs that were to be done as soon as the weather was settled.

This bad weather, by the way, was a sort of boon to the defenders of the present system, who
were hard-up for sensible arguments to explain the cause of poverty.  One of the principal
causes was, of course, the weather, which was keeping everything back.  There was not the slightest
doubt that if only the weather would allow there would always be plenty of work, and poverty
would be abolished.

Rushton & Co. had a fair share of what work there was, and Crass, Sawkins, Slyme and Owen were
kept employed pretty regularly, although they did not start until half past eight and left
off at four.  At different houses in various parts of the town they had ceilings to wash off
and distemper, to strip the old paper from the walls, and to repaint and paper the rooms, and
sometimes there were the venetian blinds to repair and repaint.  Occasionally a few extra hands
were taken on for a few days, and discharged again as soon as the job they were taken on to
do was finished.

The defenders of the existing system may possibly believe that the knowledge that they would
be discharged directly the job was done was a very good incentive to industry, that they would
naturally under these circumstances do their best to get the work done as quickly as possible.
But then it must be remembered that most of the defenders of the existing system are so constituted,
that they can believe anything provided it is not true and sufficiently silly.

All the same, it was a fact that the workmen did do their very best to get over this work in
the shortest possible time, because although they knew that to do so was contrary to their
own interests, they also knew that it would be very much more contrary to their interests not
to do so.  Their only chance of being kept on if other work came in was to tear into it for
all they were worth.  Consequently, most of the work was rushed and botched and slobbered over
in about half the time that it would have taken to do it properly.  Rooms for which the customers
paid to have three coats of paint were scamped with one or two.  What Misery did not know about
scamping and faking the work, the men suggested to and showed him in the hope of currying favour
with him in order that they might get the preference over others and be sent for when the next
job came in.  This is the principal incentive provided by the present system, the incentive
to cheat.  These fellows cheated the customers of their money.  They cheated themselves and
their fellow workmen of work, and their children of bread, but it was all for a good cause--to
make profit for their master.

Harlow and Slyme did one job--a room that Rushton & Co. had contracted to paint three coats.
It was finished with two and the men cleared away their paints.  The next day, when Slyme wept
there to paper the room, the lady of the house said that the painting was not yet finished--it
was to have another coat.  Slyme assured her that it had already had three, but, as the lady
insisted, Slyme went to the shop and sought out Misery.  Harlow had been stood off, as there
was not another job in just then, but fortunately he happened to be standing in the street
outside the shop, so they called him and then the three of them went round to the job and swore
that the room had had three coats. The lady protested that it was not so.  She had watched
the progress of the work.  Besides, it was impossible; they had only been there three days.
The first day they had not put any paint on at all; they had done the ceiling and stripped
the walls; the painting was not started till the second day.  How then could it have had three
coats?  Misery explained the mystery: he said that for first coating they had an extra special
very fast-drying paint--paint that dried so quickly that they were able to give the work two
coats in one day.  For instance, one man did the window, the other the door: when these were
finished both men did the skirting; by the time the skirting was finished the door and window
were dry enough to second coat; and then, on the following day--the finishing coat!

Of course, this extra special quick-drying paint was very expensive, but the firm did not mind
that.  They knew that most of their customers wished to have their work finished as quickly
as possible, and their study was to give satisfaction to the customers.  This explanation satisfied
the lady--a poverty-stricken widow making a precarious living by taking in lodgers--who was
the more easily deceived because she regarded Misery as a very holy man, having seen him preaching
in the street on many occasions.

There was another job at another boarding-house that Owen and Easton did--two rooms which had
to be painted three coats of white paint and one of enamel, making four coats altogether. 
That was what the firm had contracted to do.  As the old paint in these rooms was of a rather
dark shade it was absolutely necessary to give the work three coats before enamelling it. 
Misery wanted them to let it go with two, but Owen pointed out that if they did so it would
be such a ghastly mess that it would never pass.  After thinking the matter over for a few
minutes, Misery told them to go on with the third coat of paint.  Then he went downstairs and
asked to see the lady of the house.  He explained to her that, in consequence of the old paint
being so dark, he found that it would be necessary, in order to make a good job of it, to give
the work four coats before enamelling it.  Of course, they had agreed for only three, but as
they always made a point of doing their work in a first-class manner rather than not make a
good job, they would give it the extra coat for nothing, but he was sure she would not wish
them to do that.  The lady said that she did not want them to work for nothing, and she wanted
it done properly.  If it were necessary to give it an extra coat, they must do so and she would
pay for it.  How much would it be?  Misery told her.  The lady was satisfied, and Misery was
in the seventh heaven.  Then he went upstairs again and warned Owen and Easton to be sure to
say, if they were asked, that the work had had four coats.

It would not be reasonable to blame Misery or Rushton for not wishing to do good, honest work--there
was no incentive.  When they secured a contract, if they had thought first of making the very
best possible job of it, they would not have made so much profit.  The incentive was not to
do the work as well as possible, but to do as little as possible.  The incentive was not to
make good work, but to make good profit.

The same rule applied to the workers.  They could not justly be blamed for not doing good work--there
was no incentive.  To do good work requires time and pains.  Most of them would have liked
to take time and pains, because all those who are capable of doing good work find pleasure
and happiness in doing it, and have pride in it when done: but there was no incentive, unless
the certainty of getting the sack could be called an incentive, for it was a moral certainty
that any man who was caught taking time and pains with his work would be promptly presented
with the order of the boot.  But there was plenty of incentive to hurry and scamp and slobber
and botch.

There was another job at a lodging-house--two rooms to be painted and papered.  The landlord
paid for the work, but the tenant had the privilege of choosing the paper.  She could have
any pattern she liked so long as the cost did not exceed one shilling per roll, Rushton's estimate
being for paper of that price.  Misery sent her several patterns of sixpenny papers, marked
at a shilling, to choose from, but she did not fancy any of them, and said that she would come
to the shop to make her selection.  So Hunter tore round to the shop in a great hurry to get
there before her.  In his haste to dismount, he fell off his bicycle into the muddy road, and
nearly smashed the plate-glass window with the handle-bar of the machine as he placed it against
the shop front before going in.

Without waiting to clean the mud off his clothes, he ordered Budd, the pimply-faced shopman,
to get out rolls of all the sixpenny papers they had, and then they both set to work and altered
the price marked upon them from sixpence to a shilling.  Then they got out a number of shilling
papers and altered the price marked upon them, changing it from a shilling to one and six.

When the unfortunate woman arrived, Misery was waiting for her with a benign smile upon his
long visage.  He showed her all the sixpenny ones, but she did not like any of them, so after
a while Nimrod suggested that perhaps she would like a paper of a little better quality, and
she could pay the trifling difference out of her own pocket.  Then he showed her the shilling
papers that he had marked up to one and sixpence, and eventually the lady selected one of these
and paid the extra sixpence per roll herself, as Nimrod suggested.  There were fifteen rolls
of paper altogether--seven for one room and eight for the other--so that in addition to the
ordinary profit on the sale of the paper--about two hundred and seventy-five per cent.--the
firm made seven and sixpence on this transaction. I should as soon believe my old grey mare had
got into the garret as that my wife was at the courtyard gate."

Trot, trot, trot, trot, suddenly resounded high over his head.

"What's that?" asked he of his servant.

"I know not," replied the man, "an' it be not your old grey mare in the garret."

They descended in haste to the courtyard, and looked up to the window of the attic. Lo and behold!
there was indeed the grey mare with her head poked out of the window, gazing down with her
great eyes on her master and his man, and seeming to enjoy very much her exalted station, and
their surprise at it.

Knock, knock, knock went the rapper of the street gate.

"It is my wife!"

"It is my mistress!" exclaimed master and man in the same breath.

The door was quickly unfastened, and there, truly, stood the mistress of the mansion, enveloped
in her shroud.

"Are you alive or dead?" exclaimed the astonished husband.

"Alive, my dear, but very cold," she murmured faintly, her teeth chattering the while, as those
of one in a fever chill; "help me to my chamber."

He caught her in his arms and covered her with kisses.

Then he bore her to her chamber, and called up the whole house to welcome and assist her. She
suffered a little from fatigue and fright, but in a few days was very much recovered.

The thing became the talk of the town, and hundreds flocked daily to see, not alone the lady
that was rescued from the grave in so remarkable a manner, but also the grey mare which had so
strangely contrived to get into the garret.

The excellent lady lived long and happily with her husband, and at
her death was laid once more in her old resting-place.

The grey mare, after resting in the garret three days, was got down
by means of scaffolding, safe and sound.

She survived her mistress for some time, and was a general favourite in the city, and when
she died her skin was stuffed, and placed in the arsenal as a curiosity. The sexton went mad
with the fright he had sustained, and in a short time entered that bourn whence he had so unintentionally
recovered the burgomaster's wife.

Not only was this memorable circumstance
commemorated in the Church of the Apostles, but it was also celebrated
in bassi relievi figures on the walls of the burgomaster's residence--the
sign of the Parroquet in the New Marckt. The searcher after antiquities
will, however, look in vain for either. They are not now to be found.
Modern taste has defaced the porch where stood the one, and erected
a shapeless structure on the site of the other.

THE WATER SPIRIT.

About
the middle of the sixteenth century, when Zündorf was no larger than
it is at present, there lived at the end of the village, hard by the
church, one of that useful class of women termed midwives. She was
an honest, industrious creature, and what with ushering the new-born
into life, and then assisting in making garments for them, she contrived
to creep through the world in comfort, if not in complete happiness.

The
summer had been one of unusual drought, and the winter, of a necessity,
one of uncommon scarcity, so that when the spring arrived the good
woman had less to do than at any period in the preceding seven years.
In fact she was totally unemployed. As she mused one night, lying
abed, on the matter, she was startled by a sharp, quick knock at the
door of her cottage. She hesitated for a moment to answer the call,
but the knocking was repeated with more violence than before.

Just before Easter several of the men asked Hunter if they might be allowed to work on Good
Friday and Easter Monday, as, they said, they had had enough holidays during the winter; they
had no money to spare for holiday-making, and they did not wish to lose two days' pay when
there was work to be done.  Hunter told them that there was not sufficient work in to justify
him in doing as they requested: things were getting very slack again, and Mr Rushton had decided
to cease work from Thursday night till Tuesday morning.  They were thus prevented from working
on Good Friday, but it is true that not more than one working man in fifty went to any religious
service on that day or on any other day during the Easter festival.  On the contrary, this
festival was the occasion of much cursing and blaspheming on the part of those whose penniless,
poverty-stricken condition it helped to aggravate by enforcing unprofitable idleness which
they lacked the means to enjoy.

During these holidays some of the men did little jobs on their own account and others put in
the whole time--including Good Friday and Easter Sunday--gardening, digging and planting their
plots of allotment ground.

When Owen arrived home one evening during the week before Easter, Frankie gave him an envelope
which he had brought home from school. It contained a printed leaflet:

                   CHURCH OF THE WHITED SEPULCHRE,
                             MUGSBOROUGH

                             Easter 19--

Dear Sir (or Madam),

In accordance with the usual custom we invite you to join with us in presenting the Vicar,
the Rev. Habbakuk Bosher, with an Easter Offering, as a token of affection and regard.

                                           Yours faithfully,
                          A. Cheeseman }
                          W. Taylor    }  Churchwardens

Mr Bosher's income from various sources connected with the church was over six hundred pounds
a year, or about twelve pounds per week, but as that sum was evidently insufficient, his admirers
had adopted this device for supplementing it.  Frankie said all the boys had one of these letters
and were going to ask their fathers for some money to give towards the Easter offering.  Most
of them expected to get twopence.

As the boy had evidently set his heart on doing the same as the other children, Owen gave him
the twopence, and they afterwards learned that the Easter Offering for that year was one hundred
and twenty-seven pounds, which was made up of the amounts collected from the parishioners by
the children, the district visitors and the verger, the collection at a special Service, and
donations from the feeble-minded old females elsewhere referred to.

By the end of April nearly all the old hands were back at work, and several casual hands had
also been taken on, the Semi-drunk being one of the number.  In addition to these, Misery had
taken on a number of what he called 'lightweights', men who were not really skilled workmen,
but had picked up sufficient knowledge of the simpler parts of the trade to be able to get
over it passably.  These were paid fivepence or fivepence-halfpenny, and were employed in preference
to those who had served their time, because the latter wanted more money and therefore were
only employed when absolutely necessary.  Besides the lightweights there were a few young fellows
called improvers, who were also employed because they were cheap.

Crass now acted as colourman, having been appointed possibly because he knew absolutely nothing
about the laws of colour.  As most of the work consisted of small jobs, all the paint and distemper
was mixed up at the shop and sent out ready for use to the various jobs.

Sawkins or some of the other lightweights generally carried the heavier lots of colour or scaffolding,
but the smaller lots of colour or such things as a pair of steps or a painter's plank were
usually sent by the boy, whose slender legs had become quite bowed since he had been engaged
helping the other philanthropists to make money for Mr Rushton.

Crass's work as colourman was simplified, to a certain extent, by the great number of specially
prepared paints and distempers in all colours, supplied by the manufacturers ready for use.
Most of these new-fangled concoctions were regarded with an eye of suspicion and dislike by
the hands, and Philpot voiced the general opinion about them one day during a dinner-hour discussion
when he said they might appear to be all right for a time, but they would probably not last,
because they was mostly made of kimicles.

One of these new-fashioned paints was called 'Petrifying Liquid', and was used for first-coating
decaying stone or plaster work.  It was also supposed to be used for thinning up a certain
kind of patent distemper, but when Misery found out that it was possible to thin the latter
with water, the use of 'Petrifying Liquid' for that purpose was discontinued.  This 'Petrifying
Liquid' was a source of much merriment to the hands.  The name was applied to the tea that
they made in buckets on some of the jobs, and also to the four-ale that was supplied by certain
pubs.

One of the new inventions was regarded with a certain amount of indignation by the hands: it
was a white enamel, and they objected to it for two reasons--one was because, as Philpot remarked,
it dried so quickly that you had to work like greased lightning; you had to be all over the
door directly you started it.

The other reason was that, because it dried so quickly, it was necessary to keep closed the
doors and windows of the room where it was being used, and the smell was so awful that it brought
on fits of dizziness and sometimes vomiting.  Needless to say, the fact that it compelled those
who used it to work quickly recommended the stuff to Misery.

As for the smell, he did not care about that; he did not have to inhale the fumes himself.

It was just about this time that Crass, after due consultation with several of the others,
including Philpot, Harlow, Bundy, Slyme, Easton and the Semi-drunk, decided to call a meeting
of the hands for the purpose of considering the advisability of holding the usual Beano later
on in the summer.  The meeting was held in the carpenter's shop down at the yard one evening
at six o'clock, which allowed time for those interested to attend after leaving work.

The hands sat on the benches or carpenter's stools, or reclined upon heaps of shavings.  On
a pair of tressels in the centre of the workshop stood a large oak coffin which Crass had just
finished polishing.

When all those who were expected to turn up had arrived, Payne, the foreman carpenter--the
man who made the coffins--was voted to the chair on the proposition of Crass, seconded by Philpot,
and then a solemn silence ensued, which was broken at last by the chairman, who, in a lengthy
speech, explained the object of the meeting.  Possibly with a laudable desire that there should
be no mistake about it, he took the trouble to explain several times, going over the same ground
and repeating the same words over and over again, whilst the audience waited in a deathlike
and miserable silence for him to leave off. Payne, however, did not appear to have any intention
of leaving off, for he continued, like a man in a trance, to repeat what he had said before,
seeming to be under the impression that he had to make a separate explanation to each individual
member of the audience.  At last the crowd could stand it no longer, and began to shout 'Hear,
hear' and to bang bits of wood and hammers on the floor and the benches; and then, after a
final repetition of the statement, that the object of the meeting was to consider the advisability
of holding an outing, or beanfeast, the chairman collapsed on to a carpenter's stool and wiped
the sweat from his forehead.

Crass then reminded the meeting that the last year's Beano had been an unqualified success,
and for his part he would be very sorry if they did not have one this year.  Last year they
had four brakes, and they went to Tubberton Village.

It was true that there was nothing much to see at Tubberton, but there was one thing they could
rely on getting there that they could not be sure of getting for the same money anywhere else,
and that was--a good feed.  (Applause.)  Just for the sake of getting on with the business,
he would propose that they decide to go to Tubberton, and that a committee be appointed to
make arrangements--about the dinner--with the landlord of the Queen Elizabeth's Head at that place.

Philpot seconded the motion, and Payne was about to call for a show of hands when Harlow rose
to a point of order.  It appeared to him that they were getting on a bit too fast.  The proper
way to do this business was first to take the feeling of the meeting as to whether they wished
to have a Beano at all, and then, if the meeting was in favour of it, they could decide where
they were to go, and whether they would have a whole day or only half a day.

The Semi-drunk said that he didn't care a dreadful expression where they went: he was willing
to abide by the decision of the majority. (Applause.)  It was a matter of indifference to him
whether they had a day, or half a day, or two days; he was agreeable to anything.

Easton suggested that a special saloon carriage might be engaged, and they could go and visit
Madame Tussaud's Waxworks.  He had never been to that place and had often wished to see it.
But Philpot objected that if they went there, Madame Tussaud's might be unwilling to let them
out again.

Bundy endorsed the remarks that had fallen from Crass with reference to Tubberton.  He did
not care where they went, they would never get such a good spread for the money as they did
last year at the Queen Elizabeth.  (Cheers.)

The chairman said that he remembered the last Beano very well.  They had half a day--left off
work on Saturday at twelve instead of one--so there was only one hour's wages lost--they went
home, had a wash and changed their clothes, and got up to the Cricketers, where the brakes
was waiting, at one.  Then they had the two hours' drive to Tubberton, stopping on the way
for drinks at the Blue Lion, the Warrior's Head, the Bird in Hand, the Dewdrop Inn and the
World Turned Upside Down. (Applause.)  They arrived at the Queen Elizabeth at three-thirty,
and the dinner was ready; and it was one of the finest blow-outs he had ever had.  (Hear, hear.)
There was soup, vegetables, roast beef, roast mutton, lamb and mint sauce, plum duff, Yorkshire,
and a lot more.  The landlord of the Elizabeth kept as good a drop of beer as anyone could
wish to drink, and as for the teetotallers, they could have tea, coffee or ginger beer.

Having thus made another start, Payne found it very difficult to leave off, and was proceeding
to relate further details of the last Beano when Harlow again rose up from his heap of shavings
and said he wished to call the chairman to order.  (Hear, hear.)  What the hell was the use
of all this discussion before they had even decided to have a Beano at all!  Was the meeting
in favour of a Beano or not?  That was the question.

A prolonged and awkward silence followed.  Everyone was very uncomfortable, looking stolidly
on the ground or staring straight in front of them.

At last Easton broke the silence by suggesting that it would not be a bad plan if someone was
to make a motion that a Beano be held.  This was greeted with a general murmur of 'Hear, hear,'
followed by another awkward pause, and then the chairman asked Easton if he would move a resolution
to that effect.  After some hesitation, Easton agreed, and formally moved: 'That this meeting
is in favour of a Beano.'

The Semi-drunk said that, in order to get on with the business, he would second the resolution.
But meantime, several arguments had broken out between the advocates of different places, and
several men began to relate anecdotes of previous Beanos.  Nearly everyone was speaking at
once and it was some time before the chairman was able to put the resolution.  Finding it impossible
to make his voice heard above the uproar, he began to hammer on the bench with a wooden mallet,
and to shout requests for order, but this only served to increase the din.  Some of them looked
at him curiously and wondered what was the matter with him, but the majority were so interested
in their own arguments that they did not notice him at all.

Whilst the chairman was trying to get the attention of the meeting in order to put the question,
Bundy had become involved in an argument with several of the new hands who claimed to know
of an even better place than the Queen Elizabeth, a pub called 'The New Found Out', at Mirkfield,
a few miles further on than Tubberton, and another individual joined in the dispute, alleging
that a house called 'The Three Loggerheads' at Slushton-cum-Dryditch was the finest place for
a Beano within a hundred miles of Mugsborough.  He went there last year with Pushem and Driver's
crowd, and they had roast beef, goose, jam tarts, mince pies, sardines, blancmange, calves'
feet jelly and one pint for each man was included in the cost of the dinner.  In the middle
of the discussion, they noticed that most of the others were holding up their hands, so to
show there was no ill feeling they held up theirs also and then the chairman declared it was
carried unanimously.

Bundy said he would like to ask the chairman to read out the resolution which had just been
passed, as he had not caught the words.

The chairman replied that there was no written resolution.  The motion was just to express
the feeling of this meeting as to whether there was to be an outing or not.

Bundy said he was only asking a civil question, a point of information: all he wanted to know
was, what was the terms of the resolution?  Was they in favour of the Beano or not?

The chairman responded that the meeting was unanimously in favour. (Applause.)

Harlow said that the next thing to be done was to decide upon the date. Crass suggested the
last Saturday in August.  That would give them plenty of time to pay in.

Sawkins asked whether it was proposed to have a day or only half a day. He himself was in favour
of the whole day.  It would only mean losing a morning's work.  It was hardly worth going at
all if they only had half the day.

The Semi-drunk remarked that he had just thought of a very good place to go if they decided
to have a change.  Three years ago he was working for Dauber and Botchit and they went to 'The
First In and the Last Out' at Bashford.  It was a very small place, but there was a field where
you could have a game of cricket or football, and the dinner was A1 at Lloyds.  There was also
a skittle alley attached to the pub and no charge was made for the use of it.  There was a
bit of a river there, and one of the chaps got so drunk that he went orf his onion and jumped
into the water, and when they got him out the village policeman locked him up, and the next
day he was took before the beak and fined two pounds or a month's hard labour for trying to
commit suicide.

Easton pointed out that there was another way to look at it: supposing they decided to have
the Beano, he supposed it would come to about six shillings a head.  If they had it at the
end of August and started paying in now, say a tanner a week, they would have plenty of time
to make up the amount, but supposing the work fell off and some of them got the push?

Crass said that in that case a man could either have his money back or he could leave it, and
continue his payments even if he were working for some other firm; the fact that he was off
from Rushton's would not prevent him from going to the Beano.

Harlow proposed that they decide to go to the Queen Elizabeth the same as last year, and that
they have half a day.

Philpot said that, in order to get on with the business, he would second the resolution.

Bundy suggested--as an amendment--that it should be a whole day, starting from the Cricketers
at nine in the morning, and Sawkins said that, in order to get on with the business, he would
second the amendment.

One of the new hands said he wished to move another amendment.  He proposed to strike out the
Queen Elizabeth and substitute the Three Loggerheads.

The Chairman--after a pause--inquired if there were any seconder to this, and the Semi-drunk
said that, although he did not care much where they went, still, to get on with the business,
he would second the amendment, although for his own part he would prefer to go to the 'First
In and Last Out' at Bashford.

The new hand offered to withdraw his suggestion re the Three Loggerheads in favour of the Semi-drunks
proposition, but the latter said it didn't matter; it could go as it was.

As it was getting rather late, several men went home, and cries of 'Put the question' began
to be heard on all sides; the chairman accordingly was proceeding to put Harlow's proposition
when the new hand interrupted him by pointing out that it was his duty as chairman to put the
amendments first.  This produced another long discussion, in the course of which a very tall,
thin man who had a harsh, metallic voice gave a long rambling lecture about the rules of order
and the conduct of public meetings.  He spoke very slowly and deliberately, using very long
words and dealing with the subject in an exhaustive manner.  A resolution was a resolution,
and an amendment was an amendment; then there was what was called an amendment to an amendment;
the procedure of the House of Commons differed very materially from that of the House of Lords--and
so on.

This man kept on talking for about ten minutes, and might have continued for ten hours if he
had not been rudely interrupted by Harlow, who said that it seemed to him that they were likely
to stay there all night if they went on like they were going.  He wanted his tea, and he would
also like to get a few hours' sleep before having to resume work in the morning.  He was getting
about sick of all this talk.  (Hear, hear.)  In order to get on with the business, he would
withdraw his resolution if the others would withdraw their amendments. If they would agree
to do this, he would then propose another resolution which--if carried--would meet all the
requirements of the case.  (Applause.)

The man with the metallic voice observed that it was not necessary to ask the consent of those
who had moved amendments: if the original proposition was withdrawed, all the amendments fell
to the ground.

'Last year,' observed Crass, 'when we was goin' out of the room after we'd finished our dinner
at the Queen Elizabeth, the landlord pointed to the table and said, "There's enough left over
for you all to 'ave another lot."'  (Cheers.)

Harlow said that he would move that it be held on the last Saturday in August; that it be for
half a day, starting at one o'clock so that they could work up till twelve, which would mean
that they would only have to lose one hour's pay: that they go to the same place as last year--the
Queen Elizabeth.  (Hear, hear.)  That the same committee that acted last year--Crass and Bundy--be
appointed to make all the arrangements and collect the subscriptions.  (Applause.)

The tall man observed that this was what was called a compound resolution, and was proceeding
to explain further when the chairman exclaimed that it did not matter a dam' what it was called--would
anyone second it?  The Semi-drunk said that he would--in order to get on with the business.

Bundy moved, and Sawkins seconded, as an amendment, that it should be a whole day.

The new hand moved to substitute the Loggerheads for the Queen Elizabeth.

Easton proposed to substitute Madame Tussaud's Waxworks for the Queen Elizabeth.  He said he
moved this just to test the feeling of the meeting.

Harlow pointed out that it would cost at least a pound a head to defray the expenses of such
a trip.  The railway fares, tram fares in London, meals--for it would be necessary to have
a whole day--and other incidental expenses; to say nothing of the loss of wages.  It would
not be possible for any of them to save the necessary amount during the next four months. 
(Hear, hear.)

Philpot repeated his warning as to the danger of visiting Madame Tussaud's.  He was certain
that if she once got them in there she would never let them out again.  He had no desire to
pass the rest of his life as an image in a museum.

One of the new hands--a man with a red tie--said that they would look well, after having been
soaked for a month or two in petrifying liquid, chained up in the Chamber of Horrors with labels
round their necks--'Specimens of Liberal and Conservative upholders of the Capitalist System,
20 century'.

Crass protested against the introduction of politics into that meeting. (Hear, hear.)  The
remarks of the last speakers were most uncalled-for.

Easton said that he would withdraw his amendment.

Acting under the directions of the man with the metallic voice, the chairman now proceeded
to put the amendment to the vote.  Bundy's proposal that it should be a whole day was defeated,
only himself, Sawkins and the Semi-drunk being in favour.  The motion to substitute the Loggerheads
for the Queen Elizabeth was also defeated, and the compound resolution proposed by Harlow was
then carried nem. con.

Philpot now proposed a hearty vote of thanks to the chairman for the very able manner in which
he had conducted the meeting.  When this had been unanimously agreed to, the Semi-drunk moved
a similar tribute of gratitude to Crass for his services to the cause and the meeting dispersed.

Chapter 42

June

During the early part of May the weather was exceptionally bad, with bitterly cold winds. 
Rain fell nearly every day, covering the roads with a slush that penetrated the rotten leather
of the cheap or second-hand boots worn by the workmen.  This weather had the effect of stopping
nearly all outside work, and also caused a lot of illness, for those who were so fortunate
as to have inside jobs frequently got wet through on their way to work in the morning and had
to work all day in damp clothing, and with their boots saturated with water.  It was also a
source of trouble to those of the men who had allotments, because if it had been fine they
would have been able to do something to their gardens while they were out of work.

Newman had not succeeded in getting a job at the trade since he came out of prison, but he
tried to make a little money by hawking bananas. Philpot--when he was at work--used often to
buy a tanner's or a bob's worth from him and give them to Mrs Linden's children.  On Saturdays
Old Joe used to waylay these children and buy them bags of cakes at the bakers.  One week when
he knew that Mrs Linden had not had much work to do, he devised a very cunning scheme to help
her.  He had been working with Slyme, who was papering a large boarded ceiling in a shop. 
It had to be covered with unbleached calico before it could be papered and when the work was
done there were a number of narrow pieces of calico left over.  These he collected and tore
into strips about six inches wide which he took round to Mrs Linden, and asked her to sew them
together, end to end, so as to make one long strip: then this long strip had to be cut into
four pieces of equal length and the edges sewn together in such a manner that it would form
a long tube.  Philpot told her that it was required for some work that Rushton's were doing,
and said he had undertaken to get the sewing done.  The firm would have to pay for it, so she
could charge a good price.

'You see,' he said with a wink, 'this is one of those jobs where we gets a chance to get some
of our own back.'

Mary thought it was rather a strange sort of job, but she did as Philpot directed and when
he came for the stuff and asked how much it was she said threepence: it had only taken about
half an hour. Philpot ridiculed this: it was not nearly enough.  THEY were not supposed to
know how long it took: it ought to be a bob at the very least.  So, after some hesitation she
made out a bill for that amount on a half-sheet of note-paper.  He brought her the money the
next Saturday afternoon and went off chuckling to himself over the success of the scheme. 
It did not occur to him until the next day that he might just as well have got her to make
him an apron or two: and when he did think of this he said that after all it didn't matter,
because if he had done that it would have been necessary to buy new calico, and anyhow, it
could be done some other time.

Newman did not make his fortune out of the bananas--seldom more than two shillings a day--and
consequently he was very glad when Philpot called at his house one evening and told him there
was a chance of a job at Rushton's.  Newman accordingly went to the yard the next morning,
taking his apron and blouse and his bag of tools with him, ready to start work.  He got there
at about quarter to six and was waiting outside when Hunter arrived.  The latter was secretly
very glad to see him, for there was a rush of work in and they were short of men. He did not
let this appear, of course, but hesitated for a few minutes when Newman repeated the usual
formula: 'Any chance of a job, sir?'

'We wasn't at all satisfied with you last time you was on, you know,' said Misery.  'Still,
I don't mind giving you another chance.  But if you want to hold your job you'll have to move
yourself a bit quicker than you did before.'

Towards the end of the month things began to improve all round.  The weather became finer and
more settled.  As time went on the improvement was maintained and nearly everyone was employed.
Rushton's were so busy that they took on several other old hands who had been sacked the previous
year for being too slow.

Thanks to the influence of Crass, Easton was now regarded as one of the regular hands.  He
had recently resumed the practice of spending some of his evenings at the Cricketers.  It is
probable that even if it had not been for his friendship with Crass, he would still have continued
to frequent the public house, for things were not very comfortable at home.  Somehow or other,
Ruth and he seemed to be always quarrelling, and he was satisfied that it was not always his
fault.  Sometimes, after the day's work was over he would go home resolved to be good friends
with her: he would plan on his way homewards to suggest to her that they should have their
tea and then go out for a walk with the child.  Once or twice she agreed, but on each occasion,
they quarrelled before they got home again.  So after a time he gave up trying to be friends
with her and went out by himself every evening as soon as he had had his tea.

Mary Linden, who was still lodging with them, could not help perceiving their unhappiness:
she frequently noticed that Ruth's eyes were red and swollen as if with crying, and she gently
sought to gain her confidence, but without success.  On one occasion when Mary was trying to
advise her, Ruth burst out into a terrible fit of weeping, but she would not say what was the
cause--except that her head was aching--she was not well, that was all.

Sometimes Easton passed the evening at the Cricketers but frequently he went over to the allotments,
where Harlow had a plot of ground. Harlow used to get up about four o'clock in the morning
and put in an hour or so at his garden before going to work; and every evening as soon as he
had finished tea he used to go there again and work till it was dark. Sometimes he did not
go home to tea at all, but went straight from work to the garden, and his children used to
bring his tea to him there in a glass bottle, with something to eat in a little basket.  He
had four children, none of whom were yet old enough to go to work, and as may be imagined,
he found it a pretty hard struggle to live.  He was not a teetotaller, but as he often remarked,
'what the publicans got from him wouldn't make them very fat', for he often went for weeks
together without tasting the stuff, except a glass or two with the Sunday dinner, which he
did not regard as an unnecessary expense, because it was almost as cheap as tea or coffee.

Fortunately his wife was a good needlewoman, and as sober and industrious as himself; by dint
of slaving incessantly from morning till night she managed to keep her home fairly comfortable
and the children clean and decently dressed; they always looked respectable, although they
did not always have enough proper food to eat.  They looked so respectable that none of the
'visiting ladies' ever regarded them as deserving cases.

Harlow paid fifteen shillings a year for his plot of ground, and although it meant a lot of
hard work it was also a source of pleasure and some profit.  He generally made a few shillings
out of the flowers, besides having enough potatoes and other vegetables to last them nearly
all the year.

Sometimes Easton went over to the allotments and lent Harlow a hand with this gardening work,
but whether he went there or to the Cricketers, he usually returned home about half past nine,
and then went straight to bed, often without speaking a single word to Ruth, who for her part
seldom spoke to him except to answer something he said, or to ask some necessary question. 453
Organic Life increases.

ADDITIONAL NOTES.

ADDITIONAL NOTES.

SPONTANEOUS VITALITY OF MICROSCOPIC ANIMALS.

Hence without parent by spontaneous birth Rise the first specks of animated earth. CANTO I. l.
227.

Prejudices against this doctrine.

I. From the misconception of the ignorant or superstitious, it has been thought somewhat profane
to speak in favour of spontaneous vital production, as if it contradicted holy writ; which says,
that God created animals and vegetables. They do not recollect that God created all things which
exist, and that these have been from the beginning in a perpetual state of improvement; which
appears from the globe itself, as well as from the animals and vegetables, which possess it.
And lastly, that there is more dignity in our idea of the supreme author of all things, when
we conceive him to be the cause of causes, than the cause simply of the events, which we see;
if there can be any difference in infinity of power!

Another prejudice which has prevailed against the spontaneous production of vitality, seems to
have arisen from the misrepresentation of this doctrine, as if the
larger animals had been thus produced; as Ovid supposes after the
deluge of Deucalion, that lions were seen rising out of the mud of
the Nile, and struggling to disentangle their hinder parts.

It was not considered, that animals and vegetables have been perpetually improving by reproduction;
and that spontaneous vitality was only to be looked for in the simplest
organic beings, as in the smallest microscopic animalcules; which
perpetually, perhaps hourly, enlarge themselves by reproduction, like
the roots of tulips from seed, or the buds of seedling trees, which
die annually, leaving others by solitary reproduction rather more
perfect than themselves for many successive years, till at length
they acquire sexual organs or flowers.

A third prejudice against the existence of spontaneous vital productions has been the supposed
want of analogy; this has also arisen from the expectation, that
the larger or more complicated animals should be thus produced; which
have acquired their present perfection by successive generations during
an uncounted series of ages.

Add to this, that the want of analogy opposes the credibility of all new discoveries, as of
the magnetic needle, and coated electric jar, and Galvanic pile;
which should therefore certainly be well weighed and nicely investigated
before distinct credence is given them; but then the want of analogy
must at length yield to repeated ocular demonstration.

Preliminary observations.

II. Concerning the spontaneous production of the smallest microscopic animals it should be
first observed, that the power of reproduction distinguishes organic being, whether vegetable
or animal, from inanimate nature. The circulation of fluids in vessels may exist in hydraulic
machines, but the power of reproduction belongs alone to life. This reproduction of plants
and of animals is of two kinds, which may be termed solitary and sexual. The former of these,
as in the reproduction of the buds of trees, and of the bulbs of tulips, and of the polypus,
and aphis, appears to be the first or most simple mode of generation, as many of these organic
beings afterwards acquire sexual organs, as the flowers of seedling trees, and of seedling
tulips, and the autumnal progeny of the aphis. See Phytologia.

Secondly, it should be observed, that by reproduction organic beings are gradually enlarged
and improved; which may perhaps more rapidly and uniformly occur in the simplest modes of
animated being; but occasionally also in the more complicated and perfect kinds. Thus the buds of
a seedling tree, or the bulbs of seedling tulips, become larger and stronger in the second year than
the first, and thus improve till they acquire flowers or sexes; and the aphis, I believe, increases
in bulk to the eighth or ninth generation, and then produces a sexual progeny. Hence the existence
of spontaneous vitality is only to be expected to be found in the simplest modes of animation,
as the complex ones have been formed by many successive reproductions.

Experimental

facts.

III. By the experiments of Buffon, Reaumur, Ellis, Ingenhouz, and others, microscopic animals
are produced in three or four days, according to the warmth of the season, in the infusions of all
vegetable or animal matter. One or more of these gentlemen put some boiling veal broth into
a phial previously heated in the fire, and sealing it up hermetically or with melted wax, observed
it to be replete with animalcules in three or four days.

These microscopic animals are believed to possess a power of generating others like themselves
by solitary reproduction without sex; and these gradually enlarging and improving for innumerable
successive generations. Mr. Ellis in Phil. Transact. V. LIX. gives drawings of six kinds of animalcula
infusoria, which increase by dividing across the middle into two distinct animals. Thus in paste
composed of flour and water, which has been suffered to become acescent, the animalcules called
eels, vibrio anguillula, are seen in great abundance; their motions are rapid and strong;
they are viviparous, and produce at intervals a numerous progeny: animals similar to these
are also found in vinegar; Naturalist's Miscellany by Shaw and Nodder, Vol. II. These eels
were probably at first as minute as other microscopic animalcules; but by frequent, perhaps
hourly reproduction, have gradually become the large animals above described, possessing wonderful
strength and activity.

To suppose the eggs of the former microscopic animals to float in the atmosphere, and pass through
the sealed glass phial, is so contrary to apparent nature, as to
be totally incredible! and as the latter are viviparous, it is equally
absurd to suppose, that their parents float universally in the atmosphere
to lay their young in paste or vinegar!

Not only microscopic animals appear to be produced by a spontaneous vital process, and then
quickly improve by solitary generation like the buds of trees, or like the polypus and aphis,
but there is one vegetable body, which appears to be produced by a spontaneous vital process, and
is believed to be propagated and enlarged in so short a time by solitary generation as to
become visible to the naked eye; I mean the green matter first attended
to by Dr. Priestley, and called by him conferva fontinalis.

The proofs, that this material is a vegetable, are from its giving up so much oxygen, when exposed
to the sunshine, as it grows in water, and from its green colour.

Dr. Ingenhouz asserts, that by filling a bottle with well-water, and inverting it immediately
into a basin of well-water, this green vegetable is formed in great quantity; and he believes,
that the water itself, or some substance contained in the water, is converted into this kind of
vegetation, which then quickly propagates itself.

M. Girtanner asserts, that this green vegetable matter is not produced by water and heat alone,
but requires the sun's light for this purpose, as he observed by many experiments, and thinks
it arises from decomposing water deprived of a part of its oxygen,
and laughs at Dr. Priestley for believing that the seeds of this conferva,
and the parents of microscopic animals, exist universally in the atmosphere,
and penetrate the sides of glass jars; Philos.

Magazine for May 1800.

Besides this green vegetable matter of Dr. Priestley, there is another
vegetable, the minute beginnings of the growth of which Mr. Ellis
observed by his microscope near the surface of all putrefying vegetable
or animal matter, which is the mucor or mouldiness; the vegetation
of which was amazingly quick so as to be almost seen, and soon became
so large as to be visible to the naked eye.

It is difficult to conceive how the seeds of this mucor can float
so universally in the atmosphere as to fix itself on all putrid matter
in all places.

Theory of Spontaneous Vitality.

IV. In animal nutrition the organic matter of the bodies of dead animals, or vegetables, is
taken into the stomach, and there suffers decompositions and new
combinations by a chemical process.

Some parts of it are however absorbed by the lacteals as fast as they are produced by this process
of digestion; in which circumstance this process differs from common chemical operations.

In
vegetable nutrition the organic matter of dead animals, or vegetables,
undergoes chemical decompositions and new combinations on or beneath
the surface of the earth; and parts of it, as they are produced, are
perpetually absorbed by the roots of the plants in contact with it;
in which this also differs from common chemical processes.

Hence the particles which are produced from dead organic matter by chemical decompositions or
new consequent combinations, are found proper for the purposes of the nutrition of living vegetable
and animal bodies, whether these decompositions and new combinations are performed in the
stomach or beneath the soil.

For the purposes of nutrition these digested or decomposed recrements of dead animal or vegetable
matter are absorbed by the lacteals of the stomachs of animals or
of the roots of vegetables, and carried into the circulation of their
blood, and these compose new organic parts to replace others which
are destroyed, or to increase the growth of the plant or animal.

It is probable, that as in inanimate or chemical combinations, one of the composing materials must
possess a power of attraction, and the other an aptitude to be attracted; so in organic or animated
compositions there must be particles with appetencies to unite, and other particles with propensities
to be united with them.

Thus in the generation of the buds of trees, it is probable that two
kinds of vegetable matter, as they are separated from the solid system,
and float in the circulation, become arrested by two kinds of vegetable
glands, and are then deposed beneath the cuticle of the tree, and
there join together forming a new vegetable, the caudex of which extends
from the plumula at the summit to the radicles beneath the soil, and
constitutes a single fibre of the bark.

These particles appear to be of two kinds; one of them possessing an appetency to unite with the other,
and the latter a propensity to be united with the former; and they are probably separated from
the vegetable blood by two kinds of glands, one representing those of the anthers, and the
others those of the stigmas, in the sexual organs of vegetables; which is spoken of at large
in Phytologia, Sect. VII. and in Zoonomia, Vol. I. Sect. XXXIX. 8. of the third edition, in octavo;
where it is likewise shown, that none of these parts which are deposited beneath the cuticle of the
tree, is in itself a complete vegetable embryon, but that they form one by their reciprocal
conjunction.

So in the sexual reproduction of animals, certain parts separated from the living organs, and floating
in the blood, are arrested by the sexual glands of the female, and others by those of the male.
Of these none are complete embryon animals, but form an embryon by their reciprocal conjunction.

There hence appears to be an analogy between generation and nutrition, as one is the production
of new organization, and the other the restoration of that which previously existed; and which
may therefore be supposed to require materials somewhat similar. Now the food taken up by animal
lacteals is previously prepared by the chemical process of digestion
in the stomach; but that which is taken up by vegetable lacteals,
is prepared by chemical dissolution of organic matter beneath the
surface of the earth.

Thus the particles, which form generated animal embryons, are prepared from dead organic matter
by the chemico-animal processes of sanguification and of secretion; while those which form spontaneous
microscopic animals or microscopic vegetables are prepared by chemical
dissolutions and new combinations of organic matter in watery fluids
with sufficient warmth.

It may be here added, that the production and properties of some kinds of inanimate matter, are
almost as difficult to comprehend as those of the simplest degrees of animation. Thus the elastic
gum, or caoutchouc, and some fossile bitumens, when drawn out to a great length, contract themselves
by their elasticity, like an animal fibre by stimulus. The laws of action of these, and all other
elastic bodies, are not yet understood; as the laws of the attraction of cohesion, to produce these
effects, must be very different from those of general attraction,
since the farther the particles of elastic bodies are drawn from each
other till they separate, the stronger they seem to attract; and the
nearer they are pressed together, the more they seem to repel; as
in bending a spring, or in extending a piece of elastic gum; which
is the reverse to what occurs in the attractions of disunited bodies;
and much wants further investigation.

So the spontaneous production of alcohol or of vinegar, by the vinous and acetous fermentations,
as well as the production of a mucus by putrefaction which will contract when extended, seems
almost as difficult to understand as the spontaneous production of a fibre from decomposing animal
or vegetable substances, which will contract when stimulated, and thus constitutes the primordium
of life.

Some of the microscopic animals are said to remain dead for many days or weeks, when the fluid
in which they existed is dried up, and quickly to recover life and motion by the fresh addition of water
and warmth.

Thus the chaos redivivum of Linnæus dwells in vinegar and in bookbinders paste: it revives by
water after having been dried for years, and is both oviparous and viviparous; Syst. Nat. Thus
the vorticella or wheel animal, which is found in rain water that has stood some days in leaden
gutters, or in hollows of lead on the tops of houses, or in the slime or sediment left by such
water, though it discovers no sign of life except when in the water, yet it is capable of continuing
alive for many months though kept in a dry state. In this state it is of a globulous shape, exceeds
not the bigness of a grain of sand, and no signs of life appear; but being put into water,
in the space of half an hour a languid motion begins, the globule turns itself about, lengthens
itself by slow degrees, assumes the form of a lively maggot, and most commonly in a few minutes
afterwards puts out its wheels, swimming vigorously through the water as if in search of food;
or else, fixing itself by the tail, works the wheels in such a manner as to bring its food to
its mouth; English Encyclopedia, Art. Animalcule.

Thus some shell-snails in the cabinets of the curious have been kept in a dry state for ten
years or longer, and have revived on being moistened with warmish
water; Philos.

           Transact.

So eggs and seeds after many months torpor, are revived by warmth and moisture; hence it may be
concluded, that even the organic particles of dead animals may, when exposed to a due degree of
warmth and moisture, regain some degree of vitality, since this is done by more complicate animal
organs in the instances above mentioned.

The hydra of Linnæus, which dwells in the rivers of Europe under aquatic plants, has been observed
by the curious of the present time, to revive after it has been dried, to be restored after being
mutilated, to multiply by being divided, to be propagated from small portions, to live after
being inverted; all which would be best explained by the doctrine of spontaneous reproduction
from organic particles not yet completely decomposed.

To this should be added, that these microscopic animals are found in all solutions of vegetable
or animal matter in water; as black pepper steeped in water, hay suffered to become putrid in
water, and the water of dunghills, afford animalcules in astonishing numbers. See Mr. Ellis's curious
account of Animalcules produced from an infusion of Potatoes and Hempseed; Philos. Transact.
Vol. LIX. from all which it would appear, that organic particles of dead vegetables and animals
during their usual chemical changes into putridity or acidity, do not lose all their organization
or vitality, but retain so much of it as to unite with the parts
of living animals in the process of nutrition, or unite and produce
new complicate animals by secretion as in generation, or produce very
simple microscopic animals or microscopic vegetables, by their new
combinations in warmth and moisture.

And finally, that these microscopic
organic bodies are multiplied and enlarged by solitary reproduction
without sexual intercourse till they acquire greater perfection or
new properties. Lewenhoek observed in rain-water which had stood a
few days, the smallest scarcely visible microscopic animalcules, and
in a few more days he observed others eight times as large; English
Encyclop. Art. Animalcule.

Conclusion.

There is therefore no absurdity
in believing that the most simple animals and vegetables may be produced
by the congress of the parts of decomposing organic matter, without
what can properly be termed generation, as the genus did not previously
exist; which accounts for the endless varieties, as well as for the
immense numbers of microscopic animals.

Some of them said that they did not believe in helping their children to become anything better
than their parents had been because in such cases the children, when they grew up, 'looked
down' upon and were ashamed of their fathers and mothers!  They seemed to think that if they
loved and did their duty to their children, the probability was that the children would prove
ungrateful: as if even if that were true, it would be any excuse for their indifference.

Another cause of the shortage of work was the intrusion into the trade of so many outsiders:
fellows like Sawkins and the other lightweights. Whatever other causes there were, there could
be no doubt that the hurrying and scamping was a very real one.  Every 'job' had to be done
at once! as if it were a matter of life or death!  It must be finished by a certain time. 
If the 'job' was at an empty house, Misery's yarn was that it was let! the people were coming
in at the end of the week! therefore everything must be finished by Wednesday night.  All the
ceilings had to be washed off, the walls stripped and repapered, and two coats of paint inside
and outside the house.  New drains were to be put in, and all broken windows and locks and
broken plaster repaired. A number of men--usually about half as many as there should have been--would
be sent to do the work, and one man was put in charge of the 'job'.  These sub-foremen or 'coddies'
knew that if they 'made their jobs pay' they would be put in charge of others and be kept on
in preference to other men as long as the firm had any work; so they helped Misery to scheme
and scamp the work and watched and drove the men under their charge; and these latter poor
wretches, knowing that their only chance of retaining their employment was to 'tear into it',
tore into it like so many maniacs.  Instead of cleaning any parts of the woodwork that were
greasy or very dirty, they brushed them over with a coat of spirit varnish before painting
to make sure that the paint would dry: places where the plaster of the walls was damaged were
repaired with what was humorously called 'garden cement'--which was the technical term for
dirt out of the garden--and the surface was skimmed over with proper material. Ceilings that
were not very dirty were not washed off, but dusted, and lightly gone over with a thin coat
of whitewash.  The old paper was often left upon the wails of rooms that were supposed to be
stripped before being repapered, and to conceal this the joints of the old paper were rubbed
down so that they should not be perceptible through the new paper.  As far as possible, Misery
and the sub-foreman avoided doing the work the customers paid for, and even what little they
did was hurried over anyhow.

A reign of terror--the terror of the sack--prevailed on all the 'jobs', which were carried
on to the accompaniment of a series of alarums and excursions: no man felt safe for a moment:
at the most unexpected times Misery would arrive and rush like a whirlwind all over the 'job'.
If he happened to find a man having a spell the culprit was immediately discharged, but he
did not get the opportunity of doing this very often for everybody was too terrified to leave
off working even for a few minutes' rest.

From the moment of Hunter's arrival until his departure, a state of panic, hurry, scurry and
turmoil reigned.  His strident voice rang through the house as he bellowed out to them to 'Rouse
themselves! Get it done!  Smear it on anyhow!  Tar it over!  We've got another job to start
when you've done this!'

Occasionally, just to keep the others up to concert pitch, he used to sack one of the men for
being too slow.  They all trembled before him and ran about whenever he spoke to or called
them, because they knew that there were always a lot of other men out of work who would be
willing and eager to fill their places if they got the sack.

Although it was now summer, and the Distress Committee and all the other committees had suspended
operations, there was still always a large number of men hanging about the vicinity of the
Fountain on the Parade--The Wage Slave Market.  When men finished up for the firm they were
working for they usually made for that place.  Any master in want of a wage slave for a few
hours, days or weeks could always buy one there.  The men knew this and they also knew that
if they got the sack from one firm it was no easy matter to get another job, and that was why
they were terrified.

When Misery was gone--to repeat the same performance at some other job--the sub-foreman would
have a crawl round to see how the chaps were getting on: to find out if they had used up all
their paint yet, or to bring them some putty so that they should not have to leave their work
to go to get anything themselves: and then very often Rushton himself would come and stalk
quietly about the house or stand silently behind the men, watching them as they worked.  He
seldom spoke to anyone, but just stood there like a graven image, or walked about like a dumb
animal--a pig, as the men used to say.  This individual had a very exalted idea of his own
importance and dignity. One man got the sack for presuming to stop him in the street to ask
some questions about some work that was being done.

Misery went round to all the jobs the next day and told all the 'coddies' to tell all the hands
that they were never to speak to Mr Rushton if they met him in the street, and the following
Saturday the man who had so offended was given his back day, ostensibly because there was nothing
for him to do, but really for the reason stated above.

There was one job, the outside of a large house that stood on elevated ground overlooking the
town.  The men who were working there were even more than usually uncomfortable, for it was
said that Rushton used to sit in his office and watch them through a telescope.

Sometimes, when it was really necessary to get a job done by a certain time, they had to work
late, perhaps till eight or nine o'clock.  No time was allowed for tea, but some of them brought
sufficient food with them in the morning to enable them to have a little about six o'clock
in the evening.  Others arranged for their children to bring them some tea from home.  As a
rule, they partook of this without stopping work: they had it on the floor beside them and
ate and drank and worked at the same time--a paint-brushful of white lead in one hand, and
a piece of bread and margarine in the other.  On some jobs, if the 'coddy' happened to be a
decent sort, they posted a sentry to look out for Hunter or Rushton while the others knocked
off for a few minutes to snatch a mouthful of grub; but it was not safe always to do this,
for there was often some crawling sneak with an ambition to become a 'coddy' who would not
scruple to curry favour with Misery by reporting the crime.

As an additional precaution against the possibility of any of the men idling or wasting their
time, each one was given a time-sheet on which he was required to account for every minute
of the day.  The form of these sheets vary slightly with different firms: that of Rushton &
Co., was as shown.

                               TIME SHEET
  OF WORK DONE BY                                       IN THE EMPLOY OF
                              RUSHTON & CO
  BUILDERS & DECORATORS             :                        MUGSBOROUGH

          NO SMOKING OR INTOXICANTS ALLOWED DURING WORKING HOURS

   EACH PIECE OF WORK MUST BE FULLY DESCRIBED, WHAT IT WAS, AND HOW LONG
                              IT TOOK TO DO.

  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------
       |               | Time When | Time When |       |
       | Where Working | Started   | Finished  | Hours | What Doing
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Sat
  |               |           |           |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Mon
  |               |           |           |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Tues
  |               |           |           |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Wed
  |               |           |           |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Thur
  |               |           |           |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Fri
  |               |           |           |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------
       |               |           Total Hours |       |
  -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------

One Monday morning Misery gave each of the sub-foremen an envelope containing one of the firm's
memorandum forms.  Crass opened his and found the following:

Crass

When you are on a job with men under you, check and initial their time-sheets every night.

If they are called away and sent to some other job, or stood off, check and initial their time-sheets
as they leave your job.

Any man coming on your job during the day, you must take note of the exact time of his arrival,
and see that his sheet is charged right.

Any man who is slow or lazy, or any man that you notice talking more than is necessary during
working hours, you must report him to Mr Hunter.  We expect you and the other foremen to help
us to carry out these rules, AND ANY INFORMATION GIVEN US ABOUT ANY MAN IS TREATED IN CONFIDENCE.

Rushton & Co.

Note: This applies to all men of all trades who come on the jobs of which you are the foreman.

Every week the time-sheets were scrutinized, and every now and then a man would be 'had up
on the carpet' in the office before Rushton and Misery, and interrogated as to why he had taken
fifteen hours to do ten hours work?  In the event of the accused being unable to give a satisfactory
explanation of his conduct he was usually sacked on the spot.

Misery was frequently called 'up on the carpet' himself.

If he made a mistake in figuring out a 'job', and gave in too high a tender for it, so that
the firm did not get the work, Rushton grumbled. If the price was so low that there was not
enough profit, Rushton was very unpleasant about it, and whenever it happened that there was
not only no profit but an actual loss, Rushton created such a terrible disturbance that Misery
was nearly frightened to death and used to get on his bicycle and rush off to the nearest 'job'
and howl and bellow at the 'chaps' to get it done.

All the time the capabilities of the men--especially with regard to speed--were carefully watched
and noted: and whenever there was a slackness of work and it was necessary to discharge some
hands those that were slow or took too much pains were weeded out: this of course was known
to the men and it had the desired effect upon them.

In justice to Rushton and Hunter, it must be remembered that there was a certain amount of
excuse for all this driving and cheating, because they had to compete with all the other firms,
who conducted their business in precisely the same way.  It was not their fault, but the fault
of the system.

A dozen firms tendered for every 'job', and of course the lowest tender usually obtained the
work.  Knowing this, they all cut the price down to the lowest possible figure and the workmen
had to suffer.

The trouble was that there were too many 'masters'.  It would have been far better for the
workmen if nine out of every ten of the employers had never started business.  Then the others
would have been able to get a better price for their work, and the men might have had better
wages and conditions.  The hands, however, made no such allowances or excuses as these for
Misery and Rushton.  They never thought or spoke of them except with hatred and curses.  But
whenever either of them came to the 'job' the 'coddies' cringed and grovelled before them,
greeting them with disgustingly servile salutations, plentifully interspersed with the word
'Sir', greetings which were frequently either ignored altogether or answered with an inarticulate
grunt.  They said 'Sir' at nearly every second word: it made one feel sick to hear them because
it was not courtesy: they were never courteous to each other, it was simply abject servility
and self-contempt.

One of the results of all the frenzied hurrying was that every now and then there was an accident:
somebody got hurt: and it was strange that accidents were not more frequent, considering the
risk, that were taken.  When they happened to be working on ladders in busy streets they were
not often allowed to have anyone to stand at the foot, and the consequence was that all sorts
and conditions of people came into violent collision with the bottoms of the ladders.  Small
boys playing in the reckless manner characteristic of their years rushed up against them. 
Errand boys, absorbed in the perusal of penny instalments of the adventures of Claude Duval,
and carrying large baskets of green-groceries, wandered into them.  Blind men fell foul of
them. Adventurous schoolboys climbed up them.  People with large feet became entangled in them.
Fat persons of both sexes who thought it unlucky to walk underneath, tried to negotiate the
narrow strip of pavement between the foot of the ladder and the kerb, and in their passage
knocked up against the ladder and sometimes fell into the road. Nursemaids wheeling perambulators--lolling
over the handle, which they usually held with their left hands, the right holding a copy of
Orange Blossoms or some halfpenny paper, and so interested in the story of the Marquis of Lymejuice--a
young man of noble presence and fabulous wealth, with a drooping golden moustache and very
long legs, who, notwithstanding the diabolical machinations of Lady Sibyl Malvoise, who loves
him as well as a woman with a name like that is capable of loving anyone, is determined to
wed none other than the scullery-maid at the Village Inn--inevitably bashed the perambulators
into the ladders. Even when the girls were not reading they nearly always ran into the ladders,
which seemed to possess a magnetic attraction for perambulators and go-carts of all kinds,
whether propelled by nurses or mothers.  Sometimes they would advance very cautiously towards
the ladder: then, when they got very near, hesitate a little whether to go under or run the
risk of falling into the street by essaying the narrow passage: then they would get very close
up to the foot of the ladder, and dodge and dance about, and give the cart little pushes from
side to side, until at last the magnetic influence exerted itself and the perambulator crashed
into the ladder, perhaps at the very moment that the man at the top was stretching out to do
some part of the work almost beyond his reach.

Once Harlow had just started painting some rainpipes from the top of a 40-ft ladder when one
of several small boys who were playing in the street ran violently against the foot.  Harlow
was so startled that he dropped his brushes and clutched wildly at the ladder, which turned
completely round and slid about six feet along the parapet into the angle of the wall, with
Harlow hanging beneath by his hands.  The paint pot was hanging by a hook from one of the rungs,
and the jerk scattered the brown paint it contained all over Harlow and all over the brickwork
of the front of the house.  He managed to descend safely by clasping his legs round the sides
of the ladder and sliding down. When Misery came there was a row about what he called carelessness.
And the next day Harlow had to wear his Sunday trousers to work.

On another occasion they were painting the outside of a house called 'Gothic Lodge'.  At one
corner it had a tower surmounted by a spire or steeple, and this steeple terminated with an
ornamental wrought-iron pinnacle which had to be painted.  The ladder they had was not quite
long enough, and besides that, as it had to stand in a sort of a courtyard at the base of the
tower, it was impossible to slant it sufficiently: instead of lying along the roof of the steeple,
it was sticking up in the air.

When Easton went up to paint the pinnacle he had to stand on almost the very top rung of the
ladder, to be exact, the third from the top, and lean over to steady himself by holding on
to the pinnacle with his left hand while he used the brush with his right.  As it was only
about twenty minutes' work there were two men to hold the foot of the ladder.

It was cheaper to do it this way than to rig up a proper scaffold, which would have entailed
perhaps two hours' work for two or three men. Of course it was very dangerous, but that did
not matter at all, because even if the man fell it would make no difference to the firm--all
the men were insured and somehow or other, although they frequently had narrow escapes, they
did not often come to grief.

On this occasion, just as Easton was finishing he felt the pinnacle that he was holding on
to give way, and he got such a fright that his heart nearly stopped beating.  He let go his
hold and steadied himself on the ladder as well as he was able, and when he had descended three
or four steps--into comparative safety--he remained clinging convulsively to the ladder and
feeling so limp that he was unable to go down any further for several minutes.  When he arrived
at the bottom and the others noticed how white and trembling he was, he told them about the
pinnacle being loose, and the 'coddy' coming along just then, they told him about it, and suggested
that it should be repaired, as otherwise it might fall down and hurt someone: but the 'coddy'
was afraid that if they reported it they might be blamed for breaking it, and the owner might
expect the firm to put it right for nothing, so they decided to say nothing about it.  The
pinnacle is stilt on the apex of the steeple waiting for a sufficiently strong wind to blow
it down on somebody's head.

When the other men heard of Easton's 'narrow shave', most of them said that it would have served
him bloody well right if he had fallen and broken his neck: he should have refused to go up
at all without a proper scaffold.  That was what THEY would have done.  If Misery or the coddy
had ordered any of THEM to go up and paint the pinnacle off that ladder, they would have chucked
their tools down and demanded their ha'pence!

That was what they said, but somehow or other it never happened that any of them ever 'chucked
their tools down' at all, although such dangerous jobs were of very frequent occurrence.

The scamping business was not confined to houses or properties of an inferior class: it was
the general rule.  Large good-class houses, villas and mansions, the residences of wealthy
people, were done in exactly the same way.  Generally in such places costly and beautiful materials
were spoilt in the using.

There was a large mansion where the interior woodwork--the doors, windows and staircase--had
to be finished in white enamel.  It was rather an old house and the woodwork needed rubbing
down and filling up before being repainted, but of course there was not time for that, so they
painted it without properly preparing it and when it was enamelled the rough, uneven surface
of the wood looked horrible: but the owner appeared quite satisfied because it was nice and
shiny.  The dining-room of the same house was papered with a beautiful and expensive plush
paper.  The ground of this wall-hanging was made to imitate crimson watered silk, and it was
covered with a raised pattern in plush of the same colour.  The price marked on the back of
this paper in the pattern book was eighteen shillings a roll.  Slyme was paid sixpence a roll
for hanging it: the room took ten rolls, so it cost nine pounds for the paper and five shillings
to hang it!  To fix such a paper as this properly the walls should first be done with a plain
lining paper of the same colour as the ground of the wallpaper itself, because unless the paperhanger
'lapps' the joints--which should not be done--they are apt to open a little as the paper dries
and to show the white wall underneath--Slyme suggested this lining to Misery, who would not
entertain the idea for a moment--they had gone to quite enough expense as it was, stripping
the old paper off!

So Slyme went ahead, and as he had to make his wages, he could not spend a great deal of time
over it.  Some of the joints were 'lapped' and some were butted, and two or three weeks after
the owner of the house moved in, as the paper became more dry, the joints began to open and
to show the white plaster of the wall, and then Owen had to go there with a small pot of crimson
paint and a little brush, and touch out the white line.

While he was doing this he noticed and touched up a number of other faults; places where Slyme--in
his haste to get the work done--had slobbered and smeared the face of the paper with fingermarks
and paste.

The same ghastly mess was made of several other 'jobs' besides this one, and presently they
adopted the plan of painting strips of colour on the wall in the places where the joints would
come, so that if they opened the white wall would not show: but it was found that the paste
on the back of the paper dragged the paint off the wall, and when the joints opened the white
streaks showed all the same, so Misery abandoned all attempts to prevent joints showing, and
if a customer complained, he sent someone to 'touch it up': but the lining paper was never
used, unless the customer or the architect knew enough about the work to insist upon it.

In other parts of the same house the ceilings, the friezes, and the dados, were covered with
'embossed' or 'relief' papers.  These hangings require very careful handling, for the raised
parts are easily damaged; but the men who fixed them were not allowed to take the pains and
time necessary to make good work: consequently in many places--especially at the joints--the
pattern was flattened out and obliterated.

The ceiling of the drawing-room was done with a very thick high-relief paper that was made
in sheets about two feet square.  These squares were not very true in shape: they had evidently
warped in drying after manufacture: to make them match anything like properly would need considerable
time and care.  But the men were not allowed to take the necessary time.  The result was that
when it was finished it presented a sort of 'higgledy-piggledy' appearance.  But it didn't
matter: nothing seemed to matter except to get it done.  One would think from the way the hands
were driven and chivvied and hurried over the work that they were being paid five or six shillings
an hour instead of as many pence.

'Get it done!' shouted Misery from morning till night.  'For God's sake get it done!  Haven't
you finished yet?  We're losing money over this "job"!  If you chaps don't wake up and move
a bit quicker, I shall see if I can't get somebody else who will.'

These costly embossed decorations were usually finished in white; but instead of carefully
coating them with specially prepared paint of patent distemper, which would need two or three
coats, they slobbered one thick coat of common whitewash on to it with ordinary whitewash brushes.

This was a most economical way to get over it, because it made it unnecessary to stop up the
joints beforehand--the whitewash filled up all the cracks: and it also filled up the hollow
parts, the crevices and interstices of the ornament, destroying the sharp outlines of the beautiful
designs and reducing the whole to a lumpy, formless mass. But that did not matter either, so
long as they got it done.

The architect didn't notice it, because he knew that the more Rushton & Co. made out of the
'job', the more he himself would make.

The man who had to pay for the work didn't notice it; he had the fullest confidence in the
architect.

At the risk of wearying the long-suffering reader, mention must be made of an affair that happened
at this particular 'job'.

The windows were all fitted with venetian blinds.  The gentleman for whom all the work was
being done had only just purchased the house, but he preferred roller blinds: he had had roller
blinds in his former residence--which he had just sold--and as these roller blinds were about
the right size, he decided to have them fitted to the windows of his new house: so he instructed
Mr Rushton to have all the venetian blinds taken down and stored away up in the loft under
the roof.  Mr Rushton promised to have this done; but they were not ALL put away under the
roof: he had four of them taken to his own place and fitted up in the conservatory.  They were
a little too large, so they had to be narrowed before they were fixed.

The sequel was rather interesting, for it happened that when the gentleman attempted to take
the roller blinds from his old house, the person to whom he had sold it refused to allow them
to be removed; claiming that when he bought the house, he bought the blinds also. There was
a little dispute, but eventually it was settled that way and the gentleman decided that he
would have the venetian blinds in his new house after all, and instructed the people who moved
his furniture to take the venetians down again from under the roof, and refix them, and then,
of course, it was discovered that four of the blinds were missing.  Mr Rushton was sent for,
and he said that he couldn't understand it at all!  The only possible explanation that he could
think of was that some of his workmen must have stolen them!  He would make inquiries, and
endeavour to discover the culprits, but in any case, as this had happened while things were
in his charge, if he did not succeed in recovering them, he would replace them.

As the blinds had been narrowed to fit the conservatory he had to have four new ones made.

The customer was of course quite satisfied, although very sorry for Mr Rushton.  They had a
little chat about it.  Rushton told the gentleman that he would be astonished if he knew all
the facts: the difficulties one has to contend with in dealing with working men: one has to
watch them continually! directly one's back is turned they leave off working! They come late
in the morning, and go home before the proper time at night, and then unless one actually happens
to catch them--they charge the full number of hours on their time sheets!  Every now and then
something would be missing, and of course Nobody knew anything about it.  Sometimes one would
go unexpectedly to a 'job' and find a lot of them drunk.  Of course one tried to cope with
these evils by means of rules and restrictions and organization, but it was very difficult--one
could not be everywhere or have eyes at the back of one's head.  The gentleman said that he
had some idea of what it was like: he had had something to do with the lower orders himself
at one time and another, and he knew they needed a lot of watching.

Rushton felt rather sick over this affair, but he consoled himself by reflecting that he had
got clear away with several valuable rose trees and other plants which he had stolen out of
the garden, and that a ladder which had been discovered in the hayloft over the stable and
taken--by his instructions--to the 'yard' when the 'job' was finished had not been missed.

Another circumstance which helped to compensate for the blinds was that the brass fittings
throughout the house, finger-plates, sash-lifts and locks, bolts and door handles, which were
supposed to be all new and which the customer had paid a good price for--were really all the
old ones which Misery had had re-lacquered and refixed.

There was nothing unusual about this affair of the blinds, for Rushton and Misery robbed everybody.
They made a practice of annexing every thing they could lay their hands upon, provided it could
be done without danger to themselves.  They never did anything of a heroic or dare-devil character:
they had not the courage to break into banks or jewellers' shops in the middle of the night,
or to go out picking pockets: all their robberies were of the sneak-thief order.

At one house that they 'did up' Misery made a big haul.  He had to get up into the loft under
the roof to see what was the matter with the water tank.  When he got up there he found a very
fine hall gas lamp made of wrought brass and copper with stained and painted glass sides. Although
covered with dust, it was otherwise in perfect condition, so Misery had it taken to his own
house and cleaned up and fixed in the hail.

In the same loft there were a lot of old brass picture rods and other fittings, and three very
good planks, each about ten feet in length; these latter had been placed across the rafters
so that one could walk easily and safely over to the tank. But Misery thought they would be
very useful to the firm for whitewashing ceilings and other work, so he had them taken to the
yard along with the old brass, which was worth about fourpence a pound.

There was another house that had to be painted inside: the people who used to live there had
only just left: they had moved to some other town, and the house had been re-let before they
vacated it.  The new tenant had agreed with the agent that the house was to be renovated throughout
before he took possession.

The day after the old tenants moved away, the agent gave Rushton the key so that he could go
to see what was to be done and give an estimate for the work.

While Rushton and Misery were looking over the house they discovered a large barometer hanging
on the wall behind the front door: it had been overlooked by those who removed the furniture.
Before returning the key to the agent, Rushton sent one of his men to the house for the barometer,
which he kept in his office for a few weeks to see if there would be any inquiries about it.
If there had been, it would have been easy to say that he had brought it there for safety--to
take care of till he could find the owner.  The people to whom it belonged thought the thing
had been lost or stolen in transit, and afterwards one of the workmen who had assisted to pack
and remove the furniture was dismissed from his employment on suspicion of having had something
to do with its disappearance.  No one ever thought of Rushton in connection with the matter,
so after about a month he had it taken to his own dwelling and hung up in the hall near the
carved oak marble-topped console table that he had sneaked last summer from 596 Grand Parade.

And there it hangs unto this day: and close behind it, supported by cords of crimson silk,
is a beautiful bevelled-edged card about a foot square, and upon this card is written, in letters
of gold: 'Christ is the head of this house; the unseen Guest at every meal, the silent Listener
to every conversation.'

And on the other side of the barometer is another card of the same kind and size which says:
'As for me and my house we will serve the Lord.'

From another place they stole two large brass chandeliers.  This house had been empty for a
very long time, and its owner--who did not reside in the town--wished to sell it.  The agent,
to improve the chances of a sale, decided to have the house overhauled and redecorated.  Rushton
& Co.'s tender being the lowest, they got the work.  The chandeliers in the drawing-room and
the dining-room were of massive brass, but they were all blackened and tarnished.  Misery suggested
to the agent that they could be cleaned and relacquered, which would make them equal to new:
in fact, they would be better than new ones, for such things as these were not made now, and
for once Misery was telling the truth. The agent agreed and the work was done: it was an extra,
of course, and as the firm got twice as much for the job as they paid for having it done, they
were almost satisfied.

When this and all the other work was finished they sent in their account and were paid.

Some months afterwards the house was sold, and Nimrod interviewed the new proprietor with the
object of securing the order for any work that he might want done.  He was successful.  The
papers on the walls of several of the rooms were not to the new owner's taste, and, of course,
the woodwork would have to be re-painted to harmonize with the new paper.  There was a lot
of other work besides this: a new conservatory to build, a more modern bath and heating apparatus
to be put in, and the electric light to be installed, the new people having an objection to
the use of gas.

The specifications were prepared by an architect, and Rushton secured the work.  When the chandeliers
were taken down, the men, instructed by Misery, put them on a handcart, and covered them over
with sacks and dust-sheets and took them to the front shop, where they were placed for sale
with the other stock.

When all the work at the house was finished, it occurred to Rushton and Nimrod that when the
architect came to examine and pass the work before giving them the certificate that would enable
them to present their account, he might remember the chandeliers and inquire what had become
of them.  So they were again placed on the handcart, covered with sacks and dust-sheets, taken
back to the house and put up in the loft under the roof so that, if he asked for them, there
they were.

The architect came, looked ever the house, passed the work, and gave his certificate; he never
mentioned or thought of the chandeliers. The owner of the house was present and asked for Rushton's
bill, for which he at once gave them a cheque and Rushton and Misery almost grovelled and wallowed
on the ground before him.  Throughout the whole interview the architect and the 'gentleman'
had kept their hats on, but Rushton and Nimrod had been respectfully uncovered all the time,
and as they followed the other two about the house their bearing had been expressive of the
most abject servility.

When the architect and the owner were gone the two chandeliers were taken down again from under
the roof, and put upon a handcart, covered over with sacks and dust-sheets and taken back to
the shop and again placed for sale with the other stock.

These are only a few of the petty thefts committed by these people. To give anything approaching
a full account of all the rest would require a separate volume.

As a result of all the hurrying and scamping, every now and again the men found that they had
worked themselves out of a job.

Several times during the summer the firm had scarcely anything to do, and nearly everybody
had to stand off for a few days or weeks.

When Newman got his first start in the early part of the year he had only been working for
about a fortnight when--with several others--he was 'stood off'.  Fortunately, however, the
day after he left Rushtons, he was lucky enough to get a start for another firm, Driver and
Botchit, where he worked for nearly a month, and then he was again given a job at Rushton's,
who happened to be busy again.

He did not have to lose much time, for he 'finished up' for Driver and Botchit on a Thursday
night and on the Friday he interviewed Misery, who told him they were about to commence a fresh
'jab' on the following Monday morning at six o'clock, and that he could start with them.  So
this time Newman was only out of work the Friday and Saturday, which was another stroke of
luck, because it often happens that a man has to lose a week or more after 'finishing up' for
one firm before he gets another 'job'.

All through the summer Crass continued to be the general 'colour-man', most of his time being
spent at the shop mixing up colours for all the different 'jobs'.  He also acted as a sort
of lieutenant to Hunter, who, as the reader has already been informed, was not a practical
painter.  When there was a price to be given for some painting work, Misery sometimes took
Crass with him to look over it and help him to estimate the amount of time and material it
would take.  Crass was thus in a position of more than ordinary importance, not only being
superior to the 'hands', but also ranking above the other sub-foremen who had charge of the 'jobs'.

It was Crass and these sub-foremen who were to blame for most of the scamping and driving,
because if it had not been for them neither Rushton nor Hunter would have known how to scheme
the work.

Of course, Hunter and Rushton wanted to drive and scamp, but not being practical men they would
not have known how if it had not been for Crass and the others, who put them up to all the
tricks of the trade.

Crass knew that when the men stayed till half past seven they were in the habit of ceasing
work for a few minutes to eat a mouthful of grub about six o'clock, so he suggested to Misery
that as it was not possible to stop this, it would be a good plan to make the men stop work
altogether from half past five till six, and lose half an hour's pay; and to make up the time,
instead of leaving off at seven-thirty, they could work till eight.

Misery had known of and winked at the former practice, for he knew that the men could not work
all that time without something to eat, but Crass's suggestion seemed a much better way, and
it was adopted.

When the other masters in Mugsborough heard of this great reform they all followed suit, and
it became the rule in that town, whenever it was necessary to work overtime, for the men to
stay till eight instead of half past seven as formerly, and they got no more pay than before.

Previous to this summer it had been the almost invariable rule to have two men in each room
that was being painted, but Crass pointed out to Misery that under such circumstances they
wasted time talking to each other, and they also acted as a check on one another: each of them
regulated the amount of work he did by the amount the other did, and if the 'job' took too
long it was always difficult to decide which of the two was to blame: but if they were made
to work alone, each of them would be on his mettle; he would not know how much the others were
doing, and the fear of being considered slow in comparison with others would make them all
tear into it all they could.

Misery thought this a very good idea, so the solitary system was introduced, and as far as
practicable, one room, one man became the rule.

They even tried to make the men distemper large ceilings single-handed, and succeeded in one
or two cases, but after several ceilings had been spoilt and had to be washed off and done
over again, they gave that up: but nearly all the other work was now arranged on the 'solitary
system', and it worked splendidly: each man was constantly in a state of panic as to whether
the others were doing more work than himself.

Another suggestion that Crass made to Misery was that the sub-foremen should be instructed
never to send a man into a room to prepare it for painting.

'If you sends a man into a room to get it ready,' said Crass, ''e makes a meal of it!  'E spends
as much time messin' about rubbin' down and stoppin' up as it would take to paint it.  But,'
he added, with a cunning leer, 'give 'em a bit of putty and a little bit of glass-paper, and
the paint at the stand, and then 'e gits it in 'is mind as 'e's going in there to paint it!
And 'e doesn't mess about much over the preparing of it'.

These and many other suggestions--all sorts of devices for scamping and getting over the work--were
schemed out by Crass and the other sub-foremen, who put them into practice and showed them
to Misery and Rushton in the hope of currying favour with them and being 'kept on'. And between
the lot of them they made life a veritable hell for themselves, and the hands, and everybody
else around them.  And the mainspring of it all was--the greed and selfishness of one man,
who desired to accumulate money!  For this was the only object of all the driving and bullying
and hatred and cursing and unhappiness--to make money for Rushton, who evidently considered
himself a deserving case.

It is sad and discreditable, but nevertheless true, that some of the more selfish of the philanthropists
often became weary of well-doing, and lost all enthusiasm in the good cause.  At such times
they used to say that they were 'Bloody well fed up' with the whole business and 'Tired of
tearing their bloody guts out for the benefit of other people' and every now and then some
of these fellows would 'chuck up' work, and go on the booze, sometimes stopping away for two
or three days or a week at a time.  And then, when it was all over, they came back, very penitent,
to ask for another 'start', but they generally found that their places had been filled.

If they happened to be good 'sloggers'--men who made a practice of 'tearing their guts out'
when they did work--they were usually forgiven, and after being admonished by Misery, permitted
to resume work, with the understanding that if ever it occurred again they would get the 'infernal'--which
means the final and irrevocable--sack.

There was once a job at a shop that had been a high-class restaurant kept by a renowned Italian
chef.  It had been known as

                    'MACARONI'S ROYAL ITALIAN CAFE'

Situated on the Grand Parade, it was a favourite resort of the 'Elite', who frequented it for
afternoon tea and coffee and for little suppers after the theatre.

It had plate-glass windows, resplendent with gilding, marble-topped tables with snow white
covers, vases of flowers, and all the other appurtenances of glittering cut glass and silver.
The obsequious waiters were in evening dress, the walls were covered with lofty plate-glass
mirrors in carved and gilded frames, and at certain hours of the day and night an orchestra
consisting of two violins and a harp discoursed selections of classic music.

But of late years the business had not been paying, and finally the proprietor went bankrupt
and was sold out.  The place was shut up for several months before the shop was let to a firm
of dealers in fancy articles, and the other part was transformed into flats.

Rushton had the contract for the work.  When the men went there to 'do it up' they found the
interior of the house in a state of indescribable filth: the ceilings discoloured with smoke
and hung with cobwebs, the wallpapers smeared and black with grease, the handrails and the
newel posts of the staircase were clammy with filth, and the edges of the doors near the handles
were blackened with greasy dirt and finger-marks.  The tops of the skirtings, the mouldings
of the doors, the sashes of the windows and the corners of the floors were thick with the accumulated
dust of years.

In one of the upper rooms which had evidently been used as a nursery or playroom for the children
of the renowned chef, the wallpaper for about two feet above the skirting was blackened with
grease and ornamented with childish drawings made with burnt sticks and blacklead pencils,
the door being covered with similar artistic efforts, to say nothing of some rude attempts
at carving, evidently executed with an axe or a hammer.  But all this filth was nothing compared
with the unspeakable condition of the kitchen and scullery, a detailed description of which
would cause the blood of the reader to curdle, and each particular hair of his head to stand
on end.

Let it suffice to say that the walls, the ceiling, the floor, the paintwork, the gas-stove,
the kitchen range, the dresser and everything else were uniformly absolutely and literally--black.
And the black was composed of soot and grease.

In front of the window there was a fixture--a kind of bench or table, deeply scored with marks
of knives like a butcher's block.  The sill of the window was about six inches lower than the
top of the table, so that between the glass of the lower sash of the window, which had evidently
never been raised, and the back of the table, there was a long narrow cavity or trough, about
six inches deep, four inches wide and as long as the width of the window, the sill forming
the bottom of the cavity.

This trough was filled with all manner of abominations: fragments of fat and decomposed meat,
legs of rabbits and fowls, vegetable matter, broken knives and forks, and hair: and the glass
of the window was caked with filth of the same description.

This job was the cause of the sacking of the Semi-drunk and another man named Bill Bates, who
were sent into the kitchen to clean it down and prepare it for painting and distempering.

They commenced to do it, but it made them feel so ill that they went out and had a pint each,
and after that they made another start at it. But it was not long before they felt that it
was imperatively necessary to have another drink.  So they went over to the pub, and this time
they had two pints each.  Bill paid for the first two and then the Semi-drunk refused to return
to work unless Bill would consent to have another pint with him before going back.  When they
had drunk the two pints, they decided--in order to save themselves the trouble and risk of
coming away from the job--to take a couple of quarts back with them in two bottles, which the
landlord of the pub lent them, charging twopence on each bottle, to be refunded when they were
returned.

When they got back to the job they found the 'coddy' in the kitchen, looking for them and he
began to talk and grumble, but the Semi-drunk soon shut him up: he told him he could either
have a drink out of one of the bottles or a punch in the bloody nose--whichever he liked! 
Or if he did not fancy either of these alternatives, he could go to hell!

As the 'coddy' was a sensible man he took the beer and advised them to pull themselves together
and try to get some work done before Misery came, which they promised to do.

When the 'coddy' was gone they made another attempt at the work. Misery came a little while
afterwards and began shouting at them because he said he could not see what they had done.
It looked as if they had been asleep all the morning: Here it was nearly ten o'clock, and as
far as he could see, they had done Nothing!

When he was gone they drank the rest of the beer and then they began to feel inclined to laugh.
What did they care for Hunter or Rushton either?  To hell with both of 'em!  They left off
scraping and scrubbing, and began throwing buckets of water over the dresser and the walls,
laughing uproariously all the time.

'We'll show the b--s how to wash down paintwork!' shouted the Semi-drunk, as he stood in the
middle of the room and hurled a pailful of water over the door of the cupboard.  'Bring us
another bucket of water, Bill.'

Bill was out in the scullery filling his pail under the tap, and laughing so much that he could
scarcely stand.  As soon as it was full he passed it to the Semi-drunk, who threw it bodily,
pail and all, on to the bench in front of the window, smashing one of the panes of glass. 
The water poured off the table and all over the floor.

Bill brought the next pailful in and threw it at the kitchen door, splitting one of the panels
from top to bottom, and then they threw about half a dozen more pailfuls over the dresser.

'We'll show the b--rs how to clean paintwork,' they shouted, as they hurled the buckets at
the walls and doors.

By this time the floor was deluged with water, which mingled with the filth and formed a sea
of mud.

They left the two taps running in the scullery and as the waste pipe of the sink was choked
up with dirt, the sink filled up and overflowed like a miniature Niagara.

The water ran out under the doors into the back-yard, and along the passage out to the front
door.  But Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk remained in the kitchen, smashing the pails at the
walls and doors and the dresser, and cursing and laughing hysterically.

They had just filled the two buckets and were bringing them into the kitchen when they heard
Hunter's voice in the passage, shouting out inquiries as to where all that water came from.
Then they heard him advancing towards them and they stood waiting for him with the pails in
their hands, and directly he opened the door and put his head into the room they let fly the
two pails at him.  Unfortunately, they were too drunk and excited to aim straight.  One pail
struck the middle rail of the door and the other the wall by the side of it.

Misery hastily shut the door again and ran upstairs, and presently the 'coddy' came down and
called out to them from the passage.

They went out to see what he wanted, and he told them that Misery had gone to the office to
get their wages ready: they were to make out their time sheets and go for their money at once.
Misery had said that if they were not there in ten minutes he would have the pair of them locked
up.

The Semi-drunk said that nothing would suit them better than to have all their pieces at once--they
had spent all their money and wanted another drink.  Bill Bates concurred, so they borrowed
a piece of blacklead pencil from the 'coddy' and made out their time sheets, took off their
aprons, put them into their tool bags, and went to the office for their money, which Misery
passed out to them through the trap-door.

The news of this exploit spread all over the town during that day and evening, and although
it was in July, the next morning at six o'clock there were half a dozen men waiting at the
yard to ask Misery if there was 'any chance of a job'.

Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk had had their spree and had got the sack for it and most of the
chaps said it served them right.  Such conduct as that was going too far.

Most of them would have said the same thing no matter what the circumstances might have been.
They had very little sympathy for each other at any time.

Often, when, for instance, one man was sent away from one 'job' to another, the others would
go into his room and look at the work he had been doing, and pick out all the faults they could
find and show them to each other, making all sorts of ill-natured remarks about the absent
one meanwhile.  'Jist run yer nose over that door, Jim,' one would say in a tone of disgust.
'Wotcher think of it?  Did yer ever see sich a mess in yer life?  Calls hisself a painter!'
And the other man would shake his head sadly and say that although the one who had done it
had never been up to much as a workman, he could do it a bit better than that if he liked,
but the fact was that he never gave himself time to do anything properly: he was always tearing
his bloody guts out!  Why, he'd only been in this room about four hours from start to finish!
He ought to have a watering cart to follow him about, because he worked at such a hell of a
rate you couldn't see him for dust!  And then the first man would reply that other people could
do as they liked, but for his part, HE was not going to tear his guts out for nobody!

The second man would applaud these sentiments and say that he wasn't going to tear his out
either: and then they would both go back to their respective rooms and tear into the work for
all they were worth, making the same sort of 'job' as the one they had been criticizing, and
afterwards, when the other's back was turned, each of them in turn would sneak into the other's
room and criticize it and point out the faults to anyone else who happened to be near at hand.

Harlow was working at the place that had been Macaroni's Cafe when one day a note was sent
to him from Hunter at the shop.  It was written on a scrap of wallpaper, and worded in the
usual manner of such notes--as if the writer had studied how to avoid all suspicion of being
unduly civil:

    Harlow go to the yard at once take your tools with you.
    Crass will tell you where you have to go.
                                                           J.H.

They were just finishing their dinners when the boy brought this note; and after reading it
aloud for the benefit of the others, Harlow remarked that it was worded in much the same way
in which one would speak to a dog.  The others said nothing; but after he was gone the other
men--who all considered that it was ridiculous for the 'likes of us' to expect or wish to be
treated with common civility--laughed about it, and said that Harlow was beginning to think
he was Somebody: they supposed it was through readin' all those books what Owen was always
lendin' 'im.  And then one of them got a piece of paper and wrote a note to be given to Harlow
at the first opportunity.  This note was properly worded, written in a manner suitable for
a gentleman like him, neatly folded and addressed:

    Mr Harlow Esq.,
      c/o Macaroni's Royal Cafe
        till called for.

    Mister Harlow,
      Dear Sir: Wood you kinely oblige me bi cummin to the paint shop
    as soon as you can make it convenient as there is a sealin' to be
    wate-woshed hoppin this is not trubbling you to much

                                                  I remane
                                                  Yours respeckfully
                                                       Pontius Pilate.

This note was read out for the amusement of the company and afterwards stored away in the writer's
pocket till such a time as an opportunity should occur of giving it to Harlow.

As the writer of the note was on his way back to his room to resume work he was accosted by
a man who had gone into Harlow's room to criticize it, and had succeeded in finding several
faults which he pointed out to the other, and of course they were both very much disgusted
with Harlow.

'I can't think why the coddy keeps him on the job,' said the first man. 'Between you and me,
if I had charge of a job, and Misery sent Harlow there--I'd send 'im back to the shop.'

'Same as you,' agreed the other as he went back to tear into his own room.  'Same as you, old
man: I shouldn't 'ave 'im neither.'

It must not be supposed from this that either of these two men were on exceptionally bad terms
with Harlow; they were just as good friends with him--to his face--as they were with each other--to
each other's faces--and it was just their way: that was all.

If it had been one or both of these two who had gone away instead of Harlow, just the same
things would have been said about them by the others who remained--it was merely their usual
way of speaking about each other behind each other's backs.

It was always the same: if any one of them made a mistake or had an accident or got into any
trouble he seldom or never got any sympathy from his fellow workmen.  On the contrary, most
of them at such times seemed rather pleased than otherwise.

There was a poor devil--a stranger in the town; he came from London--who got the sack for breaking
some glass.  He had been sent to 'burn off' some old paint of the woodwork of a window.  He
was not very skilful in the use of the burning-off lamp, because on the firm when he had been
working in London it was a job that the ordinary hands were seldom or never called upon to
do.  There were one or two men who did it all.  For that matter, not many of Rushton's men
were very skilful at it either.  It was a job everybody tried to get out of, because nearly
always the lamp went wrong and there was a row about the time the work took.  So they worked
this job on to the stranger.

This man had been out of work for a long time before he got a start at Rushton's, and he was
very anxious not to lose the job, because he had a wife and family in London.  When the 'coddy'
told him to go and burn off this window he did not like to say that he was not used to the
work: he hoped to be able to do it.  But he was very nervous, and the end was that although
he managed to do the burning off all right, just as he was finishing he accidentally allowed
the flame of the lamp to come into contact with a large pane of glass and broke it.

They sent to the shop for a new pane of glass, and the man stayed late that night and put it
in in his own time, thus bearing half the cost of repairing it.

Things were not very busy just then, and on the following Saturday two of the hands were 'stood
off'.  The stranger was one of them, and nearly everybody was very pleased.  At mealtimes the
story of the broken window was repeatedly told amid jeering laughter.  It really seemed as
if a certain amount of indignation was felt that a stranger--especially such an inferior person
as this chap who did not know how to use a lamp--should have had the cheek to try to earn his
living at all!  One thing was very certain--they said, gleefully--he would never get another
job at Rushton's: that was one good thing.

And yet they all knew that this accident might have happened to any one of them.

Once a couple of men got the sack because a ceiling they distempered had to be washed off and
done again.  It was not really the men's fault at all: it was a ceiling that needed special
treatment and they had not been allowed to do it properly.

But all the same, when they got the sack most of the others laughed and sneered and were glad.
Perhaps because they thought that the fact that these two unfortunates had been disgraced,
increased their own chances of being 'kept on'.  And so it was with nearly everything. With
a few exceptions, they had an immense amount of respect for Rushton and Hunter, and very little
respect or sympathy for each other.

Exactly the same lack of feeling for each other prevailed amongst the members of all the different
trades.  Everybody seemed glad if anybody got into trouble for any reason whatever.

There was a garden gate that had been made at the carpenter's shop: it was not very well put
together, and for the usual reason; the man had not been allowed the time to do it properly.
After it was fixed, one of his shopmates wrote upon it with lead pencil in big letters: 'This
is good work for a joiner.  Order one ton of putty.'

But to hear them talking in the pub of a Saturday afternoon just after pay-time one would think
them the best friends and mates and the most independent spirits in the world, fellows whom
it would be very dangerous to trifle with, and who would stick up for each other through thick
and thin.  All sorts of stories were related of the wonderful things they had done and said;
of jobs they had 'chucked up', and masters they had 'told off': of pails of whitewash thrown
over offending employers, and of horrible assaults and batteries committed upon the same. 
But strange to say, for some reason or other, it seldom happened that a third party ever witnessed
any of these prodigies.  It seemed as if a chivalrous desire to spare the feelings of their
victims had always prevented them from doing or saying anything to them in the presence of
witnesses.

When he had drunk a few pints, Crass was a very good hand at these stories.  Here is one that
he told in the bar of the Cricketers on the Saturday afternoon of the same week that Bill Bates
and the Semi-drunk got the sack.  The Cricketers was only a few minutes walk from the shop
and at pay-time a number of the men used to go in there to take a drink before going home.

'Last Thursday night about five o'clock, 'Unter comes inter the paint-shop an' ses to me, "I
wants a pail o' wash made up tonight, Crass," 'e ses, "ready for fust thing in the mornin',"
'e ses.  "Oh," I ses, lookin' 'im straight in the bloody eye, "Oh, yer do, do yer?"--just like
that.  "Yes," 'e ses.  "Well, you can bloody well make it yerself!" I ses, "'cos I ain't agoin'
to," I ses--just like that. "Wot the 'ell do yer mean," I ses, "by comin' 'ere at this time
o' night with a order like that?" I ses.  You'd a larfed,' continued Crass, as he wiped his
mouth with the back of his hand after taking another drink out of his glass, and looking round
to note the effect of the story, 'you'd a larfed if you'd bin there.  'E was fairly flabbergasted!
And wen I said that to 'im I see 'is jaw drop!  An' then 'e started apoligizing and said as
'e 'adn't meant no offence, but I told 'im bloody straight not to come no more of it.  "You
bring the horder at a reasonable time," I ses--just like that--"and I'll attend to it," I ses,
"but not otherwise," I ses.'

As he concluded this story, Crass drained his glass and gazed round upon the audience, who
were full of admiration.  They looked at each other and at Crass and nodded their heads approvingly.
Yes, undoubtedly, that was the proper way to deal with such bounders as Nimrod; take up a strong
attitude, an' let 'em see as you'll stand no nonsense!

'Yer don't blame me, do yer?' continued Crass.  'Why should we put up with a lot of old buck
from the likes of 'im!  We're not a lot of bloody Chinamen, are we?'

So far from blaming him, they all assured him that they would have acted in precisely the same
way under similar circumstances.

'For my part, I'm a bloke like this,' said a tall man with a very loud voice--a chap who nearly
fell down dead every time Rushton or Misery looked at him.  'I'm a bloke like this 'ere: I
never stands no cheek from no gaffers!  If a guv'nor ses two bloody words to me, I downs me
tools and I ses to 'im, "Wot!  Don't I suit yer, guv'ner?  Ain't I done enuff for yer?  Werry
good!  Gimmie me bleedin' a'pence."'

'Quite right too,' said everybody.  That was the way to serve 'em.  If only everyone would
do the same as the tall man--who had just paid for another round of drinks--things would be
a lot more comfortable than they was.

'Last summer I was workin' for ole Buncer,' said a little man with a cutaway coat several sizes
too large for him.  'I was workin' for ole Buncer, over at Windley, an' you all knows as 'e
don't arf lower it. Well, one day, when I knowed 'e was on the drunk, I 'ad to first coat a
room out--white; so thinks I to meself, "If I buck up I shall be able to get this lot done
by about four o'clock, an' then I can clear orf 'ome.  'Cos I reckoned as 'e'd be about flattened
out by that time, an' you know 'e ain't got no foreman.  So I tears into it an' gets this 'ere
room done about a quarter past four, an' I'd just got me things put away for the night w'en
'oo should come fallin' up the bloody stairs but ole Buncer, drunk as a howl!  An' no sooner
'e gits inter the room than 'e starts yappin' an' rampin'."  "Is this 'ere hall you've done?"
'e shouts out.  "Wotcher bin up to hall day?" 'e ses, an' 'e keeps on shouting' an' swearin'
till at last I couldn't stand it no longer, 'cos you can guess I wasn't in a very good temper
with 'im comin' along jist then w'en I thought I was goin' to get orf a bit early--so w'en
'e kept on shoutin' I never made no answer to 'im, but ups with me fist an' I gives 'im a slosh
in the dial an' stopped 'is clock!  Then I chucked the pot o' w'ite paint hover 'im, an' kicked
'im down the bloody stairs.'

'Serve 'im blooming well right, too,' said Crass as he took a fresh glass of beer from one
of the others, who had just 'stood' another round.

'What did the b--r say to that?' inquired the tall man.

'Not a bloody word!' replied the little man, ''E picked 'isself up, and called a keb wot was
passin' an' got inter it an' went 'ome; an' I never seen no more of 'im until about 'arf-past
eleven the next day, w'en I was second-coatin' the room, an' 'e comes up with a noo suit o'
clothes on, an' arsts me if I'd like to come hover to the pub an' 'ave a drink?  So we goes
hover, an' 'e calls for a w'iskey an' soda for isself an' arsts me wot I'd 'ave, so I 'ad the
same.  An' w'ile we was gettin' it down us, 'e ses to me, "Ah, Garge," 'e ses.  "You losed
your temper with me yesterday,"' 'e ses.'

'There you are, you see!' said the tall man.  'There's an example for yer!  If you 'adn't served
'im as you did you'd most likely 'ave 'ad to put up with a lot more ole buck.'

They all agreed that the little man had done quite right: they all said that they didn' blame
him in the least: they would all have done the same: in fact, this was the way they all conducted
themselves whenever occasion demanded it.  To hear them talk, one would imagine that such affairs
as the recent exploit of Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk were constantly taking place, instead
of only occurring about once in a blue moon.

Crass stood the final round of drinks, and as he evidently thought that circumstance deserved
to be signalized in some special manner, he proposed the following toast, which was drunk with
enthusiasm:

        'To hell with the man,
        May he never grow fat,
        What carries two faces,
        Under one 'at.'

Rushton & Co. did a lot of work that summer.  They did not have many big jobs, but there were
a lot of little ones, and the boy Bert was kept busy running from one to the other.  He spent
most of his time dragging a handcart with loads of paint, or planks and steps, and seldom went
out to work with the men, for when he was not taking things out to the various places where
the philanthropists were working, he was in the paintshop at the yard, scraping out dirty paint-pots
or helping Crass to mix up colours.  Although scarcely anyone seemed to notice it, the boy
presented a truly pitiable spectacle.  He was very pale and thin.  Dragging the handcart did
not help him to put on flesh, for the weather was very hot and the work made him sweat.

His home was right away on the other side of Windley.  It took him more than three-quarters
of an hour to walk to the shop, and as he had to be at work at six, that meant that he had
to leave home at a few minutes past five every morning, so that he always got up about half
past four.

He was wearing a man's coat--or rather jacket--which gave the upper part of his body a bulky
appearance.  The trousers were part of a suit of his own, and were somewhat narrowly cut, as
is the rule with boys' cheap ready-made trousers.  These thin legs appearing under the big
jacket gave him a rather grotesque appearance, which was heightened by the fact that all his
clothes, cap, coat, waistcoat, trousers and boots, were smothered with paint and distemper
of various colours, and there were generally a few streaks of paint of some sort or other upon
his face, and of course his hands--especially round the fingernails--were grimed with it. 
But the worst of all were the dreadful hobnailed boots: the leather of the uppers of these
was an eighth of an inch thick, and very stiff.  Across the fore part of the boot this hard
leather had warped into ridges and valleys, which chafed his feet, and made them bleed.  The
soles were five-eighths of an inch thick, covered with hobnails, and were as hard and inflexible
and almost as heavy as iron.  These boots hurt his feet dreadfully and made him feel very tired
and miserable, for he had such a lot of walking to do. He used to be jolly glad when dinner-time
came, for then he used to get out of sight in some quiet spot and lie down for the whole hour.
His favourite dining-place was up in the loft over the carpenter's shop, where they stored
the mouldings and architraves.  No one ever came there at that hour, and after he had eaten
his dinner he used to lie down and think and rest.

He nearly always had an hour for dinner, but he did not always have it at the same time: sometimes
he had it at twelve o'clock and sometimes not till two.  It all depended upon what stuff had
to be taken to the job.

Often it happened that some men at a distant job required some material to use immediately
after dinner, and perhaps Crass was not able to get it ready till twelve o'clock, so that it
was not possible to take it before dinner-time, and if Bert left it till after dinner the men
would be wasting their time waiting for it: so in such cases he took it there first and had
his dinner when he came back.

Sometimes he got back about half past twelve, and it was necessary for him to take out another
lot of material at one o'clock.

In such a case he 'charged' half an hour overtime on his time sheet--he used to get twopence
an hour for overtime.

Sometimes Crass sent him with a handcart to one job to get a pair of steps or tressels, or
a plank, or some material or other, and take them to another job, and on these occasions it
was often very late before he was able to take his meals.  Instead of getting his breakfast
at eight, it was often nearly nine before he got back to the shop, and frequently he had to
go without dinner until half past one or two.

Sometimes he could scarcely manage to carry the pots of paint to the jobs; his feet were so
hot and sore.  When he had to push the cart it was worse still, and often when knocking-off
time came he felt so tired that he could scarcely manage to walk home.

But the weather was not always hot or fine: sometimes it was quite cold, almost like winter,
and there was a lot of rain that summer.  At such times the boy frequently got wet through
several times a day as he went from one job to another, and he had to work all the time in
his wet clothes and boots, which were usually old and out of repair and let in the water.

One of the worst jobs that he had to do was when a new stock of white lead came in.  This stuff
came in wooden barrels containing two hundredweight, and he used to have to dig it out of these
barrels with a trowel, and put it into a metal tank, where it was kept covered with water,
and the empty barrels were returned to the makers.

When he was doing this work he usually managed to get himself smeared all over with the white
lead, and this circumstance, and the fact that he was always handling paint or some poisonous
material or other was doubtless the cause of the terrible pains he often had in his stomach--pains
that sometimes caused him to throw himself down and roll on the ground in agony.

One afternoon Crass sent him with a handcart to a job that Easton, Philpot, Harlow and Owen
were just finishing.  He got there about half past four and helped the men to load up the things,
and afterwards walked alongside the cart with them back to the shop.

On the way they all noticed and remarked to each other that the boy looked tired and pale and
that he seemed to limp: but he did not say anything, although be guessed that they were talking
about him.  They arrived at the shop a little before knocking-off time--about ten minutes past
five.  Bert helped them to unload, and afterwards, while they were putting their things away
and 'charging up' the unused materials they had brought back, he pushed the cart over to the
shed where it was kept, on the other side of the yard.  He did not return to the shop at once
and a few minutes later when Harlow came out into the yard to get a bucket of water to wash
their hands with, he saw the boy leaning on the side of the cart, crying, and holding one foot
off the ground.

Harlow asked him what was the matter, and while he was speaking to him the others came out
to see what was up: the boy said he had rheumatism or growing pains or something in his leg,
'just here near the knee'. But he didn't say much, he just cried miserably, and turned his
head slowly from side to side, avoiding the looks of the men because he felt ashamed that they
should see him cry.

When they saw how ill and miserable he looked, the men all put their hands in their pockets
to get some coppers to give to him so that he could ride home on the tram.  They gave him fivepence
altogether, more than enough to ride all the way; and Crass told him to go at once--there was
no need to wait till half past; but before he went Philpot got a small glass bottle out of
his tool bag and filled it with oil and turps--two of turps and one of oil--which he gave to
Bert to rub into his leg before going to bed: The turps--he explained--was to cure the pain
and the oil was to prevent it from hurting the skin.  He was to get his mother to rub it in
for him if he were too tired to do it himself.  Bert promised to observe these directions,
and, drying his tears, took his dinner basket and limped off to catch the tram.

It was a few days after this that Hunter met with an accident.  He was tearing off on his bicycle
to one of the jobs about five minutes to twelve to see if he could catch anyone leaving off
for dinner before before the proper time, and while going down a rather steep hill the front
brake broke--the rubbers of the rear one were worn out and failed to act--so Misery to save
himself from being smashed against the railings of the houses at the bottom of the hill, threw
himself off the machine, with the result that his head and face and hands were terribly cut
and bruised.  He was so badly knocked about that he had to remain at home for nearly three
weeks, much to the delight of the men and the annoyance--one might even say the indignation--of
Mr Rushton, who did not know enough about the work to make out estimates without assistance.
There were several large jobs to be tendered for at the same time, so Rushton sent the specifications
round to Hunter's house for him to figure out the prices, and nearly all the time that Misery
was at home he was sitting up in bed, swathed in bandages, trying to calculate the probable
cost of these jobs.  Rushton did not come to see him, but he sent Bert nearly every day, either
with some specifications, or some accounts, or something of that sort, or with a note inquiring
when Hunter thought he would be able to return to work.

All sorts of rumours became prevalent amongst the men concerning Hunter's condition.  He had
'broken his spiral column', he had 'conjunction of the brain', or he had injured his 'innards'
and would probably never be able to 'do no more slave-drivin''.  Crass--who had helped Mr Rushton
to 'price up' several small jobs--began to think it might not be altogether a bad thing for
himself if something were to happen to Hunter, and he began to put on side and to assume airs
of authority.  He got one of the light-weights to assist him in his work of colourman and made
him do all the hard work, while he spent part of his own time visiting the different jobs to
see how the work progressed.

Crass's appearance did him justice.  He was wearing a pair of sporting trousers the pattern
of which consisted of large black and white squares.  The previous owner of these trousers
was taller and slighter than Crass, so although the legs were about a couple of inches too
long, they fitted him rather tightly, so much so that it was fortunate that he had his present
job of colourman, for if he had had to do any climbing up and down ladders or steps, the trousers
would have burst. His jacket was also two or three sizes too small, and the sleeves were so
short that the cuffs of his flanelette shirt were visible.  This coat was made of serge, and
its colour had presumably once been blue, but it was now a sort of heliotrope and violet: the
greater part being of the former tint, and the parts under the sleeves of the latter. This
jacket fitted very tightly across the shoulders and back and being much too short left his
tightly clad posteriors exposed to view.

He however seemed quite unconscious of anything peculiar in his appearance and was so bumptious
and offensive that most of the men were almost glad when Nimrod came back.  They said that
if Crass ever got the job he would be a dam' sight worse than Hunter.  As for the latter, for
a little while after his return to work it was said that his illness had improved his character:
he had had time to think things over; and in short, he was ever so much better than before:
but it was not long before this story began to be told the other way round.  He was worse than
ever! and a thing that happened about a fortnight after his return caused more ill feeling
and resentment against him and Rushton than had ever existed previously.  What led up to it
was something that was done by Bundy's mate, Ted Dawson.

This poor wretch was scarcely ever seen without a load of some sort or other: carrying a sack
of cement or plaster, a heavy ladder, a big bucket of mortar, or dragging a load of scaffolding
on a cart.  He must have been nearly as strong as a horse, because after working in this manner
for Rushton & Co. from six in the morning till half past five at night, he usually went to
work in his garden for two or three hours after tea, and frequently went there for an hour
or so in the morning before going to work.  The poor devil needed the produce of his garden
to supplement his wages, for he had a wife and three children to provide for and he earned
only--or rather, to be correct, he was paid only--fourpence an hour.

There was an old house to which they were making some alterations and repairs, and there was
a lot of old wood taken out of it: old, decayed floorboards and stuff of that kind, wood that
was of no use whatever except to burn.

Bundy and his mate were working there, and one night, Misery came a few minutes before half
past five and caught Dawson in the act of tying up a small bundle of this wood.  When Hunter
asked him what he was going to do with it he made no attempt at prevarication or concealment:
he said he was going to take it home for fire-wood, because it was of no other use.  Misery
kicked up a devil of a row and ordered him to leave the wood where it was: it had to be taken
to the yard, and it was nothing to do with Dawson or anyone else whether it was any use or
not! If he caught anyone taking wood away he would sack them on the spot. Hunter shouted very
loud so that all the others might hear, and as they were all listening attentively in the next
room, where they were taking their aprons off preparatory to going home, they got the full
benefit of his remarks.

The following Saturday when the hands went to the office for their money they were each presented
with a printed card bearing the following legend:

    Under no circumstances is any article or material, however
    trifling, to be taken away by workmen for their private use,
    whether waste material or not, from any workshop or place where
    work is being done.  Foremen are hereby instructed to see that
    this order is obeyed and to report any such act coming to their
    knowledge.  Any man breaking this rule will be either dismissed
    without notice or given into custody.
                                                         Rushton & Co.

Most of the men took these cards with the envelopes containing their wages and walked away
without making any comment--in fact, most of them were some distance away before they realized
exactly what the card was about.  Two or three of them stood a few steps away from the pay
window in full view of Rushton and Misery and ostentatiously tore the thing into pieces and
threw them into the street.  One man remained at the pay window while he read the card--and
then flung it with an obscene curse into Rushton's face, and demanded his back day, which they
gave him without any remark or delay, the other men who were not yet paid having to wait while
he made out his time-sheet for that morning.

The story of this card spread all over the place in a very short time. It became the talk of
every shop in the town.  Whenever any of Rushton's men encountered the employees of another
firm, the latter used to shout after them--'However trifling!'--or 'Look out, chaps! 'Ere comes
some of Rushton's pickpockets.'

Amongst Rushton's men themselves it became a standing joke or form of greeting to say when
one met another--'Remember!  However trifling!'

If one of their number was seen going home with an unusual amount of paint or whitewash on
his hands or clothes, the others would threaten to report him for stealing the material.  They
used to say that however trifling the quantity, it was against orders to take it away.

Harlow drew up a list of rules which he said Mr Rushton had instructed him to communicate to
the men.  One of these rules provided that everybody was to be weighed upon arrival at the
job in the morning and again at leaving-off time: any man found to have increased in weight
was to be discharged.

There was also much cursing and covert resentment about it; the men used to say that such a
thing as that looked well coming from the likes of Rushton and Hunter, and they used to remind
each other of the affair of the marble-topped console table, the barometer, the venetian blinds
and all the other robberies.

None of them ever said anything to either Misery or Rushton about the cards, but one morning
when the latter was reading his letters at the breakfast table, on opening one of them he found
that it contained one of the notices, smeared with human excrement.  He did not eat any more
breakfast that morning.

It was not to be much wondered at that none of them had the courage to openly resent the conditions
under which they had to work, for although it was summer, there were many men out of employment,
and it was much easier to get the sack than it was to get another job.

None of the men were ever caught stealing anything, however trifling, but all the same during
the course of the summer five or six of them were captured by the police and sent to jail--for
not being able to pay their poor rates.

All through the summer Owen continued to make himself objectionable and to incur the ridicule
of his fellow workmen by talking about the causes of poverty and of ways to abolish it.

Most of the men kept two shillings or half a crown of their wages back from their wives for
pocket money, which they spent on beer and tobacco.  There were a very few who spent a little
more than this, and there were a still smaller number who spent so much in this way that their
families had to suffer in consequence.

Most of those who kept back half a crown or three shillings from their wives did so on the
understanding that they were to buy their clothing out of it.  Some of them had to pay a shilling
a week to a tallyman or credit clothier.  These were the ones who indulged in shoddy new suits--at
long intervals.  Others bought--or got their wives to buy for them--their clothes at second-hand
shops, 'paying off' about a shilling or so a week and not receiving the things till they were
paid for.

There were a very large proportion of them who did not spend even a shilling a week for drink:
and there were numerous others who, while not being formally total abstainers, yet often went
for weeks together without either entering a public house or tasting intoxicating drink in
any form.

Then there were others who, instead of drinking tea or coffee or cocoa with their dinners or
suppers, drank beer.  This did not cost more than the teetotal drinks, but all the same there
are some persons who say that those who swell the 'Nation's Drink Bill' by drinking beer with
their dinners or suppers are a kind of criminal, and that they ought to be compelled to drink
something else: that is, if they are working people.  As for the idle classes, they of course
are to be allowed to continue to make merry, 'drinking whisky, wine and sherry', to say nothing
of having their beer in by the barrel and the dozen--or forty dozen--bottles.  But of course
that's a different matter, because these people make so much money out of the labour of the
working classes that they can afford to indulge in this way without depriving their children
of the necessaries of life.

There is no more cowardly, dastardly slander than is contained in the assertion that the majority
or any considerable proportion of working men neglect their families through drink.  It is
a condemned lie. There are some who do, but they are not even a large minority.  They are few
and far between, and are regarded with contempt by their fellow workmen.

It will be said that their families had to suffer for want of even the little that most of
them spent in that way: but the persons that use this argument should carry it to its logical
conclusion.  Tea is an unnecessary and harmful drink; it has been condemned by medical men
so often that to enumerate its evil qualities here would be waste of time. The same can be
said of nearly all the cheap temperance drinks; they are unnecessary and harmful and cost money,
and, like beer, are drunk only for pleasure.

What right has anyone to say to working men that when their work is done they should not find
pleasure in drinking a glass or two of beer together in a tavern or anywhere else?  Let those
who would presume to condemn them carry their argument to its logical conclusion and condemn
pleasure of every kind.  Let them persuade the working classes to lead still simpler lives;
to drink water instead of such unwholesome things as tea, coffee, beer, lemonade and all the
other harmful and unnecessary stuff.  They would then be able to live ever so much more cheaply,
and as wages are always and everywhere regulated by the cost of living, they would be able
to work for lower pay.

These people are fond of quoting the figures of the 'Nation's Drink Bill,' as if all this money
were spent by the working classes!  But if the amount of money spent in drink by the 'aristocracy',
the clergy and the middle classes were deducted from the 'Nation's Drink Bill', it would be
seen that the amount spent per head by the working classes is not so alarming after all; and
would probably not be much larger than the amount spent on drink by those who consume tea and
coffee and all the other unwholesome and unnecessary 'temperance' drinks.

The fact that some of Rushton's men spent about two shillings a week on drink while they were
in employment was not the cause of their poverty. If they had never spent a farthing for drink,
and if their wretched wages had been increased fifty percent, they would still have been in
a condition of the most abject and miserable poverty, for nearly all the benefits and privileges
of civilization, nearly everything that makes life worth living, would still have been beyond
their reach.

It is inevitable, so long as men have to live and work under such heartbreaking, uninteresting
conditions as at present that a certain proportion of them will seek forgetfulness and momentary
happiness in the tavern, and the only remedy for this evil is to remove the cause; and while
that is in process, there is something else that can be done and that is, instead of allowing
filthy drinking dens, presided over by persons whose interest it is to encourage men to drink
more bad beer than is good for them or than they can afford,--to have civilized institutions
run by the State or the municipalities for use and not merely for profit.  Decent pleasure
houses, where no drunkenness or filthiness would be tolerated--where one could buy real beer
or coffee or tea or any other refreshments; where men could repair when their day's work was
over and spend an hour or two in rational intercourse with their fellows or listen to music
and singing.  Taverns to which they could take their wives and children without fear of defilement,
for a place that is not fit for the presence of a woman or a child is not fit to exist at all.

Owen, being a teetotaller, did not spend any of his money on drink; but he spent a lot on what
he called 'The Cause'.  Every week he bought some penny or twopenny pamphlets or some leaflets
about Socialism, which he lent or gave to his mates; and in this way and by means of much talk
he succeeded in converting a few to his party. Philpot, Harlow and a few others used to listen
with interest, and some of them even paid for the pamphlets they obtained from Owen, and after
reading them themselves, passed them on to others, and also occasionally 'got up' arguments
on their own accounts.  Others were simply indifferent, or treated the subject as a kind of
joke, ridiculing the suggestion that it was possible to abolish poverty. They repeated that
there had 'always been rich and poor in the world and there always would be, so there was an
end of it'.  But the majority were bitterly hostile; not to Owen, but to Socialism.  For the
man himself most of them had a certain amount of liking, especially the ordinary hands because
it was known that he was not a 'master's man' and that he had declined to 'take charge' of
jobs which Misery had offered to him.  But to Socialism they were savagely and malignantly
opposed.  Some of those who had shown some symptoms of Socialism during the past winter when
they were starving had now quite recovered and were stout defenders of the Present System.

Barrington was still working for the firm and continued to maintain his manner of reserve,
seldom speaking unless addressed but all the same, for several reasons, it began to be rumoured
that he shared Owen's views.  He always paid for the pamphlets that Owen gave him, and on one
occasion, when Owen bought a thousand leaflets to give away, Barrington contributed a shilling
towards the half-crown that Owen paid for them. But he never took any part in the arguments
that sometimes raged during the dinner-hour or at breakfast-time.

It was a good thing for Owen that he had his enthusiasm for 'the cause' to occupy his mind.
Socialism was to him what drink was to some of the others--the thing that enable them to forget
and tolerate the conditions under which they were forced to exist.  Some of them were so muddled
with beer, and others so besotted with admiration of their Liberal and Tory masters, that they
were oblivious of the misery of their own lives, and in a similar way, Owen was so much occupied
in trying to rouse them from their lethargy and so engrossed in trying to think out new arguments
to convince them of the possibility of bringing about an improvement in their condition that
he had no time to dwell upon his own poverty; the money that he spent on leaflets and pamphlets
to give away might have been better spent on food and clothing for himself, because most of
those to whom he gave them were by no means grateful; but he never thought of that; and after
all, nearly everyone spends money on some hobby or other.  Some people deny themselves the
necessaries or comforts of life in order that they may be able to help to fatten a publican.
Others deny themselves in order to enable a lazy parson to live in idleness and luxury; and
others spend much time and money that they really need for themselves in buying Socialist literature
to give away to people who don't want to know about Socialism.

One Sunday morning towards the end of July, a band of about twenty-five men and women on bicycles
invaded the town.  Two of them--who rode a few yards in front of the others, had affixed to
the handlebars of each of their machines a slender, upright standard from the top of one of
which fluttered a small flag of crimson silk with 'International Brotherhood and Peace' in
gold letters.  The other standard was similar in size and colour, but with a different legend:
'One for all and All for one.'

As they rode along they gave leaflets to the people in the streets, and whenever they came
to a place where there were many people they dismounted and walked about, giving their leaflets
to whoever would accept them.  They made several long halts during their progress along the
Grand Parade, where there was a considerable crowd, and then they rode over the hill to Windley,
which they reached a little before opening time.  There were little crowds waiting outside
the several public houses and a number of people passing through the streets on their way home
from Church and Chapel.  The strangers distributed leaflets to all those who would take them,
and they went through a lot of the side streets, putting leaflets under the doors and in the
letter-boxes.  When they had exhausted their stock they remounted and rode back the way they came.

Meantime the news of their arrival had spread, and as they returned through the town they were
greeted with jeers and booing.  Presently someone threw a stone, and as there happened to be
plenty of stones just there several others followed suit and began running after the retreating
cyclists, throwing stones, hooting and cursing.

The leaflet which had given rise to all this fury read as follows:

                            WHAT IS SOCIALISM?

    At present the workers, with hand and brain produce continually
    food, clothing and all useful and beautiful things in great
    abundance.

    BUT THEY LABOUR IN VAIN--for they are mostly poor and often in
    want.  They find it a hard struggle to live.  Their women and
    children suffer, and their old age is branded with pauperism.

    Socialism is a plan by which poverty will be abolished, and
    everyone enabled to live in plenty and comfort, with leisure and
    opportunity for ampler life.

    If you wish to hear more of this plan, come to the field at the
    Cross Roads on the hill at Windley, on Tuesday evening next at 8
    P.M. and

                      LOOK OUT FOR THE SOCIALIST VAN

The cyclists rode away amid showers of stones without sustaining much damage.  One had his
hand cut and another, who happened to look round, was struck on the forehead, but these were
the only casualties.

On the following Tuesday evening, long before the appointed time, there was a large crowd assembled
at the cross roads or the hill at Windley, waiting for the appearance of the van, and they
were evidently prepared to give the Socialists a warm reception.  There was only one policeman
in uniform there but there were several in plain clothes amongst the crowd.

Crass, Dick Wantley, the Semi-drunk, Sawkins, Bill Bates and several other frequenters of the
Cricketers were amongst the crowd, and there were also a sprinkling of tradespeople, including
the Old Dear and Mr Smallman, the grocer, and a few ladies and gentlemen--wealthy visitors--but
the bulk of the crowd were working men, labourers, mechanics and boys.

As it was quite evident that the crowd meant mischief--many of them had their pockets filled
with stones and were armed with sticks--several of the Socialists were in favour of going to
meet the van to endeavour to persuade those in charge from coming, and with that object they
withdrew from the crowd, which was already regarding them with menacing looks, and went down
the road in the direction from which the van was expected to come.  They had not gone very
far, however, before the people, divining what they were going to do, began to follow them
and while they were hesitating what course to pursue, the Socialist van, escorted by five or
six men on bicycles, appeared round the corner at the bottom of the hill.

As soon as the crowd saw it, they gave an exultant cheer, or, rather, yell, and began running
down the hilt to meet it, and in a few minutes it was surrounded by a howling mob.  The van
was drawn by two horses; there was a door and a small platform at the back and over this was
a sign with white letters on a red ground: 'Socialism, the only hope of the Workers.'

The driver pulled up, and another man on the platform at the rear attempted to address the
crowd, but his voice was inaudible in the din of howls, catcalls, hooting and obscene curses.
After about an hour of this, as the crowd began pushing against the van and trying to overturn
it, the terrified horses commenced to get restive and uncontrollable, and the man on the box
attempted to drive up the hill. This seemed to still further infuriate the horde of savages
who surrounded the van. Numbers of them clutched the wheels and turned them the reverse way,
screaming that it must go back to where it came from; several of them accordingly seized the
horses' heads and, amid cheers, turned them round.

The man on the platform was still trying to make himself heard, but without success.  The strangers
who had come with the van and the little group of local Socialists, who had forced their way
through the crowd and gathered together close to the platform in front of the would-be speaker,
only increased the din by their shouts of appeal to the crowd to 'give the man a fair chance'.
This little bodyguard closed round the van as it began to move slowly downhill, but they were
not sufficiently numerous to protect it from the crowd, which, not being satisfied with the
rate at which the van was proceeding, began to shout to each other to 'Run it away!' 'Take
the brake off!' and several savage rushes were made with the intention of putting these suggestions
into execution.

Some of the defenders were hampered with their bicycles, but they resisted as well as they
were able, and succeeded in keeping the crowd off until the foot of the hill was reached, and
then someone threw the first stone, which by a strange chance happened to strike one of the
cyclists whose head was already bandaged--it was the same man who had been hit on the Sunday.
This stone was soon followed by others, and the man on the platform was the next to be struck.
He got it right on the mouth, and as he put up his handkerchief to staunch the blood another
struck him on the forehead just above the temple, and he dropped forward on his face on to
the platform as if he had been shot.

As the speed of the vehicle increased, a regular hail of stones fell upon the roof and against
the sides of the van and whizzed past the retreating cyclists, while the crowd followed close
behind, cheering, shrieking out volleys of obscene curses, and howling like wolves.

'We'll give the b--rs Socialism!' shouted Crass, who was literally foaming at the mouth.

'We'll teach 'em to come 'ere trying to undermined our bloody morality,' howled Dick Wantley
as he hurled a lump of granite that he had torn up from the macadamized road at one of the
cyclists.

They ran on after the van until it was out of range, and then they bethought themselves of
the local Socialists; but they were nowhere to be seen; they had prudently withdrawn as soon
as the van had got fairly under way, and the victory being complete, the upholders of the present
system returned to the piece of waste ground on the top of the hill, where a gentleman in a
silk hat and frockcoat stood up on a little hillock and made a speech.  He said nothing about
the Distress Committee or the Soup Kitchen or the children who went to school without proper
clothes or food, and made no reference to what was to be done next winter, when nearly everybody
would be out of work. These were matters he and they were evidently not at all interested in.
But he said a good deal about the Glorious Empire! and the Flag! and the Royal Family.  The
things he said were received with rapturous applause, and at the conclusion of his address,
the crowd sang the National Anthem with great enthusiasm and dispersed, congratulating themselves
that they had shown to the best of their ability what Mugsborough thought of Socialism and
the general opinion of the crowd was that they would hear nothing more from the Socialist van. 

This love of the mother in quadrupeds to the offspring, whom she licks and cleans, is so allied
to the pleasure of the taste or palate, that nature seems to have had a great escape in the parent
quadruped not devouring her offspring.

A crowd gathered and the Socialists held a meeting, two speeches being delivered before the
crowd recovered from their surprise at the temerity of these other Britishers who apparently
had not sense enough to understand that they had been finally defeated and obliterated last
Tuesday evening: and when the cyclist with the bandaged head got up on the hillock some of
the crowd actually joined in the hand-clapping with which the Socialists greeted him.

In the course of his speech he informed them that the man who had come with the van and who
had been felled whilst attempting to speak from the platform was now in hospital.  For some
time it had been probable that he would not recover, but he was now out of danger, and as soon
as he was well enough there was no doubt that he would come there again.

Upon this Crass shouted out that if ever the Vanners did return, they would finish what they
had begun last Tuesday.  He would not get off so easy next time.  But when he said this, Crass--not
being able to see into the future--did not know what the reader will learn in due time, that
the man was to return to that place under different circumstances.

When they had finished their speech-making one of the strangers who was acting as chairman
invited the audience to put questions, but as nobody wanted to ask any, he invited anyone who
disagreed with what had been said to get up on the hillock and state his objections, so that
the audience might have an opportunity of judging for themselves which side was right; but
this invitation was also neglected.  Then the chairman announced that they were coming there
again next Sunday at the same time, when a comrade would speak on 'Unemployment and Poverty,
the Cause and the Remedy', and then the strangers sang a song called 'England Arise', the first
verse being:

        England Arise, the long, long night is over,
        Faint in the east, behold the Dawn appear
        Out of your evil dream of toil and sorrow
        Arise, O England! for the day is here!

During the progress of the meeting several of the strangers had been going out amongst the
crowd giving away leaflets, which many of the people gloomily refused to accept, and selling
penny pamphlets, of which they managed to dispose of about three dozen.

Before declaring the meeting closed, the chairman said that the speaker who was coming next
week resided in London: he was not a millionaire, but a workman, the same as nearly all those
who were there present. They were not going to pay him anything for coming, but they intended
to pay his railway fare. Thus one grain of variolous matter, inserted by inoculation, shall in about
seven days stimulate the system into unnatural action; which in about seven days more produces
ten thousand times the quantity of a similar material thrown out on the skin in pustules!

The mystery of reproduction, which alone distinguishes organic life
from mechanic or chemic action, is yet wrapt in darkness.

During the decomposition of organic bodies, where there exists a due degree of warmth with moisture,
new microscopic animals of the most minute kind are produced; and these possess the wonderful power
of reproduction, or of producing animals similar to themselves in their general structure,
but with frequent additional improvements; which the preceding parent
might in some measure have acquired by his habits of life or accidental
situation.

But it may appear too bold in the present state of our knowledge on this subject, to suppose
that all vegetables and animals now existing were originally derived from the smallest microscopic
ones, formed by spontaneous vitality? and that they have by innumerable reproductions, during
innumerable centuries of time, gradually acquired the size, strength,
and excellence of form and faculties, which they now possess? and
that such amazing powers were originally impressed on matter and spirit
by the great Parent of Parents!

Cause of Causes! Ens Entium!

ADDITIONAL NOTES. IX.

STORGE.

And Heaven-born STORGE weaves the social chain.

CANTO II. l. 92.

The Greek word Storge is used for the affection of parents to children; which was also visibly represented
by the Stork or Pelican feeding her young with blood taken from her own wounded bosom. A number
of Pelicans form a semicircle in shallow parts of the sea near the
coast, standing on their long legs; and thus including a shoal of
small fish, they gradually approach the shore; and seizing the fish
as they advance, receive them into a pouch under their throats; and
bringing them to land regurgitate them for the use of their young,
or for their future support.

Adanson, Voyage to Senegal. In this country the parent Pigeons both male and female swallow the
grain or other seeds, which they collect for their young, and bring it up mixed with a kind
of milk from their stomachs, with their bills inserted into the mouths of the young doves.
J. Hunter's works.

The affection of the parent to the young in experienced mothers may be in part owing to their
having been relieved by them from the burden of their milk; but it is difficult to understand, how
this affection commences in those mothers of the bestial world, who have not experienced this
relief from the sucking of their offspring; and still more so to
understand how female birds were at first induced to incubate their
eggs for many weeks; and lastly how caterpillars, as of the silk-worm,
are induced to cover themselves with a well-woven house of silk before
their transformation.

  They always had to go in and out by the back way,
generally through the kitchen, and the crackling and hissing of the poultry and the joints
of meat roasting in the ovens, and the odours of fruit pies and tarts, and plum puddings and
sage and onions, were simply maddening.  In the back-yards of these houses there were usually
huge stacks of empty beer, stout and wine bottles, and others that had contained whisky, brandy
or champagne.

The smells of the delicious viands that were being prepared in the kitchen often penetrated
into the dismantled rooms that the philanthropists were renovating, sometimes just as they
were eating their own wretched fare out of their dinner basket, and washing it down with draughts
of the cold tea or the petrifying liquid they sometimes brought with them in bottles.

Sometimes, as has been said, the people of the house used to send up some tea and bread and
butter or cakes or other refreshments to the workmen, but whenever Hunter got to know of it
being done he used to speak to the people about it and request that it be discontinued, as
it caused the men to waste their time.

But the event of the year was the Beano, which took place on the last Saturday in August, after
they had been paying in for about four months.  The cost of the outing was to be five shillings
a head, so this was the amount each man had to pay in, but it was expected that the total cost--the
hire of the brakes and the cost of the dinner--would come out at a trifle less than the amount
stated, and in that case the surplus would be shared out after the dinner.  The amount of the
share-out would be greater or less according to other circumstances, for it generally happened
that apart from the subscriptions of the men, the Beano fund was swelled by charitable donations
from several quarters, as will be seen later on.

When the eventful day arrived, the hands, instead of working till one, were paid at twelve
o'clock and rushed off home to have a wash and change.

The brakes were to start from the 'Cricketers' at one, but it was arranged, for the convenience
of those who lived at Windley, that they were to be picked up at the Cross Roads at one-thirty.

There were four brakes altogether--three large ones for the men and one small one for the accommodation
of Mr Rushton and a few of his personal friends, Didlum, Grinder, Mr Toonarf, an architect
and Mr Lettum, a house and estate Agent.  One of the drivers was accompanied by a friend who
carried a long coachman's horn.  This gentleman was not paid to come, but, being out of work,
he thought that the men would be sure to stand him a few drinks and that they would probably
make a collection for him in return for his services.

Most of the chaps were smoking twopenny cigars, and had one or two drinks with each other to
try to cheer themselves up before they started, but all the same it was a melancholy procession
that wended its way up the hill to Windley.  To judge from the mournful expression on the long
face of Misery, who sat on the box beside the driver of the first large brake, and the downcast
appearance of the majority of the men, one might have thought that it was a funeral rather
than a pleasure party, or that they were a contingent of lost souls being conducted to the
banks of the Styx.  The man who from time to time sounded the coachman's horn might have passed
as the angel sounding the last trump, and the fumes of the cigars were typical of the smoke
of their torment, which ascendeth up for ever and ever.

A brief halt was made at the Cross Roads to pick up several of the men, including Philpot,
Harlow, Easton, Ned Dawson, Sawkins, Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk.  The two last-named were
now working for Smeariton and Leavit, but as they had been paying in from the first, they had
elected to go to the Beano rather than have their money back. The Semi-drunk and one or two
other habitual boozers were very shabby and down at heel, but the majority of the men were
decently dressed. Some had taken their Sunday clothes out of pawn especially for the occasion.
Others were arrayed in new suits which they were going to pay for at the rate of a shilling
a week.  Some had bought themselves second-hand suits, one or two were wearing their working
clothes brushed and cleaned up, and some were wearing Sunday clothes that had not been taken
out of pawn for the simple reason that the pawnbrokers would not take them in. These garments
were in what might be called a transition stage--old-fashioned and shiny with wear, but yet
too good to take for working in, even if their owners had been in a position to buy some others
to take their place for best.  Crass, Slyme and one or two of the single men, however, were
howling swells, sporting stand-up collars and bowler hats of the latest type, in contradistinction
to some of the others, who were wearing hats of antique patterns, and collars of various shapes
with jagged edges.  Harlow had on an old straw hat that his wife had cleaned up with oxalic
acid, and Easton had carefully dyed the faded binding of his black bowler with ink. Their boots
were the worst part of their attire: without counting Rushton and his friends, there were thirty-seven
men altogether, including Nimrod, and there were not half a dozen pairs of really good boots
amongst the whole crowd.

When all were seated a fresh start was made.  The small brake, with Rushton, Didlum, Grinder
and two or three other members of the Band, led the way.  Next came the largest brake with
Misery on the box. Beside the driver of the third brake was Payne, the foreman carpenter. Crass
occupied a similar position of honour on the fourth brake, on the back step of which was perched
the man with the coachman's horn.

Crass--who had engaged the brakes--had arranged with the drivers that the cortege should pass
through the street where he and Easton lived, and as they went by Mrs Crass was standing at
the door with the two young men lodgers, who waved their handkerchiefs and shouted greetings.
A little further on Mrs Linden and Easton's wife were standing at the door to see them go by.
In fact, the notes of the coachman's horn alarmed most of the inhabitants, who crowded to their
windows and doors to gaze upon the dismal procession as it passed.

The mean streets of Windley were soon left far behind and they found themselves journeying
along a sunlit, winding road, bordered with hedges of hawthorn, holly and briar, past rich,
brown fields of standing corn, shimmering with gleams of gold, past apple-orchards where bending
boughs were heavily loaded with mellow fruits exhaling fragrant odours, through the cool shades
of lofty avenues of venerable oaks, whose overarched and interlacing branches formed a roof
of green, gilt and illuminated with quivering spots and shafts of sunlight that filtered through
the trembling leaves; over old mossy stone bridges, spanning limpid streams that duplicated
the blue sky and the fleecy clouds; and then again, stretching away to the horizon on every
side over more fields, some rich with harvest, others filled with drowsing cattle or with flocks
of timid sheep that scampered away at the sound of the passing carriages.  Several times they
saw merry little companies of rabbits frisking gaily in and out of the hedges or in the fields
beside the sheep and cattle.  At intervals, away in the distance, nestling in the hollows or
amid sheltering trees, groups of farm buildings and stacks of hay; and further on, the square
ivy-clad tower of an ancient church, or perhaps a solitary windmill with its revolving sails
alternately flashing and darkening in the rays of the sun.  Past thatched wayside cottages
whose inhabitants came out to wave their hands in friendly greeting.  Past groups of sunburnt,
golden-haired children who climbed on fences and five-barred gates, and waved their hats and
cheered, or ran behind the brakes for the pennies the men threw down to them.

From time to time the men in the brakes made half-hearted attempts at singing, but it never
came to much, because most of them were too hungry and miserable.  They had not had time to
take any dinner and would not have taken any even if they had the time, for they wished to
reserve their appetites for the banquet at the Queen Elizabeth, which they expected to reach
about half past three.  However, they cheered up a little after the first halt--at the Blue
Lion, where most of them got down and had a drink.  Some of them, including the Semi-drunk,
Ned Dawson, Bill Bates and Joe Philpot--had two or three drinks, and felt so much happier for
them that, shortly after they started off again, sounds of melody were heard from the brake
the three first named rode in--the one presided over by Crass--but it was not very successful,
and even after the second halt--about five miles further on--at the Warrior's Head, they found
it impossible to sing with any heartiness. Fitful bursts of song arose from time to time from
each of the brakes in turn, only to die mournfully away.  It is not easy to sing on an empty
stomach even if one has got a little beer in it; and so it was with most of them.  They were
not in a mood to sing, or to properly appreciate the scenes through which they were passing.
They wanted their dinners, and that was the reason why this long ride, instead of being a pleasure,
became after a while, a weary journey that seemed as if it were never coming to an end.

The next stop was at the Bird in Hand, a wayside public house that stood all by itself in a
lonely hollow.  The landlord was a fat, jolly-looking man, and there were several customers
in the bar--men who looked like farm-labourers, but there were no other houses to be seen anywhere.
This extraordinary circumstance exercised the minds of our travellers and formed the principal
topic of conversation until they arrived at the Dew Drop Inn, about half an hour afterwards.
The first brake, containing Rushton and his friends, passed on without stopping here.  The
occupants of the second brake, which was only a little way behind the first, were divided in
opinion whether to stop or go on. Some shouted out to the driver to pull up, others ordered
him to proceed, and more were undecided which course to pursue--a state of mind that was not
shared by the coachman, who, knowing that if they stopped somebody or other would be sure to
stand him a drink, had no difficulty whatever in coming to a decision, but drew rein at the
inn, an example that was followed by both the other carriages as they drove up.

It was a very brief halt, not more than half the men getting down at all, and those who remained
in the brakes grumbled so much at the delay that the others drank their beer as quickly as
possible and the journey was resumed once more, almost in silence.  No attempts at singing,
no noisy laughter; they scarcely spoke to each other, but sat gloomily gazing out over the
surrounding country.

Instructions had been given to the drivers not to stop again till they reached the Queen Elizabeth,
and they therefore drove past the World Turned Upside Down without stopping, much to the chagrin
of the landlord of that house, who stood at the door with a sickly smile upon his face.  Some
of those who knew him shouted out that they would give him a call on their way back, and with
this he had to be content.

They reached the long-desired Queen Elizabeth at twenty minutes to four, and were immediately
ushered into a large room where a round table and two long ones were set for dinner--and they
were set in a manner worthy of the reputation of the house.

The cloths that covered the tables and the serviettes, arranged fanwise in the drinking glasses,
were literally as white as snow, and about a dozen knives and forks and spoons were laid for
each person. Down the centre of the table glasses of delicious yellow custard and cut-glass
dishes of glistening red and golden jelly alternated with vases of sweet-smelling flowers.

The floor of the dining-room was covered with oilcloth--red flowers on a pale yellow ground;
the pattern was worn off in places, but it was all very clean and shining.  Whether one looked
at the walls with the old-fashioned varnished oak paper, or at the glossy piano standing across
the corner near the white-curtained window, at the shining oak chairs or through the open casement
doors that led into the shady garden beyond, the dominating impression one received was that
everything was exquisitely clean.

The landlord announced that dinner would be served in ten minutes, and while they were waiting
some of them indulged in a drink at the bar--just as an appetizer--whilst the others strolled
in the garden or, by the landlord's invitation, looked over the house.  Amongst other places,
they glanced into the kitchen, where the landlady was superintending the preparation of the
feast, and in this place, with its whitewashed walls and red-tiled floor, as in every other
part of the house, the same absolute cleanliness reigned supreme.

'It's a bit differint from the Royal Caff, where we got the sack, ain't it?' remarked the Semi-drunk
to Bill Bates as they made their way to the dining-room in response to the announcement that
dinner was ready.

'Not arf!' replied Bill.

Rushton, with Didlum and Grinder and his other friends, sat at the round table near the piano.
Hunter took the head of the longer of the other two tables and Crass the foot, and on either
side of Crass were Bundy and Slyme, who had acted with him as the Committee who had arranged
the Beano.  Payne, the foreman carpenter, occupied the head of the other table.

The dinner was all that could be desired; it was almost as good as the kind of dinner that
is enjoyed every day by those persons who are too lazy to work but are cunning enough to make
others work for them.

There was soup, several entrees, roast beef, boiled mutton, roast turkey, roast goose, ham,
cabbage, peas, beans and sweets galore, plum pudding, custard, jelly, fruit tarts, bread and
cheese and as much beer or lemonade as they liked to pay for, the drinks being an extra; and
afterwards the waiters brought in cups of coffee for those who desired it.  Everything was
up to the knocker, and although they were somewhat bewildered by the multitude of knives and
forks, they all, with one or two exceptions, rose to the occasion and enjoyed themselves famously.
The excellent decorum observed being marred only by one or two regrettable incidents.  The
first of these occurred almost as soon as they sat down, when Ned Dawson who, although a big
strong fellow, was not able to stand much beer, not being used to it, was taken ill and had
to be escorted from the room by his mate Bundy and another man. They left him somewhere outside
and he came back again about ten minutes afterwards, much better but looking rather pale, and
took his seat with the others.

The turkeys, the roast beef and the boiled mutton, the peas and beans and the cabbage, disappeared
with astonishing rapidity, which was not to be wondered at, for they were all very hungry from
the long drive, and nearly everyone made a point of having at least one helping of everything
there was to be had.  Some of them went in for two lots of soup.  Then for the next course,
boiled mutton and ham or turkey: then some roast beef and goose.  Then a little more boiled
mutton with a little roast beef.  Each of the three boys devoured several times his own weight
of everything, to say nothing of numerous bottles of lemonade and champagne ginger beer.

Crass frequently paused to mop the perspiration from his face and neck with his serviette.
In fact everybody had a good time.  There was enough and to spare of everything to eat, the
beer was of the best, and all the time, amid the rattle of the crockery and the knives and
forks, the proceedings were enlivened by many jests and flashes of wit that continuously kept
the table in a roar.

'Chuck us over another dollop of that there white stuff, Bob,' shouted the Semi-drunk to Crass,
indicating the blancmange.

Crass reached out his hand and took hold of the dish containing the 'white stuff', but instead
of passing it to the Semi-drunk, he proceeded to demolish it himself, gobbling it up quickly
directly from the dish with a spoon.

'Why, you're eating it all yerself, yer bleeder,' cried the Semi-drunk indignantly, as soon
as he realized what was happening.

'That's all right, matey,' replied Crass affably as he deposited the empty dish on the table.
'It don't matter, there's plenty more where it come from.  Tell the landlord to bring in another
lot.'

Upon being applied to, the landlord, who was assisted by his daughter, two other young women
and two young men, brought in several more lots and so the Semi-drunk was appeased.

As for the plum-pudding--it was a fair knock-out; just like Christmas: but as Ned Dawson and
Bill Bates had drunk all the sauce before the pudding was served, they all had to have their
first helping without any.  However, as the landlord brought in another lot shortly afterwards,
that didn't matter either.

As soon as dinner was over, Crass rose to make his statement as secretary.  Thirty-seven men
had paid five shillings each: that made nine pounds five shillings.  The committee had decided
that the three boys--the painters' boy, the carpenters' boy and the front shop boy--should
be allowed to come half-price: that made it nine pounds twelve and six.  In addition to paying
the ordinary five-shilling subscription, Mr Rushton had given one pound ten towards the expenses.
(Loud cheers.)  And several other gentlemen had also given something towards it.  Mr Sweater,
of the Cave, one pound. The third source of pleasure from the perception of the visible world may
be termed the melody of colours, which will be shown to coincide with melody of sounds: this circumstance
may also accompany the picturesque, and will add to the pleasure
it affords.  (Cheers.)  Mr Toonarf,
ten shillings as well as the five-shilling subscription.  They had also written to some of
the manufacturers who supplied the firm with materials, and asked them to give something: some
of 'em had sent half a crown, some five shillings, some hadn't answered at all, and two of
'em had written back to say that as things is cut so fine nowadays, they didn't hardly get
no profit on their stuff, so they couldn't afford to give nothing; but out of all the firms
they wrote to they managed to get thirty-two and sixpence altogether, making a grand total
of seventeen pounds.

