A circumstance, not without influence on Murray's future, occurred about this time with respect
to the "Miniature," a volume of comparatively small importance, consisting of essays written
by boys at Eton, and originally published at Windsor by Charles Knight. Through Dr. Kennell,
Master of the Temple, his friend and neighbour, who lived close at hand, Murray became acquainted
with the younger Kennell, Mr. Stratford Canning, Gally Knight, the two sons of the Marquis
Wellesley, and other young Etonians, who had originated and conducted this School magazine.
Thirty-four numbers appeared in the course of a year, and were then brought out in a volume
by Mr. Knight at the expense of the authors. The transaction had involved them in debt. "Whatever
chance of success our hopes may dictate," wrote Stratford Canning, "yet our apprehensions teach
us to tremble at the possibility of additional expenses," and the sheets lay unsold on the
bookseller's hands. Mr. Murray, who was consulted about the matter, said to Dr. Rennell, "Tell
them to send the unsold sheets to me, and I will pay the debt due to the printer." The whole
of the unsold sheets were sent by the "Windsor Waggon" to Mr. Murray's at Fleet Street. He
made waste-paper of the whole bundle--there were 6,376 numbers in all,--brought out a new edition
of 750 copies, printed in good type, and neatly bound, and announced to Stratford Canning that
he did this at his own cost and risk, and would make over to the above Etonians half the profits
of the work. The young authors were highly pleased by this arrangement, and Stratford Canning
wrote to Murray (October 20, 1805): "We cannot sufficiently thank you for your kind attention
to our concerns, and only hope that the success of the embryo edition may be equal to your
care." How great was the importance of the venture in his eyes may be judged from the naïve
allusion with which he proceeds: "It will be a week or two before we commit it to the press,
for amidst our other occupations the business of the school must not be neglected, and that
by itself is no trivial employment."

By means of this transaction Murray had the sagacity to anticipate an opportunity of making
friends of Canning and Frere, who were never tired of eulogizing the spirit and enterprise
of the young Fleet Street publisher. Stratford Canning introduced him to his cousin George,
the great minister, whose friendship and support had a very considerable influence in promoting
and establishing his future prosperity. It is scarcely necessary to add that the new edition
of the "Miniature" speedily became waste paper. This connection had a considerable influence
upon Murray's future fortunes.

Constable, who was about four years older than Murray, was a man of great ability, full of
spirit and enterprise. He was by nature generous, liberal, and far-seeing. The high prices
which he gave for the best kind of literary work drew the best authors round him, and he raised
the publishing trade of Scotland to a height that it had never before reached, and made Edinburgh
a great centre of learning and literature.

In 1800 he commenced the Farmer's Magazine, and in the following year acquired the property
of the Scots Magazine, a venerable repertory of literary, historical, and antiquarian matter;
but it was not until the establishment of the Edinburgh Review, in October 1802, that Constable's
name became a power in the publishing world.

In the year following the first issue of the Review, Constable took into partnership Alexander
Gibson Hunter, eldest son of David Hunter, of Blackness, a Forfarshire laird. The new partner
brought a considerable amount of capital into the firm, at a time when capital was greatly
needed in that growing concern. His duties were to take charge of the ledger and account department,
though he never took much interest in his work, but preferred to call in the help of a clever
arithmetical clerk.

It is unnecessary to speak of the foundation of the Edinburgh Review. It appeared at the right
time, and was mainly supported by the talents of Jeffrey, Brougham, Sydney Smith, Francis Horner,
Dr. Thomas Brown, Lord Murray, and other distinguished writers. The first number immediately
attracted public attention. Mr. Joseph Mawman was the London agent, but some dissatisfaction
having arisen with respect to his management, the London sale was transferred to the Messrs.
Longman, with one half share in the property of the work.

During the partnership of Murray and Highley, they had occasional business transactions with
Constable of Edinburgh. Shortly after the partnership was dissolved in March 1803, Murray wrote
as follows to Mr. Constable:

April 25, 1803.

"I have several works in the press which I should be willing to consign to your management
in Edinburgh, but that I presume you have already sufficient business upon your hands, and
that you would not find mine worth attending to. If so, I wish that you would tell me of some
vigorous young bookseller, like myself, just starting into business, upon whose probity, punctuality,
and exertion you think I might rely, and I would instantly open a correspondence with him;
and in return it will give me much pleasure to do any civil office for you in London. I should
be happy if any arrangement could be made wherein we might prove of reciprocal advantage; and
were you from your superabundance to pick me out any work of merit of which you would either
make me the publisher in London, or in which you would allow me to become a partner, I dare
say the occasion would arise wherein I could return the compliment, and you would have the
satisfaction of knowing that your book was in the hands of one who has not yet so much business
as to cause him to neglect any part of it."

Mr. Constable's answer was favourable. In October 1804 Mr. Murray, at the instance of Constable,
took as his apprentice Charles Hunter, the younger brother of A. Gibson Hunter, Constable's
partner. The apprenticeship was to be for four or seven years, at the option of Charles Hunter.
These negotiations between the firms, and their increasing interchange of books, showed that
they were gradually drawing nearer to each other, until their correspondence became quite friendly
and even intimate. Walter Scott was now making his appearance as an author; Constable had published
his "Sir Tristram" in May 1804, and his "Lay of the Last Minstrel" in January 1805. Large numbers
of these works were forwarded to London and sold by Mr. Murray.

At the end of 1805 differences arose between the Constable and Longman firms as to the periodical
works in which they were interested. The editor and proprietors of the Edinburgh Review were
of opinion that the interest of the Longmans in two other works of a similar character--the
Annual Review and the Eclectic--tended to lessen their exertions on behalf of the Edinburgh.
It was a matter that might easily have been arranged; but the correspondents were men of hot
tempers, and with pens in their hands, they sent stinging letters from London to Edinburgh,
and from Edinburgh to London. Rees, Longman's partner, was as bitter in words on the one side
as Hunter, Constable's partner, was on the other. At length a deadly breach took place, and
it was resolved in Edinburgh that the publication of the Edinburgh Review should be transferred
to John Murray, Fleet Street. Alexander Gibson Hunter, Constable's partner, wrote to Mr. Murray
to tell of the rupture and to propose a closer alliance with him.

Mr. Murray replied:

John Murray to Mr. A.G. Hunter.

December 7, 1805.

"With regard to the important communication of your last letter, I confess the surprise with
which I read it was not without some mixture of regret. The extensive connections betwixt your
house and Longman's cannot be severed at once without mutual inconvenience, and perhaps mutual
disadvantages, your share of which a more protracted dismemberment might have prevented. From
what I had occasion to observe, I did not conceive that your concerns together would ever again
move with a cordiality that would render them lasting; but still, I imagined that mutual interest
and forbearance would allow them to subside into that indifference which, without animosity
or mischief, would leave either party at liberty to enter upon such new arrangements as offered
to their separate advantage. I do not, however, doubt but that all things have been properly
considered, and perhaps finally settled for the best; but Time, the only arbitrator in these
cases, must decide.

"In your proposed engagements with Mr. Davies, you will become better acquainted with a man
of great natural talents, and thoroughly versed in business, which he regulates by the most
honourable principles. As for myself, you will find me exceedingly assiduous in promoting your
views, into which I shall enter with feelings higher than those of mere interest. Indeed, linked
as our houses are at present, we have a natural tendency to mutual good understanding, which
will both prevent and soften those asperities in business which might otherwise enlarge into
disagreement. Country orders [referring to Constable & Co.'s 'general order'] are a branch
of business which I have ever totally declined as incompatible with my more serious plans as
a publisher. But your commissions I shall undertake with pleasure, and the punctuality with
which I have attempted to execute your first order you will, I hope, consider as a specimen
of my disposition to give you satisfaction in every transaction in which we may hereafter be
mutually engaged."

It was a great chance for a young man entering life with a moderate amount of capital, to be
virtually offered an intimate connection with one of the principal publishing houses of the
day. It was one of those chances which, "taken at the flood, lead on to fortune," but there
was also the question of honour, and Mr. Murray, notwithstanding his desire for opening out
a splendid new connection in business, would do nothing inconsistent with the strictest honour.
He was most unwilling to thrust himself in between Constable and Longman. Instead, therefore,
of jumping at Constable's advantageous offer, his feelings induced him to promote a reconciliation
between the parties; and he continued to enjoin forbearance on the part of both firms, so that
they might carry on their business transactions as before. Copies of the correspondence between
Constable and the Longmans were submitted to referees (Murray and Davies), and the following
was Mr. Murray's reply, addressed to Messrs. Constable & Co.:

John Murray to Messrs. Constable & Co.

December 14, 1805.

GENTLEMEN,

Mr. Hunter's obliging letter to me arrived this morning. That which he enclosed with yours
to his brother last night, Charles gave me to read. The contents were very flattering. Indeed,
I cannot but agree with Mr. H. that his brother has displayed very honourable feelings, upon
hearing of the probable separation of your house, and that of Messrs. Longman & Co. Mr. Longman
was the first who mentioned this to him, and indeed from the manner in which Charles related
his conversation upon the affair, I could not but feel renewed sensations of regret at the
unpleasant termination of a correspondence, which, had it been conducted upon Mr. Longman's
own feelings, would have borne, I think, a very different aspect. Longman spoke of you both
with kindness, and mildly complained that he had perceived a want of confidence on your part,
ever since his junction with Messrs. Hurst & Orme. He confessed that the correspondence was
too harsh for him to support any longer; but, he added, "if we must part, let us part like
friends." I am certain, from what Charles reported to me, that Mr. L. and I think Mr. R. [Rees]
are hurt by this sudden disunion.

Recollect how serious every dispute becomes upon paper, when a man writes a thousand asperities
merely to show or support his superior ability. Things that would not have been spoken, or
perhaps even thought of in conversation, are stated and horribly magnified upon paper. Consider
how many disputes have arisen in the world, in which both parties were so violent in what they
believed to be the support of truth, and which to the public, and indeed to themselves a few
years afterwards, appeared unwise, because the occasion or cause of it was not worth contending
about. Consider that you are, all of you, men who can depend upon each other's probity and
honour, and where these essentials are not wanting, surely in mere matters of business the
rest may be palliated by mutual bearance and forbearance. Besides, you are so connected by
various publications, your common property, and some of them such as will remain so until the
termination of your lives, that you cannot effect an entire disunion, and must therefore be
subject to eternal vexations and regrets which will embitter every transaction and settlement
between you.

You know, moreover, that it is one of the misfortunes of our nature, that disputes are always
the most bitter in proportion to former intimacy. And how much dissatisfaction will it occasion
if either of you are desirous in a year or two of renewing that intimacy which you are now
so anxious to dissolve--to say nothing of your relative utility to each other--a circumstance
which is never properly estimated, except when the want of the means reminds us of what we
have been at such pains to deprive ourselves. Pause, my dear sirs, whilst to choose be yet
in your power; show yourselves superior to common prejudice, and by an immediate exercise of
your acknowledged pre-eminence of intellect, suffer arrangements to be made for an accommodation
and for a renewal of that connexion which has heretofore been productive of honour and profit.
I am sure I have to apologize for having ventured to say so much to men so much my superiors
in sense and knowledge of the world and their own interest; but sometimes the meanest bystander
may perceive disadvantages in the movements of the most skilful players.

You will not, I am sure, attribute anything which I have said to an insensibility to the immediate
advantages which will arise to myself from a determination opposite to that which I have taken
the liberty of suggesting. It arises from a very different feeling. I should be very little
worthy of your great confidence and attention to my interest upon this occasion, if I did not
state freely the result of my humble consideration of this matter; and having done so, I do
assure you that if the arrangements which you now propose are carried into effect, I will apply
the most arduous attention to your interest, to which I will turn the channel of my own thoughts
and business, which, I am proud to say, is rising in proportion to the industry and honourable
principles which have been used in its establishment. I am every day adding to a most respectable
circle of literary connexions, and I hope, a few months after the settlement of your present
affairs, to offer shares to you of works in which you will feel it advantageous to engage.
Besides, as I have at present no particular bias, no enormous works of my own which would need
all my care, I am better qualified to attend to any that you may commit to my charge; and,
being young, my business may be formed with a disposition, as it were, towards yours; and thus
growing up with it, we are more likely to form a durable connexion than can be expected with
persons whose views are imperceptibly but incessantly diverging from each other.

Should you be determined--irrevocably determined (but consider!) upon the disunion with Messrs.
Longman, I will just observe that when persons have been intimate, they have discovered each
other's vulnerable points; it therefore shows no great talent to direct at them shafts of resentment.
It is easy both to write and to say ill-natured, harsh, and cutting things of each other. But
remember that this power is mutual, and in proportion to the poignancy of the wound which you
would inflict will be your own feelings when it is returned. It is therefore a maxim which
I laid down soon after a separation which I had, never to say or do to my late colleague what
he could say or do against me in return. I knew that I had the personal superiority, but what
his own ingenuity could not suggest, others could write for him.

I must apologise again for having been so tedious, but I am sure that the same friendliness
on your part which has produced these hasty but well-meant expostulations will excuse them.
After this, I trust it is unnecessary for me to state with how much sincerity,

I am, dear sirs,

Your faithful friend,

JOHN MURRAY.

Ten days after this letter was written, Mr. Murray sent a copy of it to Messrs. Longman & Co.,
and wrote:

John Murray to Messrs. Longman & Co,

December 24, 1805.

GENTLEMEN,

The enclosed letter will show that I am not ignorant that a misunderstanding prevails betwixt
your house and that of Messrs. Constable & Co. With the cause, however, I am as yet unacquainted;
though I have attempted, but in vain, to obviate a disunion which I most sincerely regret.
Whatever arrangements with regard to myself may take place in consequence will have arisen
from circumstances which it was not in my power to prevent; and they will not therefore be
suffered to interfere in any way with those friendly dispositions which will continue, I trust,
to obtain between you and, gentlemen,

Your obedient servant,

J. MURRAY.

But the split was not to be avoided. It appears, however, that by the contract entered into
by Constable with Longmans in 1803, the latter had acquired a legal right precluding the publication
of the Edinburgh Review by another publisher without their express assent. Such assent was
not given, and the London publication of the Edinburgh continued in Longman's hands for a time;
but all the other works of Constable were at once transferred to Mr. Murray.

Mr. Constable invited Murray to come to Edinburgh to renew their personal friendship, the foundations
of which had been laid during Mr. Murray's visit to Edinburgh in the previous year; and now
that their union was likely to be much closer, he desired to repeat the visit. Mr. Murray had
another, and, so far as regarded his personal happiness, a much more important object in view.
This arose out of the affection which he had begun to entertain for Miss Elliot, daughter of
the late Charles Elliot, publisher, with whom Mr. Murray's father had been in such constant
correspondence. The affection was mutual, and it seemed probable that the attachment would
ripen into a marriage.

Now that his reputation as a publisher was becoming established, Mr. Murray grew more particular
as to the guise of the books which he issued. He employed the best makers of paper, the best
printers, and the best book-binders. He attended to the size and tone of the paper, and quality
of the type, the accuracy of the printing, and the excellence of the illustrations. All this
involved a great deal of correspondence. We find his letters to the heads of departments full
of details as to the turn-out of his books. Everything, from the beginning to the end of the
issue of a work--the first inspection of the MS., the consultation with confidential friends
as to its fitness for publication, the form in which it was to appear, the correction of the
proofs, the binding, title, and final advertisement--engaged his closest attention. Besides
the elegant appearance of his books, he also aimed at raising the standard of the literature
which he published. He had to criticize as well as to select; to make suggestions as to improvements
where the manuscript was regarded with favour, and finally to launch the book at the right
time and under the best possible auspices. It might almost be said of the publisher, as it
is of the poet, that he is born, not made. And Mr. Murray appears, from the beginning to the
end of his career, to have been a born publisher.

In August 1806, during the slack season in London, Mr. Murray made his promised visit to Edinburgh.
He was warmly received by Constable and Hunter, and enjoyed their hospitality for some days.
After business matters had been disposed of, he was taken in hand by Hunter, the junior partner,
and led off by him to enjoy the perilous hospitality of the Forfarshire lairds.

Those have been called the days of heroic drinking. Intemperance prevailed to an enormous extent.
It was a time of greater licentiousness, perhaps, in all the capitals of Europe, and this northern
one among the rest, than had been known for a long period. Men of the best education and social
position drank like the Scandinavian barbarians of olden times. Tavern-drinking, now almost
unknown among the educated and professional classes of Edinburgh, was then carried by all ranks
to a dreadful excess.

Murray was conducted by Hunter to his father's house of Eskmount in Forfarshire, where he was
most cordially received, and in accordance with the custom of the times the hospitality included
invitations to drinking bouts at the neighbouring houses.

An unenviable notoriety in this respect attached to William Maule (created Baron Panmure 1831).
He was the second son of the eighth Earl of Dalhousie, but on succeeding, through his grandmother,
to the estates of the Earls of Panmure, he had assumed the name of Maule in lieu of that of Ramsay.

Much against his will, Murray was compelled to take part in some of these riotous festivities
with the rollicking, hard-drinking Forfarshire lairds, and doubtless he was not sorry to make
his escape at length uninjured, if not unscathed, and to return to more congenial society in
Edinburgh. His attachment to Miss Elliot ended in an engagement.

In the course of his correspondence with Miss Elliot's trustees, Mr. Murray gave a statement
of his actual financial position at the time:

"When I say," he wrote, "that my capital in business amounts to five thousand pounds, I meant
it to be understood that if I quitted business to-morrow, the whole of my property being sold,
even disadvantageously, it would leave a balance in my favour, free from debt or any incumbrance,
of the sum above specified. But you will observe that, continuing it as I shall do in business,
I know it to be far more considerable and productive. I will hope that it has not been thought
uncandid in me if I did not earlier specify the amount of my circumstances, for I considered
that I had done this in the most delicate and satisfactory way when I took the liberty of referring
you to Mr. Constable to whom I consequently disclosed my affairs, and whose knowledge of my
connexions in business might I thought have operated more pleasingly to Miss Elliot's friends
than any communication from myself."

The correspondence with Miss Elliot went on, and at length it was arranged that Mr. Murray
should proceed to Edinburgh for the marriage. He went by mail in the month of February. A tremendous
snowstorm set in on his journey north. From a village near Doncaster he wrote to Constable:
"The horses were twice blown quite round, unable to face the horrid blast of cold wind, the
like of which I have never known before. There was at the same time a terrible fall of snow,
which completely obscured everything that could be seen from the coach window. The snow became
of great depth, and six strong horses could scarcely pull us through. We are four hours behind
time." From Doncaster he went to Durham in a postchaise; and pushing onward, he at last reached
Edinburgh after six days' stormy travelling.

While at Edinburgh, Mr. Murray resided with Mr. Sands, one of the late Charles Elliot's trustees.
The marriage took place on March 6, 1807, and the newly married pair at once started for Kelso,
in spite of the roads being still very bad, and obstructed by snow. Near Blackshields the horses
fell down and rolled over and over. The postboy's leg was broken, and the carriage was sadly
damaged. A neighbouring blacksmith was called to the rescue, and after an hour and a half the
carriage was sufficiently repaired to be able to proceed. A fresh pair of horses was obtained
at the next stage, and the married couple reached Kelso in safety. They remained there a few
days, waiting for Mrs. Elliot, who was to follow them; and on her arrival, they set out at
once for the south.

The intimacy which existed between Mr. Murray and Mr. D'Israeli will be observed from the fact
that the latter was selected as one of the marriage trustees. A few days after the arrival
of the married pair in London, they were invited to dine with Mr. D'Israeli and his friends.
Mr. Alexander Hunter, whom Mr. Murray had invited to stay with him during his visit to London,
thus describes the event:

"Dressed, and went along with the Clan Murray to dine at Mr. D'Israeli's, where we had a most
sumptuous banquet, and a very large party, in honour of the newly married folks. There was
a very beautiful woman there, Mrs. Turner, wife of Sharon Turner, the Anglo-Saxon historian,
who, I am told, was one of the Godwin school! If they be all as beautiful, accomplished, and
agreeable as this lady, they must be a deuced dangerous set indeed, and I should not choose
to trust myself amongst them.

"Our male part of the company consisted mostly of literary men--Cumberland, Turner, D'Israeli,
Basevi, Prince Hoare, and Cervetto, the truly celebrated violoncello player. Turner was the
most able and agreeable of the whole by far; Cumberland, the most talkative and eccentric perhaps,
has a good sprinkling of learning and humour in his conversation and anecdote, from having
lived so long amongst the eminent men of his day, such as Johnson, Foote, Garrick, and such
like. But his conversation is sadly disgusting, from his tone of irony and detraction conveyed
in a cunning sort of way and directed constantly against the Edinburgh Review, Walter Scott
(who is a 'poor ignorant boy, and no poet,' and never wrote a five-feet line in his life),
and such other d----d stuff."

CHAPTER IV

"MARMION"--CONSTABLES AND BALLANTYNES--THE "EDINBURGH REVIEW"

Mr. Murray was twenty-nine years old at the time of his marriage. That he was full of contentment
as well as hope at this time may be inferred from his letter to Constable three weeks after
his marriage:

John Murray to Mr. Constable.

March 27, 1807.

"I declare to you that I am every day more content with my lot. Neither my wife nor I have
any disposition for company or going out; and you may rest assured that I shall devote all
my attention to business, and that your concerns will not be less the object of my regard merely
because you have raised mine so high. Every moment, my dear Constable, I feel more grateful
to you, and I trust that you will over find me your faithful friend.--J.M."

Some of the most important events in Murray's career occurred during the first year of his
married life. Chief among them may perhaps be mentioned his part share in the publication of
"Marmion" (in February 1808)--which brought him into intimate connection with Walter Scott--and
his appointment for a time as publisher in London of the Edinburgh Review; for he was thus
brought into direct personal contact with those forces which ultimately led to the chief literary
enterprise of his life--the publication of the Quarterly Review.

Mr. Scott called upon Mr. Murray in London shortly after the return of the latter from his
marriage in Edinburgh.

"Mr. Scott called upon me on Tuesday, and we conversed for an hour.... He appears very anxious
that 'Marmion' should be published by the King's birthday.... He said he wished it to be ready
by that time for very particular reasons; and yet he allows that the poem is not completed,
and that he is yet undetermined if he shall make his hero happy or otherwise."

The other important event, to which allusion has been made, was the transfer to Mr. Murray
of part of the London agency for the Edinburgh Review. At the beginning of 1806 Murray sold
1,000 copies of the Review on the day of its publication, and the circulation was steadily
increasing. Constable proposed to transfer the entire London publication to Murray, but the
Longmans protested, under the terms of their existing agreement. In April 1807 they employed
as their attorney Mr. Sharon Turner, one of Murray's staunchest allies. Turner informed him,
through a common friend, of his having been retained by the Longmans; but Murray said he could
not in any way "feel hurt at so proper and indispensable a pursuit of his profession." The
opinion of counsel was in favour of the Messrs. Longman's contention, and of their "undisputable
rights to one-half of the Edinburgh Review so long as it continues to be published under that
title."

Longman & Co. accordingly obtained an injunction to prevent the publication of the Edinburgh
Review by any other publisher in London without their express consent.

Matters were brought to a crisis by the following letter, written by the editor, Mr. Francis
Jeffrey, to Messrs. Constable & Co.:

June 1, 1807.

GENTLEMEN,

I believe you understand already that neither I nor any of the original and regular writers
in the Review will ever contribute a syllable to a work belonging to booksellers. It is proper,
however, to announce this to you distinctly, that you may have no fear of hardship or disappointment
in the event of Mr. Longman succeeding in his claim to the property of this work. If that claim
be not speedily rejected or abandoned, it is our fixed resolution to withdraw entirely from
the Edinburgh Review; to publish to all the world that the conductor and writers of the former
numbers have no sort of connection with those that may afterwards appear; and probably to give
notice of our intention to establish a new work of a similar nature under a different title.

I have the honour to be, gentlemen,

Your very obedient servant,

F. JEFFREY.

A copy of this letter was at once forwarded to Messrs. Longman. Constable, in his communication
accompanying it, assured the publishers that, in the event of the editor and contributors to
the Edinburgh Review withdrawing from the publication and establishing a new periodical, the
existing Review would soon be of no value either to proprietors or publishers, and requested
to be informed whether they would not be disposed to transfer their interest in the property,
and, if so, on what considerations. Constable added: "We are apprehensive that the editors
will not postpone for many days longer that public notification of their secession, which we
cannot help anticipating as the death-blow of the publication."

Jeffrey's decision seems to have settled the matter. Messrs. Longman agreed to accept £1,000
for their claim of property in the title and future publication of the Edinburgh Review. The
injunction was removed, and the London publication of the Review was forthwith transferred
to John Murray, 32, Fleet Street, under whose auspices No. 22 accordingly appeared.

Thus far all had gone on smoothly. But a little cloud, at first no bigger than a man's hand,
made its appearance, and it grew and grew until it threw a dark shadow over the friendship
of Constable and Murray, and eventually led to their complete separation. This was the system
of persistent drawing of accommodation bills, renewals of bills, and promissory notes. Constable
began to draw heavily upon Murray in April 1807, and the promissory notes went on accumulating
until they constituted a mighty mass of paper money. Murray's banker cautioned him against
the practice. But repeated expostulation was of no use against the impetuous needs of Constable
& Co. Only two months after the transfer of the publication of the Review to Mr. Murray, we
find him writing to "Dear Constable" as follows:

John Murray to Mr. Archd. Constable.

October 1, 1807.

"I should not have allowed myself time to write to you to-day, were not the occasion very urgent.
Your people have so often of late omitted to give you timely notice of the day when my acceptances
fell due, that I have suffered an inconvenience too great for me to have expressed to you,
had it not occurred so often that it is impossible for me to undergo the anxiety which it occasions.
A bill of yours for £200 was due yesterday, and I have been obliged to supply the means for
paying it, without any notice for preparation.... I beg of you to insist upon this being regulated,
as I am sure you must desire it to be, so that I may receive the cash for your bills two days
at least before they are due."

Mr. Murray then gives a list of debts of his own (including some of Constable's) amounting
to £1,073, which he has to pay in the following week. From a cash account made out by Mr. Murray
on October 3, it appears that the bill transactions with Constable had become enormous; they
amounted to not less than £10,000.

The correspondence continued in the same strain, and it soon became evident that this state
of things could not be allowed to continue. Reconciliations took place from time to time, but
interruptions again occurred, mostly arising from the same source--a perpetual flood of bills
and promissory notes, from one side and the other--until Murray found it necessary to put an
end to it peremptorily. Towards the end of 1808 Messrs. Constable established at No. 10 Ludgate
Street a London house for the sale of the Edinburgh Review, and the other works in which they
were concerned, under the title of Constable, Hunter, Park & Hunter. This, doubtless, tended
to widen the breach between Constable and Murray, though it left the latter free to enter into
arrangements for establishing a Review of his own, an object which he had already contemplated.

There were many books in which the two houses had a joint interest, and, therefore, their relations
could not be altogether discontinued. "Marmion" was coming out in successive editions; but
the correspondence between the publishers grew cooler and cooler, and Constable had constant
need to delay payments and renew bills.

Mr. Murray had also considerable bill transactions with Ballantyne & Co. of Edinburgh. James
and John Ballantyne had been schoolfellows of Walter Scott at Kelso, and the acquaintance there
formed was afterwards renewed. James Ballantyne established the Kelso Mail in 1796, but at
the recommendation of Scott, for whom he had printed a collection of ballads, he removed to
Edinburgh in 1802. There he printed the "Border Minstrelsy," for Scott, who assisted him with
money. Ballantyne was in frequent and intimate correspondence with Murray from the year 1806,
and had printed for him Hogg's "Ettrick Shepherd," and other works.

It was at this time that Scott committed the great error of his life. His professional income
was about £1,000 a year, and with the profits of his works he might have built Abbotsford and
lived in comfort and luxury. But in 1805 he sacrificed everything by entering into partnership
with James Ballantyne, and embarking in his printing concern almost the whole of the capital
which he possessed. He was bound to the firm for twenty years, and during that time he produced
his greatest works. It is true that but for the difficulties in which he was latterly immersed,
we might never have known the noble courage with which he met and rose superior to misfortune.

In 1808 a scheme of great magnitude was under contemplation by Murray and the Ballantynes.
It was a uniform edition of the "British Novelists," beginning with De Foe, and ending with
the novelists at the close of last century; with biographical prefaces and illustrative notes
by Walter Scott. A list of the novels, written in the hand of John Murray, includes thirty-six
British, besides eighteen foreign authors. The collection could not have been completed in
less than two hundred volumes. The scheme, if it did not originate with Walter Scott, had at
least his cordial support.

Mr. Murray not unreasonably feared the cost of carrying such an undertaking to completion.
It could not have amounted to less than twenty thousand pounds. Yet the Ballantynes urged him
on. They furnished statements of the cost of printing and paper for each volume. "It really
strikes me," said James Ballantyne, "the more I think of and examine it, to be the happiest
speculation that has ever been thought of."

This undertaking eventually fell through. Only the works of De Foe were printed by the Messrs.
Ballantyne, and published by Mr. Murray. The attention of the latter became absorbed by a subject
of much greater importance to him--the establishment of the Quarterly Review. This for a time
threw most of his other schemes into the shade.

CHAPTER V

ORIGIN OF THE "QUARTERLY REVIEW"

The publication of a Tory Review was not the result of a sudden inspiration. The scheme had
long been pondered over. Mr. Canning had impressed upon Mr. Pitt the importance of securing
the newspaper press, then almost entirely Whiggish or Revolutionary, on the side of his administration.
To combat, in some measure, the democratic principles then in full swing, Mr. Canning, with
others, started, in November 1797, the Anti-Jacobin, or Weekly Examiner.

The Anti-Jacobin ceased to be published in 1798, when Canning, having been appointed Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs, found his time fully occupied by the business of his department,
as well as by his parliamentary duties, and could no longer take part in that clever publication.

Four years later, in October 1802, the first number of the Edinburgh Review was published.
It appeared at the right time, and, as the first quarterly organ of the higher criticism, evidently
hit the mark at which it aimed. Though Walter Scott was not a founder of the Review, he was
a frequent contributor.

In its early days the criticism was rude, and wanting in delicate insight; for the most part
too dictatorial, and often unfair. Thus Jeffrey could never appreciate the merits of Wordsworth,
Southey, and Coleridge. "This will never do!" was the commencement of his review of Wordsworth's
noblest poem. Jeffrey boasted that he had "crushed the 'Excursion.'" "He might as well say,"
observed Southey, "that he could crush Skiddaw." Ignorance also seems to have pervaded the
article written by Brougham, in the second number of the Edinburgh, on Dr. Thomas Young's discovery
of the true principles of interferences in the undulatory theory of light. Sir John Herschell,
a more competent authority, said of Young's discovery, that it was sufficient of itself to
have placed its author in the highest rank of scientific immortality.

The situation seemed to Mr. Murray to warrant the following letter:

John Murray to the Right Hon. George Canning.

September 25, 1807.

Sir,

I venture to address you upon a subject that is not, perhaps, undeserving of one moment of
your attention. There is a work entitled the Edinburgh Review, written with such unquestionable
talent that it has already attained an extent of circulation not equalled by any similar publication.
The principles of this work are, however, so radically bad that I have been led to consider
the effect that such sentiments, so generally diffused, are likely to produce, and to think
that some means equally popular ought to be adopted to counteract their dangerous tendency.
But the publication in question is conducted with so much ability, and is sanctioned with such
high and decisive authority by the party of whose opinions it is the organ, that there is little
hope of producing against it any effectual opposition, unless it arise from you, Sir, and your
friends. Should you, Sir, think the idea worthy of encouragement, I should, with equal pride
and willingness, engage my arduous exertions to promote its success; but as my object is nothing
short of producing a work of the greatest talent and importance, I shall entertain it no longer
if it be not so fortunate as to obtain the high patronage which I have thus taken the liberty
to solicit.

Permit me, Sir, to add that the person who addresses you is no adventurer, but a man of some
property, and inheriting a business that has been established for nearly a century. I therefore
trust that my application will be attributed to its proper motives, and that your goodness
will at least pardon its obtrusion.

I have the honour to be, Sir, Your must humble and obedient Servant,

John Murray.

So far as can be ascertained, Mr. Canning did not answer this letter in writing. But a communication
was shortly after opened with him through Mr. Stratford Canning, whose acquaintance Mr. Murray
had made through the publication of the "Miniature," referred to in a preceding chapter. Mr.
Canning was still acting as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and was necessarily cautious,
but Mr. Stratford Canning, his cousin, was not bound by any such official restraints. In January
1808 he introduced Mr. Gifford to Mr. Murray, and the starting of the proposed new periodical
was the subject of many consultations between them.

Walter Scott still continued to write for the Edinburgh, notwithstanding the differences of
opinion which existed between himself and the editor as to political questions. He was rather
proud of the Review, inasmuch as it was an outgrowth of Scottish literature. Scott even endeavoured
to enlist new contributors, for the purpose of strengthening the Review. He wrote to Robert
Southey in 1807, inviting him to contribute to the Edinburgh. The honorarium was to be ten
guineas per sheet of sixteen pages. This was a very tempting invitation to Southey, as he was
by no means rich at the time, and the pay was more than he received for his contributions to
the Annual Register, but he replied to Scott as follows:

Mr. Southey to Mr. Scott.

December, 1807.

"I have scarcely one opinion in common with it [the Edinburgh Review] upon any subject....
Whatever of any merit I might insert there would aid and abet opinions hostile to my own, and
thus identify me with a system which I thoroughly disapprove. This is not said hastily. The
emolument to be derived from writing at ten guineas a sheet, Scotch measure, instead of seven
pounds for the Annual, would be considerable; the pecuniary advantage resulting from the different
manner in which my future works would be handled [by the Review] probably still more so. But
my moral feelings must not be compromised. To Jeffrey as an individual I shall ever be ready
to show every kind of individual courtesy; but of Judge Jeffrey of the Edinburgh Review I must
ever think and speak as of a bad politician, a worse moralist, and a critic, in matters of
taste, equally incompetent and unjust." [Footnote: "The Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey,"
iii. pp. 124-5.] Walter Scott, before long, was led to entertain the same opinion of the Edinburgh
Review as Southey. A severe and unjust review of "Marmion," by Jeffrey, appeared in 1808, accusing
Scott of a mercenary spirit in writing for money (though Jeffrey himself was writing for money
in the same article), and further irritating Scott by asserting that he "had neglected Scottish
feelings and Scottish characters." "Constable," writes Scott to his brother Thomas, in November
1808, "or rather that Bear, his partner [Mr. Hunter], has behaved by me of late not very civilly,
and I owe Jeffrey a flap with a foxtail on account of his review of 'Marmion,' and thus doth
the whirligig of time bring about my revenges."

Murray, too, was greatly annoyed by the review of "Marmion." "Scott," he used to say, "may
forgive but he can never forget this treatment"; and, to quote the words of Mr. Lockhart: "When
he read the article on 'Marmion,' and another on foreign politics, in the same number of the
Edinburgh Review, Murray said to himself, 'Walter Scott has feelings, both as a gentleman and
a Tory, which these people must now have wounded; the alliance between him and the whole clique
of the Edinburgh Review is now shaken'"; and, as far at least as the political part of the
affair was concerned, John Murray's sagacity was not at fault.

Mr. Murray at once took advantage of this opening to draw closer the bonds between himself
and Ballantyne, for he well knew who was the leading spirit in the firm, and showed himself
desirous of obtaining the London agency of the publishing business, which, as he rightly discerned,
would soon be started in connection with the Canongate Press, and in opposition to Constable.
The large increase of work which Murray was prepared to place in the hands of the printers
induced Ballantyne to invite him to come as far as Ferrybridge in Yorkshire for a personal
conference. At this interview various new projects were discussed--among them the proposed
Novelists' Library--and from the information which he then obtained as to Scott's personal
feelings and literary projects, Murray considered himself justified in at once proceeding to
Ashestiel, in order to lay before Scott himself, in a personal interview, his great scheme
for the new Review. He arrived there about the middle of October 1808, and was hospitably welcomed
and entertained. He stated his plans, mentioned the proposed editor of the Review, the probable
contributors, and earnestly invited the assistance of Scott himself.

During Murray's visit to Ashestiel No. 26 of the Edinburgh Review arrived. It contained an
article entitled "Don Cevallos on the Occupation of Spain." It was long supposed that the article
was written by Brougham, but it has since been ascertained that Jeffrey himself was the author
of it. This article gave great offence to the friends of rational liberty and limited monarchy
in this country. Scott forthwith wrote to Constable: "The Edinburgh Review had become such
as to render it impossible for me to become a contributor to it; now it is such as I can no
longer continue to receive or read it."

"The list of the then subscribers," said Mr. Cadell to Mr. Lockhart, "exhibits, in an indignant
dash of Constable's pen opposite Mr. Scott's name, the word 'STOPT!'"

Mr. Murray never forgot his visit to Ashestiel. Scott was kindness itself; Mrs. Scott was equally
cordial and hospitable. Richard Heber was there at the time, and the three went out daily to
explore the scenery of the neighbourhood. They visited Melrose Abbey, the Tweed, and Dryburgh
Abbey, not very remote from Melrose, where Scott was himself to lie; they ascended the Eildon
Hills, Scott on his sheltie often stopping by the way to point out to Murray and Heber, who
were on foot, some broad meadow or heather-clad ground, as a spot where some legend held its
seat, or some notable deed had been achieved during the wars of the Borders. Scott thus converted
the barren hillside into a region of interest and delight. From the top of the Eildons he pointed
out the scene of some twenty battles.

Very soon after his return to London, Murray addressed the following letter to Mr. Scott:

John Murray to Mr. Scott.

October 26, 1808.

DEAR SIR,

Although the pressure of business since my return to London has prevented me writing to you
sooner, yet my thoughts have, I assure you, been almost completely employed upon the important
subjects of the conversation with which you honoured me during the time I was experiencing
the obliging hospitality of Mrs. Scott and yourself at Ashestiel.

Then, after a reference to the Novelists' Library mentioned in the last chapter, the letter
continues:

"I have seen Mr. William Gifford, hinting distantly at a Review; he admitted the most imperious
necessity for one, and that too in a way that leads me to think that he has had very important
communications upon the subject.... I feel more than ever confident that the higher powers
are exceedingly desirous for the establishment of some counteracting publication; and it will,
I suspect, remain only for your appearance in London to urge some very formidable plan into
activity."

This letter was crossed in transit by the following:

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

ASHESTIEL, BY SELKIRK, October 30, 1808.

DEAR SIR,

"Since I had the pleasure of seeing you I have the satisfaction to find that Mr. Gifford has
accepted the task of editing the intended Review. This was communicated to me by the Lord Advocate,
who at the same time requested me to write Mr. Gifford on the subject. I have done so at great
length, pointing out whatever occurred to me on the facilities or difficulties of the work
in general, as well as on the editorial department, offering at the same time all the assistance
in my power to set matters upon a good footing and to keep them so. I presume he will have
my letter by the time this reaches you, and that he will communicate with you fully upon the
details. I am as certain as of my existence that the plan will answer, provided sufficient
attention is used in procuring and selecting articles of merit."

What Scott thought of Murray's visit to Ashestiel may be inferred from his letter to his political
confidant, George Ellis, of which, as it has already appeared in Scott's Life, it is only necessary
to give extracts here:

Mr. Scott to Mr. George Ellis.

November 2, 1808.

DEAR ELLIS,

"We had, equally to our joy and surprise, a flying visit from Heber about three weeks ago.
He staid but three days, but, between old stories and new, we made them very merry in their
passage. During his stay, John Murray, the bookseller in Fleet Street, who has more real knowledge
of what concerns his business than any of his brethren--at least, than any of them that I know--came
to canvass a most important plan, of which I am now, in "dern privacie," to give you the outline.
I had most strongly recommended to our Lord Advocate (the Right Hon. J.C. Colquhoun) to think
of some counter measures against the Edinburgh Review. which, politically speaking, is doing
incalculable damage. I do not mean this in a party way; the present ministry are not all I
could wish them, for (Canning excepted) I doubt there is among them too much self-seeking....
But their political principles are sound English principles, and, compared to the greedy and
inefficient horde which preceded them, they are angels of light and purity. It is obvious,
however, that they want defenders, both in and out of doors. Pitt's

  "Love and fear glued many friends to him;
  And now he's fallen, those tough co-mixtures melt."

Then, after a reference to the large circulation (9,000) and mischievous politics of the Edinburgh
Review, he proceeds:

"Now, I think there is balm in Gilead for all this, and that the cure lies in instituting such
a Review in London as should be conducted totally independent of bookselling influence, on
a plan as liberal as that of the Edinburgh, its literature as well supported, and its principles
English and constitutional. Accordingly, I have been given to understand that Mr. William Gifford
is willing to become the conductor of such a work, and I have written to him, at the Lord Advocate's
desire, a very voluminous letter on the subject. Now, should this plan succeed, you must hang
your birding-piece on its hook, take down your old Anti-Jacobin armour, and "remember your
swashing blow." It is not that I think this projected Review ought to be exclusively or principally
political; this would, in my opinion, absolutely counteract its purpose, which I think should
be to offer to those who love their country, and to those whom we would wish to love it, a
periodical work of criticism conducted with equal talent, but upon sounder principles. Is not
this very possible? In point of learning, you Englishmen have ten times our scholarship; and,
as for talent and genius, "Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than any of
the rivers in Israel?" Have we not yourself and your cousin, the Roses, Malthus, Matthias,
Gifford, Heber, and his brother? Can I not procure you a score of blue-caps who would rather
write for us than for the Edinburgh Review if they got as much pay by it?

Heber's fear was lest we should fail in procuring regular steady contributors; but I know so
much of the interior discipline of reviewing as to have no apprehension of that. Provided we
are once set a-going by a few dashing numbers, there would be no fear of enlisting regular
contributors; but the amateurs must bestir themselves in the first instance. From the Government
we should be entitled to expect confidential communications as to points of fact (so far as
fit to be made public) in our political disquisitions. With this advantage, our good cause
and St. George to boot, we may at least divide the field with our formidable competitors, who,
after all, are much better at cutting than parrying, and whose uninterrupted triumph has as
much unfitted them for resisting a serious attack as it has done Buonaparte for the Spanish
war. Jeffrey is, to be sure, a man of the most uncommon versatility of talent, but what then?

"General Howe is a gallant commander, There are others as gallant as he."

Think of all this, and let me hear from you very soon on the subject. Canning is, I have good
reason to know, very anxious about the plan. I mentioned it to Robert Dundas, who was here
with his lady for a few days on a pilgrimage to Melrose, and he highly approved of it. Though
no literary man, he is judicious, clair-voyant, and uncommonly sound-headed, like his father,
Lord Melville. With the exceptions I have mentioned, the thing continues a secret....

Ever yours,

Walter Scott."

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

November 2, 1808.

I transmitted my letter to Mr. Gifford through the Lord Advocate, and left it open that Mr.
Canning might read it if he thought it worth while. I have a letter from the Advocate highly
approving my views, so I suppose you will very soon hear from Mr. Gifford specifically on the
subject. It is a matter of immense consequence that something shall be set about, and that
without delay....

The points on which I chiefly insisted with Mr. Gifford were that the Review should be independent
both as to bookselling and ministerial influences--meaning that we were not to be advocates
of party through thick and thin, but to maintain constitutional principles. Moreover, I stated
as essential that the literary part of the work should be as sedulously attended to as the
political, because it is by means of that alone that the work can acquire any firm and extended
reputation.

Moreover yet, I submitted that each contributor should draw money for his article, be his rank
what it may. This general rule has been of great use to the Edinburgh Review. Of terms I said
nothing, except that your views on the subject seemed to me highly liberal. I do not add further
particulars because I dare say Mr. Gifford will show you the letter, which is a very long one.
Believe me, my dear Sir, with sincere regard,

Your faithful, humble Servant,

Walter Scott.

In a subsequent letter to Mr. Ellis, Scott again indicates what he considers should be the
proper management of the proposed Review.

"Let me touch," he says, "a string of much delicacy--the political character of the Review.
It appears to me that this should be of a liberal and enlarged nature, resting upon principles--indulgent
and conciliatory as far as possible upon mere party questions, but stern in detecting and exposing
all attempts to sap our constitutional fabric. Religion is another slippery station; here also
I would endeavour to be as impartial as the subject will admit of.... The truth is, there is
policy, as well as morality, in keeping our swords clear as well as sharp, and not forgetting
the Gentleman in the Critic. The public appetite is soon gorged with any particular style.
The common Reviews, before the appearance of the Edinburgh, had become extremely mawkish; and,
unless when prompted by the malice of the bookseller or reviewer, gave a dawdling, maudlin
sort of applause to everything that reached even mediocrity. The Edinburgh folks squeezed into
their sauce plenty of acid, and were popular from novelty as well as from merit. The minor
Reviews, and other periodical publications, have outréd the matter still further, and given
us all abuse and no talent.... This, therefore, we have to trust to, that decent, lively, and
reflecting criticism, teaching men not to abuse books, but to read and to judge them, will
have the effect of novelty upon a public wearied with universal efforts at blackguard and indiscriminating
satire. I have a long and very sensible letter [Footnote: Given below, under date November
15, 1808.] from John Murray, the bookseller, in which he touches upon this point very neatly."

Scott was most assiduous in his preparations for the first number. He wrote to his brother,
Thomas Scott, asking him to contribute an article; to Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe, of Christ
Church, Oxford; to Mr. Morritt, of Rokeby Park, Yorkshire; and to Robert Southey, of Keswick,
asking them for contributions. To Mr. Sharpe he says:

"The Hebers are engaged, item Rogers, Southey, Moore (Anacreon), and others whose reputations
Jeffrey has murdered, and who are rising to cry woe upon him, like the ghosts in 'King Richard.'"

Scott's letter to Gilford, the intended editor, was full of excellent advice. It was dated
"Edinburgh, October 25, 1808." We quote from it several important passages:

"John Murray, of Fleet Street," says Scott, "a young bookseller of capital and enterprise,
and with more good sense and propriety of sentiment than fall to the share of most of the trade,
made me a visit at Ashestiel a few weeks ago; and as I found he had had some communication
with you upon the subject, I did not hesitate to communicate my sentiments to him on this and
some other points of the plan, and I thought his ideas were most liberal and satisfactory.

"The office of Editor is of such importance, that had you not been pleased to undertake it,
I fear the plan would have fallen wholly to the ground. The full power of control must, of
course, be vested in the editor for selecting, curtailing, and correcting the contributions
to the Review. But this is not all; for, as he is the person immediately responsible to the
bookseller that the work (amounting to a certain number of pages, more or less) shall be before
the public at a certain time, it will be the editor's duty to consider in due turn the articles
of which each number ought to consist, and to take measures for procuring them from the persons
best qualified to write upon such and such subjects. But this is sometimes so troublesome,
that I foresee with pleasure you will soon be obliged to abandon your resolution of writing
nothing yourself. At the same time, if you will accept of my services as a sort of jackal or
lion's provider, I will do all in my power to assist in this troublesome department of editorial
duty.

"But there is still something behind, and that of the last consequence. One great resource
to which the Edinburgh editor turns himself, and by which he gives popularity even to the duller
articles of his Review, is accepting contributions from persons of inferior powers of writing,
provided they understand the books to which their criticisms relate; and as such are often
of stupefying mediocrity, he renders them palatable by throwing in a handful of spice, namely,
any lively paragraph or entertaining illustration that occurs to him in reading them over.
By this sort of veneering he converts, without loss of time or hindrance to business, articles,
which in their original state might hang in the market, into such goods as are not likely to
disgrace those among which they are placed. This seems to be a point in which an editor's assistance
is of the last consequence, for those who possess the knowledge necessary to review books of
research or abstruse disquisitions, are very often unable to put the criticisms into a readable,
much more a pleasant and captivating form; and as their science cannot be attained 'for the
nonce,' the only remedy is to supply their deficiencies, and give their lucubrations a more
popular turn.

"There is one opportunity possessed by you in a particular degree--that of access to the best
sources of political information. It would not, certainly, be advisable that the work should
assume, especially at the outset, a professed political character. On the contrary, the articles
on science and miscellaneous literature ought to be of such a quality as might fairly challenge
competition with the best of our contemporaries. But as the real reason of instituting the
publication is the disgusting and deleterious doctrine with which the most popular of our Reviews
disgraces its pages, it is essential to consider how this warfare should be managed. On this
ground, I hope it is not too much to expect from those who have the power of assisting us,
that they should on topics of great national interest furnish the reviewers, through the medium
of their editor, with accurate views of points of fact, so far as they are fit to be made public.
This is the most delicate and yet most essential part of our scheme.

"On the one hand, it is certainly not to be understood that we are to be held down to advocate
upon all occasions the cause of administration. Such a dereliction of independence would render
us entirely useless for the purpose we mean to serve. On the other hand, nothing will render
the work more interesting than the public learning, not from any vaunt of ours, but from their
own observation, that we have access to early and accurate information on points of fact. The
Edinburgh Review has profited much by the pains which the Opposition party have taken to possess
the writers of all the information they could give them on public matters. Let me repeat that
you, my dear sir, from enjoying the confidence of Mr. Canning, and other persons in power,
may easily obtain the confidential information necessary to give credit to the work, and communicate
it to such as you may think proper to employ in laying it before the public."

Mr. Scott further proceeded, in his letter to Mr. Gifford, to discuss the mode and time of
publication, the choice of subjects, the persons to be employed as contributors, and the name
of the proposed Review, thus thoroughly identifying himself with it.

"Let our forces," he said, "for a number or two, consist of volunteers or amateurs, and when
we have acquired some reputation, we shall soon levy and discipline our forces of the line.
After all, the matter is become very serious--eight or nine thousand copies of the Edinburgh
Review are regularly distributed, merely because there is no other respectable and independent
publication of the kind. In this city (Edinburgh), where there is not one Whig out of twenty
men who read the work, many hundreds are sold; and how long the generality of readers will
continue to dislike politics, so artfully mingled with information and amusement, is worthy
of deep consideration. But it is not yet too late to stand in the breach; the first number
ought, if possible, to be out in January, and if it can burst among them like a bomb, without
previous notice, the effect will be more striking.

"Of those who might be intrusted in the first instance you are a much better judge than I am.
I think I can command the assistance of a friend or two here, particularly William Erskine,
the Lord Advocate's brother-in-law and my most intimate friend. In London, you have Malthus,
George Ellis, the Roses, cum pluribus aliis. Richard Heber was with me when Murray came to
my farm, and, knowing his zeal for the good cause, I let him into our counsels. In Mr. Frere
we have the hopes of a potent ally. The Rev. Reginald Heber would be an excellent coadjutor,
and when I come to town I will sound Matthias. As strict secrecy would of course be observed,
the diffidence of many might be overcome. For scholars you can be at no loss while Oxford stands
where it did; and I think there will be no deficiency in the scientific articles."

Thus instructed, Gifford proceeded to rally his forces. There was no want of contributors.
Some came invited, some came unsought; but, as the matter was still a secret, the editor endeavoured
to secure contributions through his personal friends. For instance, he called upon Mr. Rogers
to request him to secure the help of Moore.

"I must confess," said Rogers to Moore, "I heard of the new quarterly with pleasure, as I thought
it might correct an evil we had long lamented together. Gifford wishes much for contributors,
and is exceedingly anxious that you should assist him as often as you can afford time.... All
this in confidence of course, as the secret is not my own."

Gifford also endeavoured to secure the assistance of Southey, through his friend, Mr. Grosvenor
Bedford. Southey was requested to write for the first number an article on the Affairs of Spain.
This, however, he declined to do; but promised to send an article on the subject of Missionaries.

"Let not Gifford," he wrote to Bedford, in reply to his letter, "suppose me a troublesome man
to deal with, pertinacious about trifles, or standing upon punctilios of authorship. No, Grosvenor,
I am a quiet, patient, easy-going hack of the mule breed; regular as clockwork in my pace,
sure-footed, bearing the burden which is laid on me, and only obstinate in choosing my own
path. If Gifford could see me by this fireside, where, like Nicodemus, one candle suffices
me in a large room, he would see a man in a coat 'still more threadbare than his own' when
he wrote his 'Imitation,' working hard and getting little--a bare maintenance, and hardly that;
writing poems and history for posterity with his whole heart and soul; one daily progressive
in learning, not so learned as he is poor, not so poor as proud, not so proud as happy."

Mr. James Ballantyne to John Murray.

October 28, 1808.

"Well, you have of course heard from Mr. Scott of the progress of the 'Great Plan.' Canning
bites at the hook eagerly. A review termed by Mr. Jeffrey a tickler, is to appear of Dryden
in this No. of the Edinburgh. By the Lord! they will rue it. You know Scott's present feelings,
excited by the review of 'Marmion.' What will they be when that of Dryden appears?"

It was some time, however, before arrangements could be finally made for bringing out the first
number of the Quarterly. Scott could not as yet pay his intended visit to London, and after
waiting for about a month, Murray sent him the following letter, giving his further opinion
as to the scope and object of the proposed Review:

John Murray to Mr. Scott.

November 15, 1808.

DEAR SIR,

I have been desirous of writing to you for nearly a week past, as I never felt more the want
of a personal conversation. I will endeavour, however, to explain myself to you, and will rely
on your confidence and indulgence for secrecy and attention in what I have to communicate.
I have before told you that the idea of a new Review has been revolving in my mind for nearly
two years, and that more than twelve months ago I addressed Mr. Canning on the subject. The
propriety, if not the necessity, of establishing a journal upon principles opposite to those
of the Edinburgh Review has occurred to many men more enlightened than myself; and I believe
the same reason has prevented others, as it has done myself, from attempting it, namely, the
immense difficulty of obtaining talent of sufficient magnitude to render success even doubtful.

By degrees my plan has gradually floated up to this height. But there exists at least an equal
difficulty yet--that peculiar talent in an editor of rendering our other great resources advantageous
to the best possible degree. This, I think, may be accomplished, but it must be effected by
your arduous assistance, at least for a little time. Our friend Mr. Gifford, whose writings
show him to be both a man of learning and wit, has lived too little in the world lately to
have obtained that delicacy and tact whereby he can feel at one instant, and habitually, whatever
may gratify public desire and excite public attention and curiosity. But this you know to be
a leading feature in the talents of Mr. Jeffrey and his friends; and that, without the most
happy choice of subjects, as well as the ability to treat them well--catching the "manners
living as they rise"--the Edinburgh Review could not have attained the success it has done;
and no other Review, however preponderating in solid merit, will obtain sufficient attention
without them. Entering the field too, as we shall do, against an army commanded by the most
skilful generals, it will not do for us to leave any of our best officers behind as a reserve,
for they would be of no use if we were defeated at first. We must enter with our most able
commanders at once, and we shall then acquire confidence, if not reputation, and increase in
numbers as we proceed.

Our first number must contain the most valuable and striking information in politics, and the
most interesting articles of general literature and science, written by our most able friends.
If our plan appears to be so advantageous to the ministers whose measures, to a certain extent,
we intend to justify, to support, to recommend and assist, that they have promised their support;
when might that support be so advantageously given, either for their own interests or ours,
as at the commencement, when we are most weak, and have the most arduous onset to make, and
when we do and must stand most in need of help? If our first number be not written with the
greatest ability, upon the most interesting topics, it will not excite public attention. No
man, even the friend of the principles we adopt, will leave the sprightly pages of the Edinburgh
Review to read a dull detail of staid morality, or dissertations on subjects whose interest
has long fled.

I do not say this from any, even the smallest doubt, of our having all that we desire in these
respects in our power; but because I am apprehensive that without your assistance it will not
be drawn into action, and my reason for this fear I will thus submit to you. You mentioned
in your letter to Mr. Gifford, that our Review should open with a grand article on Spain--meaning
a display of the political feeling of the people, and the probable results of this important
contest. I suggested to Mr. Gifford that Mr. Frere should be written to, which he said was
easy, and that he thought he would do it; for Frere could not only give the facts upon the
subject, but could write them better than any other person. But having, in my project, given
the name of Southey as a person who might assist occasionally in a number or two hence, I found
at our next interview that Mr. Gifford, who does not know Mr. Southey, had spoken to a friend
to ask Mr. S. to write the article upon Spain. It is true that Mr. Southey knows a great deal
about Spain, and on another occasion would have given a good article upon the subject; but
at present his is not the kind of knowledge which we want, and it is, moreover, trusting our
secret to a stranger, who has, by the way, a directly opposite bias in politics.

Mr. Gifford also told me, with very great stress, that among the articles he had submitted
to you was [one on] Hodgson's Translation of Juvenal, which at no time could be a very interesting
article for us, and having been published more than six months ago, would probably be a very
stupid one. Then, you must observe, that it would necessarily involve a comparison with Mr.
Gifford's own translation, which must of course be praised, and thus show an individual feeling--the
least spark of which, in our early numbers, would both betray and ruin us. He talks of reviewing
himself a late translation of "Persius," for (entre nous) a similar reason. He has himself
nearly completed a translation, which will be published in a few months.

In what I have said upon this most exceedingly delicate point, and which I again submit to
your most honourable confidence, I have no other object but just to show you without reserve
how we stand, and to exemplify what I set out with--that without skilful and judicious management
we shall totally mistake the road to the accomplishment of the arduous task which we have undertaken,
and involve the cause and every individual in not merely defeat, but disgrace. I must at the
same time observe that Mr. Gifford is the most obliging and well-meaning man alive, and that
he is perfectly ready to be instructed in those points of which his seclusion renders him ignorant;
and all that I wish and mean is, that we should strive to open clearly the view which is so
obvious to us--that our first number must be a most brilliant one in every respect; and to
effect this, we must avail ourselves of any valuable political information we can command.
Those persons who have the most interest in supporting the Review must be called upon immediately
for their strenuous personal help. The fact must be obvious to you,--that if Mr. Canning, Mr.
Frere, Mr. Scott, Mr. Ellis, and Mr. Gifford, with their immediate and true friends, will exert
themselves heartily in every respect, so as to produce with secrecy only one remarkably attractive
number, their further labour would be comparatively light. With such a number in our hands,
we might select and obtain every other help that we required; and then the persons named would
only be called upon for their information, facts, hints, advice, and occasional articles. But
without this--without producing a number that shall at least equal, if not excel, the best
of the Edinburgh Review, it were better not to be attempted. We should do more harm to our
cause by an unsuccessful attempt; and the reputation of the Edinburgh Review would be increased
inversely to our fruitless opposition.... With respect to bookselling interference with the
Review, I am equally convinced with yourself of its total incompatibility with a really respectable
and valuable critical journal. I assure you that nothing can be more distant from my views,
which are confined to the ardour which I feel for the cause and principles which it will be
our object to support, and the honour of professional reputation which would obviously result
to the publisher of so important a work. It were silly to suppress that I shall not be sorry
to derive from it as much profit as I can satisfactorily enjoy, consistent with the liberal
scale upon which it is my first desire to act towards every writer and friend concerned in
the work. Respecting the terms upon which the editor shall be placed at first, I have proposed,
and it appears to be satisfactory to Mr. Gifford, that he shall receive, either previous to,
or immediately after, the publication of each number, the sum of 160 guineas, which he is to
distribute as he thinks proper, without any question or interference on my part; and that in
addition to this, he shall receive from me the sum of £200 annually, merely as the editor.
This, Sir, is much more than I can flatter myself with the return of, for the first year at
least; but it is my intention that his salary shall ever increase proportionately to the success
of the work under his management. The editor has a most arduous office to perform, and the
success of the publication must depend in a great measure upon his activity.

I am, dear Sir, Your obliged and faithful Servant,

John Murray.

It will be observed from this letter, that Mr. Murray was aware that, besides skilful editing,
sound and practical business management was necessary to render the new Review a success. The
way in which he informs Mr. Scott about Gifford's proposed review of "Juvenal" and "Persius,"
shows that he fully comprehended the situation, and the dangers which would beset an editor
like Gifford, who lived for the most part amongst his books, and was, to a large extent, secluded
from the active world.

On the same day Scott was writing to Murray:

Mr. Scott to John Murray. Edinburgh, November 15, 1808.

Dear Sir,

I received two days ago a letter from Mr. Gifford highly approving of the particulars of the
plan which I had sketched for the Review. But there are two points to be considered. In the
first place, I cannot be in town as I proposed, for the Commissioners under the Judicial Bill,
to whom I am to act as clerk, have resolved that their final sittings shall be held here, so
that I have now no chance of being in London before spring. This is very unlucky, as Mr. Gifford
proposes to wait for my arrival in town to set the great machine a-going. I shall write to
him that this is impossible, and that I wish he would, with your assistance and that of his
other friends, make up a list of the works which the first number is to contain, and consider
what is the extent of the aid he will require from the North. The other circumstance is, that
Mr. Gifford pleads the state of his health and his retired habits as sequestrating him from
the world, and rendering him less capable of active exertion, and in the kindest and most polite
manner he expresses his hope that he should receive very extensive assistance and support from
me, without which he is pleased to say he would utterly despair of success. Now between ourselves
(for this is strictly confidential) I am rather alarmed at this prospect. I am willing, and
anxiously so, to do all in my power to serve the work; but, my dear sir, you know how many
of our very ablest hands are engaged in the Edinburgh Review, and what a dismal work it will
be to wring assistance from the few whose indolence has left them neutral. I can, to be sure,
work like a horse myself, but then I have two heavy works on my hands already, namely, "Somers"
and "Swift." Constable had lately very nearly relinquished the latter work, and I now heartily
wish it had never commenced; but two volumes are nearly printed, so I conclude it will now
go on. If this work had not stood in the way, I should have liked Beaumont and Fletcher much
better. It would not have required half the research, and occupied much less time. I plainly
see that, according to Mr. Gifford's view, I should have almost all the trouble of a co-editor,
both in collecting and revising the articles which are to come from Scotland, as well as in
supplying all deficiencies from my own stores.

These considerations cannot, however, operate upon the first number, so pray send me a list
of books, and perhaps you may send some on a venture. You know the department I had in the
Edinburgh Review. I will sound Southey, agreeable to Mr. Gifford's wishes, on the Spanish affairs.
The last number of the Edinburgh Review has given disgust beyond measure, owing to the tone
of the article on Cevallos' exposé. Subscribers are falling off like withered leaves.

I retired my name among others, after explaining the reasons both to Mr. Jeffrey and Mr. Constable,
so that there never was such an opening for a new Review. I shall be glad to hear what you
think on the subject of terms, for my Northern troops will not move without pay; but there
is no hurry about fixing this point, as most of the writers in the first number will be more
or less indifferent on the subject. For my own share, I care not what the conditions are, unless
the labour expected from me is to occupy a considerable portion of time, in which case they
might become an object. While we are on this subject, I may as well mention that as you incur
so large an outlay in the case of the Novels, I would not only be happy that my remuneration
should depend on the profits of the work, but I also think I could command a few hundreds to
assist in carrying it on.

By the way, I see "Notes on Don Quixote" advertised. This was a plan I had for enriching our
collection, having many references by me for the purpose. I shall be sorry if I am powerfully
anticipated. Perhaps the book would make a good article in the Review. Can you get me "Gaytoun's
Festivous Notes on Don Quixote"?

I think our friend Ballantyne is grown an inch taller on the subjects of the "Romances."

Believe me, dear Sir, Yours very truly, Walter Scott.

Gifford is much pleased with you personally.

John Murray to Mr. Scott.

November 19, 1808.

"Mr. Gifford has communicated to me an important piece of news. He met his friend, Lord Teignmouth,
and learned from him that he and the Wilberforce party had some idea of starting a journal
to oppose the Edinburgh Review, that Henry Thornton and Mr. [Zachary] Macaulay were to be the
conductors, that they had met, and that some able men were mentioned. Upon sounding Lord T.
as to their giving us their assistance, he thought this might be adopted in preference to their
own plans.... It will happen fortunately that we intend opening with an article on the missionaries,
which, as it will be written in opposition to the sentiments in the Edinburgh Review, is very
likely to gain that large body of which Wilberforce is the head. I have collected from every
Missionary Society in London, of which there are no less than five, all their curious reports,
proceedings and history, which, I know, Sydney Smith never saw; and which I could only procure
by personal application. Southey will give a complete view of the subject, and if he will enter
heartily into it, and do it well, it will be as much as he can do for the first number. These
transactions contain, amidst a great deal of fanaticism, the most curious information you can
imagine upon the history, literature, topography and manners of nations and countries of which
we are otherwise totally ignorant.... If you have occasion to write to Southey, pray urge the
vast importance of this subject, and entreat him to give it all his ability. I find that a
new volume of Burns' ('The Reliques') will be published by the end of this month, which will
form the subject of another capital article under your hands. I presume 'Sir John Carr (Tour
in Scotland)' will be another article, which even you, I fancy, will like; 'Mrs. Grant of Laggan,'
too, and perhaps your friend Mr. Cumberland's 'John de Lancaster' .... Are you not sufficiently
well acquainted with Miss (Joanna) Baillie, both to confide in her, and command her talents?
If so, you will probably think of what may suit her, and what may apply to her. Mr. Heber,
too, would apply to his brother at your request, and his friend Coplestone, who will also be
written to by a friend of Gifford's...."

Scott was very desirous of enlisting George Canning among the contributors to the Quarterly.
He wrote to his friend Ellis:

Mr. Scott to Mr. G. Ellis.

"As our start is of such immense consequence, don't you think Mr. Canning, though unquestionably
our Atlas, might for a day find a Hercules on whom to devolve the burden of the globe, while
he writes for us a review? I know what an audacious request this is, but suppose he should,
as great statesmen sometimes do, take a political fit of the gout, and absent himself from
a large ministerial dinner which might give it him in good earnest--dine at three on a chicken
and pint of wine, and lay the foundation of at least one good article? Let us but once get
afloat, and our labour is not worth talking about; but, till then, all hands must work hard."

This suggestion was communicated by George Ellis to Gifford, the chosen editor, and on December
1, Murray informed Scott that the article on Spain was proceeding under Mr. Canning's immediate
superintendence. Canning and Gifford went down to Mr. Ellis's house at Sunninghill, where the
three remained together for four days, during which time the article was hatched and completed.

On receiving the celebrated "Declaration of Westminster" on the Spanish War, Scott wrote to Ellis:

"Tell Mr. Canning that the old women of Scotland will defend the country with their distaffs,
rather than that troops enough be not sent to make good so noble a pledge. Were the thousands
that have mouldered away in petty conquests or Lilliputian expeditions united to those we have
now in that country, what a band would Sir John Moore have under him!... Jeffrey has offered
terms of pacification, engaging that no party politics should again appear in his Review. I
told him I thought it was now too late, and reminded him that I had often pointed out to him
the consequences of letting his work become a party tool. He said 'he did not fear for the
consequences--there were but four men he feared as opponents.' 'Who are these?' 'Yourself for
one.' 'Certainly you pay me a great compliment; depend upon it I will endeavour to deserve
it.' 'Why, you would not join against me?' 'Yes, I would, if I saw a proper opportunity: not
against you personally, but against your politics.' 'You are privileged to be violent.' 'I
don't ask any privilege for undue violence. But who are your other foemen?' 'George Ellis and
Southey.' The other he did not name. All this was in great good humour; and next day I had
a very affecting note from him, in answer to an invitation to dinner. He has no suspicion of
the Review whatever."

In the meantime, Mr. Murray continued to look out for further contributors. Mr. James Mill,
of the India House, in reply to a request for assistance, wrote:

"You do me a great deal of honour in the solicitude you express to have me engaged in laying
the foundation stone of your new edifice, which I hope will be both splendid and durable; and
it is no want of zeal or gratitude that delays me. But this ponderous Geography, a porter's,
or rather a horse's load, bears me down to a degree you can hardly conceive. What I am now
meditating from under it is to spare time to do well and leisurely the Indian article (my favourite
subject) for your next number. Besides, I shall not reckon myself less a founder from its having
been only the fault of my previous engagements that my first article for you appears only in
the second number, and not in the first part of your work."

Another contributor whom Mr. Murray was desirous to secure was Mrs. Inchbald, authoress of
the "Simple Story." The application was made to her through one of Murray's intimate friends,
Mr. Hoppner, the artist. Her answer was as follows:

Mrs. Inchbald to Mr. Hoppner. December 31, 1808.

My dear Sir, As I wholly rely upon your judgment for the excellency of the design in question,
I wish you to be better acquainted with my abilities as a reviewer before I suffer my curiosity
to be further gratified in respect to the plan of the work you have undertaken, or the names
of those persons who, with yourself, have done me the very great honour to require my assistance.
Before I see you, then, and possess myself of your further confidence, it is proper that I
should acquaint you that there is only one department of a Review for which I am in the least
qualified, and that one combines plays and novels. Yet the very few novels I have read, of
later publications, incapacitates me again for detecting plagiary, or for making such comparisons
as proper criticism may demand. You will, perhaps, be surprised when I tell you that I am not
only wholly unacquainted with the book you have mentioned to me, but that I never heard of
it before. If it be in French, there will be another insurmountable difficulty; for, though
I read French, and have translated some French comedies, yet I am not so perfectly acquainted
with the language as to dare to write remarks upon a French author. If Madame Cottin's "Malvina"
be in English, you wish it speedily reviewed, and can possibly have any doubt of the truth
of my present report, please to send it me; and whatever may be the contents, I will immediately
essay my abilities on the work, or immediately return it as a hopeless case.

Yours very faithfully,

E. Inchbald.

On further consideration, however, Mrs. Inchbald modestly declined to become a contributor.
Notwithstanding her great merits as an author, she had the extremest diffidence in her own
abilities.

Mrs. Inchbald to John Murray.

"The more I reflect on the importance of the contributions intended for this work, the more
I am convinced of my own inability to become a contributor. The productions in question must,
I am convinced, be of a certain quality that will demand far more acquaintance with books,
and much more general knowledge, than it has ever been my good fortune to attain. Under these
circumstances, finding myself, upon mature consideration, wholly inadequate to the task proposed,
I beg you will accept of this apology as a truth, and present it to Mr. Hoppner on the first
opportunity; and assure him that it has been solely my reluctance to yield up the honour he
intended me which has tempted me, for an instant, to be undecided in my reply to his overture.--I
am, Sir, with sincere acknowledgments for the politeness of your letter to me,

"E. Inchbald."

And here the correspondence dropped.

It is now difficult to understand the profound secrecy with which the projection of the new
Review was carried on until within a fortnight of the day of its publication. In these modern
times widespread advertisements announce the advent of a new periodical, whereas then both
publisher and editor enjoined the utmost secrecy upon all with whom they were in correspondence.
Still, the day of publication was very near, when the Quarterly was, according to Scott, to
"burst like a bomb" among the Whigs of Edinburgh. The only explanation of the secrecy of the
preliminary arrangements is that probably down to the last it was difficult to ascertain whether
enough materials could be accumulated to form a sufficiently good number before the first Quarterly
Review was launched into the world.

CHAPTER VI

THE "QUARTERLY" LAUNCHED

While Mr. Gifford was marshalling his forces and preparing for the issue of the first number
of the Quarterly, Mr. Murray was corresponding with James Ballantyne of Edinburgh as to the
works they were jointly engaged in bringing out, and also with respect to the northern agency
of the new Review. An arrangement was made between them that they should meet at Boroughbridge,
in Yorkshire, at the beginning of January 1809, for the purpose of concocting their plans.
Ballantyne proposed to leave Edinburgh on January 5, and Murray was to set out from London
on the same day, both making for Boroughbridge. A few days before Ballantyne left Edinburgh
he wrote to Murray:

"I shall not let a living soul know of my intended journey. Entire secrecy seems necessary
at present. I dined yesterday tête-à-tête with Mr. Scott, and had a great deal of highly important
conversation with him. He showed me a letter bidding a final farewell to the house of Constable."

It was mid-winter, and there were increasing indications of a heavy storm brewing. Notwithstanding
the severity of the weather, however, both determined to set out for their place of meeting
in Yorkshire. Two days before Ballantyne left Edinburgh, he wrote as follows:

Mr. Ballantyne to John Murray. January 4, 1809.

Dear Murray, It is blowing the devil's weather here; but no matter--if the mail goes, I go.
I shall travel by the mail, and shall, instantly on arriving, go to the "Crown," hoping to
find you and an imperial dinner. By the bye, you had better, on your arrival, take places north
and south for the following day. In four or five hours after your receiving this, I expect
to shake your princely paw.

Thine, J.B.

Scott also sent a note by the hand of Ballantyne to tell of his complete rupture with Constable
owing to "Mr. Hunter's extreme incivility."

As a result of these negotiations the Ballantynes were appointed publishers of the new Review
in Edinburgh, and, with a view to a more central position, they took premises in South Hanover
Street. Scott wrote with reference to this:

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

February, 1809.

I enclose the promised "Swift," and am now, I think, personally out of your debt, though I
will endeavour to stop up gaps if I do not receive the contributions I expect from others.
Were I in the neighbourhood of your shop in London I could soon run up half a sheet of trifling
articles with a page or two to each, but that is impossible here for lack of materials.

When the Ballantynes open shop you must take care to have them supplied with food for such
a stop-gap sort of criticism. I think we will never again feel the pressure we have had for
this number; the harvest has literally been great and the labourers few.

Yours truly,

W.S.

Mr. James Ballantyne. to John Murray.

January 27, 1809.

"I see or hear of nothing but good about the Review. Mr. Scott is at this moment busy with
two articles, besides the one he has sent. In conversation a few days since, I heard a gentleman
ask him, 'Pray, sir, do you think the Quarterly Review will be equal to the Edinburgh?' His
answer was, 'I won't be quite sure of the first number, because of course there are difficulties
attending the commencement of every work which time and habit can alone smooth away. But I
think the first number will be a good one, and in the course of three or four, I think we'll
sweat them!'"

The first number of the Quarterly Review was published at the end of February, 1809. Like most
first numbers, it did not entirely realize the sanguine views of its promoters. It did not
burst like a thunder-clap on the reading public; nor did it give promise to its friends that
a new political power had been born into the world. The general tone was more literary than
political; and though it contained much that was well worth reading, none of its articles were
of first-rate quality.

Walter Scott was the principal contributor, and was keenly interested in its progress, though
his mind was ever teeming with other new schemes. The allusion in the following letter to his
publication of "many unauthenticated books," if unintentional, seems little less than prophetic.

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

Edinburgh, February 25, 1809.

Dear Sir,

I see with pleasure that you will be out on the first. Yet I wish I could have seen my articles
in proof, for I seldom read over my things in manuscript, and always find infinite room for
improvement at the printer's expense. I hope our hurry will not be such another time as to
deprive me of the chance of doing the best I can, which depends greatly on my seeing the proofs.
Pray have the goodness to attend to this.

I have made for the Ballantynes a little selection of poetry, to be entitled "English Minstrelsy";
I also intend to arrange for them a first volume of English Memoirs, to be entitled--"Secret
History of the Court of James I." To consist of:

Osborne's "Traditional Memoirs."

Sir Anthony Welldon's "Court and Character of James I."

Heylin's "Aulicus Coquinariae."

Sir Edward Peyton's "Rise and Fall of the House of Stewart."

I will add a few explanatory notes to these curious memoirs, and hope to continue the collection,
as (thanks to my constant labour on "Somers") it costs me no expense, and shall cost the proprietors
none. You may advertise the publications, and Ballantyne, equally agreeable to his own wish
and mine, will let you choose your own share in them. I have a commission for you in the way
of art. I have published many unauthenticated books, as you know, and may probably bring forward
many more. Now I wish to have it in my power to place on a few copies of each a decisive mark
of appropriation. I have chosen for this purpose a device borne by a champion of my name in
a tournament at Stirling! It was a gate and portcullis, with the motto CLAUSUS TUTUS ERO. I
have it engraved on a seal, as you may remark on the enclosure, but it is done in a most blackguard
style. Now what I want is to have this same gateway and this same portcullis and this same
motto of clausus tutus ero, which is an anagram of Walterus Scotus (taking two single U's for
the W), cut upon wood in the most elegant manner, so as to make a small vignette capable of
being applied to a few copies of every work which I either write or publish. This fancy of
making portcullis copies I have much at heart, and trust to you to get it accomplished for
me in the most elegant manner. I don't mind the expense, and perhaps Mr. Westall might be disposed
to make a sketch for me.

I am most anxious to see the Review. God grant we may lose no ground; I tremble when I think
of my own articles, of two of which I have but an indefinite recollection.

What would you think of an edition of the "Old English Froissart," say 500 in the small antique
quarto, a beautiful size of book; the spelling must be brought to an uniformity, the work copied
(as I could not promise my beautiful copy to go to press), notes added and illustrations, etc.,
and inaccuracies corrected. I think Johnes would be driven into most deserved disgrace, and
I can get the use of a most curious MS. of the French Froissart in the Newbattle Library, probably
the finest in existence after that of Berlin. I am an enthusiast about Berners' Froissart,
and though I could not undertake the drudgery of preparing the whole for the press, yet Weber
[Footnote: Henry Weber, Scott's amanuensis.] would do it under my eye upon the most reasonable
terms. I would revise every part relating to English history.

I have several other literary schemes, but defer mentioning them till I come to London, which
I sincerely hope will be in the course of a month or six weeks. I hear Mr. Canning is anxious
about our Review. Constable says it is a Scotch job. I could not help quizzing Mr. Robert Miller,
who asked me in an odd sort of way, as I thought, why it was not out? I said very indifferently
I knew nothing about it, but heard a vague report that the Edition was to be much enlarged
on account of the expected demand. I also inclose a few lines to my brother, and am, dear Sir,

Very truly yours,

W. Scott.

It is universally agreed here that Cumberland is five hundred degrees beneath contempt.

Ballantyne, Scott's partner, and publisher of the Review in Edinburgh, hastened to communicate
to Murray their joint views as to the success of the work.

Mr. Ballantyne to John Murray.

February 28, 1809.

My dear Murray,

I received the Quarterly an hour ago. Before taking it to Mr. Scott, I had just time to look
into the article on Burns, and at the general aspect of the book. It looks uncommonly well....
The view of Burns' character is better than Jeffrey's. It is written in a more congenial tone,
with more tender, kindly feeling. Though not perhaps written with such elaborate eloquence
as Jeffrey's, the thoughts are more original, and the style equally powerful. The two first
articles (and perhaps the rest are not inferior) will confer a name on the Review. But why
do I trouble you with my opinions, when I can give you Mr. Scott's? He has just been reading
the Spanish article beside me, and he again and again interrupted himself with expressions
of the strongest admiration.

Three days later, Ballantyne again wrote:

"I have now read 'Spain,' 'Burns,' 'Woman,' 'Curran,' 'Cid,' 'Carr,' 'Missionaries.' Upon the
whole, I think these articles most excellent. Mr. Scott is in high spirits; but he says there
are evident marks of haste in most of them. With respect to his own articles, he much regrets
not to have had the opportunity of revising them. He thinks the 'Missionaries' very clever;
but he shakes his head at 'Sidney,' 'Woman,' and 'Public Characters.' Our copies, which we
expected this morning, have not made their appearance, which has given us no small anxiety.
We are panting to hear the public voice. Depend upon it, if our exertions are continued, the
thing will do. Would G. were as active as Scott and Murray!"

Murray had plenty of advisers. Gifford said he had too many. His friend, Sharon Turner, was
ready with his criticism on No. 1. He deplored the appearance of the article by Scott on "Carr's
Tour in Scotland." [Footnote: Scott himself had written to Murray about this, which he calls
"a whisky-frisky article," on June 30. "I take the advantage of forwarding Sir John's Review,
to send you back his letters under the same cover. He is an incomparable goose, but as he is
innocent and good-natured, I would not like it to be publicly known that the flagellation comes
from my hand. Secrecy therefore will oblige me."]

Mr. Sharon Turner to John Murray.

"I cannot endure the idea of an individual being wounded merely because he has written a book.
If, as in the case of the authors attacked in the 'Baviad,' the works censured were vitiating
our literature--or, as in the case of Moore's Poems, corrupting our morals--if they were denouncing
our religious principles, or attacking those political principles on which our Government subsists--let
them be criticised without mercy. The salus publica demands the sacrifice. But to make an individual
ridiculous merely because he has written a foolish, if it be a harmless book, is not, I think,
justifiable on any moral principle ... I repeat my principle. Whatever tends to vitiate our
literary taste, our morals, our religious or political principles, may be fairly at the mercy
of criticism. So, whatever tends to introduce false science, false history, indeed, falsehood
in any shape, exposes itself to the censor's rod. But harmless, inoffensive works should be
passed by. Where is the bravery of treading on a worm or crushing a poor fly? Where the utility?
Where the honour?"

An edition of 4,000 copies had been printed; this was soon exhausted, and a second edition
was called for.

Mr. Scott was ample in his encouragements.

"I think," he wrote to Murray, "a firm and stable sale will be settled here, to the extent
of 1,000 or 1,500 even for the next number.... I am quite pleased with my ten guineas a sheet
for my labour in writing, and for additional exertions. I will consider them as overpaid by
success in the cause, especially while that success is doubtful."

Ballantyne wrote to Murray in March:

"Constable, I am told, has consulted Sir Samuel Romilly, and means, after writing a book against
me, to prosecute me for stealing his plans! Somebody has certainly stolen his brains!"

The confederates continued to encourage each other and to incite to greater effort the procrastinating
Gifford. The following rather mysterious paragraph occurs in a letter from Scott to Murray
dated March 19, 1809.

"I have found means to get at Mr. G., and have procured a letter to be written to him, which
may possibly produce one to you signed Rutherford or Richardson, or some such name, and dated
from the North of England; or, if he does not write to you, enquiry is to be made whether he
would choose you should address him. The secrecy to be observed in this business must be most
profound, even to Ballantyne and all the world. If you get articles from him (which will and
must draw attention) you must throw out a false scent for enquirers. I believe this unfortunate
man will soon be in London."

In reply, Mr. Murray wrote on March 24 to Mr. Scott, urging him to come to London, and offering,
"if there be no plea for charging your expenses to Government," to "undertake that the Review
shall pay them as far as one hundred guineas." To this Scott replied:

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

Edinburgh, March 27, 1809.

I have only time to give a very short answer to your letter. Some very important business detains
me here till Monday or Tuesday, on the last of which days at farthest I will set off for town,
and will be with you of course at the end of the week. As to my travelling expenses, if Government
pay me, good and well; if they do not, depend on it I will never take a farthing from you.
You have, my good friend, enough of expense to incur in forwarding this great and dubious undertaking,
and God forbid I should add so unreasonable a charge as your liberality points at. I am very
frank in money matters, and always take my price when I think I can give money's worth for
money, but this is quite extravagant, and you must think no more of it. Should I want money
for any purpose I will readily make you my banker and give you value in reviews. John Ballantyne's
last remittance continues to go off briskly; the devil's in you in London, you don't know good
writing when you get it. All depends on our cutting in before the next Edinburgh, when instead
of following their lead they shall follow ours.

Mrs. Scott is my fellow-traveller in virtue of an old promise. I am, dear Sir, yours truly,

Walter Scott.

April 4, at night.

I have been detained a day later than I intended, but set off to-morrow at mid-day. I believe
I shall get franked, so will have my generosity for nothing. I hope to be in London on Monday.

In sending out copies of the first number, Mr. Murray was not forgetful of one friend who had
taken a leading part in originating the Review.

In 1808 Mr. Stratford Canning, when only twenty years of age, had been selected to accompany
Mr. Adair on a special mission to Constantinople. The following year, on Mr. Adair being appointed
H.B.M. Minister to the Sublime Porte, Stratford Canning became Secretary of Legation. Mr. Murray
wrote to him:

John Murray to Mr. Stratford Canning.

32, Fleet St., London, March 12, 1809.

Dear Sir,

It is with no small degree of pleasure that I send, for the favour of your acceptance, the
first number of the Quarterly Review, a work which owes its birth to your obliging countenance
and introduction of me to Mr. Gifford. I flatter myself that upon the whole you will not be
dissatisfied with our first attempt, which is universally allowed to be so very respectable.
Had you been in London during its progress, it would, I am confident, have been rendered more
deserving of public attention.

The letter goes on to ask for information on foreign works of importance or interest.

Mr. Stratford Canning replied:

"With regard to the comission which you have given me, it is, I fear, completely out of my
power to execute it. Literature neither resides at Constantinople nor passes through it. Even
were I able to obtain the publications of France and Germany by way of Vienna, the road is
so circuitous, that you would have them later than others who contrive to smuggle them across
the North Sea. Every London newspaper that retails its daily sixpennyworth of false reports,
publishes the French, the Hamburgh, the Vienna, the Frankfort, and other journals, full as
soon as we receive any of them here. This is the case at all times; at present it is much worse.
We are entirely insulated. The Russians block up the usual road through Bucharest, and the
Servians prevent the passage of couriers through Bosnia. And in addition to these difficulties,
the present state of the Continent must at least interrupt all literary works. You will not,
I am sure, look upon these as idle excuses. Things may probably improve, and I will not quit
this country without commissioning some one here to send you anything that may be of use to
so promising a publication as your Review."

No sooner was one number published, than preparations were made for the next. Every periodical
is a continuous work--never ending, still beginning. New contributors must be gained; new books
reviewed; new views criticised. Mr. Murray was, even more than the editor, the backbone of
the enterprise: he was indefatigable in soliciting new writers for the Quarterly, and in finding
the books fit for review, and the appropriate reviewers of the books. Sometimes the reviews
were printed before the editor was consulted, but everything passed under the notice of Gifford,
and received his emendations and final approval.

Mr. Murray went so far as to invite Leigh Hunt to contribute an article on Literature or Poetry
for the Quarterly. The reply came from John Hunt, Leigh's brother. He said:

Mr. John Hunt to John Murray.

"My brother some days back requested me to present to you his thanks for the polite note you
favoured him with on the subject of the Review, to which he should have been most willing to
have contributed in the manner you propose, did he not perceive that the political sentiments
contained in it are in direct opposition to his own."

This was honest, and it did not interfere with the personal intercourse of the publisher and
the poet. Murray afterwards wrote to Scott: "Hunt is most vilely wrong-headed in politics,
which he has allowed to turn him away from the path of elegant criticism, which might have
led him to eminence and respectability."

James Mill, author of the "History of British India," sent an article for the second number;
but the sentiments and principles not being in accordance with those of the editor, it was
not at once accepted. On learning this, he wrote to Mr. Murray as follows:

Mr. James Mill to John Murray.

My dear Sir,

I can have no objection in the world to your delaying the article I have sent you till it altogether
suits your arrangements to make use of it. Besides this point, a few words of explanation may
not be altogether useless with regard to another. I am half inclined to suspect that the objection
of your Editor goes a little farther than you state. If so, I beg you will not hesitate a moment
about what you are to do with it. I wrote it solely with a view to oblige and to benefit you
personally, but with very little idea, as I told you at our first conversation on the subject,
that it would be in my power to be of any use to you, as the views which I entertained respecting
what is good for our country were very different from the views entertained by the gentlemen
with whom in your projected concern you told me you were to be connected. To convince you,
however, of my good-will, I am perfectly ready to give you a specimen, and if it appears to
be such as likely to give offence to your friends, or not to harmonise with the general style
of your work, commit it to the flames without the smallest scruple. Be assured that it will
not make the smallest difference in my sentiments towards you, or render me in the smallest
degree less disposed to lend you my aid (such as it is) on any other occasion when it may be
better calculated to be of use to you.

Yours very truly,

J. Mill.

Gifford was not a man of business; he was unpunctual. The second number of the Quarterly appeared
behind its time, and the publisher felt himself under the necessity of expostulating with the
editor.

John Murray to Mr. Gifford.

May 11, 1809.

Dear Mr. Gifford,

I begin to suspect that you are not aware of the complete misery which is occasioned to me,
and the certain ruin which must attend the Review, by our unfortunate procrastination. Long
before this, every line of copy for the present number ought to have been in the hands of the
printer. Yet the whole of the Review is yet to print. I know not what to do to facilitate your
labour, for the articles which you have long had he scattered without attention, and those
which I ventured to send to the printer undergo such retarding corrections, that even by this
mode we do not advance. I entreat the favour of your exertion. For the last five months my
most imperative concerns have yielded to this, without the hope of my anxiety or labour ceasing.

"Tanti miserere laboris,"

in my distress and with regret from

John Murray.

Mr. Gifford's reply was as follows:

"The delay and confusion which have arisen must be attributed to a want of confidential communication.
In a word, you have too many advisers, and I too many masters."

At last the second number of the Quarterly appeared, at the end of May instead of at the middle
of April. The new contributors to this number were Dr. D'Oyley, the Rev. Mr. Walpole, and George
Canning, who, in conjunction with Sharon Turner, contributed the last article on Austrian State
Papers.

As soon as the second number was published, Mr. Gifford, whose health was hardly equal to the
constant strain of preparing and editing the successive numbers, hastened away, as was his
custom, to the seaside. He wrote to Mr. Murray from Ryde:

Mr. Gifford to John Murray.

June 18, 1809.

"I rejoice to hear of our success, and feel very anxious to carry it further. A fortnight's
complete abstraction from all sublunary cares has done me much good, and I am now ready to
put on my spectacles and look about me.... Hoppner is here, and has been at Death's door. The
third day after his arrival, he had an apoplectic fit, from which blisters, etc., have miraculously
recovered him.... This morning I received a letter from Mr. Erskine. He speaks very highly
of the second number, and of the Austrian article, which is thought its chief attraction. Theology,
he says, few people read or care about. On this, I wish to say a word seriously. I am sorry
that Mr. E. has fallen into that notion, too general I fear in Scotland; but this is his own
concern. I differ with him totally, however, as to the few readers which such subjects find;
for as far as my knowledge reaches, the reverse is the fact. The strongest letter which I have
received since I came down, in our favour, points out the two serious articles as masterly
productions and of decided superiority. We have taught the truth I mention to the Edinburgh
Review, and in their last number they have also attempted to be serious, and abstain from their
flippant impiety. It is not done with the best grace, but it has done them credit, I hear....
When you make up your parcel, pray put in some small cheap 'Horace,' which I can no more do
without than Parson Adams ex 'Aeschylus.' I have left it somewhere on the road. Any common
thing will do."

Mr. Murray sent Gifford a splendid copy of "Horace" in the next parcel of books and manuscripts.
In his reply Gifford, expostulating, "Why, my dear Sir, will you do these things?" thanked
him warmly for his gift.

Mr. George Ellis was, as usual, ready with his criticism. Differing from Gifford, he wrote:

"I confess that, to my taste, the long article on the New Testament is very tedious, and that
the progress of Socinianism is, to my apprehension, a bugbear which we have no immediate reason
to be scared by; but it may alarm some people, and what I think a dull prosing piece of orthodoxy
may have its admirers, and promote our sale."

Even Constable had a good word to say of it. In a letter to his partner, Hunter, then in London,
he said:

"I received the Quarterly Review yesterday, and immediately went and delivered it to Mr. Jeffrey
himself. It really seems a respectable number, but what then? Unless theirs improves and ours
falls off it cannot harm us, I think. I observe that Nos. 1 and 2 extend to merely twenty-nine
sheets, so that, in fact, ours is still the cheaper of the two. Murray's waiting on you with
it is one of the wisest things I ever knew him do: you will not be behindhand with him in civility."

No. 3 of the Quarterly was also late, and was not published until the end of August. The contributors
were behindhand; an article was expected from Canning on Spain, and the publication was postponed
until this article had been received, printed and corrected. The foundations of it were laid
by George Ellis, and it was completed by George Canning.

Of this article Mr. Gifford wrote:

"In consequence of my importunity, Mr. Canning has exerted himself and produced the best article
that ever yet appeared in any Review."

Although Mr. Gifford was sometimes the subject of opprobrium because of his supposed severity,
we find that in many cases he softened down the tone of the reviewers. For instance, in communicating
to Mr. Murray the first part of Dr. Thomson's article on the "Outlines of Mineralogy," by Kidd,
he observed:

Mr. Gifford to John Murray.

"It is very splenitick and very severe, and much too wantonly so. I hope, however, it is just.
Some of the opprobrious language I shall soften, for the eternal repetitions of ignorance,
absurdity, surprising, etc., are not wanted. I am sorry to observe so much Nationality in it.
Let this be a secret between us, for I will not have my private opinions go beyond yourself.
As for Kidd, he is a modest, unassuming man, and is not to be attacked with sticks and stones
like a savage. Remember, it is only the epithets which I mean to soften; for as to the scientific
part, it shall not be meddled with."

His faithful correspondent, Mr. Ellis, wrote as to the quality of this third number of the
Quarterly. He agreed with Mr. Murray, that though profound, it was "most notoriously and unequivocally
dull.... We must veto ponderous articles; they will simply sink us."

Isaac D'Israeli also tendered his advice. He was one of Mr. Murray's most intimate friends,
and could speak freely and honestly to him as to the prospects of the Review. He was at Brighton,
preparing his third volume of the "Curiosities of Literature."

Mr. I. D'Israeli to John Murray.

"I have bought the complete collection of Memoirs written by individuals of the French nation,
amounting to sixty-five volumes, for fifteen guineas.... What can I say about the Q.R.? Certainly
nothing new; it has not yet invaded the country. Here it is totally unknown, though as usual
the Ed. Rev. is here; but among private libraries, I find it equally unknown. It has yet its
fortune to make. You must appeal to the feelings of Gifford! Has he none then? Can't you get
a more active and vigilant Editor? But what can I say at this distance? The disastrous finale
of the Austrians, received this morning, is felt here as deadly. Buonaparte is a tremendous
Thaumaturgus!... I wish you had such a genius in the Q.R..... My son Ben assures me you are
in Brighton. He saw you! Now, he never lies." [Footnote: Mr. Murray was in Brighton at the time.]

Thus pressed by his correspondents, Mr. Murray did his best to rescue the Quarterly from failure.
Though it brought him into prominent notice as a publisher, it was not by any means paying
its expenses. Some thought it doubtful whether "the play was worth the candle." Yet Murray
was not a man to be driven back by comparative want of success. He continued to enlist a band
of competent contributors. Amongst these were some very eminent men: Mr. John Barrow of the
Admiralty; the Rev. Reginald Heber, Mr. Robert Grant (afterwards Sir Robert, the Indian judge),
Mr. Stephens, etc. How Mr. Barrow was induced to become a contributor is thus explained in
his Autobiography. [Footnote: "Autobiographical Memoir of Sir John Barrow," Murray, 1847.]

"One morning, in the summer of the year 1809, Mr. Canning looked in upon me at the Admiralty,
said he had often troubled me on business, but he was now about to ask me a favour. 'I believe
you are acquainted with my friend William Gifford?' 'By reputation,' I said, 'but not personally.'
'Then,' says he, 'I must make you personally acquainted; will you come and dine with me at
Gloucester Lodge any day, the sooner the more agreeable--say to-morrow, if you are disengaged?'
On accepting, he said, 'I will send for Gifford to meet you; I know he will be too glad to come.'

"'Now,' he continued, 'it is right I should tell you that, in the Review of which two numbers
have appeared, under the name of the Quarterly, I am deeply, both publicly and personally,
interested, and have taken a leading part with Mr. George Ellis, Hookham Frere, Walter Scott,
Rose, Southey, and some others; our object in that work being to counteract the virus scattered
among His Majesty's subjects through the pages of the Edinburgh Review. Now, I wish to enlist
you in our corps, not as a mere advising idler, but as an efficient labourer in our friend
Gifford's vineyard.'"

Mr. Barrow modestly expressed a doubt as to his competence, but in the sequel, he tells us,
Mr. Canning carried his point, and "I may add, once for all, that what with Gifford's eager
and urgent demands, and the exercise becoming habitual and not disagreeable, I did not cease
writing for the Quarterly Review till I had supplied no less, rather more, than 190 articles."

The fourth number of the Quarterly, which was due in November, was not published until the
end of December 1809. Gifford's excuse was the want of copy. He wrote to Mr. Murray: "We must,
upon the publication of this number, enter into some plan for ensuring regularity."

Although it appeared late, the fourth number was the best that had yet been issued. It was
more varied in its contents; containing articles by Scott, Southey, Barrow, and Heber. But
the most important article was contributed by Robert Grant, on the "Character of the late C.J.
Fox." This was the first article in the Quarterly, according to Mr. Murray, which excited general
admiration, concerning which we find a memorandum in Mr. Murray's own copy; and, what was an
important test, it largely increased the demand for the Review.

CHAPTER VII

CONSTABLE AND BALLANTYNE

During the year in which the Quarterly was first given to the world, the alliance between Murray
and the Ballantynes was close and intimate: their correspondence was not confined to business
matters, but bears witness to warm personal friendship.

Murray was able to place much printing work in their hands, and amongst other books, "Mrs.
Rundell's Cookery," a valuable property, which had now reached a very large circulation, was
printed at the Canongate Press.

They exerted themselves to promote the sale of one another's publications and engaged in various
joint works, such, for example, as Grahame's "British Georgics" and Scott's "English Minstrelsy."

In the midst of all these transactions, however, there were not wanting symptoms of financial
difficulties, which, as in a previous instance, were destined in time to cause a severance
between Murray and his Edinburgh agents. It was the old story--drawing bills for value not
received. Murray seriously warned the Ballantynes of the risks they were running in trading
beyond their capital. James Ballantyne replied on March 30, 1809:

Mr. James Ballantyne to John Murray.

"Suffer me to notice one part of your letter respecting which you will be happy to be put right.
We are by no means trading beyond our capital. It requires no professional knowledge to enable
us to avoid so fatal an error as that. For the few speculations we have entered into our means
have been carefully calculated and are perfectly adequate."

Yet at the close of the same letter, referring to the "British Novelists"--a vast scheme, to
which Mr. Murray had by no means pledged himself--Ballantyne continues:

"For this work permit me to state I have ordered a font of types, cut expressly on purpose,
at an expense of near £1,000, and have engaged a very large number of compositors for no other
object."

On June 14, James Ballantyne wrote to Murray:

"I can get no books out yet, without interfering in the printing office with business previously
engaged for, and that puts me a little about for cash. Independent of this circumstance, upon
which we reckoned, a sum of £1,500 payable to us at 25th May, yet waiting some cursed legal
arrangements, but which we trust to have very shortly [sic]. This is all preliminary to the
enclosures which I hope will not be disagreeable to you, and if not, I will trust to their
receipt accepted, by return of post."

Mr. Murray replied on June 20:

"I regret that I should be under the necessity of returning you the two bills which you enclosed,
unaccepted; but having settled lately a very large amount with Mr. Constable, I had occasion
to grant more bills than I think it proper to allow to be about at the same time."

This was not the last application for acceptances, and it will be found that in the end it
led to an entire separation between the firms.

The Ballantynes, however, were more sanguine than prudent. In spite of Mr. Murray's warning
that they were proceeding too rapidly with the publication of new works, they informed him
that they had a "gigantic scheme" in hand--the "Tales of the East," translated by Henry Weber,
Walter Scott's private secretary--besides the "Edinburgh Encyclopaedia," and the "Secret Memoirs
of the House of Stewart." They said that Scott was interested in the "Tales of the East," and
in one of their hopeful letters they requested Mr. Murray to join in their speculations. His
answer was as follows:

John Murray to Messrs. Ballantyne & Co.

October 31, 1809.

"I regret that I cannot accept a share in the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia.' I am obliged to decline
by motives of prudence. I do not know anything of the agreement made by the proprietors, except
in the palpable mismanagement of a very exclusive and promising concern. I am therefore fearful
to risk my property in an affair so extremely unsuitable.

"You distress me sadly by the announcement of having put the 'Secret Memoirs' to press, and
that the paper for it was actually purchased six months ago! How can you, my good sirs, act
in this way? How can you imagine that a bookseller can afford to pay eternal advances upon
almost every work in which he takes a share with you? And how can you continue to destroy every
speculation by entering upon new ones before the previous ones are properly completed?... Why,
with your influence, will you not urge the completion of the 'Minstrelsy'? Why not go on with
and complete the series of De Foe?... For myself, I really do not know what to do, for when
I see that you will complete nothing of your own, I am unwillingly apprehensive of having any
work of mine in your power. What I thus write is in serious friendship for you. I entreat you
to let us complete what we have already in hand, before we begin upon any other speculation.
You will have enough to do to sell those in which we are already engaged. As to your mode of
exchange and so disposing of your shares, besides the universal obloquy which attends the practice
in the mind of every respectable bookseller, and the certain damnation which it invariably
causes both to the book and the author, as in the case of Grahame, if persisted in, it must
end in serious loss to the bookseller.... If you cannot give me your solemn promise not to
exchange a copy of Tasso, I trust you will allow me to withdraw the small share which I propose
to take, for the least breath of this kind would blast the work and the author too--a most
worthy man, upon whose account alone I engaged in the speculation."

Constable, with whom Murray had never entirely broken, had always looked with jealousy at the
operations of the house of Ballantyne. Their firm had indeed been started in opposition to
himself; and it was not without a sort of gratification that he heard of their pecuniary difficulties,
and of the friction between them and Murray. Scott's "Lady of the Lake" had been announced
for publication. At the close of a letter to Murray, Constable rather maliciously remarks:

January 20, 1810.

"I have no particular anxiety about promulgating the folly (to say the least of it) of certain
correspondents of yours in this quarter; but if you will ask our friend Mr. Miller if he had
a letter from a shop nearly opposite the Royal Exchange the other day, he will, I dare say,
tell you of the contents. I am mistaken if their game is not well up! Indeed I doubt much if
they will survive the 'Lady of the Lake.' She will probably help to drown them!"

An arrangement had been made with the Ballantynes that, in consideration of their being the
sole agents for Mr. Murray in Scotland, they should give him the opportunity of taking shares
in any of their publications. Instead, however, of offering a share of the "Lady of the Lake"
to Mr. Murray, according to the understanding between the firms, the Ballantynes had already
parted with one fourth share of the work to Mr. Miller, of Albemarle Street, London, whose
business was afterwards purchased by Mr. Murray. Mr. Murray's letter to Ballantyne & Co. thus
describes the arrangement:

John Murray to Messrs. Ballantyne & Co.

March 26, 1810.

"Respecting my Review, you appear to forget that your engagement was that I should be your
sole agent here, and that you were to publish nothing but what I was to have the offer of a
share in. Your deviation from this must have led me to conclude that you did not desire or
expect to continue my agent any longer. You cannot suppose that my estimation of Mr. Scott's
genius can have rendered me indifferent to my exclusion from a share in the 'Lady of the Lake.'
I mention this as well to testify that I am not indifferent to this conduct in you as to point
it out to you, that if you mean to withhold from me that portion which you command of the advantages
of our connexion, you must surely mean to resign any that might arise from me. The sole agency
for my publications in Edinburgh is worth to any man who understands his business £300 a year;
but this requires zealous activity and deference on one side, and great confidence on both,
otherwise the connexion cannot be advantageous or satisfactory to either party. For this number
of the Review I have continued your name solely in it, and propose to make you as before sole
publisher in Scotland; but as you have yourself adopted the plan of drawing upon me for the
amount of each transaction, you will do me the favour to consider what quantity you will need,
and upon your remitting to me a note at six months for the amount, I shall immediately ship
the quantity for you."

Mr. James Ballantyne to John Murray.

"Your agency hitherto has been productive of little or no advantage to us, and the fault has
not lain with us. We have persisted in offering you shares of everything begun by us, till
we found the hopelessness of waiting any return; and in dividing Mr. Scott's poem, we found
it our duty to give what share we had to part with to those by whom we were chiefly benefited
both as booksellers and printers."

This letter was accompanied with a heavy bill for printing the works of De Foe for Mr. Murray.
A breach thus took place with the Ballantynes; the publisher of the Quarterly was compelled
to look out for a new agent for Scotland, and met with a thoroughly competent one in Mr. William
Blackwood, the founder of the well-known publishing house in Edinburgh.

To return to the progress of the Quarterly. The fifth number, which was due in February 1810,
but did not appear until the end of March, contained many excellent articles, though, as Mr.
Ellis said, some of them were contributed by "good and steady but marvellously heavy friends."
Yet he found it better than the Edinburgh, which on that occasion was "reasonably dull."

It contained one article which became the foundation of an English classic, that of Southey
on the "Life of Nelson." Of this article Murray wrote to its author:

"I wish it to be made such a book as shall become the heroic text of every midshipman in the
Navy, and the association of Nelson and Southey will not, I think, be ungrateful to you. If
it be worth your attention in this way I am disposed to think that it will enable me to treble
the sum I first offered as a slight remuneration."

Mr. Murray, writing to Mr. Scott (August 28, 1810) as to the appearance of the new number,
which did not appear till a month and a half after it was due, remarked on the fourth article.
"This," he said, "is a review of the 'Daughters of Isenberg, a Bavarian Romance,' by Mr. Gifford,
to whom the authoress (Alicia T. Palmer) had the temerity to send three £1 notes!" Gifford,
instead of sending back the money with indignation, as he at first proposed, reviewed the romance,
and assumed that the authoress had sent him the money for charitable purposes.

Mr. Gifford to Miss A.T. Palmer.

"Our avocations leave us but little leisure for extra-official employment; and in the present
case she has inadvertently added to our difficulties by forbearing to specify the precise objects
of her bounty. We hesitated for some time between the Foundling and Lying-in Hospitals: in
finally determining for the latter, we humbly trust that we have not disappointed her expectations,
nor misapplied her charity. Our publisher will transmit the proper receipt to her address."

One of the principal objections of Mr. Murray to the manner in which Mr. Gifford edited the
Quarterly was the war which he waged with the Edinburgh. This, he held, was not the way in
which a respectable periodical should be conducted. It had a line of its own to pursue, without
attacking its neighbours. "Publish," he said, "the best information, the best science, the
best literature; and leave the public to decide for themselves." Relying on this opinion he
warned Gifford and his friends against attacking Sydney Smith, and Leslie, and Jeffrey, because
of their contributions to the Edinburgh. He thought that such attacks had only the effect of
advertising the rival journal, and rendering it of greater importance. With reference to the
article on Sydney Smith's "Visitation Sermon" in No. 5, Mr. George Ellis privately wrote to
Mr. Murray:

"Gifford, though the best-tempered man alive, is terribly severe with his pen; but S.S. would
suffer ten times more by being turned into ridicule (and never did man expose himself so much
as he did in that sermon) than from being slashed and cauterized in that manner."

The following refers to a difference of opinion between Mr. Murray and his editor. Mr. Gifford
had resented some expression of his friend's as savouring of intimidation.

John Murray to Mr. Gifford.

September 25, 1810.

"I entreat you to be assured that the term 'intimidation' can never be applied to any part
of my conduct towards you, for whom I entertain the highest esteem and regard, both as a writer
and as a friend. If I am over-anxious, it is because I have let my hopes of fame as a bookseller
rest upon the establishment and celebrity of this journal. My character, as well with my professional
brethren as with the public, is at stake upon it; for I would not be thought silly by the one,
or a mere speculator by the other. I have a very large business, as you may conclude by the
capital I have been able to throw into this one publication, and yet my mind is so entirely
engrossed, my honour is so completely involved in this one thing, that I neither eat, drink,
nor sleep upon anything else. I would rather it excelled all other journals and I gained nothing
by it, than gain £300 a year by it without trouble if it were thought inferior to any other.
This, sir, is true."

Meanwhile, Mr. Murray was becoming hard pressed for money. To conduct his increasing business
required a large floating capital, for long credits were the custom, and besides his own requirements,
he had to bear the constant importunities of the Ballantynes to renew their bills. On July
25, 1810, he wrote to them: "This will be the last renewal of the bill (£300); when it becomes
due, you will have the goodness to provide for it." It was, however, becoming impossible to
continue dealing with them, and he gradually transferred his printing business to other firms.
We find him about this time ordering Messrs. George Ramsay & Co., Edinburgh, to print 8,000
of the "Domestic Cookery," which was still having a large sale.

The Constables also were pressing him for renewals of bills. The correspondence of this date
is full of remonstrances from Murray against the financial unpunctuality of his Edinburgh correspondents.

On March 21, 1811, he writes: "With regard to myself, I will engage in no new work of any kind";
and again, on April 4, 1811:

Dear Constable,

You know how much I have distressed myself by entering heedlessly upon too many engagements.
You must not urge me to involve myself in renewed difficulties.

To return to the Quarterly No. 8. Owing to the repeated delay in publication, the circulation
fell off from 5,000 to 4,000, and Mr. George Ellis had obviously reason when he wrote: "Hence
I infer that punctuality is, in our present situation, our great and only desideratum."

Accordingly, increased efforts were made to have the Quarterly published with greater punctuality,
though it was a considerable time before success in this respect was finally reached. Gifford
pruned and pared down to the last moment, and often held back the publication until an erasure
or a correction could be finally inserted.

No. 9, due in February 1811, was not published until March. From this time Southey became an
almost constant contributor to the Review. He wrote with ease, grace, and rapidity, and there
was scarcely a number without one, and sometimes two and even three articles from his pen.
His prose style was charming--clear, masculine, and to the point. The public eagerly read his
prose, while his poetry remained unnoticed on the shelves. The poet could not accept this view
of his merits. Of the "Curse of Kehama" he wrote:

"I was perfectly aware that I was planting acorns while my contemporaries were setting Turkey
beans. The oak will grow, and though I may never sit under its shade, my children will. Of
the 'Lady of the Lake,' 25,000 copies have been printed; of 'Kehama', 500; and if they sell
in seven years I shall be surprised."

Scott wrote a kindly notice of Southey's poem. It was not his way to cut up his friend in a
review. He pointed out the beauties of the poem, in order to invite purchasers and readers.
Yet his private opinion to his friend George Ellis was this:

Mr. Scott to Mr. G. Ellis.

"I have run up an attempt on the 'Curse of Kehama' for the Quarterly: a strange thing it is--the
'Curse,' I mean--and the critique is not, as the blackguards say, worth a damn; but what I
could I did, which was to throw as much weight as possible upon the beautiful passages, of
which there are many, and to slur over its absurdities, of which there are not a few. It is
infinite pity for Southey, with genius almost to exuberance, so much learning and real good
feeling of poetry, that, with the true obstinacy of a foolish papa, he will be most attached
to the defects of his poetical offspring. This said 'Kehama' affords cruel openings to the
quizzers, and I suppose will get it roundly in the Edinburgh Review. I could have made a very
different hand of it indeed, had the order of the day been pour déchirer."

It was a good thing for Southey that he could always depend upon his contributions to the Quarterly
for his daily maintenance, for he could not at all rely upon the income from his poetry.

The failure of the Edinburgh Annual Register, published by Ballantyne, led to a diminution
of Southey's income amounting to about £400 a year. He was thus led to write more and more
for the Quarterly. His reputation, as well as his income, rose higher from his writings there
than from any of his other works. In April 1812 he wrote to his friend Mr. Wynn:

Mr. Southey to Mr. Wynn.

"By God's blessing I may yet live to make all necessary provision myself. My means are now
improving every year. I am up the hill of difficulty, and shall very soon get rid of the burthen
which has impeded me in the ascent. I have some arrangements with Murray, which are likely
to prove more profitable than any former speculations ... Hitherto I have been highly favoured.
A healthy body, an active mind, and a cheerful heart, are the three best boons Nature can bestow,
and, God be praised, no man ever enjoyed these more perfectly."

A good understanding was now established between Mr. Murray and his editor, and the Quarterly
went on improving and gradually increased in circulation. Though regular in the irregularity
of its publication, the subscribers seem to have become accustomed to the delay, and when it
did make its appearance it was read with eagerness and avidity. The interest and variety of
its contents, and the skill of the editor in the arrangement of his materials, made up for
many shortcomings.

Murray and Gifford were in constant communication, and it is interesting to remember that the
writer of the following judicious criticism had been editor of the Anti-Jacobin before he was
editor of the Quarterly.

Mr. Gifford to John Murray.

May 17, 1811.

"I have seldom been more pleased and vexed at a time than with the perusal of the enclosed
MS. It has wit, it has ingenuity, but both are absolutely lost in a negligence of composition
which mortifies me. Why will your young friend fling away talent which might so honourably
distinguish him? He might, if be chose, be the ornament of our Review, instead of creating
in one mingled regret and admiration. It is utterly impossible to insert such a composition
as the present; there are expressions which would not be borne; and if, as you say, it will
be sent to Jeffrey's if I do not admit it, however I may grieve, I must submit to the alternative.
Articles of pure humour should be written with extraordinary attention. A vulgar laugh is detestable.
I never saw much merit in writing rapidly. You will believe me when I tell you that I have
been present at the production of more genuine wit and humour than almost any person of my
time, and that it was revised and polished and arranged with a scrupulous care which overlooked
nothing. I have not often seen fairer promises of excellence in this department than in your
correspondent; but I tell you frankly that they will all be blighted and perish prematurely
unless sedulously cultivated. It is a poor ambition to raise a casual laugh in the unreflecting.

The article did not appear in the Quarterly, and Mr. Pillans, the writer, afterwards became
a contributor to the Edinburgh Review.

In a letter of August 25, 1811, we find Gifford writing to a correspondent: "Since the hour
I was born I never enjoyed, as far as I can recollect, what you call health for a single day."
In November, after discussing in a letter the articles which were about to appear in the next
Review, he concluded: "I write in pain and must break off." In the following month Mr. Murray,
no doubt in consideration of the start which his Review had made, sent him a present of £500.
"I thank you," he answered (December 6), "very sincerely for your magnificent present; but
£500 is a vast sum. However, you know your own business."

Yet Mr. Murray was by no means abounding in wealth. There were always those overdrawn bills
from Edinburgh to be met, and Ballantyne and Constable were both tugging at him for accommodation
at the same time.

The business arrangements with Constable & Co., which, save for the short interruption which
has already been related, had extended over many years, were now about to come to an end. The
following refers to the purchase of Mr. Miller's stock and the removal of Mr. Murray's business
to Albemarle Street.

John Murray to Mr. Constable.

ALBEMARLE ST., October 27, 1812.

"I do not see any existing reason why we, who have so long been so very intimate, should now
be placed in a situation of negative hostility. I am sure that we are well calculated to render
to each other great services; you are the best judge whether your interests were ever before
so well attended to as by me ... The great connexion which I have for the last two years been
maturing in Fleet Street I am now going to bring into action here; and it is not with any view
to, or with any reliance upon, what Miller has done, but upon what I know I can do in such
a situation, that I had long made up my mind to move. It is no sudden thing, but one long matured;
and it is only from the accident of Miller's moving that I have taken his house; so that the
notions which, I am told, you entertain respecting my plans are totally outside the ideas upon
which it was formed.... I repeat, it is in my power to do you many services; and, certainly,
I have bought very largely of you, and you never of me; and you know very well that I will
serve you heartily if I can deal with you confidentially."

A truce was, for a time, made between the firms, but it proved hollow. The never-ending imposition
of accommodation bills sent for acceptance had now reached a point beyond endurance, having
regard to Murray's credit. The last letter from Murray to Constable & Co. was as follows:

John Murray to Constable & Co.

April 30, 1813.

GENTLEMEN,

I did not answer the letter to which the enclosed alludes, because its impropriety in all respects
rendered it impossible for me to do so without involving myself in a personal dispute, which
it is my anxious resolution to avoid: and because my determination was fully taken to abide
by what I told you in my former letter, to which alone I can or could have referred you. You
made an express proposition to me, to which, as you have deviated from it, it is not my intention
to accede. The books may remain with me upon sale or return, until you please to order them
elsewhere; and in the meantime I shall continue to avail myself of every opportunity to sell
them. I return, therefore, an account and bills, with which I have nothing to do, and desire
to have a regular invoice.

I am, gentlemen, yours truly,

J. MURRAY.

Constable & Co. fired off a final shot on May 28 following, and the correspondence and business
between the firms then terminated.

No. 12 of the Quarterly appeared in December 1811, and perhaps the most interesting article
in the number was that by Canning and Ellis, on Trotter's "Life of Fox." Gifford writes to
Murray about this article:

"I have not seen Canning yet, but he is undoubtedly at work by this time. Pray take care that
no one gets a sight of the slips. It will be a delightful article, but say not a word till
it comes out."

A pamphlet had been published by W.S. Landor, dedicated to the President of the United States,
entitled, "Remarks upon Memoirs of Mr. Fox lately published." Gifford was furious about it.
He wrote to Murray:

Mr. Gifford to John Murray.

"I never read so rascally a thing as the Dedication. It is almost too bad for the Eatons and
other publishers of mad democratic books. In the pamphlet itself there are many clever bits,
but there is no taste and little judgment. His attacks on private men are very bad. Those on
Mr. C. are too stupid to do much harm, or, indeed, any. The Dedication is the most abject piece
of business that I ever read. It shows Landor to have a most rancorous and malicious heart.
Nothing but a rooted hatred of his country could have made him dedicate his Jacobinical book
to the most contemptible wretch that ever crept into authority, and whose only recommendation
to him is his implacable enmity to his country. I think you might write to Southey; but I would
not, on any account, have you publish such a scoundrel address."

The only entire article ever contributed to the Review by Gifford himself was that which he
wrote, in conjunction with Barron Field, on Ford's "Dramatic Works." It was an able paper,
but it contained a passage, the publication of which occasioned Gifford the deepest regret.
Towards the conclusion of the article these words occurred: The Editor "has polluted his pages
with the blasphemies of a poor maniac, who, it seems, once published some detached scenes of
the 'Broken Heart.'" This referred to Charles Lamb, who likened the "transcendent scene [of
the Spartan boy and Calantha] in imagination to Calvary and the Cross." Now Gifford had never
heard of the personal history of Lamb, nor of the occasional fits of lunacy to which his sister
Mary was subject; and when the paragraph was brought to his notice by Southey, through Murray,
it caused him unspeakable distress. He at once wrote to Southey [Footnote: When the subject
of a memoir of Charles Lamb by Serjeant Talfourd was under consideration, Southey wrote to
a friend: "I wish that I had looked out for Mr. Talfourd the letter which Gifford wrote in
reply to one in which I remonstrated with him upon his designation of Lamb as a poor maniac.
The words were used in complete ignorance of their peculiar bearings, and I believe nothing
in the course of Gifford's life ever occasioned him so much self-reproach. He was a man with
whom I had no literary sympathies; perhaps there was nothing upon which we agreed, except great
political questions; but I liked him the better ever after for his conduct on this occasion."]
the following letter:

Mr. W. Gifford to Mr. Southey.

February 13, 1812.

MY DEAR SIR,

I break off here to say that I have this moment received your last letter to Murray. It has
grieved and shocked me beyond expression; but, my dear friend, I am innocent so far as the
intent goes. I call God to witness that in the whole course of my life I never heard one syllable
of Mr. Lamb or his family. I knew not that he ever had a sister, or that he had parents living,
or that he or any person connected with him had ever manifested the slightest tendency to insanity.
In a word, I declare to you in the most solemn manner that all I ever knew or ever heard of
Mr. Lamb was merely his name. Had I been aware of one of the circumstances which you mention,
I would have lost my right arm sooner than have written what I have. The truth is, that I was
shocked at seeing him compare the sufferings and death of a person who just continues to dance
after the death of his lover is announced (for this is all his merit) to the pangs of Mount
Calvary; and not choosing to attribute it to folly, because I reserved that charge for Weber,
I unhappily in the present case ascribed it to madness, for which I pray God to forgive me,
since the blow has fallen heavily when I really thought it would not be felt. I considered
Lamb as a thoughtless scribbler, who, in circumstances of ease, amused himself by writing on
any subject. Why I thought so, I cannot tell, but it was the opinion I formed to myself, for
I now regret to say I never made any inquiry upon the subject; nor by any accident in the whole
course of my life did I hear him mentioned beyond the name.

I remain, my dear Sir,

Yours most sincerely,

W. GIFFORD.

It is unnecessary to describe in detail the further progress of the Quarterly. The venture
was now fairly launched. Occasionally, when some friction arose from the editorial pruning
of Southey's articles, or when Mr. Murray remonstrated with the exclusion or inclusion of some
particular article, Mr. Gifford became depressed, or complained, "This business begins to get
too heavy for me, and I must soon have done, I fear." Such discouragement was only momentary.
Gifford continued to edit the Review for many years, until and long after its complete success
had become assured.

The following extract, from a letter of Southey's to his friend Bedford, describes very happily
the position which Mr. Murray had now attained.

"Murray offers me a thousand guineas for my intended poem in blank verse, and begs it may not
be a line longer than "Thomson's Seasons"! I rather think the poem will be a post obit, and
in that case, twice that sum, at least, may be demanded for it. What his real feelings may
be towards me, I cannot tell; but he is a happy fellow, living in the light of his own glory.
The Review is the greatest of all works, and it is all his own creation; he prints 10,000,
and fifty times ten thousand read its contents, in the East and in the West. Joy be with him
and his journal!"

CHAPTER IX

LORD BYRON'S WORKS, 1811 TO 1814

The origin of Mr. Murray's connection with Lord Byron was as follows. Lord Byron had made Mr.
Dallas [Footnote: Robert Charles Dallas (1754-1824). His sister married Captain George Anson
Byron, and her descendants now hold the title.] a present of the MS. of the first two cantos
of "Childe Harold," and allowed him to make arrangements for their publication. Mr. Dallas's
first intention was to offer them to the publisher of "English Bards and Scotch Reviewers,"
but Cawthorn did not rank sufficiently high among his brethren of the trade. He was precluded
from offering them to Longman & Co. because of their refusal to publish the Satire. He then
went to Mr. Miller, of Albemarle Street, and left the manuscript with him, "enjoining the strictest
secrecy as to the author." After a few days' consideration Miller declined to publish the poem,
principally because of the sceptical stanzas which it contained, and also because of its denunciation
as a "plunderer" of his friend and patron the Earl of Elgin, who was mentioned by name in the
original manuscript of the poem.

After hearing from Dallas that Miller had declined to publish "Childe Harold," Lord Byron wrote
to him from Reddish's Hotel:

Lord Byron to Mr. Miller.

I am, Sir, your very obedient, humble servant,

BYRON.

"Next to these publishers," proceeds Dallas, in his "Recollections of the Life of Lord Byron,"
"I wished to oblige Mr. Murray, who had then a shop opposite St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet
Street. Both he and his father before him had published for myself. He had expressed to me
his regret that I did not carry him the 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers.' But this was
after its success; I think he would have refused it in its embryo state. After Lord Byron's
arrival I had met him, and he said he wished I would obtain some work of his Lordship's for
him. I now had it in my power, and I put 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' into his hands, telling
him that Lord Byron had made me a present of it, and that I expected he would make a very liberal
arrangement with me for it.

"He took some days to consider, during which time he consulted his literary advisers, among
whom, no doubt, was Mr. Gifford, who was Editor of the Quarterly Review. That Mr. Gifford gave
a favourable opinion I afterwards learned from Mr. Murray himself; but the objections I have
stated stared him in the face, and he was kept in suspense between the desire of possessing
a work of Lord Byron's and the fear of an unsuccessful speculation. We came to this conclusion:
that he should print, at his expense, a handsome quarto edition, the profits of which I should
share equally with him, and that the agreement for the copyright should depend upon the success
of this edition. When I told this to Lord Byron he was highly pleased, but still doubted the
copyright being worth my acceptance, promising, however, if the poem went through the edition,
to give me other poems to annex to 'Childe Harold.'"

Mr. Murray had long desired to make Lord Byron's acquaintance, and now that Mr. Dallas had
arranged with him for the publication of the first two cantos of "Childe Harold," he had many
opportunities of seeing Byron at his place of business. The first time that he saw him was
when he called one day with Mr. Hobhouse in Fleet Street. He afterwards looked in from time
to time, while the sheets were passing through the press, fresh from the fencing rooms of Angelo
and Jackson, and used to amuse himself by renewing his practice of "Carte et Tierce," with
his walking-cane directed against the book-shelves, while Murray was reading passages from
the poem, with occasional ejaculations of admiration; on which Byron would say, "You think
that a good idea, do you, Murray?" Then he would fence and lunge with his walking-stick at
some special book which he had picked out on the shelves before him. As Murray afterwards said,
"I was often very glad to get rid of him!"

A correspondence took place with regard to certain omissions, alterations, and improvements
which were strongly urged both by Mr. Dallas and the publisher. Mr. Murray wrote as follows:

John Murray to Lord Byron.

September 4, 1811.

MY LORD,

An absence of some days, passed in the country, has prevented me from writing earlier, in answer
to your obliging letters. [Footnote: These letters are given in Moore's "Life and Letters of
Lord Byron."] I have now, however, the pleasure of sending you, under a separate cover, the
first proof sheets of your poem; which is so good as to be entitled to all your care in rendering
it perfect. Besides its general merits, there are parts which, I am tempted to believe, far
excel anything that you have hitherto published; and it were therefore grievous indeed if you
do not condescend to bestow upon it all the improvements of which your mind is so capable.
Every correction already made is valuable, and this circumstance renders me more confident
in soliciting your further attention. There are some expressions concerning Spain and Portugal
which, however just at the time they were conceived, yet, as they do not harmonise with the
now prevalent feeling, I am persuaded would so greatly interfere with the popularity which
the poem is, in other respects, certainly calculated to excite, that, in compassion to your
publisher, who does not presume to reason upon the subject, otherwise than as a mere matter
of business, I hope your goodness will induce you to remove them; and with them perhaps some
religious sentiments which may deprive me of some customers amongst the Orthodox. Could I flatter
myself that these suggestions were not obtrusive, I would hazard another,--that you would add
the two promised cantos, and complete the poem. It were cruel indeed not to perfect a work
which contains so much that is excellent. Your fame, my Lord, demands it. You are raising a
monument that will outlive your present feelings; and it should therefore be constructed in
such a manner as to excite no other association than that of respect and admiration for your
character and genius. I trust that you will pardon the warmth of this address, when I assure
you that it arises, in the greatest degree, from a sincere regard for your best reputation;
with, however, some view to that portion of it which must attend the publisher of so beautiful
a poem as you are capable of rendering in the 'Romaunt of Childe Harold.'"

In compliance with the suggestions of the publisher, Byron altered and improved the stanzas
relating to Elgin and Wellington. With respect to the religious, or anti-religious sentiments,
Byron wrote to Murray: "As for the 'orthodox,' let us hope they will buy on purpose to abuse--you
will forgive the one if they will do the other." Yet he did alter Stanza VIII, and inserted
what Moore calls a "magnificent stanza" in place of one that was churlish and sneering, and
in all respects very much inferior.

Byron then proceeded to another point. "Tell me fairly, did you show the MS. to some of your
corps?" "I will have no traps for applause," he wrote to Mr. Murray, at the same time forbidding
him to show the manuscript of "Childe Harold" to his Aristarchus, Mr. Gifford, though he had
no objection to letting it be seen by any one else. But it was too late. Mr. Gifford had already
seen the manuscript, and pronounced a favourable opinion as to its great poetic merits. Byron
was not satisfied with this assurance, and seemed, in his next letter, to be very angry. He
could not bear to have it thought that he was endeavouring to ensure a favourable review of
his work in the Quarterly.

Byron at first objected to allow the new poem to be published with his name, thinking that
this would bring down upon him the enmity of his critics in the North, as well as the venom
of the southern scribblers, whom he had enraged by his Satire. At last, on Mr. Murray's strong
representation, he consented to allow his name to be published on the title-page as the author.
Even to the last, however, his doubts were great as to the probable success of the poem; and
he more than once talked of suppressing it.

In October 1811 Lord Byron wrote from Newstead Abbey to his friend Mr. Hodgson: [Footnote:
The Rev. Francis Hodgson was then residing at Cambridge as Fellow and Tutor of King's College.
He formed an intimate friendship with Byron, who communicated with him freely as to his poetical
as well as his religious difficulties.

The whole of the sheets were printed off in the following month of January; and the work was
published on March 1, 1812. Of the first edition only 500 copies, demy quarto, were printed.

It is unnecessary to say with what applause the book was received. The impression it produced
was as instantaneous as it proved to be lasting. Byron himself briefly described the result
of the publication in his memoranda: "I awoke one morning and found myself famous." The publisher
had already taken pains to spread abroad the merits of the poem. Many of his friends had re-echoed
its praises. The attention of the public was fixed upon the work; and in three days after its
appearance the whole edition was disposed of. When Mr. Dallas went to see Lord Byron at his
house in St. James's Street, he found him loaded with letters from critics, poets, and authors,
all lavish of their raptures. A handsome new edition, in octavo, was proposed, to which his
Lordship agreed.

Eventually Mr. Murray consented to give Mr. Dallas £600 for the copyright of the poem; although
Mr. Gifford and others were of opinion that it might prove a bad bargain at that price. There
was, however, one exception, namely Mr. Rogers, who told Mr. Murray not to be disheartened,
for he might rely upon its turning out the most fortunate purchase he had ever made; and so
it proved. Three thousand copies of the second and third editions of the poem in octavo were
printed; and these went off in rapid succession.

On the appearance of "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage" Lord Byron became an object of interest in
the fashionable world of London. His poem was the subject of conversation everywhere, and many
literary, noble, and royal personages desired to make his acquaintance. In the month of June
he was invited to a party at Miss Johnson's, at which His Royal Highness the Prince Regent
was present. As Lord Byron had not yet been to Court, it was not considered etiquette that
he should appear before His Royal Highness. He accordingly retired to another room. But on
the Prince being informed that Lord Byron was in the house, he expressed a desire to see him.
Lord Byron was sent for, and the following is Mr. Murray's account of the conversation that
took place.

John Murray to Mr. Scott.

June 27, 1812.

DEAR SIR,

I cannot refrain, notwithstanding my fears of intrusion, from mentioning to you a conversation
which Lord Byron had with H.R.H. the Prince Regent, and of which you formed the leading subject.
He was at an evening party at Miss Johnson's this week, when the Prince, hearing that Lord
Byron was present, expressed a desire to be introduced to him; and for more than half an hour
they conversed on poetry and poets, with which the Prince displayed an intimacy and critical
taste which at once surprised and delighted Lord Byron. But the Prince's great delight was
Walter Scott, whose name and writings he dwelt upon and recurred to incessantly. He preferred
him far beyond any other poet of the time, repeated several passages with fervour, and criticized
them faithfully. He spoke chiefly of the 'Lay of the Last Minstrel,' which he expressed himself
as admiring most of the three poems. He quoted Homer, and even some of the obscurer Greek poets,
and appeared, as Lord Byron supposes, to have read more poetry than any prince in Europe. He
paid, of course, many compliments to Lord Byron, but the greatest was "that he ought to be
offended with Lord B., for that he had thought it impossible for any poet to equal Walter Scott,
and that he had made him find himself mistaken." Lord Byron called upon me, merely to let off
the raptures of the Prince respecting you, thinking, as he said, that if I were likely to have
occasion to write to you, it might not be ungrateful for you to hear of his praises.

In reply Scott wrote to Mr. Murray as follows, enclosing a letter to Lord Byron, which has
already been published in the Lives of both authors:

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

EDINBURGH, July 2, 1812.

MY DEAR SIR,

I have been very silent, partly through pressure of business and partly from idleness and procrastination,
but it would be very ungracious to delay returning my thanks for your kindness in transmitting
the very flattering particulars of the Prince Regent's conversation with Lord Byron. I trouble
you with a few lines to his Lordship expressive of my thanks for his very handsome and gratifying
communication, and I hope he will not consider it as intrusive in a veteran author to pay my
debt of gratitude for the high pleasure I have received from the perusal of 'Childe Harold,'
which is certainly the most original poem which we have had this many a day....

Your obliged, humble Servant,

WALTER SCOTT.

This episode led to the opening of an agreeable correspondence between Scott and Byron, and
to a lasting friendship between the two poets.

The fit of inspiration was now on Lord Byron. In May 1813 appeared "The Giaour," and in the
midst of his corrections of successive editions of it, he wrote in four nights his second Turkish
story, "Zuleika," afterwards known as "The Bride of Abydos."

With respect to the business arrangement as to the two poems, Mr. Murray wrote to Lord Byron
as follows:

John Murray to Lord Byron.

November 18, 1813.

MY DEAR LORD,

I am very anxious that our business transactions should occur frequently, and that they should
be settled immediately; for short accounts are favourable to long friendships.

I restore "The Giaour" to your Lordship entirely, and for it, the "Bride of Abydos," and the
miscellaneous poems intended to fill up the volume of the small edition, I beg leave to offer
you the sum of One Thousand Guineas; and I shall be happy if you perceive that my estimation
of your talents in my character of a man of business is not much under my admiration of them
as a man.

I do most heartily accept the offer of your portrait, as the most noble mark of friendship
with which you could in any way honour me. I do assure you that I am truly proud of being distinguished
as your publisher, and that I shall ever continue,

Your Lordship's faithful Servant,

JOHN MURRAY.

The "Bride of Abydos" was received with almost as much applause as the "Giaour." "Lord Byron,"
said Sir James Mackintosh, "is the author of the day; six thousand of his 'Bride of Abydos'
have been sold within a month."

"The Corsair" was Lord Byron's next poem, written with great vehemence, literally "struck off
at a heat," at the rate of about two hundred lines a day,--"a circumstance," says Moore, "that
is, perhaps, wholly without a parallel in the history of genius." "The Corsair" was begun on
the 18th, and finished on the 31st of December, 1813.

A sudden impulse induced Lord Byron to present the copyright of this poem also to Mr. Dallas,
with the single stipulation that he would offer it for publication to Mr. Murray, who eventually
paid Mr. Dallas five hundred guineas for the copyright, and the work was published in February
1814. The following letters will give some idea of the reception it met with.

John Murray to Lord Byron.

February 3, 1814.

MY LORD,

I have been unwilling to write until I had something to say, an occasion to which I do not
always restrict myself. I am most happy to tell you that your last poem is--what Mr. Southey's
is called--a Carmen Triumphale. Never, in my recollection, has any work, since the "Letter
of Burke to the Duke of Bedford," excited such a ferment--a ferment which, I am happy to say,
will subside into lasting fame. I sold, on the day of publication--a thing perfectly unprecedented--10,000
copies.... Gifford did what I never knew him do before--he repeated several passages from memory."

The "Ode to Napoleon Bonaparte," which appeared in April 1814, was on the whole a failure.
It was known to be Lord Byron's, and its publication was seized upon by the press as the occasion
for many bitter criticisms, mingled with personalities against the writer's genius and character.
He was cut to the quick by these notices, and came to the determination to buy back the whole
of the copyrights of his works, and suppress every line he had ever written. On April 29, 1814,
he wrote to Mr. Murray:

Lord Byron to John Murray.

April 29, 1814.

I enclose a draft for the money; when paid, send the copyrights. I release you from the thousand
pounds agreed on for "The Giaour" and "Bride," and there's an end.... For all this, it might
be well to assign some reason. I have none to give, except my own caprice, and I do not consider
the circumstance of consequence enough to require explanation.... It will give me great pleasure
to preserve your acquaintance, and to consider you as my friend. Believe me very truly, and
for much attention,

Yours, etc.,

BYRON.

Mr. Murray was of course very much concerned at this decision, and remonstrated. Three days
later Lord Byron revoked his determination.

Before the end of the month Lord Byron began the composition of his next poem, "Lara," usually
considered a continuation of "The Corsair." It was published conjointly with Mr. Rogers's "Jacqueline."
But in this case, the lady will not be the sufferer."

The two poems were published anonymously in the following August (1814): Murray allowed 500
guineas for the copyright of each.

CHAPTER X

MR. MURRAY'S REMOVAL TO 50, ALBEMARLE STREET

We must now revert to the beginning of 1812, at which time Mr. William Miller, who commenced
business in Bond Street in 1791, and had in 1804 removed to 50, Albemarle Street, desired to
retire from "the Trade." He communicated his resolve to Mr. Murray, who had some time held
the intention of moving westward from Fleet Street, and had been on the point of settling in
Pall Mall. Murray at once entered into an arrangement with Miller, and in a letter to Mr. Constable
of Edinburgh he observed:

John Murray to Mr. A. Constable.

May 1, 1812.

"You will probably have heard that Miller is about to retire, and that I have ventured to undertake
to succeed him. I had for some time determined upon moving, and I did not very long hesitate
about accepting his offer. I am to take no part of his stock but such as I may deem expedient,
and for it and the rest I shall have very long credit. How far it may answer, I know not; but
if I can judge of my own views, I think it may prove an advantageous opening. Miller's retirement
is very extraordinary, for no one in the trade will believe that he has made a fortune; but
from what he has laid open to me, it is clear that he has succeeded. In this arrangement, I
propose of course to dispose of my present house, and my medical works, with other parts of
my business. I have two offers for it, waiting my decision as to terms.... I am to enter at
Miller's on September 29th next." [Footnote: The Fleet Street business was eventually purchased
by Thomas and George Underwood. It appears from the "Memoirs of Adam Black" that Black was
for a short time a partner with the Underwoods. Adam Black quitted the business in 1813. Upon
the failure of the Underwoods in 1831, Mr. Samuel Highley, son of Mr. Murray's former partner,
took possession, and the name of Highley again appeared over the door.]

The terms arranged with Mr. Miller were as follows: The lease of the house, No. 50, Albemarle
Street, was purchased by Mr. Murray, together with the copyrights, stock, etc., for the sum
of £3,822 12s. 6d.; Mr. Miller receiving as surety, during the time the purchase money remained
unpaid, the copyright of "Domestic Cookery," of the Quarterly Review, and the one-fourth share
in "Marmion." The debt was not finally paid off until the year 1821.

Amongst the miscellaneous works which Mr. Murray published shortly after his removal to Albemarle
Street were William Sotheby's translation of the "Georgies of Virgil"--the most perfect translation,
according to Lord Jeffrey, of a Latin classic which exists in our language; Robert Bland's
"Collection from the Greek Anthology"; Prince Hoare's "Epochs of the Arts"; Lord Glenbervie's
work on the "Cultivation of Timber"; Granville Penn's "Bioscope, or Dial of Life explained";
John Herman Merivale's "Orlando in Roncesvalles"; and Sir James Hall's splendid work on "Gothic
Architecture." Besides these, there was a very important contribution to our literature--in
the "Miscellaneous Works of Gibbon" in 5 volumes, for the copyright of which Mr. Murray paid
Lord Sheffield the sum of £1,000.

In 1812 he published Sir John Malcolm's "Sketch of the Sikhs," and in the following year Mr.
Macdonald Kinneir's "Persia." Mr. D'Israeli's "Calamities of Authors" appeared in 1812, and
Murray forwarded copies of the work to Scott and Southey.

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

July 2,1812.

I owe you best thanks for the 'Calamities of Authors,' which has all the entertaining and lively
features of the 'Amenities of Literature.' I am just packing them up with a few other books
for my hermitage at Abbotsford, where my present parlour is only 12 feet square, and my book-press
in Lilliputian proportion. Poor Andrew Macdonald I knew in days of yore, and could have supplied
some curious anecdotes respecting him. He died of a poet's consumption, viz. want of food.

"The present volume of 'Somers' [Footnote: Lord Somers' "Tracts," a new edition in 12 volumes.]
will be out immediately; with whom am I to correspond on this subject since the secession of
Will. Miller? I shall be happy to hear you have succeeded to him in this department, as well
as in Albemarle Street. What has moved Miller to retire? He is surely too young to have made
a fortune, and it is uncommon to quit a thriving trade. I have had a packet half finished for
Gifford this many a day."

Southey expressed himself as greatly interested in the "Calamities of Authors," and proposed
to make it the subject of an article for the Quarterly.

Mr. Southey to John Murray.

August 14, 1812.

"I should like to enlarge a little upon the subject of literary property, on which he has touched,
in my opinion, with proper feeling. Certainly I am a party concerned. I should like to say
something upon the absurd purposes of the Literary Fund, with its despicable ostentation of
patronage, and to build a sort of National Academy in the air, in the hope that Canning might
one day lay its foundation in a more solid manner. [Footnote: Canning had his own opinion on
the subject. When the Royal Society of Literature was about to be established, an application
was made to him to join the committee. He refused, for reasons "partly general, partly personal."
He added, "I am really of opinion, with Dr. Johnson, that the multitudinous personage, called
The Public, is after all, the best patron of literature and learned men."] And I could say
something on the other side of the picture, showing that although literature in almost all
cases is the worst trade to which a man can possibly betake himself, it is the best and wisest
of all pursuits for those whose provision is already made, and of all amusements for those
who have leisure to amuse themselves. It has long been my intention to leave behind me my own
Memoirs, as a post-obit for my family--a wise intention no doubt, and one which it is not very
prudent to procrastinate. Should this ever be completed, it would exhibit a case directly in
contrast to D'Israeli's view of the subject. I chose literature for my own profession, with
every advantage of education it is true, but under more disadvantages perhaps of any other
kind than any of the persons in his catalogue. I have never repented the choice. The usual
censure, ridicule, and even calumnies, which it has drawn on me never gave me a moment's pain;
but on the other hand, literature has given me friends; among the best and wisest and most
celebrated of my contemporaries it has given me distinction. If I live twenty years longer,
I do not doubt that it will give me fortune, and if it pleases God to take me before my family
are provided for, I doubt as little that in my name and in my works they will find a provision.
I want to give you a 'Life of Wesley.' The history of the Dissenters must be finished by that
time, and it will afford me opportunity."

During the year 1813 the recklessness of the younger Ballantyne, combined with the formation
of the incipient estate at Abbotsford, were weighing heavily on Walter Scott. This led to a
fresh alliance with Constable, "in which," wrote Scott, "I am sensible he has gained a great
advantage"; but in accordance with the agreement Constable, in return for a share in Scott's
new works, was to relieve the Ballantynes of some of their heavy stock, and in May Scott was
enabled "for the first time these many weeks to lay my head on a quiet pillow." But nothing
could check John Ballantyne. "I sometimes fear," wrote Scott to him, "that between the long
dates of your bills and the tardy settlements of the Edinburgh trade, some difficulties will
occur even in June; and July I always regard with deep anxiety." How true this forecast proved
to be is shown by the following letter:

Mr. Scott to John Murray,

EDINBURGH, July 5, 1813.

I delayed answering your favour, thinking I could have overtaken the "Daemonology" for the
Review, but I had no books in the country where it found me, and since that Swift, who is now
nearly finished, has kept me incessantly labouring. When that is off my hand I will have plenty
of leisure for reviewing, though you really have no need of my assistance. The volume of "Somers"
being now out of my hands I take the liberty to draw at this date as usual for £105. Now I
have a favour to ask which I do with the more confidence because, if it is convenient and agreeable
to you to oblige me in the matter, it will be the means of putting our connection as author
and publisher upon its former footing, which I trust will not be disagreeable to you. I am
making up a large sum of money to pay for a late purchase, and as part of my funds is secured
on an heritable bond which cannot be exacted till Martinmas, I find myself some hundreds short,
which the circumstances of the money market here renders it not so easy to supply as formerly.
Now if you will oblige me by giving me a lift with your credit and accepting the enclosed bills,
[Footnote: Three bills for £300 each at three, four, and six months respectively.] it will
accommodate me particularly at this moment, and as I shall have ample means of putting you
in cash to replace them as they fall due, will not, I should hope, occasion you any inconvenience.
Longmans' house on a former occasion obliged me in this way, and I hope found their account
in it. But I entreat you will not stand on the least ceremony should you think you could not
oblige me without inconveniencing yourself. The property I have purchased cost about £6,000,
so it is no wonder I am a little out for the moment. Will you have the goodness to return an
answer in course of post, as, failing your benevolent aid, I must look about elsewhere?

You will understand distinctly that I do not propose that you should advance any part of the
money by way of loan or otherwise, but only the assistance of your credit, the bills being
to be retired by cash remitted by me before they fall due.

Believe me, very truly,

Your obedient Servant,

WALTER SCOTT.

Mr. Murray at once replied:

John Murray to Mr. Scott.

July 8, 1813.

DEAR SIR,

I have the pleasure of returning accepted the bills which I received from you this morning.
In thus availing myself of your confidential application, I trust that you will do me the justice
to believe that it is done for kindness already received, and not with the remotest view towards
prospective advantages. I shall at all times feel proud of being one of your publishers, but
this must be allowed to arise solely out of your own feelings and convenience when the occasions
shall present themselves. I am sufficiently content in the belief that even negative obstacles
to our perfect confidence have now subsided.

When weightier concerns permit we hope that you will again appear in our Review. In confidence
I may tell you that your long silence led us to avail ourselves of your friend Mr. Rose's offer
to review Ferriar, [Footnote: Dr. Ferriar on "Apparitions."] and his article is already printing.

I will send you a new edition of the "Giaour," in which there are one or two stanzas added
of peculiar beauty.

I trust that your family are well, and remain, dear Sir,

Your obliged and faithful Servant,

JOHN MURRAY.

Within a few months of this correspondence, Scott was looking into an old writing-desk in search
of some fishing-tackle, when his eye chanced to light upon the Ashestiel fragment of "Waverley,"
begun several years before. He read over the introductory chapters, and then determined to
finish the story. It is said that he first offered it anonymously to Sir R. Phillips, London,
who refused to publish it. "Waverley" was afterwards accepted by Constable & Co., and published
on half profits, on July 7, 1814. When it came out, Murray got an early copy of the novel;
he read it, and sent it to Mr. Canning, and wrote upon the title-page, "By Walter Scott." The
reason why he fixed upon Scott as the author was as follows. When he met Ballantyne at Boroughbridge,
in 1809, to settle some arrangements as to the works which Walter Scott proposed to place in
his hands for publication, he remembered that among those works were three--1st, an edition
of "Beaumont and Fletcher"; 2nd, a poem; and 3rd, a novel. Now, both the edition of "Beaumont
and Fletcher" (though edited by Weber) and the poem, the "Lady of the Lake," had been published;
and now, at last, appeared the novel. [Footnote: Indeed, in Ballantyne & Co.'s printed list
of "New Works and Publications for 1809-10," issued August 1810 (now before us), we find the
following entry: "Waverley; or, 'Tis Sixty Years Since; a novel in 3 vols. 12mo." The work
was not, however, published until July 1814.] He was confirmed in his idea that Walter Scott
was the author after carefully reading the book. Canning called on Murray next day; said he
had begun it, found it very dull, and concluded: "You are quite mistaken; it cannot be by Walter
Scott." But a few days later he wrote to Murray: "Yes, it is so; you are right: Walter Scott,
and no one else."

In the autumn of 1814 Mrs. Murray went to Leith by sailing-ship from the Thames, to visit her
mother and friends in Edinburgh. She was accompanied by her son John and her two daughters.
During her absence, Mr. Murray wrote to her two or three times a week, and kept her au courant
with the news of the day. In his letter of August 9 he intimated that he had been dining with
D'Israeli, and that he afterwards went with him to Sadler's Wells Theatre to see the "Corsair,"
at which he was "woefully disappointed and enraged.... They have actually omitted his wife
altogether, and made him a mere ruffian, ultimately overcome by the Sultan, and drowned in
the New River!"

Mr. Blackwood, of Edinburgh, was then in London, spending several days with Mr. Murray over
their accounts and future arrangements. The latter was thinking of making a visit to Paris,
in the company of his friend D'Israeli, during the peace which followed the exile of Napoleon
to Elba. D'Israeli had taken a house at Brighton, from which place the voyagers intended to
set sail, and make the passage to Dieppe in about fourteen hours. On August 13 Mr. Murray informs
his wife that "Lord Byron was here yesterday, and I introduced him to Blackwood, to whom he
was very civil. They say," he added, "that Madame de Staël has been ordered to quit Paris,
for writing lightly respecting the Bourbons." Two days later he wrote to Mrs. Murray:

August 15, 1814.

"I dined yesterday with D'Israeli, and in the afternoon we partly walked and partly rode to
Islington, to drink tea with Mrs. Lindo, who, with Mr. L. and her family, were well pleased
to see me. Mr. Cervetto was induced to accompany the ladies at the piano with his violoncello,
which he did delightfully. We walked home at 10 o'clock. On Saturday we passed a very pleasant
day at Petersham with Turner and his family....

"I have got at last Mr. Eagle's 'Journal of Penrose, the Seaman,' for which, as you may remember,
I am to pay £200 in twelve months for 1,000 copies: too dear perhaps; but Lord Byron sent me
word this morning by letter (for he borrowed the MS. last night): 'Penrose is most amusing.
I never read so much of a book at one sitting in my life. He kept me up half the night, and
made me dream of him the other half. It has all the air of truth, and is most entertaining
and interesting in every point of view.'"

Writing again on August 24, 1814, he says:

"Lord Byron set out for Newstead on Sunday. It is finally settled to be his again, the proposed
purchaser forfeiting £25,000. 'Lara' and 'Jacqueline' are nearly sold off, to the extent of
6,000, which leaves me £130, and the certain sale of 10,000 more in the 8vo form. Mr. Canning
called upon Gifford yesterday, and from their conversation I infer very favourably for my Review.
We shall now take a decided tone in Politics, and we are all in one boat. Croker has gone down
to the Prince Regent, at Brighton, where I ought to have been last night, to have witnessed
the rejoicings and splendour of the Duke of Clarence's birthday. But I am ever out of luck.
'O, indolence and indecision of mind! if not in yourselves vices, to how much exquisite misery
do you frequently prepare the way!' Have you come to this passage in 'Waverley' yet? Pray read
'Waverley'; it is excellent."

On September 5, 1814, Mr. Murray communicated with Mrs. Murray as to the education of his son
John, then six-and-a-half years old:

John Murray to Mrs. Murray.

"I am glad that you venture to say something about the children, for it is only by such minutiae
that I can judge of the manner in which they amuse or behave themselves. I really do not see
the least propriety in leaving John, at an age when the first impressions are so deep and lasting,
to receive the rudiments and foundation of his education in Scotland. If learning English,
his native language, mean anything, it is not merely to read it correctly and understand it
grammatically, but to speak and pronounce it like the most polished native. But how can you
expect this to be effected, even with the aid of the best teachers, when everybody around him,
with whom he can practise his instructions, speaks in a totally different manner? No! I rather
think it better that he should go to Edinburgh after he has passed through the schools here,
and when he is sixteen or seventeen. He should certainly go to some school next spring, and
I most confidingly trust that you are unremitting in your duty to give him daily lessons of
preparation, or he may be so far behind children of his age when he does go to school, that
the derision he may meet there may destroy emulation. All this, however, is matter for serious
consideration and for future consultation, in which your voice shall have its rightful influence...."

Mr. Murray was under the necessity of postponing his visit to France. He went to Brighton instead,
and spent a few pleasant days with Mr. D'Israeli and his friends.

On September 24 Mr. Murray, having returned to London, informed his wife, still at Edinburgh,
of an extraordinary piece of news.

John Murray to Mrs. Murray.

"I was much surprised to learn from Dallas, whom I accidentally met yesterday, that Lord Byron
was expected in town every hour. I accordingly left my card at his house, with a notice that
I would attend him as soon as he pleased; and it pleased him to summon my attendance about
seven in the evening. He had come to town on business, and regretted that he would not be at
Newstead until a fortnight, as he wished to have seen me there on my way to Scotland. Says
he, 'Can you keep a secret?' 'Certainly--positively--my wife's out of town!' 'Then--I am going
to be MARRIED!' 'The devil! I shall have no poem this winter then?' 'No.' 'Who is the lady
who is to do me this injury?' 'Miss Milbanke--do you know her?' 'No, my lord.'

"So here is news for you! I fancy the lady is rich, noble, and beautiful; but this shall be
my day's business to enquire about. Oh! how he did curse poor Lady C---- as the fiend who had
interrupted all his projects, and who would do so now if possible. I think he hinted that she
had managed to interrupt this connexion two years ago. He thought she was abroad, and, to his
torment and astonishment, he finds her not only in England, but in London. He says he has written
some small poems which his friends think beautiful, particularly one of eight lines, his very
best--all of which, I believe, I am to have; and, moreover, he gives me permission to publish
the octavo edition of 'Lara' with his name, which secures, I think, £700 to you and me. So
Scott's poem is announced ['Lord of the Isles'], and I am cut out. I wish I had been in Scotland
six weeks ago, and I might have come in for a share. Should I apply for one to him, it would
oblige me to be a partner with Constable, who is desperately in want of money. He has applied
to Cadell & Davies (the latter told me in confidence) and they refused."

At the beginning of October Mr. Murray set out for Edinburgh, journeying by Nottingham for
the purpose of visiting Newstead Abbey.

The following is Mr. Murray's account of his visit to Newstead. His letter is dated Matlock,
October 5, 1814:

"I got to Newstead about 11 o'clock yesterday and found the steward, my namesake, and the butler
waiting for me. The first, who is good-looking and a respectable old man of about sixty-five
years, showed me over the house and grounds, which occupied two hours, for I was anxious to
examine everything. But never was I more disappointed, for my notions, I suppose, had been
raised to the romantic. I had surmised the possibly easy restoration of this once famous abbey,
the mere skeleton of which is now fast crumbling to ruin. Lord Byron's immediate predecessor
stripped the whole place of all that was splendid and interesting; and you may judge of what
he must have done to the mansion when inform you that he converted the ground, which used to
be covered with the finest trees, like a forest, into an absolute desert. Not a tree is left
standing, and the wood thus shamefully cut down was sold in one day for £60,000. The hall of
entrance has about eighteen large niches, which had been filled with statues, and the side
walls covered with family portraits and armour. All these have been mercilessly torn down,
as well as the magnificent fireplace, and sold. All the beautiful paintings which filled the
galleries--valued at that day at £80,000--have disappeared, and the whole place is crumbling
into dust. No sum short of £100,000 would make the place habitable. Lord Byron's few apartments
contain some modern upholstery, but serve only to show what ought to have been there. They
are now digging round the cloisters for a traditionary cannon, and in their progress, about
five days ago, they discovered a corpse in too decayed a state to admit of removal. I saw the
drinking-skull [Footnote: When the father of the present Mr. Murray was a student in Edinburgh,
he wrote to his father (April 10,1827): "I saw yesterday at a jeweller's shop in Edinburgh
a great curiosity, no less than Lord Byron's skull cup, upon which he wrote the poem. It is
for sale; the owner, whose name I could not learn (it appears he does not wish it known), wants
£200 for it."] and the marble mausoleum erected over Lord Byron's dog. I came away with my
heart aching and full of melancholy reflections--producing a lowness of spirits which I did
not get the better of until this morning, when the most enchanting scenery I have ever beheld
has at length restored me. I am far more surprised that Lord Byron should ever have lived at
Newstead, than that he should be inclined to part with it; for, as there is no possibility
of his being able, by any reasonable amount of expense, to reinstate it, the place can present
nothing but a perpetual memorial of the wickedness of his ancestors. There are three, or at
most four, domestics at board wages. All that I was asked to taste was a piece of bread-and-butter.
As my foot was on the step of the chaise, when about to enter it, I was informed that his lordship
had ordered that I should take as much game as I liked. What makes the steward, Joe Murray,
an interesting object to me, is that the old man has seen the abbey in all its vicissitudes
of greatness and degradation. Once it was full of unbounded hospitality and splendour, and
now it is simply miserable. If this man has feelings--of which, by the way, he betrays no symptom--he
would possibly be miserable himself. He has seen three hundred of the first people in the county
filling the gallery, and seen five hundred deer disporting themselves in the beautiful park,
now covered with stunted offshoots of felled trees. Again I say it gave me the heartache to
witness all this ruin, and I regret that my romantic picture has been destroyed by the reality."

Among the friends that welcomed Mr. Murray to Edinburgh was Mr. William Blackwood, who then,
and for a long time after, was closely connected with him in his business transactions. Blackwood
was a native of Edinburgh; having served his apprenticeship with Messrs. Bell & Bradfute, booksellers,
he was selected by Mundell & Company to take charge of a branch of their extensive publishing
business in Glasgow. He returned to Edinburgh, and again entered the service of Bell et Bradfute;
but after a time went to London to master the secrets of the old book trade under the well-known
Mr. Cuthill. Returning to Edinburgh, he set up for himself in 1804, at the age of twenty-eight,
at a shop in South Bridge Street--confining himself, for the most part, to old books. He was
a man of great energy and decision of character, and his early education enabled him to conduct
his correspondence with a remarkable degree of precision and accuracy. Mr. Murray seems to
have done business with him as far back as June 1807, and was in the habit of calling upon
Blackwood, who was about his own age, whenever he visited Edinburgh. The two became intimate,
and corresponded frequently; and at last, when Murray withdrew from the Ballantynes, in August
1810 he transferred the whole of his Scottish agency to the house of William Blackwood. In
return for the publishing business sent to him from London, Blackwood made Murray his agent
for any new works published by him in Edinburgh. In this way Murray became the London publisher
for Hogg's new poems, and "The Queen's Wake," which had reached its fourth edition.

Mr. Murray paid at this time another visit to Abbotsford. Towards the end of 1814 Scott had
surrounded the original farmhouse with a number of buildings--kitchen, laundry, and spare bedrooms--and
was able to entertain company. He received Murray with great cordiality, and made many enquiries
as to Lord Byron, to whom Murray wrote on his return to London:

John Murray to Lord Byron.

"Walter Scott commissioned me to be the bearer of his warmest greetings to you. His house was
full the day I passed with him; and yet, both in corners and at the surrounded table, he talked
incessantly of you. Unwilling that I should part without bearing some mark of his love (a poet's
love) for you, he gave me a superb Turkish dagger to present to you, as the only remembrance
which, at the moment, he could think of to offer you. He was greatly pleased with the engraving
of your portrait, which I recollected to carry with me; and during the whole dinner--when all
were admiring the taste with which Scott had fitted up a sort of Gothic cottage--he expressed
his anxious wishes that you might honour him with a visit, which I ventured to assure him you
would feel no less happy than certain in effecting when you should go to Scotland; and I am
sure he would hail your lordship as 'a very brother.'"

After all his visits had been paid, and he had made his arrangements with his printers and
publishers, Mr. Murray returned to London with his wife and family. Shortly after his arrival
he received a letter from Mr. Blackwood.

Mr. Wm. Blackwood to John Murray.

November 8, 1814.

"I was much gratified by your letter informing me of your safe arrival. How much you must be
overwhelmed just now, and your mind distracted by so many calls upon your attention at once.
I hope that you are now in one of your best frames of mind, by which you are enabled, as you
have told me, to go through, with more satisfaction to yourself, ten times the business you
can do at other times. While you are so occupied with your great concerns, I feel doubly obliged
to you for your remembrance of my small matters."

After referring to his illness, he proceeds:

"Do not reflect upon your visit to the bard (Walter Scott). You would have blamed yourself
much more if you had not gone. The advance was made by him through Ballantyne, and you only
did what was open and candid. We shall be at the bottom of these peoples' views by-and-bye;
at present I confess I only see very darkly--but let us have patience; a little time will develop
all these mysteries. I have not seen Ballantyne since, and when I do see him I shall say very
little indeed. If there really is a disappointment in not being connected with Scott's new
poem, you should feel it much less than any man living--having such a poet as Lord Byron."
"I hope," said Mr. Murray to his wife, "to leave the drawing-room entirely at your ladyship's
exclusive command." But the drawing-room was used for other purposes than the reception of
ordinary visitors. It became for some time the centre of literary friendship and intercommunication
at the West End. In those days there was no Athenaeum Club for the association of gentlemen
known for their literary, artistic, or scientific attainments. That institution was only established
in 1823, through the instrumentality of Croker, Lawrence, Chantrey, Sir Humphry Davy, and their
friends. Until then, Murray's drawing-room was the main centre of literary intercourse in that
quarter of London. Men of distinction, from the Continent and America, presented their letters
of introduction to Mr. Murray, and were cordially and hospitably entertained by him; meeting,
in the course of their visits, many distinguished and notable personages.

In these rooms, early in 1815, young George Ticknor, from Boston, in America, then only twenty-three,
met Moore, Campbell, D'Israeli, Gifford, Humphry Davy, and others. He thus records his impressions
of Gifford:

"Among other persons, I brought letters to Gifford, the satirist, but never saw him till yesterday.
Never was I so mistaken in my anticipations. Instead of a tall and handsome man, as I had supposed
him from his picture--a man of severe and bitter remarks in conversation, such as I had good
reason to believe him from his books, I found him a short, deformed, and ugly little man, with
a large head sunk between his shoulders, and one of his eyes turned outward, but withal, one
of the best-natured, most open and well-bred gentlemen I have ever met. He is editor of the
Quarterly Review, and was not a little surprised and pleased to hear that it was reprinted
with us, which I told him, with an indirect allusion to the review of 'Inchiquen's United States.'....
He carried me to a handsome room over Murray's book-store, which he has fitted up as a sort
of literary lounge, where authors resort to read newspapers, and talk literary gossip. I found
there Elmsley, Hallam, Lord Byron's 'Classic Hallam, much renowned for Greek,' now as famous
as being one of his lordship's friends, Boswell, a son of Johnson's biographer, etc., so that
I finished a long forenoon very pleasantly." [Footnote: "Life, Letters, and Journal of George
Ticknor," i. 48.]

The following letter and Ticknor's reference to Gifford only confirm the testimony of all who
knew him that in private life the redoubtable editor and severe critic was an amiable and affectionate
man.

Mr. Gifford to John Murray,

JAMES STREET, October 20, 1814.

My DEAR SIR,

What can I say in return for your interesting and amusing letter? I live here quite alone,
and see nobody, so that I have not a word of news for you. I delight in your visit to Scotland,
which I am sure would turn to good, and which I hope you will, as you say, periodically repeat.
It makes me quite happy to find you beating up for recruits, and most ardently do I wish you
success. Mention me kindly to Scott, and tell him how much I long to renew our wonted acquaintance.
Southey's article is, I think, excellent. I have softened matters a little. Barrow is hard
at work on Flinders [Q. R. 23]. I have still a most melancholy house. My poor housekeeper is
going fast. Nothing can save her, and I lend all my care to soften her declining days. She
has a physician every second day, and takes a world of medicines, more for their profit than
her own, poor thing. She lives on fruit, grapes principally, and a little game, which is the
only food she can digest. Guess at my expenses; but I owe in some measure the extension of
my feeble life to her care through a long succession of years, and I would cheerfully divide
my last farthing with her. I will not trouble you again on this subject, which is a mere concern
of my own; but you have been very kind to her, and she is sensible of it."

With respect to this worthy woman, it may be added that she died on February 6, 1815, carefully
waited on to the last by her affectionate master. She was buried in South Audley Churchyard,
where Gifford erected a tomb over her, and placed on it a very touching epitaph, concluding
with these words: "Her deeply-affected master erected this stone to her memory, as a faithful
testimony of her uncommon worth, and of his gratitude, respect, and affection for her long
and meritorious services." [Footnote: It will serve to connect the narrative with one of the
famous literary quarrels of the day, if we remind the reader that Hazlitt published a cruel
and libellous pamphlet in 1819, entitled "A Letter to William Gifford," in which he hinted
that some improper connection had subsisted between himself and his "frail memorial." Hazlitt
wrote this pamphlet because of a criticism on the "Round Table" in the Quarterly, which Gifford
did not write, and of a criticism of Hunt's "Rimini," published by Mr. Murray, which was also
the work of another writer. But Gifford never took any notice of these libellous attacks upon
him. He held that secrecy between himself and the contributors to the Quarterly was absolutely
necessary. Hazlitt, in the above pamphlet, also attacks Murray, Croker, Canning, Southey, and
others whom he supposed to be connected with the Review.]

Murray's own description of his famous drawing-room may also be given, from a letter to a relative:

"I have lately ventured on the bold step of quitting the old establishment to which I have
been so long attached, and have moved to one of the best, in every respect, that is known in
my business, where I have succeeded in a manner the most complete and flattering. My house
is excellent; and I transact all the departments of my business in an elegant library, which
my drawing-room becomes during the morning; and there I am in the habit of seeing persons of
the highest rank in literature and talent, such as Canning, Frere, Mackintosh, Southey, Campbell,
Walter Scott, Madame de Staël, Gifford, Croker, Barrow, Lord Byron, and others; thus leading
the most delightful life, with means of prosecuting my business with the highest honour and
emolument."

It was in Murray's drawing-room that Walter Scott and Lord Byron first met. They had already
had some friendly intercourse by letter and had exchanged gifts, but in the early part of 1815
Scott was summoned to London on matters connected with his works. Mr. Murray wrote to Lord
Byron on April 7:

"Walter Scott has this moment arrived, and will call to-day between three and four, for the
chance of having the pleasure of seeing you before he sets out for Scotland. I will show you
a beautiful caricature of Buonaparte."

Lord Byron called at the hour appointed, and was at once introduced to Mr. Scott, who was in
waiting. They greeted each other in the most affectionate manner, and entered into a cordial
conversation. How greatly Mr. Murray was gratified by a meeting which he had taken such pains
to bring about, is shown by the following memorandum carefully preserved by him:

"1815. Friday, April 7.--This day Lord Byron and Walter Scott met for the first time and were
introduced by me to each other. They conversed together for nearly two hours. There were present,
at different times, Mr. William Gifford, James Boswell (son of the biographer of Johnson),
William Sotheby, Robert Wilmot, Richard Heber, and Mr. Dusgate."

Mr. Murray's son--then John Murray, Junior--gives his recollections as follows:

"I can recollect seeing Lord Byron in Albemarle Street. So far as I can remember, he appeared
to me rather a short man, with a handsome countenance, remarkable for the fine blue veins which
ran over his pale, marble temples. He wore many rings on his fingers, and a brooch in his shirt-front,
which was embroidered. When he called, he used to be dressed in a black dress-coat (as we should
now call it), with grey, and sometimes nankeen trousers, his shirt open at the neck. Lord Byron's
deformity in his foot was very evident, especially as he walked downstairs. He carried a stick.
After Scott and he had ended their conversation in the drawing-room, it was a curious sight
to see the two greatest poets of the age--both lame--stumping downstairs side by side. They
continued to meet in Albemarle Street nearly every day, and remained together for two or three
hours at a time. Lord Byron dined several times at Albemarle Street, On one of these occasions,
he met Sir John Malcolm--a most agreeable and accomplished man--who was all the more interesting
to Lord Byron, because of his intimate knowledge of Persia and India. After dinner, Sir John
observed to Lord Byron, how much gratified he had been to meet him, and how surprised he was
to find him so full of gaiety and entertaining conversation. Byron replied, 'Perhaps you see
me now at my best.' Sometimes, though not often, Lord Byron read passages from his poems to
my father. His voice and manner were very impressive. His voice, in the deeper tones, bore
some resemblance to that of Mrs. Siddons."

Shortly before this first interview between Scott and Byron the news had arrived that Bonaparte
had escaped from Elba, and landed at Cannes on March 1, 1815.

A few days before--indeed on the day the battle was fought--Blackwood gave great praise to
the new number of the Quarterly, containing the contrast of Bonaparte and Wellington. It happened
that Southey wrote the article in No. 25, on the "Life and Achievements of Lord Wellington,"
in order to influence public opinion as much as possible, and to encourage the hearts of men
throughout the country for the great contest about to take place in the Low Countries. About
the same time Sir James Mackintosh had written an able and elaborate article for the Edinburgh,
to show that the war ought to have been avoided, and that the consequences to England could
only be unfortunate and inglorious. The number was actually printed, stitched, and ready for
distribution in June; but it was thought better to wait a little, for fear of accidents, and
especially for the purpose of using it instantly after the first reverse should occur, and
thus to give it the force of prophecy. The Battle of Waterloo came like a thunderclap. The
article was suppressed, and one on "Gall and his Craniology" substituted. "I think," says Ticknor,
"Southey said he had seen the repudiated article." [Footnote: "Life, Letters, and Journals
of George Ticknor "(2nd ed.), i. p. 41.]

Lord Byron did not write another "Ode on Napoleon." He was altogether disappointed in his expectations.
Nevertheless, he still, like Hazlitt, admired Napoleon, and hated Wellington. When he heard
of the result of the Battle of Waterloo, and that Bonaparte was in full retreat upon Paris,
he said, "I'm d----d sorry for it!"

Mr. Murray, about this time, began to adorn his dining-room with portraits of the distinguished
men who met at his table. His portraits include those of Gifford, [Footnote: This portrait
was not painted for Mr. Murray, but was purchased by him.] by Hoppner, R.A.; Byron and Southey,
by Phillips; Scott and Washington Irving, by Stewart Newton; Croker, by Eddis, after Lawrence;
Coleridge, Crabbe, Mrs. Somerville, Hallam, T. Moore, Lockhart, and others. In April 1815 we
find Thomas Phillips, afterwards R.A., in communication with Mr. Murray, offering to paint
for him a series of Kit-cat size at eighty guineas each, and in course of time his pictures,
together with those of John Jackson, R.A., formed a most interesting gallery of the great literary
men of the time, men and women of science, essayists, critics, Arctic voyagers, and discoverers
in the regions of Central Africa.

Byron and Southey were asked to sit for their portraits to Phillips. Though Byron was willing,
and even thought it an honour, Southey pretended to grumble. To Miss Barker he wrote (November
9, 1815):

"Here, in London, I can find time for nothing; and, to make things worse, the Devil, who owes
me an old grudge, has made me sit to Phillips for a picture for Murray. I have in my time been
tormented in this manner so often, and to such little purpose, that I am half tempted to suppose
the Devil was the inventor of portrait painting."

Meanwhile Mr. Murray was again in treaty for a share in a further work by Walter Scott. No
sooner was the campaign of 1815 over, than a host of tourists visited France and the Low Countries,
and amongst them Murray succeeded in making his long-intended trip to Paris, and Scott set
out to visit the battlefields in Belgium. Before departing, Scott made an arrangement with
John Ballantyne to publish the results of his travels, and he authorized him to offer the work
to Murray, Constable, and the Longmans, in equal shares.

In 1815 a very remarkable collection of documents was offered to Mr. Murray for purchase and
publication. They were in the possession of one of Napoleon's generals, a friend of Miss Waldie.
[Footnote: Afterwards Mrs. Eaton, author of "Letters from Italy."] The collection consisted
of the personal correspondence of Bonaparte, when in the height of his power, with all the
crowned heads and leading personages of Europe, upon subjects so strictly confidential that
they had not even been communicated to their own ministers or private secretaries. They were
consequently all written by their own hands.

As regards the contents of these letters, Mr. Murray had to depend upon his memory, after making
a hurried perusal of them. He was not allowed to copy any of them, but merely took a rough
list. No record was kept of the dates. Among them was a letter from the King of Bavaria, urging
his claims as a true and faithful ally, and claiming for his reward the dominion of Wurtemberg.

There were several letters from the Prussian Royal family, including one from the King, insinuating
that by the cession of Hanover to him his territorial frontier would be rendered more secure.
The Emperor Paul, in a letter written on a small scrap of paper, proposed to transfer his whole
army to Napoleon, to be employed in turning the English out of India, provided he would prevent
them passing the Gut and enclosing the Baltic.

The Empress of Austria wrote an apology for the uncultivated state of mind of her daughter,
Marie Louise, about to become Napoleon's bride; but added that her imperfect education presented
the advantage of allowing Napoleon to mould her opinions and principles in accordance with
his own views and wishes.

This correspondence would probably have met with an immense sale, but Mr. Murray entertained
doubts as to the propriety of publishing documents so confidential, and declined to purchase
them for the sum proposed. The next day, after his refusal, he ascertained that Prince Lieven
had given, on behalf of his government, not less than £10,000 for the letters emanating from
the Court of Russia alone. Thus the public missed the perusal of an important series of international
scandals.

In December 1815 Mr. Murray published "Emma" for Miss Jane Austen, and so connected his name
with another English classic. Miss Austen's first novel had been "Northanger Abbey." It remained
long in manuscript, and eventually she had succeeded in selling it to a bookseller at Bath
for £10. He had not the courage to publish it, and after it had remained in his possession
for some years, Miss Austen bought it back for the same money he had paid for it. She next
wrote "Sense and Sensibility," and "Pride and Prejudice." The latter book was summarily rejected
by Mr. Cadell. At length these two books were published anonymously by Mr. Egerton, and though
they did not make a sensation, they gradually attracted attention and obtained admirers. No
one could be more surprised than the authoress, when she received no less than £150 from the
profits of her first published work--"Sense and Sensibility."

When Miss Austen had finished "Emma," she put herself in communication with Mr. Murray, who
read her "Pride and Prejudice," and sent it to Gifford. Gifford replied as follows:

Mr. Gifford to John Murray.

"I have for the first time looked into 'Pride and Prejudice'; and it is really a very pretty
thing. No dark passages; no secret chambers; no wind-howlings in long galleries; no drops of
blood upon a rusty dagger--things that should now be left to ladies' maids and sentimental
washerwomen."

In a later letter he said:

September 29, 1815.

"I have read 'Pride and Prejudice' again--'tis very good--wretchedly printed, and so pointed
as to be almost unintelligible. Make no apology for sending me anything to read or revise.
I am always happy to do either, in the thought that it may be useful to you.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Of 'Emma,' I have nothing but good to say. I was sure of the writer before you mentioned her.
The MS., though plainly written, has yet some, indeed many little omissions; and an expression
may now and then be amended in passing through the press. I will readily undertake the revision."

Miss Austen's two other novels, "Northanger Abbey" and "Persuasion," were also published by
Murray, but did not appear until after her death in 1818. The profits of the four novels which
had been published before her death did not amount to more than seven hundred pounds.

Mr. Murray also published the works of Mr. Malthus on "Rent," the "Corn Laws," and the "Essay
on Population." His pamphlet on Rent appeared in March 1815.

Murray's correspondence with Scott continued. On December 25, 1815, he wrote:

"I was about to tell you that Croker was so pleased with the idea of a Caledonian article from
you, that he could not refrain from mentioning it to the Prince Regent, who is very fond of
the subject, and he said he would be delighted, and is really anxious about it. Now, it occurs
to me, as our Edinburgh friends choose on many occasions to bring in the Prince's name to abuse
it, this might offer an equally fair opportunity of giving him that praise which is so justly
due to his knowledge of the history of his country....

"I was with Lord Byron yesterday. He enquired after you, and bid me say how much he was indebted
to your introduction of your poor Irish friend Maturin, who had sent him a tragedy, which Lord
Byron received late in the evening, and read through, without being able to stop. He was so
delighted with it that he sent it immediately to his fellow-manager, the Hon. George Lamb,
who, late as it came to him, could not go to bed without finishing it. The result is that they
have laid it before the rest of the Committee; they, or rather Lord Byron, feels it his duty
to the author to offer it himself to the managers of Covent Garden. The poor fellow says in
his letter that his hope of subsistence for his family for the next year rests upon what he
can get for this play. I expressed a desire of doing something, and Lord Byron then confessed
that he had sent him fifty guineas. I shall write to him tomorrow, and I think if you could
draw some case for him and exhibit his merits, particularly if his play succeeds, I could induce
Croker and Peel to interest themselves in his behalf, and get him a living.

".... Have you any fancy to dash off an article on 'Emma'? It wants incident and romance, does
it not? None of the author's other novels have been noticed, and surely 'Pride and Prejudice'
merits high commendation."

Scott immediately complied with Murray's request. He did "dash off an article on 'Emma,'" which
appeared in No. 27 of the Quarterly. In enclosing his article to Murray, Scott wrote as follows:

Mr. Scott to John Murray.

January 19, 1816.

Dear Sir,

Enclosed is the article upon "Emma." I have been spending my holidays in the country, where,
besides constant labour in the fields during all the hours of daylight, the want of books has
prevented my completing the Highland article. (The "Culloden Papers," which appeared in next
number.) It will be off, however, by Tuesday's post, as I must take Sunday and Monday into
the account of finishing it. It will be quite unnecessary to send proofs of "Emma," as Mr.
Gifford will correct all obvious errors, and abridge it where necessary.

January, 25, 1816.

"My article is so long that I fancy you will think yourself in the condition of the conjuror,
who after having a great deal of trouble in raising the devil, could not get rid of him after
he had once made his appearance. But the Highlands is an immense field, and it would have been
much more easy for me to have made a sketch twice as long than to make it shorter. There still
wants eight or nine pages, which you will receive by tomorrow's or next day's post; but I fancy
you will be glad to get on."

The article on the "Culloden Papers," which occupied fifty pages of the Review (No. 28), described
the clans of the Highlands, their number, manners, and habits; and gave a summary history of
the Rebellion of '45. It was graphically and vigorously written, and is considered one of Scott's
best essays. Charles Maturin, after completing his course of education at Trinity College,
married Miss Harriet Kinsburg. His family grew, but not his income. He took orders, and obtained
the curacy of St. Peter's Church, Dublin, but owing to his father's affairs having become embarrassed,
he was compelled to open a boarding-school, with the view of assisting the family. Unfortunately,
he became bound for a friend, who deceived him, and eventually he was obliged to sacrifice
his interest in the school. Being thus driven to extremities, he tried to live by literature,
and produced "The Fatal Revenge; or, the Family of Montorio," the first of a series of romances,
in which he outdid Mrs. Radcliffe and Monk Lewis. "The Fatal Revenge" was followed by "The
Wild Irish Boy," for which Colburn gave him £80, and "The Milesian Chief," all full of horrors
and misty grandeur. These works did not bring him in much money; but, in 1815, he determined
to win the height of dramatic fame in his "Bertram; or, the Castle of St. Aldebrand," a tragedy.
He submitted the drama to Walter Scott, as from an "obscure Irishman," telling him of his sufferings
as an author and the father of a family, and imploring his kind opinion. Scott replied in the
most friendly manner, gave him much good advice, spoke of the work as "grand and powerful,
the characters being sketched with masterly enthusiasm"; and, what was practically better,
sent him £50 as a token of his esteem and sympathy, and as a temporary stop-gap until better
times came round. He moreover called the attention of Lord Byron, then on the Committee of
Management of Drury Lane Theatre, to the play, and his Lordship strongly recommended a performance
of it. Thanks to the splendid acting of Kean, it succeeded, and Maturin realized about £1,000.

"Bertram" was published by Murray, a circumstance which brought him into frequent communication
with the unfortunate Maturin. The latter offered more plays, more novels, and many articles
for the Quarterly. With reference to one of his articles--a review of Sheil's "Apostate" --Gifford
said, "A more potatoe-headed arrangement, or rather derangement, I have never seen. I have
endeavoured to bring some order out of the chaos. There is a sort of wild eloquence in it that
makes it worth preserving."

Maturin continued to press his literary work on Murray, who however, though he relieved him
by the gift of several large sums of money, declined all further offers of publication save
the tragedy of "Manuel."

John Murray to Lord Byron.

March 15, 1817.

"Maturin's new tragedy, 'Manuel,' appeared on Saturday last, and I am sorry to say that the
opinion of Mr. Gifford was established by the impression made on the audience. The first act
very fine, the rest exhibiting a want of judgment not to be endured. It was brought out with
uncommon splendour, and was well acted. Kean's character as an old man--a warrior--was new
and well sustained, for he had, of course, selected it, and professed to be--and he acted as
if he were--really pleased with it.... I have undertaken to print the tragedy at my own expense,
and to give the poor Author the whole of the profit."

In 1824 Maturin died, in Dublin, in extreme poverty.

The following correspondence introduces another great name in English literature. It is not
improbable that it was Southey who suggested to Murray the employment of his brother-in-law,
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, from his thorough knowledge of German, as the translator of Goethe's
"Faust." The following is Mr. Coleridge's first letter to Murray:

Mr. Coleridge to John Murray.

JOSIAH WADE'S, Esq., 2, QUEEN'S SQUARE, BRISTOL. [August 23, 1814.]

Dear Sir,

I have heard, from my friend Mr. Charles Lamb, writing by desire of Mr. Robinson, that you
wish to have the justly-celebrated "Faust" of Goethe translated, and that some one or other
of my partial friends have induced you to consider me as the man most likely to execute the
work adequately, those excepted, of course, whose higher power (established by the solid and
satisfactory ordeal of the wide and rapid sale of their works) it might seem profanation to
employ in any other manner than in the development of their own intellectual organization.
I return my thanks to the recommender, whoever he be, and no less to you for your flattering
faith in the recommendation; and thinking, as I do, that among many volumes of praiseworthy
German poems, the "Louisa" of Voss, and the "Faust" of Goethe, are the two, if not the only
ones, that are emphatically original in their conception, and characteristic of a new and peculiar
sort of thinking and imagining, I should not be averse from exerting my best efforts in an
attempt to import whatever is importable of either or of both into our own language.

But let me not be suspected of a presumption of which I am not consciously guilty, if I say
that I feel two difficulties; one arising from long disuse of versification, added to what
I know, better than the most hostile critic could inform me, of my comparative weakness; and
the other, that any work in Poetry strikes me with more than common awe, as proposed for realization
by myself, because from long habits of meditation on language, as the symbolic medium of the
connection of Thought with Thought, and of Thoughts as affected and modified by Passion and
Emotion, I should spend days in avoiding what I deemed faults, though with the full preknowledge
that their admission would not have offended perhaps three of all my readers, and might be
deemed Beauties by 300--if so many there were; and this not out of any respect for the Public
(i.e. the persons who might happen to purchase and look over the Book), but from a hobby-horsical,
superstitious regard to my own feelings and sense of Duty. Language is the sacred Fire in this
Temple of Humanity, and the Muses are its especial and vestal Priestesses. Though I cannot
prevent the vile drugs and counterfeit Frankincense, which render its flame at once pitchy,
glowing, and unsteady, I would yet be no voluntary accomplice in the Sacrilege. With the commencement
of a PUBLIC, commences the degradation of the GOOD and the BEAUTIFUL--both fade and retire
before the accidentally AGREEABLE. "Othello" becomes a hollow lip-worship; and the "CASTLE
SPECTRE," or any more recent thing of Froth, Noise, and Impermanence, that may have overbillowed
it on the restless sea of curiosity, is the true Prayer of Praise and Admiration.

I thought it right to state to you these opinions of mine, that you might know that I think
the Translation of the "Faust" a task demanding (from me, I mean), no ordinary efforts--and
why? This--that it is painful, very painful, and even odious to me, to attempt anything of
a literary nature, with any motive of pecuniary advantage; but that I bow to the all-wise Providence,
which has made me a poor man, and therefore compelled me by other duties inspiring feelings,
to bring even my Intellect to the Market. And the finale is this. I should like to attempt
the Translation. If you will mention your terms, at once and irrevocably (for I am an idiot
at bargaining, and shrink from the very thought), I will return an answer by the next Post,
whether in my present circumstances, I can or cannot undertake it. If I do, I will do it immediately;
but I must have all Goethe's works, which I cannot procure in Bristol; for to give the "Faust"
without a preliminary critical Essay would be worse than nothing, as far as regards the PUBLIC.
If you were to ask me as a Friend, whether I think it would suit the General Taste, I should
reply that I cannot calculate on caprice and accident (for instance, some fashionable man or
review happening to take it up favourably), but that otherwise my fears would be stronger than
my hopes. Men of genius will admire it, of necessity. Those most, who think deepest and most
imaginatively. The "Louisa" would delight all of good hearts.

I remain, dear Sir, With due respect, S.T. COLERIDGE.

To this letter Mr. Murray replied as follows:

John Murray to Mr. Coleridge.

August 29, 1814.

Dear Sir,

I feel greatly obliged by the favour of your attention to the request which I had solicited
our friend Mr. Robinson to make to you for the translation of Goethe's extraordinary drama
of "Faust," which I suspect that no one could do justice to besides yourself. It will be the
first attempt to render into classical English a German work of peculiar but certainly of unquestionable
Genius; and you must allow that its effects upon the public must be doubtful. I am desirous
however of making the experiment, and this I would not do under a less skilful agent than the
one to whom I have applied. I am no less anxious that you should receive, as far as I think
the thing can admit, a fair remuneration; and trusting that you will not undertake it unless
you feel disposed to execute the labour perfectly con amore, and in a style of versification
equal to "Remorse," I venture to propose to you the sum of One Hundred Pounds for the Translation
and the preliminary Analysis, with such passages translated as you may judge proper of the
works of Goethe, with a copy of which I will have the pleasure of supplying you as soon as
I have your final determination. The sum which I mention shall be paid to you in two months
from the day on which you place the complete Translation and Analysis in my hands; this will
allow a reasonable time for your previous correction of the sheets through the press. I shall
be glad to hear from you by return of Post, if convenient, as I propose to set out this week
for the Continent. If this work succeeds, I am in hopes that it will lead to many similar undertakings.

With sincere esteem, I am, dear Sir, Your faithful Servant, J. Murray

I should hope that it might not prove inconvenient to you to complete the whole for Press in
the course of November next.

Mr. Coleridge replied as follows, from the same address:

Mr. Coleridge to John Murray.

August 31, 1814.

Dear Sir,

I have received your letter. Considering the necessary labour, and (from the questionable nature
of the original work, both as to its fair claims to Fame--the diction of the good and wise
according to unchanging principles--and as to its chance for Reputation, as an accidental result
of local and temporary taste), the risk of character on the part of the Translator, who will
assuredly have to answer for any disappointment of the reader, the terms proposed are humiliatingly
low; yet such as, under modifications, I accede to. I have received testimonials from men not
merely of genius according to my belief, but of the highest accredited reputation, that my
translation of "Wallenstein" was in language and in metre superior to the original, and the
parts most admired were substitutions of my own, on a principle of compensation. Yet the whole
work went for waste-paper. I was abused--nay, my own remarks in the Preface were transferred
to a Review, as the Reviewer's sentiments against me, without even a hint that he had copied
them from my own Preface. Such was the fate of "Wallenstein"! And yet I dare appeal to any
number of men of Genius--say, for instance, Mr. W. Scott, Mr. Southey, Mr. Wordsworth, Mr.
Wilson, Mr. Sotheby, Sir G. Beaumont, etc., whether the "Wallenstein" with all its defects
(and it has grievous defects), is not worth all Schiller's other plays put together. But I
wonder not. It was too good, and not good enough; and the advice of the younger Pliny: "Aim
at pleasing either all, or the few," is as prudentially good as it is philosophically accurate.
I wrote to Mr. Longman before the work was published, and foretold its fate, even to a detailed
accuracy, and advised him to put up with the loss from the purchase of the MSS and of the Translation,
as a much less evil than the publication. I went so far as to declare that its success was,
in the state of public Taste, impossible; that the enthusiastic admirers of "The Robbers,"
"Cabal and Love," etc., would lay the blame on me; and that he himself would suspect that if
he had only lit on another Translator then, etc. Everything took place as I had foretold, even
his own feelings--so little do Prophets gain from the fulfilment of their Prophecies!

On the other hand, though I know that executed as alone I can or dare do it--that is, to the
utmost of my power (for which the intolerable Pain, nay the far greater Toil and Effort of
doing otherwise, is a far safer Pledge than any solicitude on my part concerning the approbation
of the PUBLIC), the translation of so very difficult a work as the "Faustus," will be most
inadequately remunerated by the terms you propose; yet they very probably are the highest it
may be worth your while to offer to me. I say this as a philosopher; for, though I have now
been much talked of, and written of, for evil and not for good, but for suspected capability,
yet none of my works have ever sold. The "Wallenstein" went to the waste. The "Remorse," though
acted twenty times, rests quietly on the shelves in the second edition, with copies enough
for seven years' consumption, or seven times seven. I lost £200 by the non-payment, from forgetfulness,
and under various pretences, by "The Friend"; [Footnote: Twenty-seven numbers of The Friend
were published by Coleridge at Penrith in Cumberland in 1809-10, but the periodical proved
a failure, principally from the irregularity of its appearance. It was about this time that
he was addicted to opium-eating.] and for my poems I did get from £10 to £15. And yet, forsooth,
the Quarterly Review attacks me for neglecting and misusing my powers! I do not quarrel with
the Public--all is as it must be--but surely the Public (if there be such a Person) has no
right to quarrel with me for not getting into jail by publishing what they will not read!

The "Faust," you perhaps know, is only a Fragment. Whether Goethe ever will finish it, or whether
it is ever his object to do so, is quite unknown. A large proportion of the work cannot be
rendered in blank verse, but must be given in wild lyrical metres; and Mr. Lamb informs me
that the Baroness de Staël has given a very unfavourable account of the work. Still, however,
I will undertake it, and that instantly, so as to let you have the last sheet by the middle
of November, on the following terms:

1. That on the delivery of the last MS. sheet you remit 100 guineas to Mrs. Coleridge, or Mr.
Robert Southey, at a bill of five weeks. 2. That I, or my widow or family, may, any time after
two years from the first publication, have the privilege of reprinting it in any collection
of all my poetical writings, or of my works in general, which set off with a Life of me, might
perhaps be made profitable to my widow. And 3rd, that if (as I long ago meditated) I should
re-model the whole, give it a finale, and be able to bring it, thus re-written and re-cast,
on the stage, it shall not be considered as a breach of the engagement between us, I on my
part promising that you shall, for an equitable consideration, have the copy of this new work,
either as a separate work, or forming a part of the same volume or both, as circumstances may
dictate to you. When I say that I am confident that in this possible and not probable case,
I should not repeat or retain one fifth of the original, you will perceive that I consult only
my dread of appearing to act amiss, as it would be even more easy to compose the whole anew.

If these terms suit you I will commence the Task as soon as I receive Goethe's works from you.
If you could procure Goethe's late Life of himself, which extends but a short way, or any German
biographical work of the Germans living, it would enable me to render the preliminary Essay
more entertaining.

Respectfully, dear Sir,

S.T. COLERIDGE.

Mr. Murray's reply to this letter has not been preserved. At all events, nothing further was
done by Coleridge with respect to the translation of "Faust," which is to be deplored, as his
exquisite and original melody of versification might have produced a translation almost as
great as the original.

Shortly after Coleridge took up his residence with the Gillmans at Highgate, and his intercourse
with Murray recommenced. Lord Byron, while on the managing committee of Drury Lane Theatre,
had been instrumental in getting Coleridge's "Remorse" played upon the stage, as he entertained
a great respect for its author. He was now encouraging Mr. Murray to publish other works by
Coleridge--among others, "Zapolya" and "Christabel."

On April 12, 1816, Coleridge gave the following lines to Mr. Murray, written in his own hand:
[Footnote: The "Song, by Glycine" was first published in "Zapolya: A Christmas Tale," 1817,
Part II., Act ii., Scene I. It was set to music by W. Patten in 1836; and again, with the title
"May Song," in 1879, by B.H. Loehr.]

GLYCINE: Song.
Sweet month of May! we must away!
  Far, far away!
  Today! today!"

In the following month (May 8, 1816) Mr. Coleridge offered Mr. Murray his "Remorse" for publication,
with a Preface. He also offered his poem of "Christabel," still unfinished. For the latter
Mr. Murray agreed to give him seventy guineas, "until the other poems shall be completed, when
the copyright shall revert to the author," and also £20 for permission to publish the poem
entitled "Kubla Khan."

Next month (June 6) Murray allowed Coleridge £50 for an edition of "Zapolya: A Christmas Tale,"
which was then in MS.; and he also advanced him another £50 for a play which was still to be
written. "Zapolya" was afterwards entrusted to another publisher (Rest Fenner), and Coleridge
repaid Murray £50. Apparently (see letter of March 29, 1817) Murray very kindly forewent repayment
of the second advance of £50. There was, of course, no obligation to excuse a just debt, but
the three issues of "Christabel" had resulted in a net profit of a little over £100 to the
publisher.

Mr. Coleridge to John Murray.

HIGHGATE, July 4, 1816.

I have often thought that there might be set on foot a review of old books, i.e., of all works
important or remarkable, the authors of which are deceased, with a probability of a tolerable
sale, if only the original plan were a good one, and if no articles were admitted but from
men who understood and recognized the Principles and Rules of Criticism, which should form
the first number. I would not take the works chronologically, but according to the likeness
or contrast of the kind of genius--ex. gr. Jeremy Taylor, Milton (his prose works), and Burke--Dante
and Milton--Scaliger and Dr. Johnson. Secondly, if especial attention were paid to all men
who had produced, or aided in producing, any great revolution in the Taste or opinions of an
age, as Petrarch, Ulrich von Hutten, etc. (here I will dare risk the charge of self-conceit
by referring to my own parallel of Voltaire and Erasmus, of Luther and Rousseau in the seventh
number of "The Friend "). Lastly, if proper care was taken that in every number of the Review
there should be a fair proportion of positively amusing matter, such as a review of Paracelsus,
Cardan, Old Fuller; a review of Jest Books, tracing the various metempsychosis of the same
joke through all ages and countries; a History of Court Fools, for which a laborious German
has furnished ample and highly interesting materials; foreign writers, though alive, not to
be excluded, if only their works are of established character in their own country, and scarcely
heard of, much less translated, in English literature. Jean Paul Richter would supply two or
three delightful articles.

Any works which should fall in your way respecting the Jews since the destruction of the Temple,
I should of course be glad to look through. Above all, Mezeray's (no! that is not the name,
I think) "History of the Jews," that I must have.

I shall be impatient for the rest of Mr. Frere's sheets. Most unfeignedly can I declare that
I am unable to decide whether the admiration which the excellence inspires, or the wonder which
the knowledge of the countless difficulties so happily overcome, never ceases to excite in
my mind during the re-perusal and collation of them with the original Greek, be the greater.
I have not a moment's hesitation in fixing on Mr. Frere as the man of the correctest and most
genial taste among all our contemporaries whom I have ever met with, personally or in their
works. Should choice or chance lead you to sun and air yourself on Highgate Hill during any
of your holiday excursions, my worthy friend and his amiable and accomplished wife will be
happy to see you. We dine at four, and drink tea at six.

Yours, dear Sir, respectfully, S.T. COLERIDGE.

Mr. Murray did not accept Mr. Coleridge's proposal to publish his works in a collected form
or his articles for the Quarterly, as appears from the following letter:

Mr. Coleridge to John Murray.

HIGHGATE, March 26, 1817.

DEAR SIR,

I cannot be offended by your opinion that my talents are not adequate to the requisites of
matter and manner for the Quarterly Review, nor should I consider it as a disgrace to fall
short of Robert Southey in any department of literature. I owe, however, an honest gratification
to the conversation between you and Mr. Gillman, for I read Southey's article, on which Mr.
Gillman and I have, it appears, formed very different opinions. It is, in my judgment, a very
masterly article. [Footnote: This must have been Southey's article on Parliamentary Reform
in No. 31, which, though due in October 1816, was not, published until February 1817.] I would
to heaven, my dear sir, that the opinions of Southey, Walter Scott, Lord Byron, Mr. Frere,
and of men like these in learning and genius, concerning my comparative claims to be a man
of letters, were to be received as the criterion, instead of the wretched, and in deed and
in truth mystical jargon of the Examiner and Edinburgh Review.

Mr. Randall will be so good as to repay you the £50, and I understand from Mr. Gillman that
you are willing to receive this as a settlement respecting the "Zapolya." The corrections and
additions to the two first books of the "Christabel" may become of more value to you when the
work is finished, as I trust it will be in the course of the spring, than they are at present.
And let it not be forgotten, that while I had the utmost malignity of personal enmity to cry
down the work, with the exception of Lord Byron, there was not one of the many who had so many
years together spoken so warmly in its praise who gave it the least positive furtherance after
its publication. It was openly asserted that the Quarterly Review did not wish to attack it,
but was ashamed to say a word in its favor. Thank God! these things pass from me like drops
from a duck's back, except as far as they take the bread out of my mouth; and this I can avoid
by consenting to publish only for the present times whatever I may write. You will be so kind
as to acknowledge the receipt of the £50 in such manner as to make all matters as clear between
us as possible; for, though you, I am sure, could not have intended to injure my character,
yet the misconceptions, and perhaps misrepresentations, of your words have had that tendency.
By a letter from R. Southey I find that he will be in town on the 17th. The article in Tuesday's
Courier was by me, and two other articles on Apostacy and Renegadoism, which will appear this week.

Believe me, with respect, your obliged,

S.T. COLERIDGE.

The following letter completes Coleridge's correspondence with Murray on this subject:

Mr. Coleridge to John Murray.

[Highgate], March 29, 1817.

Dear Sir,

From not referring to the paper dictated by yourself, and signed by me in your presence, you
have wronged yourself in the receipt you have been so good as to send me, and on which I have
therefore written as follows--"A mistake; I am still indebted to Mr. Murray £20 legally (which
I shall pay the moment it is in my power), and £30 from whatever sum I may receive from the
'Christabel' when it is finished. Should Mr. Murray decline its publication, I conceive myself
bound in honor to repay." I strive in vain to discover any single act or expression of my own,
or for which I could be directly or indirectly responsible as a moral being, that would account
for the change in your mode of thinking respecting me. But with every due acknowledgment of
the kindness and courtesy that I received from you on my first coming to town,

I remain, dear Sir, your obliged, S.T. COLERIDGE.

Leigh Hunt was another of Murray's correspondents. When the Quarterly was started, Hunt, in
his Autography, says that "he had been invited, nay pressed by the publisher, to write in the
new Review, which surprised me, considering its politics and the great difference of my own."
Hunt adds that he had no doubt that the invitation had been made at the instance of Gifford
himself. Murray had a high opinion of Hunt as a critic, but not as a politician. Writing to
Walter Scott in 1810 he said:

John Murray to Mr. Scott,

"Have you got or seen Hunt's critical essays, prefixed to a few novels that he edited. Lest
you should not, I send them. Hunt is most vilely wrongheaded in politics, and has thereby been
turned away from the path of elegant criticism, which might have led him to eminence and respectability."

Hunt was then, with his brother, joint editor of the Examiner, and preferred writing for the
newspaper to contributing articles to the Quarterly.

On Leigh Hunt's release from Horsemonger Lane Gaol, where he had been imprisoned for his libel
on the Prince Regent, he proceeded, on the strength of his reputation, to compose the "Story
of Rimini," the publication of which gave the author a place among the poets of the day. He
sent a portion of the manuscript to Mr. Murray before the poem was finished, saying that it
would amount to about 1,400 lines. Hunt then proceeded (December 18, 1815) to mention the terms
which he proposed to be paid for his work when finished. "Booksellers," he said, "tell me that
I ought not to ask less than £450 (which is a sum I happen to want just now); and my friends,
not in the trade, say I ought not to ask less than £500, with such a trifling acknowledgment
upon the various editions after the second and third, as shall enable me to say that I am still
profiting by it."

Mr. Murray sent his reply to Hunt through their common friend, Lord Byron:

John Murray to Lord Byron.

December 27, 1815.

"I wish your lordship to do me the favour to look at and to consider with your usual kindness
the accompanying note to Mr. Leigh Hunt respecting his poem, for which he requests £450. This
would presuppose a sale of, at least, 10,000 copies. Now, if I may trust to my own experience
in these matters, I am by no means certain that the sale would do more than repay the expenses
of paper and print. But the poem is peculiar, and may be more successful than I imagine, in
which event the proposition which I have made to the author will secure to him all the advantages
of such a result, I trust that you will see in this an anxious desire to serve Mr. Hunt, although
as a mere matter of business I cannot avail myself of his offer. I would have preferred calling
upon you today were I not confined by a temporary indisposition; but I think you will not be
displeased at a determination founded upon the best judgment I can form of my own business.
I am really uneasy at your feelings in this affair, but I think I may venture to assume that
you know me sufficiently well to allow me to trust my decision entirely to your usual kindness."

John Murray to Mr. Leigh Hunt.

December 27, 1815.

"I have now read the MS. poem, which you confided to me, with particular attention, and find
that it differs so much from any that I have published that I am fearful of venturing upon
the extensive speculation to which your estimate would carry it. I therefore wish that you
would propose its publication and purchase to such houses as Cadell, Longman, Baldwin, Mawman,
etc., who are capable of becoming and likely to become purchasers, and then, should you not
have found any arrangement to your mind, I would undertake to print an edition of 500 or 750
copies as a trial at my own risk, and give you one half of the profits. After this edition
the copyright shall be entirely your own property. By this arrangement, in case the work turn
out a prize, as it may do, I mean that you should have every advantage of its success, for
its popularity once ascertained, I am sure you will find no difficulty in procuring purchasers,
even if you should be suspicious of my liberality from this specimen of fearfulness in the
first instance. I shall be most happy to assist you with any advice which my experience in
these matters may render serviceable to you."

Leigh Hunt at once accepted the offer.

After the poem was printed and published, being pressed for money, he wished to sell the copyright.
After a recitation of his pecuniary troubles, Hunt concluded a lengthy letter as follows:

"What I wanted to ask you then is simply this--whether, in the first instance, you think well
enough of the "Story of Rimini" to make you bargain with me for the copyright at once; or,
in the second instance, whether, if you would rather wait a little, as I myself would do, I
confess, if it were convenient, you have still enough hopes of the work, and enough reliance
on myself personally, to advance me £450 on security, to be repaid in case you do not conclude
the bargain, or merged in the payment of the poem in case you do."

Mr. Murray's reply was not satisfactory, as will be observed from the following letter of Leigh
Hunt:

Mr. Leigh Hunt to John Murray,

April 12, 1816.

Dear Sir,

I just write to say something which I had omitted in my last, and to add a word or two on the
subject of an expression in your answer to it. I mean the phrase "plan of assistance." I do
not suppose that you had the slightest intention of mortifying me by that phrase; but I should
wish to impress upon you, that I did not consider my application to you as coming in the shape
of what is ordinarily termed an application for assistance. Circumstances have certainly compelled
me latterly to make requests, and resort to expedients, which, however proper in themselves,
I would not willingly have been acquainted with; but I have very good prospects before me,
and you are mistaken (I beg you to read this in the best and most friendly tone you can present
to yourself) if you have at all apprehended that I should be in the habit of applying to you
for assistance, or for anything whatsoever, for which I did not conceive the work in question
to be more than a security.

I can only say, with regard to yourself, that I am quite contented and ought to be so, as long
as you are sincere with me, and treat me in the same gentlemanly tone.

Very sincerely yours,

LEIGH HUNT.

This negotiation was ultimately brought to a conclusion by Mr. Hunt, at Mr. Murray's suggestion,
disposing of the copyright of "Rimini" to another publisher. The world was taken by surprise
at the vigour of thought and richness of fancy displayed in the poem. Shortly after its publication,
Campbell went to Germany, and saw, from the Benedictine monastery of Scottish monks at Ratisbon,
a battle which was not, as has often been said, the Battle of Hohenlinden. What he saw, however,
made a deep impression on his mind, and on his return to Scotland he published the beautiful
lines beginning, "On Linden when the sun was low." In 1801 he composed "The Exile of Erin"
and "Ye Mariners of England." The "Battle of the Baltic" and "Lochiel's Warning" followed;
and in 1803 he published an edition of his poems. To have composed such noble lyrics was almost
unprecedented in so young a man; for he was only twenty-six years of age when his collected
edition appeared. He was treated as a lion, and became acquainted with Walter Scott and the
leading men in Edinburgh. In December 1805 we find Constable writing to Murray, that Longman
& Co. had offered the young poet £700 for a new volume of his poems.

One of the earliest results of the association of Campbell with Murray was a proposal to start
a new magazine, which Murray had long contemplated. This, it will be observed, was some years
before the communications took place between Walter Scott and Murray with respect to the starting
of the Quarterly.

The projected magazine, however, dropped out of sight, and Campbell reverted to his proposed
"Lives of the British Poets, with Selections from their Writings." Toward the close of the
year he addressed the following letter to Mr. Scott:

Mr. T. Campbell to Mr. Scott.

November 5, 1806.

My Dear Scott,

A very excellent and gentlemanlike man--albeit a bookseller--Murray, of Fleet Street, is willing
to give for our joint "Lives of the Poets," on the plan we proposed to the trade a twelvemonth
ago, a thousand pounds. For my part, I think the engagement very desirable, and have no uneasiness
on the subject, except my fear that you may be too much engaged to have to do with it, as five
hundred pounds may not be to you the temptation that it appears to a poor devil like myself.
Murray is the only gentleman, except Constable, in the trade;--I may also, perhaps, except
Hood. I have seldom seen a pleasanter man to deal with. .... Our names are what Murray principally
wants--yours in particular.... I will not wish, even in confidence, to say anything ill of
the London booksellers beyond their deserts; but I assure you that, to compare this offer of
Murray's with their usual offers, it is magnanimous indeed.... The fallen prices of literature-which
is getting worse by the horrible complexion of the times-make me often rather gloomy at the
life I am likely to lead.

Scott entered into Campbell's agreement with kindness and promptitude, and it was arranged,
under certain stipulations, that the plan should have his zealous cooperation; but as the number
and importance of his literary engagements increased, he declined to take an active part either
in the magazine or the other undertaking. "I saw Campbell two days ago," writes Murray to Constable,
"and he told me that Mr. Scott had declined, and modestly asked if it would do by himself alone;
but this I declined in a way that did not leave us the less friends."

At length, after many communications and much personal intercourse, Murray agreed with Campbell
to bring out his work, without the commanding name of Walter Scott, and with the name of Thomas
Campbell alone as Editor of the "Selections from the British Poets." The arrangement seems
to have been made towards the end of 1808. In January 1809 Campbell writes of his intention
"to devote a year exclusively to the work," but the labour it involved was perhaps greater
than he had anticipated. It was his first important prose work; and prose requires continuous
labour. It cannot, like a piece of poetry, be thrown off at a heat while the fit is on. Campbell
stopped occasionally in the midst of his work to write poems, among others, his "Gertrude of
Wyoming," which confirmed his poetical reputation. Murray sent a copy of the volume to Walter
Scott, and requested a review for the Quarterly, which was then in its first year. What Campbell
thought of the review will appear from the following letter:

Mr. T. Campbell to John Murray.

June 2, 1809.

My Dear Murray,

I received the review, for which I thank you, and beg leave through you to express my best
acknowledgments to the unknown reviewer. I do not by this mean to say that I think every one
of his censures just. On the contrary, if I had an opportunity of personal conference with
so candid and sensible a man, I think I could in some degree acquit myself of a part of the
faults he has found. But altogether I am pleased with his manner, and very proud of his approbation.
He reviews like a gentleman, a Christian, and a scholar.

Although the "Lives of the Poets" had been promised within a year from January 1809, four years
passed, and the work was still far from completion.

In the meantime Campbell undertook to give a course of eleven Lectures on Poetry at the Royal
Institution, for which he received a hundred guineas. He enriched his Lectures with the Remarks
and Selections collected for the "Specimens," for which the publisher had agreed to pay a handsome
sum. The result was a momentary hesitation on the part of Mr. Murray to risk the publication
of the work. On this, says Campbell's biographer, a correspondence ensued between the poet
and the publisher, which ended to the satisfaction of both. Mr. Murray only requested that
Mr. Campbell should proceed with greater alacrity in finishing the long projected work.

At length, about the beginning of 1819, fourteen years after the project had been mentioned
to Walter Scott, and about ten years after the book should have appeared, according to Campbell's
original promise, the "Essays and Selections of English Poetry" were published by Mr. Murray.
The work was well received. The poet was duly paid for it, and Dr. Beattie, Campbell's biographer,
says he "found himself in the novel position of a man who has money to lay out at interest."
This statement must be received with considerable deduction, for, as the correspondence shows,
Campbell's pecuniary difficulties were by no means at an end.

It appears that besides the £1,000, which was double the sum originally proposed to be paid
to Campbell for the "Selections," Mr. Murray, in October 1819, paid him £200 "for books," doubtless
for those he had purchased for the "Collections," and which he desired to retain.

We cannot conclude this account of Campbell's dealing with Murray without referring to an often-quoted
story which has for many years sailed under false colours. It was Thomas Campbell who wrote
"Now Barabbas was a publisher," whether in a Bible or otherwise is not authentically recorded,
and forwarded it to a friend; but Mr. Murray was not the publisher to whom it referred, nor
was Lord Byron, as has been so frequently stated, the author of the joke.

The great burden of the correspondence entailed by the Quarterly Review now fell on Mr. Murray,
for Gifford had become physically incapable of bearing it. Like the creaking gate that hangs
long on its hinges, Gifford continued to live, though painfully. He became gradually better,
and in October 1816 Mr. Murray presented him with a chariot, by means of which he might drive
about and take exercise in the open air. Gifford answered:

"I have a thousand thanks to give you for the pains you have taken about the carriage, without
which I should only have talked about it, and died of a cold. It came home yesterday, and I
went to Fulham in it. It is everything that I could wish, neat, easy, and exceedingly comfortable."

Among the other works published by Mr. Murray in 1816 may be mentioned, "The Last Reign of
Napoleon," by Mr. John Cam Hobhouse, afterwards Lord Broughton. Of this work the author wrote
to Mr. Murray:

January, 1816.

"I must have the liberty of cancelling what sheets I please, for a reason that I now tell you
in the strictest confidence: the letters are to go to Paris previously to publication, and
are to be read carefully through by a most intimate friend of mine, who was entirely in the
secrets of the late Imperial Ministry, and who will point out any statements as to facts, in
which he could from his knowledge make any necessary change."

The first edition, published without the author's name, was rapidly exhausted, and Hobhouse
offered a second to Murray, proposing at the same time to insert his name as author on the
title-page.

"If I do," he said, "I shall present the book to Lord Byron in due form, not for his talents
as a poet, but for his qualities as a companion and a friend. I should not write 'My dear Byron,'
à la Hunt." [Footnote: Leigh Hunt had dedicated his "Rimini" to the noble poet, addressing
him as "My dear Byron."]

Mr. D'Israeli also was busy with his "Inquiry into the Literary and Political Character of
James the First." He wrote to his publisher as follows: "I am sorry to say every one, to whom
I have mentioned the subject, revolts from it as a thing quite untenable, and cares nothing
about 'James.' This does not stop me from finishing."

Mr. Croker, in the midst of his work at the Admiralty, his articles for the Quarterly, and
his other literary labours, found time to write his "Stories for Children from the History
of England." In sending the later stories Mr. Croker wrote to Mr. Murray:

The Rt. Hon. J.W. Croker to John Murray.

"I send you seven stories, which, with eleven you had before, brings us down to Richard III.,
and as I do not intend to come down beyond the Revolution, there remain nine stories still.
I think you told me that you gave the first stories to your little boy to read. Perhaps you
or Mrs. Murray would be so kind as to make a mark over against such words as he may not have
understood, and to favour me with any criticism the child may have made, for on this occasion
I should prefer a critic of 6 years old to one of 60."

Thus John Murray's son, John Murray the Third, was early initiated into the career of reading
for the press. When the book came out it achieved a great success, and set the model for Walter
Scott in his charming "Tales of a Grandfather."

It may be mentioned that "Croker's Stories for Children" were published on the system of division
of profits. Long after, when Mr. Murray was in correspondence with an author who wished him
to pay a sum of money down before he had even seen the manuscript, the publisher recommended
the author to publish his book on a division of profits, in like manner as Hallam, Milman,
Mahon, Croker, and others had done. "Under this system," he said, "I have been very successful.
For Mr. Croker's 'Stories from the History of England,' selling for 2s. 6d., if I had offered
the small sum of twenty guineas, he would have thought it liberal. However, I printed it to
divide profits, and he has already received from me the moiety of £1,400. You will perhaps
be startled at my assertion; for woeful experience convinces me that not more than one publication
in fifty has a sale sufficient to defray its expenses."

The success of Scott's, and still more of Byron's Poems, called into existence about this time
a vast array of would-be poets, male and female, and from all ranks and professions. Some wrote
for fame, some for money; but all were agreed on one point--namely, that if Mr. Murray would
undertake the publication of the poems, the authors' fame was secured.

When in doubt about any manuscript, he usually conferred with Croker, Campbell, or Gifford,
who always displayed the utmost kindness in helping him with their opinions. Croker was usually
short and pithy. Of one poem he said: "Trash--the dullest stuff I ever read." This was enough
to ensure the condemnation of the manuscript. Campbell was more guarded, as when reporting
on a poem entitled "Woman," he wrote, "In my opinion, though there are many excellent lines
in it, the poem is not such as will warrant a great sum being speculated upon it. But, as it
is short, I think the public, not the author or publisher, will be in fault if it does not
sell one edition."

Of a poem sent for his opinion, Gifford wrote:

"Honestly, the MS. is totally unfit for the press. Do not deceive yourself: this MS. is not
the production of a male. A man may write as great nonsense as a woman, and even greater; but
a girl may pass through those execrable abodes of ignorance, called boarding schools, without
learning whether the sun sets in the East or in the West, whereas a boy can hardly do this,
even at Parson's Green."

James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd, was another of Murray's correspondents.

The publication of "The Queen's Wake" in 1813 immediately brought Hogg into connection with
the leading authors and publishers of the day, Hogg sent a copy of the volume to Lord Byron,
his "brother poet," whose influence he desired to enlist on behalf of a work which Hogg wished
Murray to publish.

The poem which the Ettrick Shepherd referred to was "The Pilgrims of the Sun," and the result
of Lord Byron's conversation with Mr. Murray was, that the latter undertook to publish Hogg's
works. The first letter from him to Murray, December 26, 1814, begins:

"What the deuce have you made of my excellent poem that you are never publishing it, while
I am starving for want of money, and cannot even afford a Christmas goose to my friends?"

To this and many similar enquiries Mr. Murray replied on April 10, 1815:

My Dear Friend,

I entreat you not to ascribe to inattention the delay which has occurred in my answer to your
kind and interesting letter. Much more, I beg you not for a moment to entertain a doubt about
the interest which I take in your writings, or the exertions which I shall ever make to promote
their sale and popularity.... They are selling every day.

I have forgotten to tell you that Gifford tells me that he would receive, with every disposition
to favour it, any critique which you like to send of new Scottish works. If I had been aware
of it in time I certainly would have invited your remarks on "Mannering." Our article is not
good and our praise is by no means adequate, I allow, but I suspect you very greatly overrate
the novel. "Meg Merrilies" is worthy of Shakespeare, but all the rest of the novel might have
been written by Scott's brother or any other body.

The next letter from the Shepherd thanks Murray for some "timeous" aid, and asks a novel favour.

May 7, 1815.

I leave Edinburgh on Thursday for my little farm on Yarrow. I will have a confused summer,
for I have as yet no home that I can dwell in; but I hope by-and-by to have some fine fun there
with you, fishing in Saint Mary's Loch and the Yarrow, eating bull-trout, singing songs, and
drinking whisky. This little possession is what I stood much in need of--a habitation among
my native hills was what of all the world I desired; and if I had a little more money at command,
I would just be as happy a man as I know of; but that is an article of which I am ever in want.
I wish you or Mrs. Murray would speer me out a good wife with a few thousands. I dare say there
is many a romantic girl about London who would think it a fine ploy to become a Yarrow Shepherdess!
Believe me, dear Murray,

Very sincerely yours, JAMES HOGG.

Here, for the present, we come to an end of the Shepherd's letters; but we shall find him turning
up again, and Mr. Murray still continuing his devoted friend and adviser.

John Murray to Lord Byron.

February 17, 1815.

MY LORD,

I have paid frequent attention to your wish that I should ascertain if all things appeared
to be safe in your chambers, and I am happy in being able to report that the whole establishment
carries an appearance of security, which is confirmed by the unceasing vigilance of your faithful
and frigid Duenna [Mrs. Mule].

Every day I have been in expectation of receiving a copy of "Guy Mannering," of which the reports
of a friend of mine, who has read the first two volumes, is such as to create the most extravagant
expectations of an extraordinary combination of wit, humour and pathos. I am certain of one
of the first copies, and this you may rely upon receiving with the utmost expedition.

I hear many interesting letters read to me from the Continent, and one in particular from Mr.
Fazakerly, describing his interview of four hours with Bonaparte, was particularly good. He
acknowledged at once to the poisoning of the sick prisoners in Egypt; they had the plague,
and would have communicated it to the rest of his army if he had carried them on with him,
and he had only to determine if he should leave them to a cruel death by the Turks, or to an
easy one by poison. When asked his motive for becoming a Mahomedan, he replied that there were
great political reasons for this, and gave several; but he added, the Turks would not admit
me at first unless I submitted to two indispensable ceremonies.... They agreed at length to
remit the first and to commute the other for a solemn vow, for every offence to give expiation
by the performance of some good action. "Oh, gentlemen," says he, "for good actions, you know
you may command me," and his first good action was to put to instant death an hundred of their
priests, whom he suspected of intrigues against him. Not aware of his summary justice, they
sent a deputation to beg the lives of these people on the score of his engagement. He answered
that nothing would have made him so happy as this opportunity of showing his zeal for their
religion; but that they had arrived too late; their friends had been dead nearly an hour.

He asked Lord Ebrington of which party he was, in Politics. "The Opposition." "The Opposition?
Then can your Lordship tell me the reason why the Opposition are so unpopular in England?"
With something like presence of mind on so delicate a question, Lord Ebrington instantly replied:
"Because, sir, we always insisted upon it, that you would be successful in Spain."

During the spring and summer of 1815 Byron was a frequent visitor at Albemarle Street, and
in April, as has been already recorded, he first met Walter Scott in Murray's drawing-room.

In March, Lord and Lady Byron took up their residence at 13, Piccadilly Terrace. The following
letter is undated, but was probably written in the autumn of 1815.

John Murray to Lord Byron.

My Lord,

I picked up, the other day, some of Napoleon's own writing paper, all the remainder of which
has been burnt; it has his portrait and eagle, as you will perceive by holding a sheet to the
light either of sun or candle: so I thought I would take a little for you, hoping that you
will just write me a poem upon any twenty-four quires of it in return.

By the autumn of 1815 Lord Byron found himself involved in pecuniary embarrassments, which
had, indeed, existed before his marriage, but were now considerably increased and demanded
immediate settlement. His first thought was to part with his books, though they did not form
a very valuable collection. He mentioned the matter to a book collector, who conferred with
other dealers on the subject. The circumstances coming to the ears of Mr. Murray, he at once
communicated with Lord Byron, and forwarded him a cheque for £1,500, with the assurance that
an equal sum should be at his service in the course of a few weeks, offering, at the same time,
to dispose of all the copyrights of his poems for his Lordship's use.

Lord Byron could not fail to be affected by this generous offer, and whilst returning the cheque,
he wrote:

November 14, 1815.

Meanwhile Lord Byron had completed his "Siege of Corinth" and "Parisina," and sent the packet
containing them to Mr. Murray. They had been copied in the legible hand of Lady Byron.

December, 1815.

My Lord,

I tore open the packet you sent me, and have found in it a Pearl. It is very interesting, pathetic,
beautiful--do you know, I would almost say moral. I am really writing to you before the billows
of the passions you excited have subsided. I have been most agreeably disappointed (a word
I cannot associate with the poem) at the story, which--what you hinted to me and wrote--had
alarmed me; and I should not have read it aloud to my wife if my eye had not traced the delicate
hand that transcribed it.

Mr. Murray enclosed to Lord Byron two notes, amounting to a thousand guineas, for the copyright
of the poems, but Lord Byron refused the notes, declaring that the sum was too great.

The money, therefore, which Murray thought the copyright of the "Siege of Corinth" and "Parisina"
was worth, remained untouched in the publisher's hands. It was afterwards suggested, by Mr.
Rogers and Sir James Mackintosh, to Lord Byron, that a portion of it (£600) might be applied
to the relief of Mr. Godwin, the author of "An Enquiry into Political Justice," who was then
in difficulties; and Lord Byron himself proposed that the remainder should be divided between
Mr. Maturin and Mr. Coleridge. This proposal caused the deepest vexation to Mr. Murray, who
made the following remonstrance against such a proceeding.

John Murray to Lord Byron.

ALBEMARLE STREET, Monday, 4 o'clock.

My Lord,

I did not like to detain you this morning, but I confess to you that I came away impressed
with a belief that you had already reconsidered this matter, as it refers to me--Your Lordship
will pardon me if I cannot avoid looking upon it as a species of cruelty, after what has passed,
to take from me so large a sum--offered with no reference to the marketable value of the poems,
but out of personal friendship and gratitude alone,--to cast it away on the wanton and ungenerous
interference of those who cannot enter into your Lordship's feelings for me, upon, persons
who have so little claim upon you, and whom those who so interested themselves might more decently
and honestly enrich from their own funds, than by endeavouring to be liberal at the cost of
another, and by forcibly resuming from me a sum which you had generously and nobly resigned.

I am sure you will do me the justice to believe that I would strain every nerve in your service,
but it is actually heartbreaking to throw away my earnings on others. I am no rich man, abounding,
like Mr. Rogers, in superfluous thousands, but working hard for independence, and what would
be the most grateful pleasure to me if likely to be useful to you personally, becomes merely
painful if it causes me to work for others for whom I can have no such feelings.

This is a most painful subject for me to address you upon, and I am ill able to express my
feelings about it. I commit them entirely to your liberal construction with a reference to
your knowledge of my character.

I have the honour to be, etc.,

JOHN MURRAY.

This letter was submitted to Gifford before it was despatched, and he wrote:

Mr. Gifford to John Murray.

"I have made a scratch or two, and the letter now expresses my genuine sentiments on the matter.
But should you not see Rogers? It is evident that Lord Byron is a little awkward about this
matter, and his officious friends have got him into a most unlordly scrape, from which they
can only relieve him by treading back their steps. The more I consider their conduct, the more
I am astonished at their impudence. A downright robbery is honourable to it. If you see Rogers,
do not be shy to speak: he trembles at report, and here is an evil one for him."

In the end Lord Byron was compelled by the increasing pressure of his debts to accept the sum
offered by Murray and use it for his own purposes.

It is not necessary here to touch upon the circumstances of Lord Byron's separation from his
wife; suffice it to say that early in 1816 he determined to leave England, and resolved, as
he had before contemplated doing, to sell off his books and furniture. He committed the arrangements
to Mr. Murray, through Mr. Hanson, his solicitor, in Bloomsbury Square. A few months before,
when Lord Byron was in straits for money, Mr. Hanson communicated with Mr. Murray as follows:

Mr. Hanson to John Murray.

November 23, 1815.

"Mr. Hanson's compliments to Mr. Murray. He has seen Lord Byron, and his Lordship has no objection
to his Library being taken at a valuation. Mr. Hanson submits to Mr. Murray whether it would
not be best to name one respectable bookseller to set a value on them. In the meantime, Mr.
Hanson has written to Messrs. Crook & Armstrong, in whose hands the books now are, not to proceed
further in the sale."

On December 28, 1815, Mr. Murray received the following valuation:

"Mr. Cochrane presents respectful compliments to Mr. Murray, and begs to inform him that upon
carefully inspecting the books in Skinner Street, he judges the fair value of them to be £450."

Mr. Murray sent Lord Byron a bill of £500 for the books as a temporary accommodation. But the
books were traced and attached by the sheriff. I wish to see you to-morrow to return your bill
for them, which, thank Heaven, is neither due nor paid.

A letter was next received by Mr. Murray's solicitor, Mr. Turner, from Mr. Gunn, to the following
effect:

Mr. Gunn to Mr. Turner.

March 16, 1816.

Sir,

Mr. Constable, the plaintiff's attorney, has written to say he will indemnify the sheriff to
sell the books under the execution; as such, we must decline taking your indemnity.

The result was, that Lord Byron, on March 22, paid to Crook & Armstrong £231 15s., "being the
amount of three levies, poundage, and expenses," and also £25 13s. 6d., the amount of Crook
& Armstrong's account. Crook & Armstrong settled with Levy, the Jew, who had lent Byron money;
and also with the officer, who had been in possession twenty-three days, at 5s. a day. The
books were afterwards sold by Mr. Evans at his house, 26, Pall Mall, on April 5, 1816, and
the following day. The catalogue describes them as "A collection of books, late the property
of a nobleman, about to leave England on a tour."

Mr. Murray was present at the sale, and bought a selection of books for Mrs. Leigh, for Mr.
Rogers, and for Mr. J.C. Hobhouse, as well as for himself. He bought the large screen, with
the portraits of actors and pugilists, which is still at Albemarle Street. There was also a
silver cup and cover, nearly thirty ounces in weight, elegantly chased. These articles realised
£723 12s. 6d., and after charging the costs, commission, and Excise duty, against the sale
of the books, the balance was handed over to Lord Byron.

The "Sketch from Private Life" was one of the most bitter and satirical things Byron had ever
written. In sending it to Mr. Murray (March 30, 1816), he wrote: "I send you my last night's
dream, and request to have fifty copies struck off for private distribution. I wish Mr. Gifford
to look at it; it is from life." Afterwards, when Lord Byron called upon Mr. Murray, he said:
"I could not get to sleep last night, but lay rolling and tossing about until this morning,
when I got up and wrote that; and it is very odd, Murray, after doing that, I went to bed again,
and never slept sounder in my life."

The lines were printed and sent to Lord Byron. But before publishing them, Mr. Murray took
advice of his special literary adviser and solicitor, Mr. Sharon Turner. His reply was as follows:

Mr. Turner to John Murray.

April 3, 1816.

There are some expressions in the Poem that I think are libellous, and the severe tenor of
the whole would induce a jury to find them to be so. The question only remains, to whom it
is applicable. It certainly does not itself name the person. But the legal pleadings charge
that innuendo must mean such a person. How far evidence extrinsic to the work might be brought
or received to show that the author meant a particular person, I will not pretend to affirm.
Some cases have gone so far on this point that I should not think it safe to risk. And if a
libel, it is a libel not only by the author, but by the printer, the publisher, and every circulator.

I am, dear Murray, yours most faithfully,

SHN. TURNER.

Mr. Murray did not publish the poems, but after their appearance in the newspapers, they were
announced by many booksellers as "Poems by Lord Byron on his Domestic Circumstances." Among
others, Constable printed and published them, whereupon Blackwood, as Murray's agent in Edinburgh,
wrote to him, requesting the suppression of the verses, and threatening proceedings. Constable,
in reply, said he had no wish to invade literary property, but the verses had come to him without
either author's name, publisher's name, or printer's name, and that there was no literary property
in publications to which neither author's, publisher's, nor printer's name was attached. Blackwood
could proceed no farther. In his letter to Murray (April 17, 1816), he wrote:

"I have distributed copies of 'Fare Thee Well' and 'A Sketch' to Dr. Thomas Brown, Walter Scott,
and Professor Playfair. One cannot read 'Fare Thee Well' without crying. The other is 'vigorous
hate,' as you say. Its power is really terrible; one's blood absolutely creeps while reading it."

Byron left England in April 1816, and during his travels he corresponded frequently with Mr.
Murray.

The MSS. of the third canto of "Childe Harold" and "The Prisoner of Chillon" duly reached the
publisher. Mr. Murray acknowledged the MSS.:

Mr. Murray to Lord Byron.

September 12, 1816.

My Lord,

