After the shattering experience of the storm, Columbus, although he did not return to San Domingo,
remained for some time on the coast of Espanola repairing his ships and resting his exhausted
crews.  There were threatenings of another storm which delayed them still further, and it was
not until the middle of July that the Admiral was able to depart on the real purpose of his
voyage.  His object was to strike the mainland far to the westward of the Gulf of Paria, and
so by following it back eastward to find the passage which he believed to exist.  But the winds
and currents were very baffling; he was four days out of sight of land after touching at an
island north of Jamaica; and finally, in some bewilderment, he altered his course more and
more northerly until he found his whereabouts by coming in sight of the archipelago off the
south-western end of Cuba which he had called the Gardens. I frequently heard them in their tent, when
they thought I had dropped asleep, complaining of severe pains and of great exhaustion. "I
must tell the captain, to-morrow," some of them would say, "that I can pull no more." To-morrow
came, and they pulled on, as if reluctant to yield to circumstances. Macnamee at length lost
his senses. We first observed this from his incoherent conversation, but eventually from manner.
He related the most extraordinary tales, and fidgeted about eternally
while in the boat.
They wore clothing, they had copper hatchets, and bells, and palm-wood swords in the edges
of which were set sharp blades of flint.  They had a fermented liquor, a kind of maize beer
which looked like English ale; they had some kind of money or medium of exchange also, and
they told the Admiral that there was land to the west where all these things existed and many
more. It is strange and almost inexplicable that he did not follow this trail to the westward;
if he had done so he would have discovered Mexico.  But one thing at a time always occupied
him to the exclusion of everything else; his thoughts were now turned to the eastward, where
he supposed the Straits were; and the significance of this canoe full of natives was lost upon him.

They crossed over to the mainland of Honduras on August 15th, Bartholomew landing and attending
mass on the beach as the Admiral himself was too ill to go ashore.  Three days later the cross
and banner of Castile were duly erected on the shores of the Rio Tinto and the country was
formally annexed.  The natives were friendly, and supplied the ships with provisions; but they
were very black and ugly, and Columbus readily believed the assertion of his native guide that
they were cannibals. They continued their course to the eastward, but as the gulf narrowed
the force of the west-going current was felt more severely.  Columbus, believing that the strait
which he sought lay to the eastward, laboured against the current, and his difficulties were
increased by the bad weather which he now encountered.  There were squalls and hurricanes,
tempests and cross-currents that knocked his frail ships about and almost swamped them.  Anchors
and gear were lost, the sails were torn out of the bolt-ropes, timbers were strained; and for
six weeks this state of affairs went on to an accompaniment of thunder and lightning which
added to the terror and discomfort of the mariners.

This was in August and the first half of September--six weeks of the worst weather that Columbus
had ever experienced.  It was the more unfortunate that his illness made it impossible for
him to get actively about the ship; and he had to have a small cabin or tent rigged up on deck,
in which he could lie and direct the navigation.  It is bad enough to be as ill as he was in
a comfortable bed ashore; it is a thousand times worse amid the discomforts of a small boat
at sea; but what must it have been thus to have one's sick-bed on the deck of a cockle-shell
which was being buffeted and smashed in unknown seas, and to have to think and act not for
oneself alone but for the whole of a suffering little fleet! No wonder the Admiral's distress
of mind was great; but oddly enough his anxieties, as he recorded them in a letter, were not
so much on his own account as on behalf of others.  The terrified seamen making vows to the
Virgin and promises of pilgrimages between their mad rushes to the sheets and furious clinging
and hauling; his son Ferdinand, who was only fourteen, but who had to endure the same pain
and fatigue as the rest of them, and who was enduring it with such pluck that "it was as if
he had been at sea eighty years"; the dangers of Bartholomew, who had not wanted to come on
this voyage at all, but was now in the thick of it in the worst ship of the squadron, and fighting
for his life amid tempests and treacherous seas; Diego at home, likely to be left an orphan
and at the mercy of fickle and doubtful friends--these were the chief causes of the Admiral's
anxiety. We had not seen any of them for some time, when Hopkinson, who was standing in the
bow of the boat, informed me that they had thrown boughs across the river to prevent our passage.
I was exceedingly indignant at this, and pushed on, intending to force the barrier. On our nearer
approach, a solitary black was observed standing close to the river, and abreast of the impediment
which I imagined they had raised to our further progress. I threatened to shoot this man, and pointed
to the branches that stretched right across the stream. Dreadful to him, these things, but not dreadful to us; for they show
us an Admiral restored to his true temper and vocation, something of the old sea hero breaking
out in him at last through all these misfortunes, like the sun through the hurrying clouds
of a stormy afternoon.

Forty days of passage through this wilderness of water were endured before the sea-worn mariners,
rounding a cape on September 12th, saw stretching before them to the southward a long coast
of plain and mountain which they were able to follow with a fair wind.  Gradually the sea went
down; the current which had opposed them here aided them, and they were able to recover a little
from the terrible strain of the last six weeks.  The cape was called by Columbus 'Gracios de
Dios'; and on the 16th of September they landed at the entrance to a river to take in water.
The boat which was sent ashore, however, capsized on the sandy bar of the entrance, two men
being drowned, and the river was given the name of Rio de Desastre.  They found a better anchorage,
where they rested for ten days, overhauled their stores, and had some intercourse with the
natives and exploration on shore.  Some incidents occurred which can best be described in the
Admiral's own language as he recorded them in his letter to the Sovereigns.

