FROM PLACE TO PLACE

The Works of

IRVIN S. COBB

The Review of Reviews Corporation Publishers New York Published by Arrangement with George
H. Doran Company

Copyright, 1920, by George H. Doran Company Copyright, 1918, 1919, by the Curtis Publishing
Company Copyright, 1918, by the Frank A. Munsey Co. Copyright, 1913, 1918, by the Red Book
Corporation

Printed in the United States of America

TO

CHARLES R. FLINT, ESQ.

CONTENTS

        CHAPTER                                                 PAGE

           I THE GALLOWSMITH                                      11

          II THE BROKEN SHOELACE                                  55

         III BOYS WILL BE BOYS                                    96

          IV THE LUCK PIECE                                      156

           V QUALITY FOLKS                                       206

          VI JOHN J. COINCIDENCE                                 259

         VII WHEN AUGUST THE SECOND WAS APRIL THE FIRST          302

        VIII HOODWINKED                                          332

          IX THE BULL CALLED EMILY                               382

FROM PLACE TO PLACE

CHAPTER I

THE GALLOWSMITH

This man that I have it in mind to write about was, at the time of which I write, an elderly
man, getting well along toward sixty-five. He was tall and slightly stooped, with long arms,
and big, gnarled, competent-looking hands, which smelled of yellow laundry soap, and had huge,
tarnished nails on the fingers. He had mild, pale eyes, a light blue as to colour, with heavy
sacs under them, and whitish whiskers, spindly and thin, like some sort of second-growth, which
were so cut as to enclose his lower face in a nappy fringe, extending from ear to ear under
his chin. "Why," said Brownlee, lowering his voice, "it's that young one that John Heedman took
to keep; his father was drowned, you'll remember--Scott, the pilot."

On hearing this most of them were silent, but one boy thrust his lamp forward, and stared rudely
in Charlie's face.

"Why, if it isn't that Miss Nancy fellow, Scott!" he exclaimed, in either real or pretended
astonishment. "But it can't be," he went on, in a mocking tone, "and yet it is; why, how ever
has it happened that such a nice, good boy, the ladies' pet, has come down amongst us roughs?
I thought he was going to be made a gentleman of--dear, dear! and he hasn't got his white collar
on; and his mother isn't with him."

"Come, hold that saucy tongue of yours, White Bob," said Brownlee, in an angry tone, "or it will
be worse for you."

The boy's proper name was Bob White. He was a tall, thin, singular-looking lad, about fifteen years
old, with a pale face. When he first went to work in the mine some
of the boys called him White Bob, in nonsense, and the name had stuck
to him.

He was certainly silent after Brownlee spoke to him, but
he kept throwing back his head, lifting up his hands, turning up his
eyes, and expressing his mock astonishment in so many odd ways, that
the rest of the boys, although they bore no ill-will to Charlie, were
convulsed with laughter. As for Charlie himself, he was in a great
passion; it was fortunate that just at this moment the cage reached
the bottom, and in the general scramble to get out he lost sight of
Bob. He averaged about four hangings every three months or, say, about
nine hundred dollars a year--all clear money.

The manner of Mr. Dramm's having entered upon the practise of this somewhat grisly trade makes
in itself a little tale. He was a lifelong citizen of the town of Chickaloosa, down in the
Southwest, where there stood a State penitentiary, and where, during the period of which I
am speaking, the Federal authorities sent for confinement and punishment the criminal sweepings
of half a score of States and Territories. This was before the government put up prisons of
its own, and while still it parcelled out its human liabilities among State-owned institutions,
paying so much apiece for their keep. When the government first began shipping a share of its
felons to Chickaloosa, there came along, in one clanking caravan of shackled malefactors, a
half-breed, part Mexican and the rest of him Indian, who had robbed a territorial post-office
and incidentally murdered the postmaster thereof. Wherefore this half-breed was under sentence
to expiate his greater misdeed on a given date, between the hours of sunrise and sunset, and
after a duly prescribed manner, namely: by being hanged by the neck until he was dead.

At once a difficulty and a complication arose. The warden of the penitentiary at Chickaloosa
was perfectly agreeable to the idea of keeping and caring for those felonious wards of the
government who were put in his custody to serve terms of imprisonment, holding that such disciplinary
measures fell within the scope of his sworn duty. But when it came to the issue of hanging
any one of them, he drew the line most firmly. As he pointed out, he was not a government agent.
He derived his authority and drew his salary not from Washington, D. C., but from a State capital
several hundreds of miles removed from Washington. Moreover, he was a zealous believer in the
principle of State sovereignty. As a soldier of the late Southern Confederacy, he had fought
four years to establish that doctrine. Conceded, that the cause for which he fought had been
defeated; nevertheless his views upon the subject remained fixed and permanent. He had plenty
of disagreeable jobs to do without stringing up bad men for Uncle Sam; such was the attitude
the warden took. The sheriff of the county of which Chickaloosa was the county-seat, likewise
refused to have a hand in the impending affair, holding it--and perhaps very properly--to be
no direct concern of his, either officially or personally.

Now the government very much wanted the hybrid hanged. The government had been put to considerable
trouble and no small expense to catch him and try him and convict him and transport him to
the place where he was at present confined. Day and date for the execution of the law's judgment
having been fixed, a scandal and possibly a legal tangle would ensue were there delay in the
premises. It was reported that a full pardon had been offered to a long-term convict on condition
that he carry out the court's mandate upon the body of the condemned mongrel, and that he had
refused, even though the price were freedom for himself.

In this serious emergency, a volunteer in the person of Tobias Dramm came forward. Until then
he had been an inconspicuous unit in the life of the community. He was a live-stock dealer
on a small scale, making his headquarters at one of the town livery stables. He was a person
of steady habits, with a reputation for sobriety and frugality among his neighbours. The government,
so to speak, jumped at the chance. Without delay, his offer was accepted. There was no prolonged
haggling over terms, either. He himself fixed the cost of the job at seventy-five dollars;
this figure to include supervision of the erection of the gallows, testing of the apparatus,
and the actual operation itself.

So, on the appointed day, at a certain hour, to wit, a quarter past six o'clock in the morning,
just outside the prison walls, and in the presence of the proper and ordained number of witnesses,
Uncle Tobe, with a grave, untroubled face, and hands which neither fumbled nor trembled, tied
up the doomed felon and hooded his head in a black-cloth bag, and fitted a noose about his
neck. The drop fell at eighteen minutes past the hour. Fourteen minutes later, following brief
tests of heart and pulse, the two attending physicians agreed that the half-breed was quite
satisfactorily defunct. They likewise coincided in the opinion that the hanging had been conducted
with neatness, and with swiftness, and with the least possible amount of physical suffering
for the deceased. One of the doctors went so far as to congratulate Mr. Dramm upon the tidiness
of his handicraft. He told him that in all his experience he had never seen a hanging pass
off more smoothly, and that for an amateur, Dramm had done splendidly. To this compliment Uncle
Tobe replied, in his quiet and drawling mode of speech, that he had studied the whole thing
out in advance.

"Ef I should keep on with this way of makin' a livin' I don't 'low ever to let no slip-ups
occur," he added with simple directness. There was no suggestion of the morbid in his voice
or manner as he said this, but instead merely a deep personal satisfaction.

Others present, having been made sick and faint by the shock of seeing a human being summarily
jerked into the hereafter, went away hurriedly without saying anything at all. But afterward
thinking it over when they were more composed, they decided among themselves that Uncle Tobe
had carried it off with an assurance and a skill which qualified him most aptly for future
undertakings along the same line; that he was a born hangman, if ever there was one.

This was the common verdict. So, thereafter, by a tacit understanding, the ex-cattle-buyer
became the regular government hangman. He had no official title nor any warrant in writing
for the place he filled. He worked by the piece, as one might say, and not by the week or month.
Some years he hanged more men than in other years, but the average per annum was about twelve.
He had been hanging them now for going on ten years.

It was as though he had been designed and created for the work. He hanged villainous men singly,
sometimes by pairs, and rarely in groups of threes, always without a fumble or a hitch. Once,
on a single morning, he hanged an even half-dozen, these being the chief fruitage of a busy
term of the Federal court down in the Indian country where the combination of a crowded docket,
an energetic young district attorney with political ambitions, and a businesslike presiding
judge had produced what all unprejudiced and fair-minded persons agreed were marvellous results,
highly beneficial to the moral atmosphere of the territory and calculated to make potential
evil-doers stop and think. Four of the six had been members of an especially desperate gang
of train and bank robbers. The remaining two had forfeited their right to keep on living by
slaying deputy marshals. Each, with malice aforethought and with his own hands, had actually
killed some one or had aided and abetted in killing some one.

This sextuple hanging made a lot of talk, naturally. The size of it alone commanded the popular
interest. Besides, the personnel of the group of villains was such as to lend an aspect of
picturesqueness to the final proceedings. The sextet included a full-blooded Cherokee; a consumptive
ex-dentist out of Kansas, who from killing nerves in teeth had progressed to killing men in
cold premeditation; a lank West Virginia mountaineer whose family name was the name of a clan
prominent in one of the long-drawn-out hill-feuds of his native State; a plain bad man, whose
chief claim to distinction was that he hailed originally from the Bowery in New York City;
and one, the worst of them all, who was said to be the son of a pastor in a New England town.
One by one, unerringly and swiftly, Uncle Tobe launched them through his scaffold floor to
get whatever deserts await those who violate the laws of God and man by the violent shedding
of innocent blood. When the sixth and last gunman came out of the prison proper into the prison
enclosure--it was the former dentist, and being set, as the phrase runs, upon dying game, he
wore a twisted grin upon his bleached face--there were six black boxes under the platform,
five of them occupied, with their lids all in place, and one of them yet empty and open. In
the act of mounting the steps the condemned craned his head sidewise, and at the sight of those
coffins stretching along six in a row on the gravelled courtyard, he made a cheap and sorry
gibe. But when he stood beneath the cross-arm to be pinioned, his legs played him traitor.
Those craven knees of his gave way under him, so that trusties had to hold the weakening ruffian
upright while the executioner snugged the halter about his throat.

On this occasion Uncle Tobe elucidated the creed and the code of his profession for a reporter
who had come all the way down from St. Louis to report the big hanging for his paper. Having
covered the hanging at length, the reporter stayed over one more day at the Palace Hotel in
Chickaloosa to do a special article, which would be in part a character sketch and in part
a straight interview, on the subject of the hangman. The article made a full page spread in
the Sunday edition of the young man's paper, and thereby a reputation, which until this time
had been more or less local, was given what approximated a national notoriety. Through a somewhat
general reprinting of what the young man had written, and what his paper had published, the
country at large eventually became acquainted with an ethical view-point which was already
fairly familiar to nearly every resident in and about Chickaloosa. Reading the narrative, one
living at a distance got an accurate picture of a personality elevated above the commonplace
solely by the rôle which its owner filled; a picture of an old man thoroughly sincere and thoroughly
conscientious; a man dull, earnest, and capable to his limits; a man who was neither morbid
nor imaginative, but filled with rather a stupid gravity; a man canny about the pennies and
affectionately inclined toward the dollars; a man honestly imbued with the idea that he was
a public servant performing a necessary public service; a man without nerves, but in all other
essentials a small-town man with a small-town mind; in short, saw Uncle Tobe as he really was.
The reporter did something else which marked him as a craftsman. Without stating the fact in
words, he nevertheless contrived to create in the lines which he wrote an atmosphere of self-defence
enveloping the old man--or perhaps the better phrase would be self-extenuation. The reader
was made to perceive that Dramm, being cognizant and mildly resentful of the attitude in which
his own little world held him, by reason of the fatal work of his hands, sought after a semiapologetic
fashion to offer a plea in abatement of public judgment, to set up a weight of moral evidence
in his own behalf, and behind this in turn, and showing through it, might be sensed the shy
pride of a shy man for labour undertaken with good motives and creditably performed. With no
more than a pardonable broadening and exaggeration of the other's mode of speech, the reporter
succeeded likewise in reproducing not only the language, but the wistful intent of what Uncle
Tobe said to him. From this interview I propose now to quote to the extent of a few paragraphs.
This is Uncle Tobe addressing the visiting correspondent:

    "It stands to reason--don't it?--that these here
    sinful men have got to be hung, an' that somebody
    has got to hang 'em. The Good Book says an eye fur
    an eye an' a tooth fur a tooth an' a life fur a
    life. That's perzactly whut it says, an' I'm one
    whut believes the Bible frum kiver to kiver. These
    here boys that they bring in here have broke the
    law of Gawd an' the law of the land, an' they jest
    natchelly got to pay fur their devilment. That's
    so, ain't it? Well, then, that bein' so, I step
    forward an' do the job. Ef they was free men,
    walkin' around like you an' me, I wouldn't lay the
    weight of my little finger on 'em to harm a single
    hair in their haids. Ef they hadn't done nothin'
    ag'in' the law, I'd be the last one to do 'em a
    hurt. I wisht you could make that p'int plain in
    the piece you aim to write, so's folks would
    understand jest how I feel--so's they'd understand
    that I don't bear no gredge ag'inst any livin'
    creature.

    "Ef the job was left to some greenhawn he'd mebbe
    botch it up an' make them boys suffer more'n
    there's any call fur. Sech things have happened, a
    plenty times before now ez you yourself doubtless
    know full well. But I don't botch it up. I ain't
    braggin' none whilst I'm sayin' this to you; I'm
    jest tellin' you. I kin take an oath that I ain't
    never botched up one of these jobs yit, not frum
    the very fust. The warden or Dr. Slattery, the
    prison physician, or anybody round this town that
    knows the full circumstances kin tell you the
    same, ef you ast 'em. You see, son, I ain't never
    nervoused up like some men would be in my place.
    I'm always jest ez ca'm like ez whut you are this
    minute. The way I look at it, I'm jest a chosen
    instrument of the law. I regard it ez a trust that
    I'm called on to perform, on account of me havin' a
    natchel knack in that 'special direction. Some men
    have gifts fur one thing an' some men have gifts
    fur another thing. It would seem this is the
    perticular thing--hangin' men--that I've got a gift
    fur. So, sech bein' the case, I don't worry none
    about it beforehand, nor I don't worry none after
    it's all over with, neither. With me handlin' the
    details the whole thing is over an' done with
    accordin' to the law an' the statutes an' the
    jedgment of the high court in less time than some
    people would take fussin' round, gittin' ready. The
    way I look at it, it's a mercy an' a blessin' to
    all concerned to have somebody in charge that knows
    how to hang a man.

    "Why, it's come to sech a pass that when there's a
    hangin' comin' off anywhere in this part of the
    country they send fur me to be present ez a kind of
    an expert. I've been to hangin's all over this
    State, an' down into Louisiana, an' wunst over into
    Texas in order to give the sheriffs the benefit of
    my experience an' my advice. I make it a rule not
    never to take no money fur doin' sech ez that--only
    my travelin' expenses an' my tavern bills; that's
    all I ever charge 'em. But here in Chickaloosa the
    conditions is different, an' the gover'mint pays me
    seventy-five dollars a hangin'. I figger that it's
    wuth it, too. The Bible says the labourer is worthy
    of his hire. I try to be worthy of the hire I git.
    I certainly aim to earn it--an' I reckin I do earn
    it, takin' everything into consideration--the
    responsibility an' all. Ef there's any folks that
    think I earn my money easy--seventy-five dollars
    fur whut looks like jest a few minutes' work--I'd
    like fur 'em to stop an' think ef they'd consider
    themselves qualified to hang ez many men ez I have
    without never botchin' up a single job."

That was his chief boast, if boasting it might be called--that he never botched the job. It
is the common history of common hangmen, so I've been told, that they come after a while to
be possessed of the devils of cruelty, and to take pleasure in the exercise of their most grim
calling. If this be true, then surely Uncle Tobe was to all outward appearances an exception
to the rule. Never by word or look or act was he caught gloating over his victims; always he
exhibited a merciful swiftness in the dread preliminaries and in the act of execution itself.
At the outset he had shown deftness. With frequent practise he grew defter still. He contrived
various devices for expediting the proceeding. For instance, after prolonged experiments, conducted
in privacy, he evolved a harnesslike arrangement of leather belts and straps, made all in one
piece, and fitted with buckles and snaffles. With this, in a marvellously brief space, he could
bind his man at elbows and wrists, at knees and ankles, so that in less time almost than it
would take to describe the process, the latter stood upon the trap, as a shape deprived of
motion, fully caparisoned for the end. He fitted the inner side of the crosspiece of the gallows
with pegs upon which the rope rested, entirely out of sight of him upon whom it was presently
to be used, until the moment when Uncle Tobe, stretching a long arm upward, brought it down,
all reeved and ready. He hit upon the expedient of slickening the noose parts with yellow bar
soap so that it would run smoothly in the loop and tighten smartly, without undue tugging.
He might have used grease or lard, but soap was tidier, and Uncle Tobe, as has been set forth,
was a tidy man.

After the first few hangings his system began to follow a regular routine. From somewhere to
the west or southwest of Chickaloosa the deputy marshals would bring in a man consigned to
die. The prison people, taking their charge over from them, would house him in a cell of a
row of cells made doubly tight and doubly strong for such as he; in due season the warden would
notify Uncle Tobe of the date fixed for the inflicting of the penalty. Four or five days preceding
the day, Uncle Tobe would pay a visit to the prison, timing his arrival so that he reached
there just before the exercise hour for the inmates of a certain cell-tier. Being admitted,
he would climb sundry flights of narrow iron stairs and pause just outside a crisscrossed door
of iron slats while a turnkey, entering that door and locking it behind him, would open a smaller
door set flat in the wall of damp-looking grey stones and invite the man caged up inside to
come forth for his daily walk. Then, while the captive paced the length and breadth of the
narrow corridor back and across, to and fro, up and down, with the futile restlessness of a
cat animal in a zoo, his feet clumping on the flagged flooring, and the watchful turnkey standing
by, Uncle Tobe, having flattened his lean form in a niche behind the outer lattice, with an
appraising eye would consider the shifting figure through a convenient cranny of the wattled
metal strips. He took care to keep himself well back out of view, but since he stood in shadow
while the one he marked so keenly moved in a flood of daylight filtering down through a skylight
in the ceiling of the cell block, the chances were the prisoner could not have made out the
indistinct form of the stranger anyhow. Five or ten minutes of such scrutiny of his man was
all Uncle Tobe ever desired. In his earlier days before he took up this present employment,
he had been an adept at guessing the hoof-weight of the beeves and swine in which he dealt.
That early experience stood him in good stead now; he took no credit to himself for his accuracy
in estimating the bulk of a living human being.

Downstairs, on the way out of the place, if by chance he encountered the warden in his office,
the warden, in all likelihood, would say: "Well, how about it this time, Uncle Tobe?"

And Uncle Tobe would make some such answer as this:

"Well, suh, accordin' to my reckonin' this here one will heft about a hund'ed an' sixty-five
pound, ez he stands now. How's he takin' it, warden?"

"Oh, so-so."

"He looks to me like he was broodin' a right smart," the expert might say. "I jedge he ain't
relishin' his vittles much, neither. Likely he'll worry three or four pound more off'n his
bones 'twixt now an' Friday mornin'. He oughter run about one hund'ed an' sixty or mebbe one-sixty-one
by then."

"How much drop do you allow to give him?"

"Don't worry about that, suh," would be the answer given with a contemplative squint of the
placid, pale eye. "I reckin my calculations won't be very fur out of the way, ef any."

They never were, either.

On the day before the day, he would be a busy man, what with superintending the fitting together
and setting up of the painted lumber pieces upon which tomorrow's capital tragedy would be
played; and, when this was done to his liking, trying the drop to see that the boards had not
warped, and trying the rope for possible flaws in its fabric or weave, and proving to his own
satisfaction that the mechanism of the wooden lever which operated to spring the trap worked
with an instantaneous smoothness. To every detail he gave a painstaking supervision, guarding
against all possible contingencies. Regarding the trustworthiness of the rope he was especially
careful. When this particular hanging was concluded, the scaffold would be taken apart and
stored away for subsequent use, but for each hanging the government furnished a brand new rope,
especially made at a factory in New Orleans at a cost of eight dollars. The spectators generally
cut the rope up into short lengths after it had fulfilled its ordained purpose, and carried
the pieces away for souvenirs. So always there was a new rope provided, and its dependability
must be ascertained by prolonged and exhaustive tests before Uncle Tobe would approve of it.
Seeing him at his task, with his coat and waistcoat off, his sleeves rolled back, and his intent
mien, one realised why, as a hangman, he had been a success. He left absolutely nothing to
chance. When he was through with his experimenting, the possibility of an exhibition of the
proneness of inanimate objects to misbehave in emergencies had been reduced to a minimum.

Before daylight next morning Uncle Tobe, dressed in sober black, like a country undertaker,
and with his mid-Victorian whiskers all cleansed and combed, would present himself at his post
of duty. He would linger in the background, an unobtrusive bystander, until the condemned sinner
had gone through the mockery of eating his last breakfast; and, still making himself inconspicuous
during the march to the gallows, would trail at the very tail of the line, while the short,
straggling procession was winding out through gas-lit murky hallways into the pale dawn-light
slanting over the walls of the gravel-paved, high-fenced compound built against the outer side
of the prison close. He would wait on, always holding himself discreetly aloof from the middle
breadth of the picture, until the officiating clergyman had done with his sacred offices; would
wait until the white-faced wretch on whose account the government was making all this pother
and taking all this trouble, had mumbled his farewell words this side of eternity; would continue
to wait, very patiently, indeed, until the warden nodded to him. Then, with his trussing harness
tucked under his arm, and the black cap neatly folded and bestowed in a handy side-pocket of
his coat, Uncle Tobe would advance forward, and laying a kindly, almost a paternal hand upon
the shoulder of the man who must die, would steer him to a certain spot in the centre of the
platform, just beneath a heavy cross-beam. There would follow a quick shifting of the big,
gnarled hands over the unresisting body of the doomed man, and almost instantly, so it seemed
to those who watched, all was in order: the arms of the murderer drawn rearward and pressed
in close against his ribs by a broad girth encircling his trunk at the elbows, his wrists caught
together in buckled leather cuffs behind his back; his knees and his ankles fast in leathern
loops which joined to the rest of the apparatus by means of a transverse strap drawn tautly
down the length of his legs, at the back; the black-cloth head-bag with its peaked crown in
place; the noose fitted; the hobbled and hooded shape perhaps swaying a trifle this way and
that; and Uncle Tobe on his tiptoes stepping swiftly over to a tilted wooden lever which projected
out and upward through the planked floor, like the handle of a steering oar.

It was at this point that the timorous-hearted among the witnesses turned their heads away.
Those who were more resolute--or as the case might be, more morbid--and who continued to look,
were made aware of a freak of physics which in accord, I suppose, with the laws of horizontals
and parallels decrees that a man cut off short from life by quick and violent means and fallen
prone upon the earth, seems to shrink up within himself and to grow shorter in body and in
sprawling limb, whereas one hanged with a rope by the neck has the semblance of stretching
out to unseemly and unhuman lengths all the while that he dangles.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having repossessed himself of his leather cinches, Uncle Tobe would presently depart for his
home, stopping en route at the Chickaloosa National Bank to deposit the greater part of the
seventy-five dollars which the warden, as representative of a satisfied Federal government,
had paid him, cash down on the spot. To his credit in the bank the old man had a considerable
sum, all earned after this mode, and all drawing interest at the legal rate. On his arrival
at his home, Mr. Dramm would first of all have his breakfast. This over, he would open the
second drawer of an old black-walnut bureau, and from under a carefully folded pile of spare
undergarments would withdraw a small, cheap book, bound in imitation red leather, and bearing
the word "Accounts" in faded script upon the cover. On a clean, blue-lined page of the book,
in a cramped handwriting, he would write in ink, the name, age, height, and weight of the man
he had just despatched out of life; also the hour and minute when the drop fell, the time elapsing
before the surgeons pronounced the man dead; the disposition which had been made of the body,
and any other data which seemed to him pertinent to the record. Invariably he concluded the
entry thus: "Neck was broke by the fall. Everything passed off smooth." From his first time
of service he had never failed to make such notations following a hanging, he being in this,
as in all things, methodical and exact.

The rest of the day, in all probabilities, would be given to small devices of his own. If the
season suited he might work in his little truck garden at the back of the house, or if it were
the fall of the year he might go rabbit hunting; then again he might go for a walk. When the
evening paper came--Chickaloosa had two papers, a morning paper and an evening paper--he would
read through the account given of the event at the prison, and would pencil any material errors
which had crept into the reporter's story, and then he would clip out the article and file
it away with a sheaf of similar clippings in the same bureau drawer where he kept his account-book
and his underclothing. This done he would eat his supper, afterward washing and wiping the
supper dishes and, presently bedtime for him having arrived, he would go to bed and sleep very
soundly and very peacefully all night. Sometimes his heart trouble brought on smothering spells
which woke him up. He rarely had dreams, and never any dreams unpleasantly associated with
his avocation. Probably never was there a man blessed with less of an imagination than this
same Tobias Dramm. It seemed almost providential, considering the calling he followed, that
he altogether lacked the faculty of introspection, so that neither his memory nor his conscience
ever troubled him.

Thus far I have made no mention of his household, and for the very good reason that he had
none. In his youth he had not married. The forked tongue of town slander had it that he was
too stingy to support a wife, and on top of that expense, to run the risk of having children
to rear. He had no close kindred excepting a distant cousin or two in Chickaloosa. He kept
no servant, and for this there was a double cause. First, his parsimonious instincts; second,
the fact that for love or money no negro would minister to him, and in this community negroes
were the only household servants to be had. Among the darkies there was current a belief that
at dead of night he dug up the bodies of those he had hanged and peddled the cadavers to the
"student doctors." They said he was in active partnership with the devil; they said the devil
took over the souls of his victims, paying therefor in red-hot dollars, after the hangman was
done with their bodies. The belief of the negroes that this unholy traffic existed amounted
with them to a profound conviction. They held Mr. Dramm in an awesome and horrified veneration,
bowing to him most respectfully when they met him, and then sidling off hurriedly. It would
have taken strong horses to drag any black-skinned resident of Chickaloosa to the portals of
the little three-roomed frame cottage in the outskirts of the town which Uncle Tobe tenanted.
Therefore he lived by himself, doing his own skimpy marketing and his own simple housekeeping.
Loneliness was a part of the penalty he paid for following the calling of a gallowsmith.

Among members of his own race he had no close friends. For the most part the white people did
not exactly shun him, but, as the saying goes in the Southwest, they let him be. They were
well content to enshrine him as a local celebrity, and ready enough to point him out to visitors,
but by an unwritten communal law the line was drawn there. He was as one set apart for certain
necessary undertakings, and yet denied the intimacy of his kind because he performed them acceptably.
If his aloof and solitary state ever distressed him, at least he gave no outward sign of it,
but went his uncomplaining way, bearing himself with a homely, silent dignity, and enveloped
in those invisible garments of superstition which local prejudice and local ignorance had conjured
up.

Ready as he was when occasion suited, to justify his avocation in the terms of that same explanation
which he had given to the young reporter from St. Louis that time, and greatly though he may
have craved to gain the good-will of his fellow citizens, he was never known openly to rebel
against his lot. The nearest he ever came to doing this was once when he met upon the street
a woman of his acquaintance who had suffered a recent bereavement in the death of her only
daughter. He approached her, offering awkward condolences, and at once was moved to a further
expression of his sympathy for her in her great loss by trying to shake her hand. At the touch
of his fingers to hers the woman, already in a mood of grief bordering on hysteria, shrank
back screaming out that his hand smelled of the soap with which he coated his gallows-nooses.
She ran away from him, crying out as she ran, that he was accursed; that he was marked with
that awful smell and could not rid himself of it. To those who had witnessed this scene the
hangman, with rather an injured and bewildered air, made explanation. The poor woman, he said,
was wrong; although in a way of speaking she was right, too. He did, indeed, use the same yellow
bar soap for washing his hands that he used for anointing his ropes. It was a good soap, and
cheap; he had used the same brand regularly for years in cleansing his hands. Since it answered
the first purpose so well, what possible harm could there be in slicking the noose of the rope
with it when he was called upon to conduct one of his jobs over up at the prison? Apparently
he was at a loss to fathom the looks they cast at him when he had finished with this statement
and had asked this question. He began a protest, but broke off quickly and went away shaking
his head as though puzzled that ordinarily sane folks should be so squeamish and so unreasonable.
But he kept on using the soap as before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Until now this narrative has been largely preamble. The real story follows. It concerns itself
with the birth of an imagination.

In his day Uncle Tobe hanged all sorts and conditions of men--men who kept on vainly hoping
against hope for an eleventh-hour reprieve long after the last chance of reprieve had vanished,
and who on the gallows begged piteously for five minutes, for two minutes, for one minute more
of precious grace; negroes gone drunk on religious exhortation who died in a frenzy, sure of
salvation, and shouting out halleluiahs; Indians upborne and stayed by a racial stoicism; Chinamen
casting stolid, slant-eyed glances over the rim of the void before them and filled with the
calmness of the fatalist who believes that whatever is to be, is to be; white men upon whom
at the last, when all prospect of intervention was gone, a mental numbness mercifully descended
with the result that they came to the rope's embrace like men in a walking coma, with glazed,
unseeing eyes, and dragging feet; other white men who summoned up a mockery of bravado and
uttered poor jests from between lips drawn back in defiant sneering as they gave themselves
over to the hangman, so that only Uncle Tobe, feeling their flesh crawling under their grave-clothes
as he tied them up, knew a hideous terror berode their bodies. At length, in the tenth year
of his career as a paid executioner he was called upon to visit his professional attentions
upon a man different from any of those who had gone down the same dread chute.

The man in question was a train-bandit popularly known as the Lone-Hand Kid, because always
he conducted his nefarious operations without confederates. He was a squat, dark ruffian, as
malignant as a moccasin snake, and as dangerous as one. He was filthy in speech and vile in
habit, being in his person most unpicturesque and most unwholesome, and altogether seemed a
creature more viper than he was man. The sheriffs of two border States and the officials of
a contiguous reservation sought for him many times, long and diligently, before a posse overcame
him in the hills by over-powering odds and took him alive at the cost of two of its members
killed outright and a third badly crippled. So soon as surgeons plugged up the holes in his
hide which members of the vengeful posse shot into him after they had him surrounded and before
his ammunition gave out, he was brought to bar to answer for the unprovoked murder of a postal
clerk on a transcontinental limited. No time was wasted in hurrying his trial through to its
conclusion; it was felt that there was crying need to make an example of this red-handed desperado.
Having been convicted with commendable celerity, the Lone-Hand Kid was transferred to Chickaloosa
and strongly confined there against the day of Uncle Tobe's ministrations upon him.

From the very hour that the prosecution was started, the Lone-Hand Kid, whose real name was
the prosaic name of Smith, objected strongly to this procedure which in certain circles is
known as "railroading." He insisted that he was being legally expedited out of life on his
record and not on the evidence. There were plenty of killings for any one of which he might
have been tried and very probably found guilty, but he reckoned it a profound injustice that
he should be indicted, tried, and condemned for a killing he had not committed. By his code
he would not have rebelled strongly against being punished for the evil things he himself had
done; he did dislike, though, being hanged for something some rival hold-up man had done. Such
was his contention, and he reiterated it with a persistence which went far toward convincing
some people that after all there might be something in what he said, although among honest
men there was no doubt whatsoever that the world would be a sweeter and a healthier place to
live in with the Lone-Hand Kid entirely translated out of it.

Having been dealt with, as he viewed the matter, most unfairly, the condemned killer sullenly
refused to make submission to his appointed destiny. On the car journey up to Chickaloosa,
although still weak from his wounds and securely ironed besides, he made two separate efforts
to assault his guards. In his cell, a few days later, he attacked a turnkey in pure wantonness
seemingly, since even with the turnkey eliminated, there still was no earthly prospect for
him to escape from the steel strong-box which enclosed him. That was what it truly was, too,
a strong-box, for the storing of many living pledges held as surety for the peace and good
order of the land. Of all these human collaterals who were penned up there with him, he, for
the time being, was most precious in the eyes of the law. Therefore the law took no chance
of losing him, and this he must have known when he maimed his keeper.

After this outbreak he was treated as a vicious wild beast, which, undoubtedly, was exactly
what he was. He was chained by his ankles to his bed, and his food was shoved in to him through
the bars by a man who kept himself at all times well out of reach of the tethered prisoner.
Having been rendered helpless, he swore then that when finally they unbarred his cell door
and sought to fetch him forth to garb him for his journey to the gallows, he would fight them
with his teeth and his bare hands for so long as he had left an ounce of strength with which
to fight. Bodily force would then be the only argument remaining to him by means of which he
might express his protest, and he told all who cared to listen that most certainly he meant
to invoke it.

There was a code of decorum which governed the hangings at Chickaloosa, and the resident authorities
dreaded mightily the prospect of having it profaned by spiteful and unmannerly behaviour on
the part of the Lone-Hand Kid. There was said to be in all the world just one living creature
for whom the rebellious captive entertained love and respect, and this person was his half-sister.
With the good name of his prison at heart, the warden put up the money that paid her fare from
her home down in the Indian Territory. Two days before the execution she arrived, a slab-sided,
shabby drudge of a woman. Having first been primed and prompted for her part, she was sent
to him, and in his cell she wept over the fettered prisoner, and with him she pleaded until
he promised her, reluctantly, he would make no physical struggle on being led out to die.

He kept his word, too; but it was to develop that the pledge of non-resistance, making his
body passive to the will of his jailers, did not, according to the Lone-Hand Kid's sense of
honour, include the muscles of his tongue. His hour came at sunup of a clear, crisp, October
morning, when a rime of frost made a silver carpet upon the boarded floor of the scaffold,
and in the east the heavens glowed an irate red, like the reflections of a distant bale-fire.
From his cell door before the head warder summoned him forth, he drove away with terrible oaths
the clergyman who had come to offer him religious consolation. At daylight, when the first
beams of young sunlight were stealing in at the slitted windows to streak the whitewashed wall
behind him with a barred pattern of red, like brush strokes of fresh paint, he ate his last
breakfast with foul words between bites, and outside, a little later, in the shadow of the
crosstree from which shortly he would dangle in the article of death, a stark offence before
the sight of mortal eyes, he halted and stood reviling all who had a hand in furthering and
compassing his condemnation. Profaning the name of his Maker with every breath, he cursed the
President of the United States who had declined to reprieve him, the justices of the high court
who had denied his appeal from the verdict of the lower, the judge who had tried him, the district
attorney who had prosecuted him, the grand jurors who had indicted him, the petit jurors who
had voted to convict him, the witnesses who had testified against him, the posse men who had
trapped him, consigning them all and singly to everlasting damnation. Before this pouring flood
of blasphemy the minister, who had followed him up the gallows steps in the vain hope that
when the end came some faint sign of contrition might be vouchsafed by this poor lost soul,
hid his face in his hands as though fearing an offended Deity would send a bolt from on high
to blast all who had been witnesses to such impiety and such impenitence.

The indignant warden moved to cut short this lamentable spectacle. He signed with his hand
for Uncle Tobe to make haste, and Uncle Tobe, obeying, stepped forward from where he had been
waiting in the rear rank of the shocked spectators. Upon him the defiant ruffian turned the
forces of his sulfurous hate, full-gush. First over one shoulder and then over the other as
the executioner worked with swift fingers to bind him into a rigid parcel of a man, he uttered
what was both a dreadful threat and a yet more dreadful promise.

"I ain't blamin' these other folks here," he proclaimed. "Some of 'em are here because it's
their duty to be here, an' ef these others kin git pleasure out of seem' a man croaked that
ain't afeared of bein' croaked, they're welcome to enjoy the free show, so fur ez I'm concerned.
But you--you stingy, white-whiskered old snake!--you're doin' this fur the little piece of
dirty money that's in it fur you.

"Listen to me, you dog: I know I'm headin' straight fur hell, an' I ain't skeered to go, neither.
But I ain't goin' to stay there. I'm comin' back fur you! I'm comin' back this very night to
git you an' take your old, withered, black soul back down to hell with me. No need fur you
to try to hide. Wharever you hide I'll seek you out. You can't git away frum me. You kin lock
your door an' you kin lock your winder, an' you kin hide your head under the bedclothes, but
I'll find you wharever you are, remember that! An' you're goin' back down there with me!

"Now go ahead an' hang me--I'm all set fur it ef you are!"

Through this harangue Uncle Tobe worked on, outwardly composed. Whatever his innermost emotions
may have been, his expression gave no hint that the mouthings of the Lone-Hand Kid had sunk
in. He drew the peaked black sack down across the swollen face, hiding the glaring eyes and
the lips that snarled. He brought the rope forward over the cloaked head and drew the noose
in tautly, with the knot adjusted to fit snugly just under the left ear, so that the hood took
on the semblance of a well-filled, inverted bag with its puckered end fluting out in the effect
of a dark ruff upon the hunched shoulders of its wearer. Stepping back, he gripped the handle
of the lever-bar, and with all his strength jerked it toward him. A square in the floor opened
as the trap was flapped back upon its hinges, and through the opening the haltered form shot
straight downward to bring up with a great jerk, and after that to dangle like a plumb-bob
on a string. Under the quick strain the gallows-arm creaked and whined; in the silence which
followed the hangman was heard to exhale his breath in a vast puff of relief. His hand went
up to his forehead to wipe beads of sweat which for all that the morning was cool almost to
coldness, had suddenly popped out through his skin. He for one was mighty glad the thing was
done, and, as he in this moment figured, well done.

But for once and once only as those saw who had the hardihood to look, Uncle Tobe had botched
up a job. Perhaps it was because of his great haste to make an end of a scandalous scene; perhaps
because the tirade of the bound malefactor had discomfited him and made his fingers fumble
this one time at their familiar task. Whatever the cause, it was plainly enough to be seen
that the heavy knot had not cracked the Lone-Hand Kid's spine. The noose, as was ascertained
later, had caught on the edge of the broad jawbone, and the man, instead of dying instantly,
was strangling to death by degrees and with much struggling.

In the next half minute a thing even more grievous befell. The broad strap which girthed the
murderer's trunk just above the bend of the elbows, held fast, but the rest of the harness,
having been improperly snaffled on, loosened and fell away from the twitching limbs so that
as the elongated body twisted to and fro in half circles, the lower arms winnowed the air in
foreshortened and contorted flappings, and the freed legs drew up and down convulsively.

Very naturally, Uncle Tobe was chagrined; perhaps he had hidden within him emotions deeper
than those bred of a personal mortification. At any rate, after a quick, distressed glance
through the trap at the writhing shape of agony below, he turned his eyes from it and looked
steadfastly at the high wall facing him. It chanced to be the western wall, which was bathed
in a ruddy glare where the shafts of the upcoming sun, lifting over the panels at the opposite
side of the fenced enclosure, began to fall diagonally upon the whitewashed surface just across.
And now, against that glowing plane of background opposite him, there appeared as he looked
the slanted shadow of a swaying rope framed in at right and at left by two broader, deeper
lines which were the shadows marking the timber uprights that supported the scaffold at its
nearer corners; and also there appeared, midway between the framing shadows, down at the lower
end of the slender line of the cord, an exaggerated, wriggling manifestation like the reflection
of a huge and misshapen jumping-jack, which first would lengthen itself grotesquely, and then
abruptly would shorten up, as the tremors running through the dying man's frame altered the
silhouette cast by the oblique sunbeams; and along with this stencilled vision, as a part of
it, occurred shifting shadow movements of two legs dancing busily on nothing, and of two foreshortened
arms, flapping up and down. It was no pretty picture to look upon, yet Uncle Tobe, plucking
with a tremulous hand at the ends of his beard, continued to stare at the apparition, daunted
and fascinated. To him it must have seemed as though the Lone-Hand Kid, with a malignant pertinacity
which lingered on in him after by rights the last breath should have been squeezed out of his
wretched carcass, was painting upon those tall planks the picture and the presentiment of his
farewell threat.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearly half an hour passed before the surgeons consented that the body should be taken down
and boxed. His harness which had failed him having been returned to its owner, he made it up
into a compact bundle and collected his regular fee and went away very quietly. Ordinarily,
following his habitual routine, he would have gone across town to his little house; would have
washed his hands with a bar of the yellow laundry soap; would have cooked and eaten his breakfast,
and then, after tidying up the kitchen, would have made the customary entry in his red-backed
account-book. But this morning he seemed to have no appetite, and besides, he felt an unaccountable
distaste for his home, with its silence and its emptiness. Somehow he much preferred the open
air, with the skies over him and wide reaches of space about him; which was doubly strange,
seeing that he was no lover of nature, but always theretofore had accepted sky and grass and
trees as matters of course--things as inevitable and commonplace as the weathers and the winds.

Throughout the day and until well on toward night he was beset by a curious, uncommon restlessness
which made it hard for him to linger long in any one spot. He idled about the streets of the
town; twice he wandered aimlessly miles out along roads beyond the town. All the while, without
cessation, there was a tugging and nagging at his nerve-ends, a constant inward irritation
which laid a hold on his thoughts, twitching them off into unpleasant channels. It kept him
from centering his interest upon the casual things about him; inevitably it turned his mind
back to inner contemplations. The sensation was mental largely, but it seemed so nearly akin
to the physical that to himself Uncle Tobe diagnosed it as the after-result of a wrench for
his weak heart. You see, never before having experienced the reactions of a suddenly quickened
imagination, he, naturally, was at a loss to account for it on any other ground.

Also he was weighted down by an intense depression that his clean record of ten years should
have been marred by a mishap; this regret, constantly recurring in his thoughts, served to
make him unduly sensitive. He had a feeling that people stared hard at him as they passed and,
after he had gone by, that they turned to stare at him some more. Mr. Macaulay was very quiet and
unostentatious in his manner, and did his work brilliantly. He returned to Scotland the other
day from abroad, and may yet play for some of our leading clubs.

~Walter Arnott (Queen's Park).~

Second in the order of teams, but premier in all that pertains to back play, comes the name
of Mr. Arnott. Out of all the fine players who acted as extreme backs, none has done better
work for his club and, let me say, International matches. It is all very well to say that
there were giants in those days, but you all know what befell Goliath, and I cannot help saying
that if you were to ask me candidly (taking the question in an all-round way) who was the best
back you ever saw, I should have no hesitation in answering that it was Walter Arnott. In the
words of the old English ballad, "he feared no foe," and never in the history of football of the
present time has such a brilliant man arisen. He has so many remarkable points that I cannot
tell them in a brief notice, but as he is still playing well, spectators are at one in admitting his
grand ability.

~M. Paton (Dumbarton).~

The match under review was Mr. Paton's second appearance against England, and he acquitted himself
very well. Somehow or other the committee of selection in International matches, while they honestly
do their duty, sometimes move in a mysterious way, and the selection of Mr. Paton to stand alongside
Mr. Arnott in this contest was, at the time, considered somewhat risky. Not by any means because
Mr. Paton was not a good back, but in consequence of the diversity of play shown by the pair.
Mr. Paton was nothing if he was not allowed a little latitude, and in some of the matches he
came off with flying colours. Arnott and he, however, acted well together. To give Mr. Paton
his due, he was a most gentlemanly young fellow, and did his very best for the game.

~J. J. Gow (Queen's Park).~

It has just occurred to me, and I can't see how the illustration might not with equal force be applied
to football as in the honest range of every-day life, that if a "round-robin" were sent about
the clubs that tackled the Q.P. in their best matches in the past decade, I am certain that
the verdict about the man who was most feared in all the elevens, the name of Mr. J. J. Gow
would come out first. He was, in fine, a half-back that the Q.P. had reason to feel proud.
Half-backs might come and go--as they undoubtedly did--but Gow seemed in his football career
to go on for ever. The most mysterious thing about him was that he was always in the same form,
and never had any practice. Football at half-back seemed to come to him by nature, and cost him no
effort. He could return splendidly, but at close tackling, and in clearing the ball away, he
was sometimes a little slack, and had to make it up by sheer force of hard work.

~Alexander Hamilton (Queen's Park).~

Not long ago, while "doing" a match at Hampden Park (I think it was Q.P. v. Battlefield, in the
Glasgow Cup), I met my old friend in the pavilion looking on and enjoying the sport. Like the
M'Neils, the Hamiltons are a football family, and while Mr. James, who is now an active member
of the present Q.P., will come under my pen later on, I have only at present to deal with Mr.
Alexander. Well, he was something in his day, and by no means to be despised as a forward. He
was not a fast dribbler, but when hard work was required, and wasn't it just in the great match
against the professional Preston North End, when the Q.P. were able
to hold their own, Mr. Hamilton never played better in his life.

~William Sellar (Queen's Park).~

I have for the most part been dealing with the past, and it is no force of imagination to come
straight to the living present, and add that a better left-wing player never appeared in any
club or combination of players than Mr. William Sellar. He has a style of his own which is,
to give the Battlefield its due, peculiar to that club's ability in the dribbling game. Mr.
Sellar did not learn all his football in the Queen's Park, but really perfected his style on Hampden
Park, and he is undoubtedly, at the present time, the most brilliant forward in Scotland.
Gentlemanly in every sense of the word, Sellar is the fairest player
that ever faced an opponent, and no man is more respected on the field.

In addition to this contest, he played against England in 1886, 1887, and 1888. It may be mentioned
that in 1890, in playing against the 3rd L.R.V., he played from the left in a style never excelled
by any forward.

~Joseph Lindsay (Dumbarton).~

Before this date, Mr. Joseph Lindsay was what might be called an old hand at Internationals, as
he had appeared before England in 1881 and 1884, and Wales in 1880, 1881, 1884, and 1885. It
is not too much to say of him that he was the most dangerous forward (to an opponent, I mean)
of his day, and if the backs were in any way slack, Lindsay "spread
dismay around," as he was a dead shot at goal, and rarely, if ever,
missed a chance if he got within a dozen yards of the sticks.

Lindsay was the best forward in many respects that ever toed a ball for Dumbarton. He was, however,
sorely tried in the finishing year of his football life, and in many of the leading matches so closely
watched by the opposing backs that he was sometimes fairly done for, and could not get the ball away.

~David
S. Allan (Queen's Park).~

Like Sir Roger de Coverley's definition of a great ethical question to one of his numerous friends,
"that much might be said of one point," the illustration holds good when applied to Mr. David
Allan. Popularity has its duties as well as its privileges, and there is not a single forward
in broad Scotland who is so popular and so much beloved by club companions and opponents alike as
Mr. Allan. He is, in fine, the most useful man in the Queen's Park, and while all of us seem
to grow older as each season comes round, Allan has always that juvenile look which undoubtedly
betokens an easy and contented mind. He is not what might be called a brilliant and showy forward,
but I'll back him to do the best hour and a half of heavy work in
the world without any outward sign of fatigue.

       I verily believe if Allan were forced to do it, he could play in
any part of the field with a few minutes' notice.

       ~R. Calderwood (Cartvale).~

In consequence of Mr. R. M. Christie, who had played in the International, of the previous year,
meeting with an accident in one of the trial matches, Mr. Calderwood
did duty as left-wing forward in this match, and played very creditably.

He was by far the best man in the young Cartvale, and a finer country player never came under the
eye of an International referee. He was a veritable dodger among the opposing backs, and in
this contest gave the Englishmen, but more particularly the Walters
and Amos, a lot of trouble.

He played a fine game in combination with the rest of the Scottish forwards. In the same season
Mr. Calderwood played against Wales in the Principality.

~The Final Association Cup Tie of 1886.~

The clubs left in the final tie for possession of the Blue Ribbon of Association football glory
in this season were the Queen's Park and Renton. Queen's Park led off by scoring from the foot
of Mr. Lambie, and this was all the effective work till ends were
changed, when the Renton team made a brilliant charge on the Queen's
Park goal, and forced the ball through in a scrimmage.

The play immediately after this was so even that a draw looked certain, but the Queen's Park
eventually assumed command, and scored other two goals (one by Mr. Hamilton and another by Mr.
Allan), and won a hard contest by three goals to one. As most of the Renton players who took
part in the match were considered famous in their day, and have not been already introduced to
you, I shall give short sketches of their style of play. So far as the Queen's Park team are
concerned, however, I have only to deal with new faces in Messrs. R. M. Christie, G. Somerville,
and J. A. Lambie, as all the other eight (Messrs. Campbell, Watson, Gow, Harrower, Hamilton,
Arnott, Allan, and Gillespie) have already been disposed of in the present volume.

~J. A. Lindsay.~

Somehow or other the Renton Club were never very strong in goalkeeping when the perfect form of
their forward division was taken into account, but Mr. J. A. Lindsay was decidedly their best. He
had what might be called his good and bad days, however, and while he was always clever with
his feet, he sometimes misjudged the ball and allowed a "soft thing" to take effect. In the
present contest he had hot work in keeping the Q.P. forwards clear.

Mr. Lindsay showed such brilliant form in the trial matches of 1888 that he was chosen to represent
Scotland on Hampden Park. He was somewhat unfortunate there, however, as England revenged
Bannockburn to the extent of five goals to none.

~A. Hannah.~

Who does not remember Mr. Hannah's fine fly-kick and powerful tackling?

In meeting and judging the ball in the air he rivalled the great Q.P. back himself, but wanted the
ability to follow up an advantage. In nearly all the matches in which he took part that season,
Hannah worked hard and earnest. He had a peculiar way of turning round to an opponent and taking
the ball away from him with the side of the foot, and no man in the
Renton team was more feared by an opponent than Hannah.

He never played against England, but in 1888 was picked out to represent
Scotland against Wales.

~A. M'Call.~

In this tie Mr. Hannah had as his companion at extreme back Mr. A. M'Call. In some of the earlier
matches in which the latter appeared he was a wild tackler and erratic in charging--rather
going for the man, and never minding the ball--but by and by he mellowed down, and returned
the leather beautifully from a besieged goal. I remember seeing him in several of the leading
games that same year, and he showed a neatness of style which won for him golden opinions. He
played against Ireland in 1888.

~R. Kelso.~

Mr. Kelso was a tower of strength to the Renton team at half-back,
and did his duty in this contest.

Rather a shade rough on an opponent at times, Mr. Kelso could also be generous to the foe when
he liked, and sometimes made a brilliant hit at half-back by clearing away the ball from the feet
of an opponent, just when the latter was poising for a shot at goal. Like Mr. Leitch Keir, of
Dumbarton, he was, and is, a magnificent half-back, and had International honours against England
in 1887 and 1888.

~D. M'Kechnie.~

In connection with Mr. M'Kechnie's name in juxtaposition with Renton's
crack half-back, I must honestly confess I am like Cuddie Headrigg--"Between
the deil and the deep sea."

I can only remember seeing him twice. I come to the conclusion, then, that he must have been
a substitute, and if I am wrong in my supposition I shall be glad to stand corrected. He was
at any rate not sufficiently brilliant to get his name handed down to posterity, although it must
be said of him that he was a fair average player, and did very well in this game.

~J. Thomson.~

Although he had a disposition to "poach" a little now and again, as some forwards are apt to do,
for you all know it is human to err, Thomson was a grand player, and made the most of his speed.
He never kept the ball longer than was necessary, and if he thought his club would benefit
by it, shied quickly in from the touch-line no matter where his companions
or opponents alike were stationed on the field.

He was really a fine shier, and his dribbling powers beyond dispute.

~J. M'Call.~

The Renton team had now risen to the acme of their fame, and no player helped them more to
attain that position than Mr. J. M'Call. Some clubs carry their position through sheer force of
medium ability all round; some have rare luck with their goalkeeping
and backs; but, there is no doubt about it, Renton was strong in front,
and I question if any man during that season played a better game
than the younger M'Call.

He represented Scotland in the contests with England in 1887 and
1888 as left-wing forward, and played a fine game.

~A. Grant.~

When the Renton men carried off the Glasgow Charity Cup that same season, the forwards showed great
ability. Mr. Grant was a very neat player. If my memory serves me right, he backed up Mr. Barbour
in this game, and did it very well. He was, however, rather slow on the ball, and was often sent
to the right-about by Messrs. Gow and Watson. Like Mr. M'Kechnie, he does not seem to have played
in many of the Renton's first-class matches, and his name is not found among Internationalists.

~A.
M'Intyre.~

Mr. M'Intyre was one of the best forwards in the county which has produced so many fine Association
football exponents, and acted as centre forward.

Like Mr. D. Gow, of the Rangers, when he got fairly on the ball there was no getting it from
him and he excelled in hard tackling. Possessing considerable speed, M'Intyre used it to the best advantage,
and he had such a liking for dodging round the backs that he sometimes fairly carried away the
spectators, and was loudly cheered for his manoeuvring.

~A. Barbour.~

In this event Mr. Barbour was the best man on the Renton side, and kept his feet on the slippery
ground in a manner that completely astonished all who saw the contest. He was sometimes fairly
puzzled by the clever heading of Mr. Campbell and the terrible tackling of Mr. Arnott, but fought
gamely to the last. In close dribbling he was the nearest approach to Mr. William M'Kinnon
(Q.P.) I have ever seen, and while he was quite as tricky, wanted the tact to lead an opponent
astray. He played against Ireland in 1885.

~J. Kelly.~

What Mr. Marshall is to the 3rd L.R.V., Mr. Berry to the Queen's Park,
and Mr. Groves to the Celtic, Mr. Kelly was to his old club, the Renton--viz.,
a grand man.

Kelly, I think, first came out as a forward, and played as such for his county against Renfrewshire
in 1885, and also in this tussle on Cathkin Park, but he eventually developed into a very fine
half-back, and played against England as such twice--in 1888 for his mother club, and last season
for his new love, the Celtic. His proper place, however, is undoubtedly at half-back.

~R. M. Christie.~

Slowly but surely Mr. Christie passed all the probationary
stages in the Queen's Park on the way to develop a brilliant player,
and in 1884 appeared in the International with England.

He was in the best of form, and caused the strangers a deal of trouble. He was very strong
on his legs, and about the most powerful opponent of his day to meet in a close match. The passing between
Christie and Harrower that day was splendid, and fairly astonished the Renton backs and goalkeeper.

~G.
Somerville.~

Mr. Somerville was a very fine all round forward, with a good deal
of ability in backing up and middling the ball in front of goal.

Mr. Hamilton and he used to make the spectators laugh at the way in which they annoyed the
opposing backs by passing the leather to one another in a tantalising way, right in front of
the uprights. He was a sturdy player, something of the same make as Mr. David Davidson, of
3rd L.R.V. and latterly Queen's Park fame, with a nerve of iron and, shall I say, a frame
of steel. He played against England in 1886.

~J. A. Lambie.~

A comparatively short career had Mr. Lambie on Hampden Park, but it was fraught with much distinction.
He was a grand forward among a fine division, and scored a lot of
goals for the Queen's Park.

He was, indeed, at it again in this match, and, as I have already
said in the introduction, took one more for the black and white stripes.

When nearing the keeper, if he were fortunate enough to pass the backs, he generally looked
about for one of his companions to follow up, and was quite an adept at the "screw-kick." Lambie
appeared against England in 1888, and is now an active member of
the Corinthians.

~The Association International of 1887.~

As the International of 1887 is, so to speak, a thing of yesterday, I have only introduced
it here for two reasons.

The first of these is to give me an opportunity of bringing new faces into my reminiscences, and
shortly criticising their styles of play, and the second to show
you how the admittedly best eleven sent out by England in all her
matches with Scotland were vanquished on their own soil by three goals
to two.

The event came off at Blackburn in presence of some 10,000 spectators--a
much larger crowd than ever appeared in London to see the International.

The weather was dry overhead during the early stages of the tussle, but a heavy shower of hail fell
later on, and this, added to a mud-covered ground, made matters anything
but pleasant.

The Scotchmen were the first to score, which they did through Mr. M'Call against the wind,
half-an-hour from the start; but the Englishmen soon bore down on the Scottish lines, and Mr.
Lindley equalised, so that at half-time both nationalities were on terms of equality. Not long after
ends were changed, the Scotchmen made one of those determined charges for which they have been famed
in many of the International games, and shoved both goalkeeper and ball through between the
posts. No sooner, however, had the leather again been started than
Mr. Dewhurst, the crack English forward, sent in a shooter, and once
more squared the game.

It was now "night or Blucher" for Scotland, and after a grand run between Messrs. Marshall and
Allan, which was loudly cheered, even though an enemy did it, the
young Queen's Park forward made Scotland one goal up.

Till the close the Englishmen had several brilliant sallies on the
strangers' goal, but the backs--Messrs. Arnott and Forbes--held their
own, and Scotland won by three goals to two. Mr. Macaulay kept goal
in fine style, and was the captain of the victorious team. The Englishmen
chosen to meet the Scotchmen on the occasion were--Messrs. Roberts,
A. M. Walters, P. M. Walters, N. C. Bailey, G. Howarth, J. Forrest,
E. C. Bambridge, W. N. Cobbald, J. Lofthouse, F. Dewhurst, and T.
Lindley. Besides the six who are mentioned below, Messrs. Arnott,
Macaulay, Kelso, J. M'Call, and W. Sellar (who have already been noticed)
also appeared against England in the same contest.

~J. Forbes (Vale
of Leven).~

Like certain cricketers who can only cut, and are weak
on the leg-side, there are several backs playing for fair medium clubs
just now who can only return the ball properly if they have plenty
of room to work, but Mr. Forbes, who played in this match along with
Mr. Arnott, was none of these. You were, in fact, not five minutes
in his company as a spectator at a match before you were captivated
with the style and finish of his play. In the excitement of the game
you imagined it was "all up with the Vale," when a crowd of opposing
forwards were observed getting the ball nearer goal. All the time,
however, Forbes was maturing his mode of attack, and like the unsuspecting
animal that darts upon its prey, the crack Vale of Leven back dashed
in, and you were sure to see the ball flying away down the field,
with a magnificent return. While kicking he always got his toes well
under the ball, and it was quite a rare thing to see Forbes kicking
high into the air. A great favourite with his club and opponents as
well, Mr. Forbes first appeared against England in 1884, when Scotland
won by one to none, so that in both Internationals in which he took
part his team were on the winning side. He is now in business in England.

~L.
Keir (Dumbarton).~

When in the spring of 1887 Mr. Leitch Keir was
chosen as companion to Mr. Kelso (Renton), and Mr. Auld (3rd L.R.V.),
in this great event at Blackburn, almost everybody had confidence
in them as half-backs, and I am happy to say that this confidence
was not misplaced, for no better trio ever did duty in an International
at that important position in the field. For good, even-down tackling,
and hard work, both in heading and clean kicking, Keir was one of
the very best men who ever played football. So proficient was he at
a "free kick," that when a "hand" was given against the opposing team,
in most of the Dumbarton matches, Keir was invariably intrusted with
the ball; and when the infringement took place near the goal, the
opposing team always dreaded his shot. He was also a very fine dribbler
for a half-back, and could run out the ball in fine style from a hotly-pressed
goal, and send it spinning down the field. In the succeeding year
he was chosen to appear against England on Hampden Park, but, like
the rest of the Scottish representatives in that fatal contest, he
did not show to the best advantage.

~J. Auld (3rd L.R.V.).~

During
the past four or five years, Mr. Auld has been one of the best half-backs
in Scotland, and was a decided success in this contest. No club in
Britain has produced a string of better backs and half-backs than
the 3rd Lanark Rifle Volunteer Athletic and Football Club. His rags fluttered
freely in the evening air and his sole-less shoes flopped up and down upon his feet, rasping
his bare toes, as he approached the nearest ticket booth.

Behind the wicket sat a young woman of much self-possession. By all the outward signs she was
a born and bred metropolitan and therefore one steeled against surprise and armed mentally
against trick and device. Even before she spoke you felt sure she would say oily if she meant
early, and early if she meant oily--sure linguistic marks of the native-born New York cockney.

To match the environment of her employment she wore a costume that was fondly presumed to be
the correct garbing of a Sicilian peasant maid, including a brilliant bodice that laced in
front and buttoned behind, an imposing headdress, and on both her arms, bracelets of the better
known semi-precious metals.

Coming boldly up to her, the ragged man laid upon the shelf of the wicket his precious bill--it
was now wadded into a greenish-yellow wisp like a sprig of celery top--and said simply, "One!"

With a jangle of her wrist jewelry, the young woman drew the bill in under the bars and straightened
it out in front of her. She considered, with widening gaze, the numeral 1 and the three naughts
following it. Then through the bars she considered carefully him who had brought it. From one
to the other and back again she looked.

"Woit one minute," she said. It is impossible to reproduce in cold type the manner in which
this young woman uttered the word minute. But there was an "o" in it and a labial hint of an
extra "u."

"Woit, please," she said again, and holding the bill down flat with one hand she turned and
beckoned to some one at her left.

A pace behind the panhandler, Judson Green watched. Now the big comedy scene was coming, just
as it always came in the books. Either the tattered possessor of the one-thousand-dollar bill
would be made welcome by a gratified proprietor and would be given the liberty of the entire
island and would have columns written about him by a hundred gratified press-agents, or else
there would be a call for the police and for the first time in the history of New York a man
would be locked up, not for the common crime of having no money, but for having too much money.

Obedient to the young woman's request, the panhandler waited. At her beck there came a stout
person in a green coat and red trousers--Italian soldiers wear these colours, or at least they
often do at Coney Island--and behind her free hand the young woman whispered in his ear. He
nodded understandingly, cast a sharp look at the opulent individual in the brimless hat, and
then hurried away toward the inner recesses of the entrance. In a minute he was back, but not
with determined police officers behind him. He came alone and he carried in one hand a heavy
canvas bag that gave off a muffled jingling sound, and in the other, a flat green packet.

The young woman riffled through the packet and drove a hand into the jingling bag. Briskly
she counted down before her the following items in currency and specie:

Four one-hundred-dollar bills, six fifty-dollar bills, twelve twenty-dollar bills, five ten-dollar
bills, one five-dollar bill, four one-dollar bills, one fifty-cent piece, one quarter, two
dimes and one nickel. Lifting one of the dimes off the top of this pleasing structure, she
dropped it in a drawer; then she shoved the remaining mound of money under the wicket, accompanying
it by a flat blue ticket of admission, whisked the one-thousand-dollar bill out of sight and
calmly awaited the pleasure of the next comer.

All downcast and disappointed, Green drew his still bewildered accomplice aside, relieved him
of the bulk of his double handful of change, endowed him liberally with cash for his trouble,
and making his way to where his car waited, departed in haste and silence for Manhattan. A
plan that was recommended by several of the leading fiction authorities as infallible, had,
absolutely failed him.

III

Other schemes proved equally disappointing. Choosing mainly the cool of the evening, he travelled
the town from the primeval forests of the Farther Bronx to the sandy beaches of Ultimate Staten
Island, which is in the city, and yet not of it. He roamed through queer streets and around
quaint by-corners, and he learned much strange geography of his city and yet had no delectable
adventures.

Once, acting on the inspiration of the plot of a popular novel that he had read at a sitting,
he bought at an East Side pawnshop a strange badge, or token, of gold and black enamel, all
mysteriously embossed over with intertwined Oriental signs and characters. Transferring this
ornament from the pawnshop window to the lapel of his coat, he went walking first through the
Syrian quarter, where the laces and the revolutionary plots come from, and then through the
Armenian quarter, where the rugs come from, and finally in desperation through the Greek quarter,
where the plaster statues and the ripe bananas come from.

By rights,--by all the rights of fiction,--he, wearing this jewelled emblem in plain sight,
should have been hailed by a bearded foreigner and welcomed to the inner councils of some secret
Bund, cabal, council or propaganda, as one coming from afar, bearing important messages. It
should have turned out so, certainly. In this case, however, the sequel was very different
and in a great measure disappointing.

A trifle foot-weary and decidedly overheated, young Mr. Green came out of the East Side by
way of Nassau Street, and at Fulton turned north into Broadway. Just across from the old Astor
House, a man wearing a stringy beard and a dusty black suit stood at the curbing, apparently
waiting for a car. He carried an umbrella under one arm and at his feet rested a brown wicker
suit-case with the initials "G. W. T." and the address, "Enid, Oklahoma," stencilled on its
side in black letters. Plainly he was a stranger in the city. Between glances down the street
to see whether his car was nearing him, he counted the upper stories of the near-by skyscrapers
and gazed at the faces of those who streamed past him.

His roving eye fell upon a splendid badge of gold enamel gleaming against a background of blue
serge, and his face lighted with the joy of one meeting a most dear friend in a distant land.
Shifting his umbrella from the right hand to the left, he gave three successive and careful
tugs at his right coat lapel, all the while facing Judson Green. Following this he made a military
salute and then, stepping two paces forward, he undertook to engage Green's hand in a peculiar
and difficult cross-fingered clasp. And he uttered cabalistic words of greeting in some strange
tongue, all the while beaming gladly.

In less than no time, though, his warmth all changed to indignation; and as Green backed away,
retreating in poor order and some embarrassment, he gathered from certain remarks thrown after
him, that the outraged brother from Enid was threatening him with arrest and prosecution as
a rank impostor--for wearing, without authority, the sacred insignia of an Imperial Past Potentate
of the Supreme Order of Knightly Somethings or Other--he didn't catch the last words, being
then in full flight. So the adventure-seeker counted that day lost too and buried the Oriental
emblem at the bottom of a bureau drawer to keep it out of mischief.

He read the papers closely, seeking there the seeds of adventure. In one of them, a pathetic
story appeared, telling of a once famous soldier of fortune starving in a tenement on Rivington
Street, a man who in his day--so the papers said--had made rulers and unmade them, had helped
to alter the map of more than one continent. Green investigated personally. The tale turned
out to be nine-tenths reporter's imagination, and one-tenth, a garrulous, unreliable old man.

In another paper was an advertisement richly laden with veiled pleadings for immediate aid
from a young woman who described herself as being in great danger. He looked into this too,
but stopped looking, when he ran into an affable and accommodating press-agent. The imperilled
young lady was connected with the drama, it seemed, and she sought free advertisement and was
willing to go pretty far to get it.

Coming away from a roof garden show one steaming night, a slinky-looking, slightly lame person
asked Green for the time, and as Green reached for his watch he endeavoured to pick Green's
pocket. Being thwarted in this, the slinky person made slowly off. A Van Bibber would have
hired vigilant aides to dog the footsteps of the disappointed thief and by harrying him forth
with threats from wherever he stopped, would speedily have driven him desperate from lack of
sleep and lack of food. Green had read somewhere of this very thing having been done successfully.
He patterned after the plan. He trailed the gimpy one to where he mainly abided and drove him
out of one lunchroom, and dispossessed him from one lodging house; and at that, giving his
pursuer malevolent looks, the "dip" went limping to the Grand Central and caught the first
train leaving for the West.

And then, at the fag end of the summer, when all his well-laid plans had one by one gone agley,
chance brought to Green an adventure--sheer chance and a real adventure. The circumstance of
a deranged automobile was largely responsible--that and the added incident of a broken shoe-string.

IV

It was in the first week in September and Judson Green, a tired, badly sunburned young man,
disappointed and fagged, looked forward ten days to the expiration of the three months, when
confessing himself beaten, and what was worse, wrong, he must pay over one hundred dollars
to the jubilant Wainright. With him it wasn't the money--he had already spent the amount of
the wager several times over in the prosecution of his vain campaigning after adventure--it
was the upsetting of his pet theory; that was the worst part of it.

I believe I stated a little earlier in this narrative that Judson Green was a young man of
profoundly professed theories. It came to pass, therefore, that on the Saturday before Labour
Day, Judson Green, being very much out of sorts, found himself very much alone and didn't know
what to do with himself. He thought of the beaches, but dismissed the thought. Of a Saturday
afternoon in the season, the sea beaches that lie within the city bounds are a-crawl with humans.
There is small pleasure in surf-bathing where you must share every wave with from one to a
dozen total strangers.

Mr. Green climbed into his car and told his driver to take him to Van Cortlandt Park, which,
lying at the northernmost boundaries of New York City, had come, with successive northerly
shifts of the centre of population, to be the city's chief playground.

When, by reason of a confusion of tongues, work was knocked off on the Tower of Babel, if then
all hands had turned to outdoor sports, the resultant scene would have been, I imagine, much
like the picture that is presented on most Saturdays on the sixty-acre stretch of turf known
as Indian Field, up in Van Cortlandt Park. Here there are baseball games by the hundred and
football games by the score--all the known varieties of football games too, Gaelic, Soccer,
Rugby and others; and coal black West Indian negroes in white flannels, with their legs buskined
like the legs of comic opera brigands, play at cricket, meanwhile shouting in the broadest
of British accents; and there is tennis on the tennis courts and boating on the lake near-by
and golf on the links that lie beyond the lake. Also, in odd corners, there are all manners
of queer Scandinavian and Latin games, for which no one seems to know the name; and on occasion,
there are polo matches.

Accordingly, when his car drew up at the edge of the parking space, our young man beheld a
wide assortment of sporting events spread before his eyes. The players disported themselves
with enthusiasm, for there was now a soft coolness in the air. But the scars of a brutal summer
still showed, in the turf that was burnt brown and crisp, and in the withered leaves on the
elms, and in white dust inches deep on the roadways.

Young Mr. Green sat at his ease and looked until he was tired of looking, and then he gave
the order for a home-bound spin. Right here was where chanced stepped in and diverted him from
his appointed paths. For the car, now turned cityward, had rolled but a few rods when a smell
of overheated metals assailed the air, and with a tired wheezing somewhere down in its vital
organs, the automobile halted itself. The chauffeur spent some time tinkering among its innermost
works before he stood up, hot and sweaty and disgusted, to announce that the breakdown was
serious in character. He undertook to explain in highly technical terms the exact nature of
the trouble, but his master had no turn for mechanics and small patience for listening. He
gathered that it would take at least an hour to mend the mishap, perhaps even longer, and he
was not minded to wait.

"I'll walk across yonder and catch the subway," he said. "You mend the car and bring it downtown
when you get it mended."

At its farthest point north, the Broadway subway, belying its name, emerges from the earth
and becomes an elevated structure, rearing high above the ground. Its northernmost station
stands aloft, butt-ended and pierced with many windows, like a ferry-boat cabin set up on stilts.
Through a long aisle of sun-dried trees, Judson Green made for this newly risen landmark. A
year or two years before, all this district had been well wooded and sparsely inhabited. But
wherever a transit line goes in New York it works changes in the immediate surroundings, and
here at this particular spot, the subway was working them, and many of them. Through truck
patches and strips of woodland, cross-streets were being cut, and on the hills to the westward,
tall apartment houses were going up. On the raw edge of a cut, half of an old wooden mansion
stood, showing tattered strips of an ancient flowered wallpaper and a fireplace, clinging like
a chimney-swift's nest to a wall, where the rest of the room had been sheared away bodily.
Along Broadway, beyond a huddle of merry-go-rounds and peanut stands, a row of shops had sprung
up, as it were, overnight; they were shiny, trim, citified shops, looking a trifle strange
now in this half-transformed setting, but sure to have plenty of neighbours before long. There
was even a barber shop, glittering inside and out with the neatness of newness, and complete,
even to a manicuring table and a shoe-shining stand. The door of the shop was open; within,
electric fans whirred in little blurs of rapid movement.

See now how chance still served our young man: Crossing to the station, Judson Green took note
of this barber shop and took note also that his russet shoes had suffered from his trudge through
the dusty park. Likewise one of the silken strings had frayed through; the broken end stood
up through the top eyelet in an untidy fringed effect. So he turned off short and went into
the little place and mounted the new tall chair that stood just inside the door. The only other
customer in the place was in the act of leaving. This customer got up from the manicure table
opposite the shoe-shining stand, slipped a coin into the palm of the manicure girl and passed
out, giving Green a brief profile view of a thin, bearded face. Behind the back of her departing
patron, the manicure girl shrugged her shoulders inside of an ornate bodice and screwed up
her nose derisively. It was plainly to be seen that she did not care greatly for him she had
just served.

From where he was languidly honing a razor, the head barber, he who presided over the first
of the row of three chairs, spoke:

"You ought'nter be making faces at your regular steadies, Sadie. If you was to ask me, I think
you've got a mash on that there gent."

The young person thus addressed shook her head with a sprightly motion.

"Not on your life," she answered. "There's certainly something about that man I don't like."

"It don't never pay to knock a stand-by," opined the head barber, banteringly.

As though seeking sympathy from these gibes, the young lady denominated as Sadie turned toward
the well-dressed, alert-looking young man who had just come in. Apparently he impressed her
as a person in whom she might confide.

"Speaking about the fella that just went out," she said. "August yonder is all the time trying
to guy me about him. I should worry! He ain't my style. Honest, I think he's nutty."

Politely Green uttered one of those noncommittal sounds that may be taken to mean almost anything.
But the manicure lady was of a temperament needing no prompting. She went on, blithe to be
talking to a new listener.

"Yes, sir, I think he's plumb dippy. He first came in here about two weeks ago to have his
nails did, and I don't know whether you'll believe it or not--but August'll tell you it's the
truth--he's been back here every day since. And the funniest part of it is I'm certain sure
he never had his nails done in his life before then--they was certainly in a untidy state the
first time he came. And there's another peculiar thing about him. He always makes me scrape
away down under his nails, right to the quick. Sometimes they bleed and it must hurt him."

"Apparently the gentleman has the manicuring habit in a serious form," said Green, seeing that
Miss Sadie had paused, in expectation of an answer from him.

"He sure has--in the most vi'lent form," she agreed. "He's got other habits too. He's sure
badly stuck on the movies."

"I beg your pardon--on the what?"

"On the movies--the moving pictures," she explained. "Well, oncet in a while I enjoy a good
fillum myself, but I'm no bigot on the subject--I can take my movies or I can let 'em be. But
not that man that just now went out. All the time I'm doing his nails he don't talk about nothing
else hardly, except the moving pictures, he's seen that day or the day before. It's right ridiculous,
him being a grown-up man and everything. I actually believe he never misses a new fillum at
that new moving picture place three doors above here, or at that other one, that's opened up
down by Two Hundred an' Thirtieth Street. He seems to patronise just those two. I guess he
lives 'round here somewhere. Yet he don't seem to be very well acquainted in this part of town
neither. Well, it sure takes all kind of people to make a world, don't it?"

Temporarily Miss Sadie lapsed into silence, never noticing that what she said had caused her
chief auditor to bend forward in absorbed interest. He sat with his eyes on the Greek youth
who worked over his shoes, but his mind was busy with certain most interesting speculations.

When the bootblack had given his restored and resplendent russets a final loving rub, and had
deftly inserted a new lace where the old one had been, Mr. Green decided that he needed a manicure
and he moved across the shop, and as the manicure lady worked upon his nails he siphoned the
shallow reservoir of her little mind as dry as a bone. The job required no great amount of
pump-work either, for this Miss Sadie dearly loved the sound of her own voice and was gratefully
glad to tell him all she knew of the stranger who favoured such painful manicuring processes
and who so enjoyed a moving picture show. For his part, Green had seen only the man's side
face, and that casually and at a fleeting glance; but before the young lady was through with
her description, he knew the other's deportment and contour as though he had passed him a hundred
times and each time had closely studied him.

To begin with, the man was sallow and dark, and his age was perhaps thirty, or at most thirty-two
or three. His beard was newly grown; it was a young beard, through which his chin and chops
still showed. He smoked cigarettes constantly--the thumb and forefinger of his right hand were
stained almost black, and Miss Sadie, having the pride of her craft, had several times tried
unsuccessfully to bleach them of their nicotine disfigurements.

He had a manner about him which the girl described as "kind of suspicious and scary,"--by which
Green took her to mean that he was shy and perhaps furtive in his bearing. His teeth, his eyes,
his expression, his mode of dress--Mr. Green knew them all before Miss Sadie gave his left
hand a gentle pat as a sign that the job was concluded. He tipped her generously and caught
the next subway train going south.

V

Southbound subway trains run fast, especially when the rush of traffic is northward. Within
the hour Judson Green sat in the reading room of his club, industriously turning the pages
of the club's file of the World for the past month. Presently he found what he was seeking.
He read a while, and for a while then he took notes. Pocketing his notes, he ate dinner alone
and in due season thereafter he went home and to bed. But before this, he sent off a night
lettergram to the Byrnes private detective agency down in Park Row. He wanted--so in effect
the message ran--the best man in the employ of that concern to call upon him at his bachelor
apartments in the Hotel Sedgwick, in the morning at ten o'clock. The matter was urgent, important--and
confidential.

If the man who knocked at Green's sitting-room door that next morning at ten was not the best
man of the Byrnes staff he looked the part. He was square-jawed, with an appraising eye and
a good pair of shoulders. He had the right kind of a name for a detective, too. The name was
Cassidy--Michael J.

"Mr. Cassidy," said Judson Green, when the preliminaries of introduction were over, "you remember,
don't you, what the papers said at the time of the Steinway murder about the suspect Maxwell,
the old man's nephew--the description they printed of him, and all?"

"I ought to," said Cassidy. "Our people had that case from the start--I worked on it myself
off and on, up until three days ago." From memory he quoted: "Medium height, slender, dark-complected,
smooth-faced and about thirty-one years old; a good dresser and well educated; smokes cigarettes
constantly; has one upper front tooth crowned with gold--" He hesitated, searching his memory
for more details.

"Remember anything else about him that was striking?" prompted Green.

"Let's see?" pondered Mr. Cassidy. Then after a little pause, "No, that's all I seem to recall
right now."

"How about his being a patron of moving pictures?"

"That's right," agreed the other, "that's the only part of it I forgot." He repeated pretty
exactly the language of the concluding paragraph of the official police circular that all the
papers had carried for days: "Formerly addicted to reading cheap and sensational novels, now
an inveterate attendant of motion-picture theatres." He glanced at Judson Green over his cigar.
"What's the idea?" he asked. "Know something about this case?"

"Not much," said Green, "except that I have found the man who killed old Steinway."

Forgetting his professional gravity, up rose Mr. Cassidy, and his chair, which had been tilted
back, brought its forelegs to the floor with a thump.

"No!" he said, half-incredulously, half-hopefully.

"Yes," stated Mr. Green calmly. "At least I've found Maxwell. Or anyway, I think I have."

Long before he was through telling what he had seen and heard the afternoon before, Mr. Cassidy,
surnamed Michael J., was almost sitting in his lap. When the younger man had finished his tale
the detective fetched a deep and happy breath.

"It sounds good to me," he commented, "it certainly sounds to me like you've got the right
dope on this party. But listen, Mr. Green, how do you figure in this here party's fad for getting
himself manicured as a part of the lay-out--I can see it all but that?"

"Here is how I deduced that element of the case," stated Green. "Conceding this man to be the
fugitive Maxwell, it is quite evident that he has a highly developed imagination--his former
love of trashy literature and his present passion for moving pictures would both seem to prove
that. Now then, you remember that all the accounts of that murder told of the deep marks of
finger-nail scratches in the old man's throat. If this man is the murderer, I would say, from
what we know of him, that he cannot rid himself of the feeling that the blood of his victim
is still under his nails. And so, nursing that delusion, he goes daily to that manicure girl----"

He got no farther along than that. Mr. Cassidy extended his large right hand in a congratulatory
clasp, and admiration was writ large upon his face.

"Colonel," he said, "you're immense--you oughter be in the business. Say, when are we going
to nail this guy?"

"Well," said Green, "I think we should start watching his movements at once, but we should
wait until we are pretty sure of the correctness of our theory before acting. And of course,
in the meanwhile, we must deport ourselves in such a way as to avoid arousing his suspicions."

"Just leave that to me. You do the expert thinking on this here case; I'll guarantee a good
job of trailing."

Inside of forty-eight hours these two, working discreetly, knew a good deal of their man. For
example, they knew that under the name of Morrison he was living in a summer boarding house
on a little hill rising to the west of the park; that he had been living there for a little
more than a fortnight; that his landlady didn't know his business, but thought that he must
be an invalid. Among the other lodgers the impression prevailed that he suffered from a nervous
trouble. Mornings, he kept to his room, sleeping until late. In fact, as well as the couple
occupying the room below his might judge, he did most of his sleeping in the daytime--they
heard him night after night, walking the floor until all hours.

A maid-servant of ultra conversational tendencies gratuitously furnished most of these valued
details, after Michael J. Cassidy had succeeded in meeting her socially.

Afternoons, the suspect followed a more or less regular itinerary. He visited the manicure
girl at the new barber shop; he patronized one or both of the moving picture places in the
vicinity, but usually both, and then he went for a solitary walk through the park, and along
toward dusk he returned to the boarding house, ate his supper and went to his room. He had
no friends, apparently; certainly he had no callers. He received no letters and seemingly wrote
none. Cassidy was convinced; he burned with eagerness to make the arrest without further delay.
For this would be more than a feather in the Cassidy cap; it would be a whole war bonnet.

"You kin stay in the background if you want to," he said. "Believe me, I'm perfectly willing
to take all the credit for pulling off this pinch."

As he said this they were passing along Broadway just above the subway terminal. The straggling
line of new shops was on one side and the park stretched away on the other. Green was on the
inner side of the pavement. Getting no answer to his suggestion, Mr. Cassidy started to repeat it.

"I heard you," said Green, stopping now dead short, directly in front of the resplendent front
of the Regal Motion Picture Palace. He contemplated with an apparently unwarranted interest
the illuminated and lithographed announcements of the morrow's bill.

"I'm perfectly willing to stay in the background," he said. "But--but I've just this very minute
thought of a plan that ought to make us absolutely sure of our man--providing the plan works!
Are you at all familiar with the tragedy of 'Macbeth'?"

"I don't know as I am," admitted Mr. Cassidy honestly. "When did it happen and who done it?"

Again his employer seemed not to hear him.

"Let's go into this place," he said, turning in towards the hospitable portals of the Regal.
"I want to have a business talk with the proprietor of this establishment, if he's in."

The manager was in, and they had their talk; but after all it was money--which in New York
speaks with such a clarion-loud and convincing voice--that did most of the talking. As soon
as Judson Green had produced a bill-roll of august proportions, the proprietor, doubtful until
that moment, showed himself to be a man open to all reasonable arguments. Moreover, he presently
scented in this enterprise much free advertisement for his place.

VI

On the following afternoon, the weather being rainy, the Regal opened its doors for the three-o'clock
performance to an audience that was smaller than common and mostly made up of dependable neighbourhood
patrons. However, there were at least two newcomers present. They sat side by side, next to
central aisle, in the rearmost row of chairs--Judson Green and Michael J. Cassidy. Their man
was almost directly in front of them, perhaps halfway down toward the stage. Above a scattering
line of heads of women and children they could see, in the half light of the darkened house,
his head and shoulders as he bent his body forward at an interested angle.

Promptly on the hour, a big bull's-eye of light flashed on, making a shimmering white target
in the middle of the screen. The music started up, and a moving-picture soloist with a moving-picture
soloist's voice, appeared in the edge of the illuminated space and rendered a moving-picture
ballad, having reference to the joys of life down in Old Alabam', where the birds are forever
singing in the trees and the cotton-blossoms bloom practically without cessation. This, mercifully,
being soon over, a film entitled "The Sheriff's Sweetheart" was offered, and for a time, in
shifting pictures, horse-thieves in leather "chaps," and heroes in open-necked shirts, and
dashing cow-girls in divided skirts, played out a thrilling drama of the West, while behind
them danced and quivered a background labelled Arizona, but suggesting New Jersey. When the
dashing and intrepid sheriff had, after many trials, won his lady love, the ballad singer again
obliged throatily, and then from his coop in the little gallery the lantern man made an announcement,
in large, flickering letters, of a film depicting William Shakespeare's play, "Macbeth."

Thereupon scene succeeded scene, unfolding the tragic tale. The ill-fated Duncan was slain;
the Witches of Endor capered fearsomely about their fearsome cauldron of snaky, froggy horrors;
and then--taking some liberties with the theme as set down by the original author--the operator
presented a picture wherein Macbeth, tortured by sleeplessness and hag-ridden with remorse,
saw, in imagination, the dripping blood upon his hands and vainly sought to scour it off.

Right here, too, came another innovation which might or might not have pleased the Bard of
Avon. For as Macbeth wrestled with his fears, the phantom of the murdered Duncan, a cloaked,
shadowy shape, crossed slowly by him from right to left, traversing the breadth of the screen,
while the orchestra rendered shivery music in appropriate accompaniment.

Midway of the lighted space the ghost raised its averted head and looked out full, not at the
quivering Macbeth, but, with steady eyes and set, impassive face, into the body of the darkened
little theatre. In an instant the sheeted form was gone--gone so quickly that perhaps no keen-eyed
juvenile in the audience detected the artifice by which, through a skilful scissoring and grafting
and doctoring of the original film, the face of the actor who played the dead and walking Duncan
had been replaced by the photographed face, printed so often in the newspapers, of murdered
Old Man Steinway!

There was a man near the centre of the house who got instantly upon his legs and stumbling,
indeed almost running in his haste, made up the centre aisle for the door; and in the daylight
which strengthened as he neared the open, it might be seen that he wore the look of one stunned
by a sudden blighting shock. And at once Green and Cassidy were noisily up too, and following
close behind him, their nerves a-tingle.

All unconscious of surveillance, the suspect was out of the door, on the pavement, when they
closed on him. At the touch of Cassidy's big hand upon his shoulder he spun round, staring
at them with wide-open, startled eyes. Above his scraggy beard his face was dappled white and
red in patches, and under the mottled skin little muscles twitched visibly.

"What--what do you want?" he demanded in a shaken, quick voice. A gold-capped tooth showed
in his upper jaw between his lips.

"We want a word or two with you," said Cassidy, with a sort of threatening emphasis.

"Are you--are you officers?" He got the question out with a separate gulp for each separate word.

"Not exactly," answered Cassidy, and tightened his grip on the other's shoulder the least bit
more firmly. "But we can call one mighty easy if you ain't satisfied to talk to us a minute
or two. There's one yonder."

He ducked his head toward where, forty yards distant, a middle-aged and somewhat pursy patrolman
was shepherding the traffic that eddied in small whirls about the steps of the subway terminal.

"All right, all right," assented the captive eagerly. "I'll talk to you. Let's go over there--where
it's quiet." He pointed a wavering finger, with a glistening, highly polished nail on it, toward
the opposite side of the street; there the park came right up to the sidewalk and ended. They
went, and in a minute all three of them were grouped close up to the shrub-lined boundary.
The mottled-faced man was in the middle. Green stood on one side of him and Cassidy on the
other, shouldering up so close that they blocked him off, flank and front.

"Now, then, we're all nice and cozy," said Cassidy with a touch of that irony which a cat often
displays, in different form, upon capturing a live mouse. "And we want to ask you a few questions.
What's your name--your real name?" he demanded roughly.

"Morrison," said the man, licking with his tongue to moisten his lips.

"Did you say Maxwell?" asked Cassidy, shooting out his syllables hard and straight.

"No, no--I said Morrison." The man looked as though he were going to collapse then and there.

"One name's as good as another, I guess, ain't it?" went on the detective. "Well, what's your
business?"

"My business?" He was parrying as though seeking time to collect his scattered wits. "Oh, I
haven't any business--I've been sick lately."

"Oh, you've been sick lately--well, you look sick right now." Cassidy shoved his hands in his
pockets and with a bullying, hectoring air pushed his face, with the lower jaw undershot, into
the suspect's face. "Say, was it because you felt sick that you came out of that there moving-picture
show so sudden?"

Just as he had calculated, the other jumped at the suggestion.

"Yes--yes," he nodded nervously. "That was it--the heat in there made me faint." He braced
himself tauter. "Say," he said, and tried to put force into his tones, "what business have
you men got spying on me and asking me these things? I'm a free American citizen----"

"Well now, young fellow, that all depends," broke in Cassidy, "that all depends." He sank his
voice almost to a whisper, speaking deliberately. "Now tell us why you didn't feel real sick
until you seen your dead uncle's face looking at you----"

"Look out!" screamed the prisoner. He flinched back, pointing with one arm wildly, and flinging
up the other across his face as though to shut out a sight of danger. There was a rattle of
wheels behind them.

Judson Green pivoted on his heel, with the thought of runaways springing up to his mind. But
Mr. Cassidy, wiser in the tricks of the hunter and the hunted, made a darting grab with both
hands for the shoulder which he had released. His greedy fingers closed on space. The suspect,
with a desperate and unexpected agility, had given his body a backward nimble fling that carried
him sprawling through a gap between the ornamental bushes fringing the park sward. Instantly
he was up and, with never a backward glance, was running across the lower, narrower verge of
Indian Field, making for the trees which edged it thickly upon the east. He could run fast,
too. Nor were there men in front to hinder him, since because of the rain, coming down in a
thin drizzle, the wide, sloped stretch of turf was for this once bare of ball-players and cricket
teams.

Upon the second, Cassidy was through the hedge gap and hot-foot after him, with Green coming
along only a pace or two behind. Over his shoulder Cassidy whooped a call for aid to the traffic
policeman in the roadway. But that stout person, who had been exiled to these faraway precincts
by reason of his increasing girth and a tendency toward fallen arches, only took one or two
steps upon his flat feet and then halted, being in doubt as to what it was all about. Before
he could make up his mind whether or not to join the chase, it was too late to join it. The
fugitive, travelling a straight course, had crossed the field at its narrowest point and had
bounded into the fringe of greenery bordering the little lake, heading apparently for the thick
swampy place lying between the ball ground and the golf links. The two pursuers, legging along
behind, did their best to keep him in sight, but, one thing sure, they were not gaining on him.

As a matter of truth, they were losing. Twice they lost him and twice they spied him again--once
crossing a bit of open glade, once weaving in and out among the tree trunks farther on. Then
they lost him altogether. Cassidy had shown the better pair of legs at the start of the race,
but now his wind began to fail. Panting and blowing fit to shame porpoises, he slackened his
speed, falling back inch by inch, while the slighter and younger man took the lead. Green settled
to a steady, space-eating jog-trot, all the time watching this way and that. There were singularly
few people in sight--only a chronic golfer here and there up on the links--and these incurables
merely stared through the rain-drops at him as he forced his way among the thickets below them.

Cassidy, falling farther and farther behind, presently met a mounted policeman ambling his
horse along a tree-shaded roadway that crossed the park from east to west, and between gulps
for breath told what he knew. Leaning half out of his saddle, the mounted man listened, believed--and
acted. Leaving Cassidy behind, he spurred his bay to a walloping gallop, aiming for the northern
confines of the park, and as he travelled, he spread the alarm, gathering up for the man-chase
such recruits as two park labourers and a park woodchopper and an automobile party of young
men, so that presently there was quite a good-sized search party abroad in the woodland.

As for Judson Green, he played his hand out alone. Dripping wet with rain and his own sweat,
he emerged from a mile-long thicket upon an asphalted drive that wound interminably under the
shouldering ledges of big gray rocks and among tall elms and oaks. Already he had lost his
sense of direction, but he ran along the deserted road doggedly, pausing occasionally to peer
among the tree trunks for a sight of his man. He thought, once, he heard a shot, but couldn't
be sure, the sound seemed so muffled and so far away.

On a venture he left the road, taking to the woods again. He was working through a small green
tangle when something caught at his right foot and he was spun about so that he faced the opposite
direction from the one in which he had been travelling, and went down upon his hands and knees,
almost touching with his head a big licheny boulder, half buried in vines and grass. Glancing
back, he saw what had twisted him off his course and thrown him down--it was an upward-aimed
tree-root, stubby and pointed, which had thrust itself through his right shoe lacing. The low
shoe had been pulled half-way off his foot, and, under the strain, the silken lace had broken
short off.

In the act of raising himself upright, he had straightened to a half-crouch when, just beyond
the big green-masked boulder, he saw that which held him petrified in his pose. There, in a
huddle among the shrubs, where he would never have seen it except for the chance shifting-about
of his gaze, was the body of a man lying face downward the head hidden under the upturned skirts
of the coat.

He went to it and turned it over. It was the body of the man he sought--Maxwell--and there
was a revolver in Maxwell's right hand and a hole in Maxwell's right temple, and Maxwell was dead.

Judson Green stood up and waited for the other pursuers. He had won a hundred-dollar bet and
Cassidy had lost a thousand-dollar reward.

CHAPTER III

BOYS WILL BE BOYS

When Judge Priest, on this particular morning, came puffing into his chambers at the courthouse,
looking, with his broad beam and in his costume of flappy, loose white ducks, a good deal like
an old-fashioned full-rigger with all sails set, his black shadow, Jeff Poindexter, had already
finished the job of putting the quarters to rights for the day. The cedar water bucket had
been properly replenished; the upper flange of a fifteen-cent chunk of ice protruded above
the rim of the bucket; and alongside, on the appointed nail, hung the gourd dipper that the
master always used. The floor had been swept, except, of course, in the corners and underneath
things; there were evidences, in streaky scrolls of fine grit particles upon various flat surfaces,
that a dusting brush had been more or less sparingly employed. A spray of trumpet flowers,
plucked from the vine that grew outside the window, had been draped over the framed steel engraving
of President Davis and his Cabinet upon the wall; and on the top of the big square desk in
the middle of the room, where a small section of cleared green-blotter space formed an oasis
in a dry and arid desert of cluttered law journals and dusty documents, the morning's mail
rested in a little heap.

Having placed his old cotton umbrella in a corner, having removed his coat and hung it upon
a peg behind the hall door, and having seen to it that a palm-leaf fan was in arm's reach should
he require it, the Judge, in his billowy white shirt, sat down at his desk and gave his attention
to his letters. There was an invitation from the Hylan B. Gracey Camp of Confederate Veterans
of Eddyburg, asking him to deliver the chief oration at the annual reunion, to be held at Mineral
Springs on the twelfth day of the following month; an official notice from the clerk of the
Court of Appeals concerning the affirmation of a judgment that had been handed down by Judge
Priest at the preceding term of his own court; a bill for five pounds of a special brand of
smoking tobacco; a notice of a lodge meeting--altogether quite a sizable batch of mail.

At the bottom of the pile he came upon a long envelope addressed to him by his title, instead
of by his name, and bearing on its upper right-hand corner several foreign-looking stamps;
they were British stamps, he saw, on closer examination.

To the best of his recollection it had been a good long time since Judge Priest had had a communication
by post from overseas. He adjusted his steel-bowed spectacles, ripped the wrapper with care
and shook out the contents. There appeared to be several inclosures; in fact, there were several--a
sheaf of printed forms, a document with seals attached, and a letter that covered two sheets
of paper with typewritten lines. To the letter the recipient gave consideration first. Before
he reached the end of the opening paragraph he uttered a profound grunt of surprise; his reading
of the rest was frequently punctuated by small exclamations, his face meantime puckering up
in interested lines. At the conclusion, when he came to the signature, he indulged himself
in a soft low whistle. He read the letter all through again, and after that he examined the
forms and the document which had accompanied it.

Chuckling under his breath, he wriggled himself free from the snug embrace of his chair arms
and waddled out of his own office and down the long bare empty hall to the office of Sheriff
Giles Birdsong. Within, that competent functionary, Deputy Sheriff Breck Quarles, sat at ease
in his shirt sleeves, engaged, with the smaller blade of his pocketknife, in performing upon
his finger nails an operation that combined the fine deftness of the manicure with the less
delicate art of the farrier. At the sight of the Judge in the open doorway he hastily withdrew
from a tabletop, where they rested, a pair of long thin legs, and rose.

"Mornin', Breck," said Judge Priest to the other's salutation. "No, thank you, son, I won't
come in; but I've got a little job fur you. I wisht, ef you ain't too busy, that you'd step
down the street and see ef you can't find Peep O'Day fur me and fetch him back here with you.
It won't take you long, will it?"

"No, suh--not very." Mr. Quarles reached for his hat and snuggled his shoulder holster back
inside his unbuttoned waistcoat. "He'll most likely be down round Gafford's stable. Whut's
Old Peep been doin', Judge--gettin' himself in contempt of court or somethin'?" He grinned,
asking the question with the air of one making a little joke.

"No," vouchsafed the Judge; "he ain't done nothin'. But he's about to have somethin' of a highly
onusual nature done to him. You jest tell him I'm wishful to see him right away--that'll be
sufficient, I reckin."

Without making further explanation, Judge Priest returned to his chambers and for the third
time read the letter from foreign parts. Court was not in session, and the hour was early and
the weather was hot; nobody interrupted him. Perhaps fifteen minutes passed. Mr. Quarles poked
his head in at the door.

"I found him, suh," the deputy stated. "He's outside here in the hall."

"Much obliged to you, son," said Judge Priest. "Send him on in, will you, please?"

The head was withdrawn; its owner lingered out of sight of His Honour, but within earshot.
It was hard to figure the presiding judge of the First Judicial District of the state of Kentucky
as having business with Peep O'Day; and, though Mr. Quarles was no eavesdropper, still he felt
a pardonable curiosity in whatsoever might transpire. As he feigned an absorbed interest in
a tax notice, which was pasted on a blackboard just outside the office door, there entered
the presence of the Judge a man who seemingly was but a few years younger than the Judge himself--a
man who looked to be somewhere between sixty-five and seventy. There is a look that you may
have seen in the eyes of ownerless but well-intentioned dogs--dogs that, expecting kicks as
their daily portion, are humbly grateful for kind words and stray bones; dogs that are fairly
yearning to be adopted by somebody--by anybody--being prepared to give to such a benefactor
a most faithful doglike devotion in return.

This look, which is fairly common among masterless and homeless dogs, is rare among humans;
still, once in a while you do find it there too. The man who now timidly shuffled himself across
the threshold of Judge Priest's office had such a look out of his eyes. He had a long, simple
face, partly inclosed in grey whiskers. Four dollars would have been a sufficient price to
pay for the garments he stood in, including the wrecked hat he held in his hands and the broken,
misshaped shoes on his feet. A purchaser who gave more than four dollars for the whole in its
present state of decrepitude would have been but a poor hand at bargaining.

The man who wore this outfit coughed in an embarrassed fashion and halted, fumbling his ruinous
hat in his hands.

"Howdy do?" said Judge Priest heartily. "Come in!"

The other diffidently advanced himself a yard or two.

"Excuse me, suh," he said apologetically; "but this here Breck Quarles he come after me and
he said ez how you wanted to see me. 'Twas him ez brung me here, suh."

Faintly underlying the drawl of the speaker was just a suspicion--a mere trace, as you might
say--of a labial softness that belongs solely and exclusively to the children, and in a diminishing
degree to the grandchildren, of native-born sons and daughters of a certain small green isle
in the sea. It was not so much a suggestion of a brogue as it was the suggestion of the ghost
of a brogue; a brogue almost extinguished, almost obliterated, and yet persisting through the
generations--South of Ireland struggling beneath south of Mason and Dixon's Line.

"Yes," said the Judge; "that's right. I do want to see you." The tone was one that he might
employ in addressing a bashful child. "Set down there and make yourself at home."

The newcomer obeyed to the extent of perching himself on the extreme forward edge of a chair.
His feet shuffled uneasily where they were drawn up against the cross rung of the chair.

The Judge reared well back, studying his visitor over the tops of his glasses with rather a
quizzical look. In one hand he balanced the large envelope which had come to him that morning.

"Seems to me I heared somewheres, years back, that your regular Christian name was Paul--is
that right?" he asked.

"Shorely is, suh," assented the ragged man, surprised and plainly grateful that one holding
a supremely high position in the community should vouchsafe to remember a fact relating to
so inconsequent an atom as himself. "But I ain't heared it fur so long I come mighty nigh furgittin'
it sometimes, myself. You see, Judge Priest, when I wasn't nothin' but jest a shaver folks
started in to callin' me Peep--on account of my last name bein' O'Day, I reckin. They been
callin' me so ever since. 'Fust off, 'twas Little Peep, and then jest plain Peep; and now it's
got to be Old Peep. But my real entitled name is Paul, jest like you said, Judge--Paul Felix
O'Day."

"Uh-huh! And wasn't your father's name Philip and your mother's name Katherine Dwyer O'Day?"

"To the best of my recollection that's partly so, too, suh. They both of 'em up and died when
I was a baby, long before I could remember anything a-tall. But they always told me my paw's
name was Phil, or Philip. Only my maw's name wasn't Kath--Kath--wasn't whut you jest now called
it, Judge. It was plain Kate."

"Kate or Katherine--it makes no great difference," explained Judge Priest. "I reckin the record
is straight this fur. And now think hard and see ef you kin ever remember hearin' of an uncle
named Daniel O'Day--your father's brother."

The answer was a shake of the tousled head.

"I don't know nothin' about my people. I only jest know they come over from some place with
a funny name in the Old Country before I was born. The onliest kin I ever had over here was
that there no-'count triflin' nephew of mine--Perce Dwyer--him that uster hang round this town.
I reckin you call him to mind, Judge?"

The old Judge nodded before continuing:

"All the same, I reckin there ain't no manner of doubt but whut you had an uncle of the name
of Daniel. All the evidences would seem to p'int that way. Accordin' to the proofs, this here
Uncle Daniel of yours lived in a little town called Kilmare, in Ireland." He glanced at one
of the papers that lay on his desktop; then added in a casual tone: "Tell me, Peep, whut are
you doin' now fur a livin'?"

The object of this examination grinned a faint grin of extenuation.

"Well, suh, I'm knockin' about, doin' the best I kin--which ain't much. I help out round Gafford's
liver' stable, and Pete Gafford he lets me sleep in a little room behind the feed room, and
his wife she gives me my vittles. Oncet in a while I git a chancet to do odd jobs fur folks
round town--cuttin' weeds and splittin' stove wood and packin' in coal, and sech ez that."

"Not much money in it, is there?"

"No, suh; not much. Folks is more prone to offer me old clothes than they are to pay me in
cash. Still, I manage to git along. I don't live very fancy; but, then, I don't starve, and
that's more'n some kin say."

"Peep, whut was the most money you ever had in your life--at one time?"

Peep scratched with a freckled hand at his thatch of faded whitish hair to stimulate recollection.

"I reckin not more'n six bits at any one time, suh. Seems like I've sorter got the knack of
livin' without money."

"Well, Peep, sech bein' the case, whut would you say ef I was to tell you that you're a rich man?"

The answer came slowly.

"I reckin, suh, ef it didn't sound disrespectful, I'd say you was prankin' with me--makin'
fun of me, suh."

Judge Priest bent forward in his chair.

"I'm not prankin' with you. It's my pleasant duty to inform you that at this moment you are
the rightful owner of eight thousand pounds."

"Pounds of whut, Judge?" The tone expressed a heavy incredulity.

"Why, pounds in money."

Outside, in the hall, with one ear held conveniently near the crack in the door, Deputy Sheriff
Quarles gave a violent start; and then, at once, was torn between a desire to stay and hear
more and an urge to hurry forth and spread the unbelievable tidings. After the briefest of
struggles the latter inclination won; this news was too marvellously good to keep; surely a
harbinger and a herald was needed to spread it broadcast.

Mr. Quarles tiptoed rapidly down the hall. When he reached the sidewalk the volunteer bearer
of a miraculous tale fairly ran. As for the man who sat facing the Judge, he merely stared
in a dull bewilderment.

"Judge," he said at length, "eight thousand pounds of money oughter make a powerful big pile,
oughten it?"

"It wouldn't weigh quite that much ef you put it on the scales," explained His Honour painstakingly. Do
you call that manly, eh? Would anyone but a pure lunatic run the chance of getting his shins
cut, or collar-bone dislocated, indulging in such work, and donning coloured stockings and fantastic
shirt the while to make the matter all the more absurd!"

He seems to forget that "all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy," and the real meaning of
a dull boy and a dull man is irregularity and vexation in the counting-house and office. There
are amusements and amusements, and recreations and recreations, but
I know of none adapted for the winter months which can be so cheaply
indulged in, with so much profit to health, as Football.

Accidents do happen occasionally, I admit, but they are exceedingly few when the number of
young men engaged in the game is taken into account, combined with the fact that, last year,
some of the leading Association matches were played much more roughly than in previous years,
it is an astonishing fact that no fatal accident occurred in Scotland. There are, of course,
many, if the whole truth must be written, whom the exciting and manly game has failed to touch
by its magic and fascinating influence, but they should not be courted,
and fortunately their patronage is neither sought nor needed, for
they are the men most to be avoided on a wintry Saturday afternoon
while one is on his way to see an exciting "cup tie."

Depend upon it, they will allure you to some haunt where the language is not even so choice
as where the "final" is being played between two leading clubs.

I am fully convinced that when the game was first improved and adapted to stand side by side
with others requiring both pluck and skill, the thought never entered the heads of its promoters
that some of the laws might be abused, not used.

Unfortunately, such is too true, and the sooner these things are discouraged the better. The
old precept about warriors feeling a stern joy when they knew they
were opposed to foemen worthy of their steel, should never be forgotten
by the biggest back, half-back, or the smallest forward.

To put it in another way, gentlemanly conduct towards an opponent in the field is pleasing to see,
and, indeed, civility is worth much, and costs nothing--only a small effort of self-denial.
In this enlightened age, the nation who crows too much over a vanquished
foe is naturally detested, and why should not this spirit regulate
the game of Football?

If this were carefully remembered during the season, there would
undoubtedly be such a close bond of fellowship and good feeling amongst
Football players that nothing could disturb.

And again, I cannot allow the present opportunity to pass without protesting against a practice,
now, unfortunately, too largely followed by a section of the spectators who turn out to all the
big events--viz., betting. About as long as I can remember, and it may be before Football,
perhaps, was played, many an honest wager was made by the leaders
in all out-door sports that they would be the victors, but the practice,
I have been assured, never went further.

Now it is quite a common thing to see cash dancing about a ring of spectators at a big match,
and often the loss of cash to certain individuals means a proportionate
loss of temper, and the practice is all the more to be deplored.

It is for this end, it is for this avowed purpose, that one and all
connected with its development and culture, will strive to their utmost
to ennoble and raise Football to a higher and purer level, and consequently
discourage, by every legitimate means, betting in all its phases,
and the slightest tendencies amongst the players who take part in
the various matches towards rough play, and a disposition to indulge
in unnecessary charging.

II.--THE FOOTBALL WAVE.

Like Dogberry's idea of certain kinds of novel writing, both Association
and Rugby Football seem to come to the Scotchmen by nature.

My readers can, perhaps, easily remember the clever jeu d'esprit
on the antiquity of the Gaelic tongue which appeared several years
ago advocating the claims of that race as lisping the first "speech"
heard in Eden in a manner that must have stirred the blood of Professor
Blackie.

As the history of Association Football, with which I have only to deal under the present circumstances,
is so well-known and a thing of yesterday, its origin, like that of the Gaelic language, is
not shrouded in mystery, but actually known (or should be known) to all who take an interest in
the game. In my previous article, I tried to trace the origin of football in its rudest form
as played by our forefathers, when goal-posts and bars, to say nothing of corner-flags, were
unknown. Football now, however, has been reduced to something like a scientific game, and to
the credit of England be it said, the Association Rules there first saw the light. Scotch players
in the Western District soon emulated their Southern brethren, and
from the Parent Club, which had a humble and unassuming origin on
the recreation ground at Queen's Park, sprang hundreds of clubs, spreading
over the length and breadth of the land with remarkable rapidity.

The wave soon rolled all over Glasgow and suburbs, submerged the
whole country, and eventually invaded the Heart of Midlothian itself,
where the Rugby code had hitherto reigned supreme.

The schoolboys who played cricket and rounders in the summertime came out on a wintry afternoon
to see their seniors engaged in Association football, and soon felt the desire creep over them
to be members of a club containing lads like themselves. The young men engaged in the city all day
thought on the health-imparting exercise it afforded, and had the necessary funds raised to form
a club.

The artisans, too, from the dusky foundry, the engineer shop, and the factory, soon began to dribble
about. The young ones, and even the seniors themselves, had many a collision with mother earth
ere they could rely on keeping their pins with any degree of accuracy, and it was rare fun to
see a bearded man turning a somersault as he missed the ball in trying to make a big kick.
Football is easily acquired in so far as the rudimentary part is
concerned, but a great deal of probation is required to convert one
into a crack player.

Among those who now practice football, and their name is legion,
the superior players can be numbered in (to give it a wide scope)
hundreds.

In fact, to be able to master all the details requisite to win a first-class match, one has
to be capable of dribbling, middling, heading, and passing in a way that would do credit to solving
a complicated problem in Euclid. It is all very well to talk about brute force and lasting
power, but unless these are accompanied by scientific application, they are worth little, and
cost much. "The race is not always to the swift," says the old proverb. In at least eight cases
out of ten, the match is to the scientific and careful, but of this more anon. There is one thing that
can be said about football which in the nature of things must recommend it to all lovers of out-door
exercise.

Of late years bicycling has obtained a great deal of popularity all over the three kingdoms,
both for its usefulness as a speedy means of conveyance, and exercise to the limbs, but that
it has its drawbacks has just been made apparent by undisputed medical
authority.

"The bicycle back," the effect of hard work on the "iron horse," is beginning to appear on
the handsome young man who thinks nothing of doing his 50 miles a day, and while walking occasionally
with the young lady with the "Grecian bend," the contrast in his case is amusing. To say that
there are no dangers of any kind attached to football would be making an assertion which I
cannot substantiate, but these are comparatively few. All sports, of whatever kind, have the
elements of danger attached to their pursuit, but, with great care, these can be reduced to
a minimum. Although I have certainly never observed the round-shoulders of the bicyclist in
the football player, I have not unfrequently seen the "football leg."

That is a series of cuts about the shin bone, administered by a vicious opponent while (as it
generally happens) playing a "cup tie," and last season they were
more plentiful than ever.

In fact, I heard from the lips of a member of one of the crack clubs that in not a few of
the ties they retired from the field "greatly impressed with the unmistakable signs of muscular
ability shown by their opponents."

This means most undoubtedly hacking and tripping, under the guise
of tackling, and if Association football is to go on and prosper such
disgraceful acts of tyranny on the football field must forever cease.

These "accidents" can, of course, be avoided, and as there are distinct
rules forbidding them, clubs would do well to see that these are rigidly
enforced.

III.--A "SWEEP FOR THE CUP;"

OR,

HOW PATE BROWN KEPT HIS ENGAGEMENT.

"What do you say, old fellow, about a 'Sweep for the Cup.' Why, a 'sov.' is nothing to the like
of you, and there will be such fun at the lifting." This was said to me one morning about nine, just
as I was preparing to get my shaving utensils into working order before turning out to the warehouse.
Pate Brown used to make fun of me about my scanty hirsute appendages,
and many a time caused me to blush before sundry members of the Druids
when he emphatically declared that I was one of those effeminate individuals
who shaved, not because they had whiskers, but because they hadn't.
This was in September, and a more open year for the respective chances
of the clubs in the Cup had, perhaps, never come round.

I was unattached then. I was, in fact, neither a member of the Druids nor the Nomads, but simply
a friend of both, and an enthusiastic admirer of the game. My big brother Angus, it is true,
was one of the best men in the Conquerors, and he and I sometimes
had animated discussions about the respective merits of the clubs.

"Why, Jack, this is only September, it will be more sensible for us to postpone the affair till
after the preliminary ties. A lot of chaps to whom I have spoken consider it next to nonsense to
draw the 'sweep' so soon."

After a great deal of talking and another meeting, it was agreed to go right ahead with the "sweep,"
and accordingly the necessary arrangements were duly made, and subscribers' names taken, as
well as their cash.

The warehouse of Ball & Field was the largest in the whole city.

Their trade connection extended to every known country on the face of the globe. There was a
decided charm about the way in which the firm did business, and the
kindly, not to say considerate manner, in which they treated employés,
who really deserved it.

The two leading members of the firm, in fact, were not insignificant prototypes of Dickens' Cheeryble
Brothers (with the exception that they were both married).

I verily believe that in an hour's notice a couple of excellent teams could have been picked
from the house to make a decent match of it anywhere.

The senior himself was an enthusiastic admirer of the game, and one
way or another did much to encourage it by his presence on the field
at all the big matches, and if any of the lads, such as myself, Brown,
Rose, Wilson, or M'Nab wanted away to play in a big affair, a hint
reaching the governor's ears to that effect was amply sufficient.

The manager, however, was of a different sort, he hated football like poison. He even relegated
the grand game to a pastime suitable for pure and unadulterated lunatics,
those, as he put it, "who were too daft to get into Gartnavel."

Fancy that! Woe betide the unfortunate half-back or forward, who in a weak moment relied on
the magnanimity of "Sour Plums," as he was called, to let him off to a match, without first
consulting the governor himself. Sometimes M'Nab forgot to do so, and as his club were frequently
in great straits to get him to play, he had to steep his brains to
think on a strategic movement to get free, and succeeded; but sometimes
with the aid of a "crammer."

Brown, for reasons best known to himself, but which will duly come
out as my story advances, was very anxious to be at the "draw," and
accordingly duly appeared at the Marie Stuart Hall, Crosshill.

There were a lot of pale faces in the room when Pate drew the Queen's Park, Dick Wallace the
"Vale," Bill Weldon, Dumbarton, and Sandy M'Bean the Rangers. A rosy-cheeked, country-looking
lad belonging to the Q.P. drew Cowlairs, and a general titter ran
through the august assembly when that same lad remarked, "he was quite
satisfied with his draw, the other crack clubs notwithstanding."

Tom Vincent got Kilmarnock Athletic, Alf.

Grant the Clyde, Blower Fleming drew the Heart of Midlothian, and
Bill Fairfield the Hibernian.

I was unlucky enough to secure one of the many insignificant clubs who never survived the first
round, and so my "sov." was a dead letter.

The entire "sweep" came to a fine round sum, as the subscribers included a good many of the
rank and file of football enthusiasts, and even two "football-daft" members of the upper strata
of the Glasgow Police Force, and three of the Fire Brigade, went
the length of taking a couple of tickets.

There was also Luke Wood, the representative of the "Kick-off," who knew a thing or two about
the game. He was in for a pair of tickets, too, and drew the Invincible and Morning Star. He was
thoroughly disgusted at the prospect (more particularly as he had been one of the leading hands
in getting up the "sweep"); but, as the Yankees say, he gradually "cooled himself down," and
got thoroughly reconciled to his loss.

The Cowlairs had to play the Queen's Park in one of the ties, and a determined tussle it turned
out to be. The "boys" bore a wild look that afternoon as they emerged from the pavilion at Hampden
Park. You could read the anxious and determined character of their mission on every face. They
had fully made up their minds to fight hard for the Cup, and really they did. Several of the team
were big powerful fellows whom not a few cautious half-backs would think twice before "going
for," and two of the forwards were very smart on their pins, but wanted that true mastery of
the art of passing and dribbling at the proper time which make up the refined and superior Association
player.

As for endurance, they did not toil among iron wheels, steel axles, and brass fittings for
locomotives, to say nothing of generating steam on the shortest notice, without being "hardy."
No, no. They were in the best of condition for the game. The Queen's took them too cheaply, and
nearly paid a lasting penalty for their carelessness.

The game, in fact, was so closely fought that the teams were unable to overcome one another,
and two goals each was the result. Meeting a second time, however, the Q.P. made short work of
them, and won by nine goals to none.

The evening before the memorable tussle which put the half of Dumbartonshire into a state of excitement,
bordering on the football fever, "Mary, the Maid of the Football
Inn," came to the door of the little hotel repeatedly, and after casting
sundry glances at the roadway and scanning the passers-by, muttered
something about being jilted, and how shamefully she had been used
by Bob.

Her own Bob, who was always so punctual, and occasionally treated her to a nice walk along the
Leven, past Ewing's big work, and even went the length of composing verses in her honour.

"What had become of him? Had Nancy Pringle waylaid him, as she positively swore she would do, on
the first opportunity, and start the probationary stages of a drama
in real life?"

The fact was Bob never came, and no wonder. He was collared by the Dumbarton captain, and carried
off to the field to practice for the great fight of the next day, under pains and penalties.
He pleaded for Mary, but it was of no avail. "He had," he went on to remonstrate, "promised on
his word of honour to meet her that evening and take her to Luckie M'Latchie's booking." Luckie
and Tam M'Murtrie (an old footballer) were to be spliced a fortnight afterwards, and the "cries"
were in.

With a serious air the captain lectured Bob till he was blue in the face, and told him if he
did not put himself in condition for the great battle of the morrow
he would be stoned by the town enthusiasts.

He remembered when a boy at school scribbling as best he could on his copybook, "Discretion
is the better part of valour," and the sentence flashed across his heated brain with all the
force of actual conviction. "What was he to do?" "Was it to be football first, and Mary afterwards?"
Something whispered "yes; Mary could afford to wait, but the 'Cup' was a transitory article, and
the splendid chance his club had of winning it might pass away like
a dream."

"Why, there was Joe Laidlay, he was in something like the same dilemma so far as his 'lass' was
concerned, and if Joe, he thought, could afford to put off his sweetheart, Maggie Jackson, in
the same way, he (Bob) considered that he should be able to conclude the arrangement, and make
the best excuse to Mary."

       

Quietly speaking, Bob had an ambition in his football, and it consisted in being a member of
the eleven who would at one time or another "lick" the Queen's Park, and went into the practice
game with his whole heart, and played all through in good form.

Just a year or so before this the "Vale" would have given the same Dumbarton lot short shift
and no favour on any of the grounds, but matters were altered. They wanted a lot of their old blood,
which had in years gone bye carried them through many a doubtful
battle.

They had lost their grand goalkeeper, and the crack half-back had vacated his favourite position
to keep the ball from going between the uprights in "time o' need."

Some of the daring forwards had also bade farewell to the game, and were scattered over the
length and breadth of the land. The match, however, had to be played--it would brook no delay--and
the spirited captain resolved to make the best of it, although a score of misgivings passed through
his mind as to the issue.

There was one thing in favour of the "Vale," they had their own ground to play upon, and that
was reckoned as worth a goal any day.

Before the start Johnny Freer told his old chums to keep their "weather eyes" open for sudden rushes
by the Dumbarton forward division, and before the game was very old,
they discovered that the advice did not come a moment too soon.

Keeping close on the touch lines till well down among the half-backs, Maclure and his light companion,
"the Bird," assuredly did not allow the grass to grow under their leather bars. The ground
was a little sloppy from the recent rain, but, strange to say, the Dumbarton men seemed to keep
their feet in a remarkable manner. M'Luckie and big Walton tried their very best to intercept
the dribblers, but at times they were completely mastered, and Dick
Wallace had to come away from his place at back and assist.

The most of the Dumbarton lads were much faster on the ball than the "Vale," and this, added
to a slice of luck, aided them in scoring twice, and they consequently won a hard battle by
two goals to none, and earned the proud distinction of being the champions.

After the great crowd had dispersed, and lots of silver had changed hands, a solemn silence reigned
in that part of the pavilion utilised by the "Vale." "There is no use denying the fact, chaps,"
said the captain of the defeated team, "these fellows have beaten us on our form this season, and we'll
have to make the best of a bad bargain."

Not so, however, in the other end of the house. The victors were "blowing" a good deal of the
bad luck they had had, and how they ought to have scored a dozen
goals if "Sandy had not repeatedly allowed the ball to graze the goal-posts,
instead of attempting to kick it out.

They had, however, beaten the 'Vale,' and that was all they cared for, in the said tie. The Rangers
they declared they did not fear, and from all they could hear, they were now quite able to meet
the Queen's Park face to face."

With the Rangers, however, they had just sufficient to do on their own ground in the first match,
but in the second came off victorious by five goals to one.

One Saturday evening we took forcible possession of Jack Cook's lodgings, which were situated near
the Marie Stuart Hall, Crosshill. Jack was very fond of billiards, and sometimes pocketed several
"pools" of an evening, when a few choice spirits congregated in "The
Rooms."

Jack, as a matter of precaution warned us that we were to comport ourselves with decency, and
not rouse the aforesaid lady. Our friend had something in the bottle. We were comfortably seated,
and the room filled with tobacco smoke, when a dim shadow was noticed at the door, and turned out
to be Willie Fairfield, of the Flying Blues, who had just called
to let us know he had received a telegram from Edinburgh announcing
the defeat of the Hibernian in the protested match with Dumbarton,
by six goals to two.

Willie, it may be mentioned, had drawn the Hibernian in our "sweep," and was, I may inform all
concerned, well pleased with his luck when the ticket came out the bag; but now much crestfallen.
Bill Weldon, however, who had secured Dumbarton in the same drawing, jumped off his chair at
the success of the club he had secured, and remarked--"Look here, boys, Dumbarton are just
about good enough to win the Association Cup, and I'll take evens on't." "Done," said a chorus of
voices, and Mrs. Blank's parlour was for a few minutes transformed
into a betting house on a small scale.

We had a long chat as to the respective merits of the Rangers and Dumbarton, who were to play their
tie over again, in consequence of some informality, and after draining Jack's bottle, were accompanied
to the door with solemn injunctions not to kick up a row on the stairs.

Weeks passed after this little incident, and the clubs left in our "sweep" were getting small
by degrees and beautifully less. The Rangers, Partick, South-Western, Northern, 3rd L.R.V., Arthurlie,
Kilmarnock Portland, Alexandra Athletic, Thornliebank, Heart of Midlothian, and even the plucky
little Clyde were cleared off the list, and the Queen's Park had their own ado with Kilmarnock
Athletic, and only beat that sturdy Ayrshire Club by three goals
to two

.


With his meagre frame incased in new black woollens, and wearing, as an incongruous added touch,
the most brilliant of neckties, a necktie of the shade of a pomegranate blossom, he presently
issued from Felsburg Brothers' and entered M. Biederman's shoe store, two doors below. Here
Mr. Biederman fitted him with shoes, and in addition noted down a further order, which the
purchaser did not give until after he had conferred earnestly with the members of his youthful
entourage.

Those watching this scene from a distance saw--and perhaps marvelled at the sight--that already,
between these small boys, on the one part, and this old man, on the other, a perfect understanding
appeared to have been established.

After leaving Biederman's, and tagged by his small escorts, O'Day went straight to the courthouse
and, upon knocking at the door, was admitted to Judge Priest's private chambers, the boys meantime
waiting outside in the hall. When he came forth he showed them something he held in his hand
and told them something; whereupon all of them burst into excited and joyous whoops.

It was at that point that O'Day, by the common verdict of most grown-up onlookers, began to
betray the vagaries of a disordered intellect. Not that his reason had not been under suspicion
already, as a result of his freakish excess in the matter of B. Weil & Son's wares on the preceding
day; but the relapse that now followed, as nearly everybody agreed, was even more pronounced,
even more symptomatic than the earlier attack of aberration.

In brief, this was what happened: To begin with, Mr. Virgil Overall, who dealt in lands and
houses and sold insurance of all the commoner varieties on the side, had stalked O'Day to this
point and was lying in wait for him as he came out of the courthouse into the Public Square,
being anxious to describe to him some especially desirable bargains, in both improved and unimproved
realty; also, Mr. Overall was prepared to book him for life, accident and health policies on
the spot.

So pleased was Mr. Overall at having distanced his professional rivals in the hunt that he
dribbled at the mouth. But the warmth of his disappointment and indignation dried up the salivary
founts instantly when the prospective patron declined to listen to him at all and, breaking
free from Mr. Overall's detaining clasp, hurried on into Legal Row, with his small convoys
trotting along ahead and alongside him.

At the door of the Blue Goose Saloon and Short Order Restaurant its proprietor, by name Link
Iserman, was lurking, as it were, in ambush. He hailed the approaching O'Day most cordially;
he inquired in a warm voice regarding O'Day's health; and then, with a rare burst of generosity,
he invited, nay urged, O'Day to step inside and have something on the house--wines, ales, liquors
or cigars; it was all one to Mr. Iserman. The other merely shook his head and, without a word
of thanks for the offer, passed on as though bent upon an important mission.

Mark how the proofs were accumulating: The man had disdained the company of men of approximately
his own age or thereabout; he had refused an opportunity to partake of refreshment suitable
to his years; and now he stepped into the Bon Ton toy store and bought for cash--most inconceivable
of acquisitions!--a little wagon that was painted bright red and bore on its sides, in curlicued
letters, the name Comet.

His next stop was made at Bishop & Bryan's grocery, where, with the aid of his youthful compatriots,
he first discriminatingly selected, and then purchased on credit, and finally loaded into the
wagon, such purchases as a dozen bottles of soda pop, assorted flavours; cheese, crackers--soda
and animal; sponge cakes with weather-proof pink icing on them; fruits of the season; cove
oysters; a bottle of pepper sauce; and a quantity of the extra large sized bright green cucumber
pickles known to the trade as the Fancy Jumbo Brand, Prime Selected.

Presently the astounding spectacle was presented of two small boys, with string bridles on
their arms, drawing the wagon through our town and out of it into the country, with Peep O'Day
in the rôle of teamster walking alongside the laden wagon. He was holding the lines in his
hands and shouting orders at his team, who showed a colty inclination to shy at objects, to
kick up their heels without provocation, and at intervals to try to run away. Eight or ten
small boys--for by now the troupe had grown in number and in volume of noise--trailed along,
keeping step with their elderly patron and advising him shrilly regarding the management of
his refractory span.

As it turned out, the destination of this preposterous procession was Bradshaw's Grove, where
the entire party spent the day picnicking in the woods and, as reported by several reliable
witnesses, playing games. It was not so strange that holidaying boys should play games; the
amazing feature of the performance was that Peep O'Day, a man old enough to be grandfather
to any of them, played with them, being by turns an Indian chief, a robber baron, and the driver
of a stagecoach attacked by Wild Western desperadoes.

When he returned to town at dusk, drawing his little red wagon behind him, his new suit was
rumpled into many wrinkles and marked by dust and grass stains; his flame-coloured tie was
twisted under one ear; his new straw hat was mashed quite out of shape; and in his eyes was
a light that sundry citizens, on meeting him, could only interpret to be a spark struck from
inner fires of madness.

Days that came after this, on through the midsummer, were, with variations, but repetitions
of the day I have just described. Each morning Peep O'Day would go to either the courthouse
or Judge Priest's home to turn over to the Judge the unopened mail which had been delivered
to him at Gafford's stables; then he would secure from the Judge a loan of money against his
inheritance. Generally the amount of his daily borrowing was a dollar; rarely was it so much
as two dollars; and only once was it more than two dollars.

By nightfall the sum would have been expended upon perfectly useless and absolutely childish
devices. It might be that he would buy toy pistols and paper caps for himself and his following
of urchins; or that his whim would lead him to expend all the money in tin flutes. In one case
the group he so incongruously headed would be for that one day a gang of make-believe banditti;
in another, they would constitute themselves a fife-and-drum corps--with barreltops for the
drums--and would march through the streets, where scandalised adults stood in their tracks
to watch them go by, they all the while making weird sounds, which with them passed for music.

Or again, the available cash resources would be invested in provender; and then there would
be an outing in the woods. Under Peep O'Day's captaincy his chosen band of youngsters picked
dewberries; they went swimming together in Guthrie's Gravel Pit, out by the old Fair Grounds,
where his spare naked shanks contrasted strongly with their plump freckled legs as all of them
splashed through the shallows, making for deep water. Under his leadership they stole watermelons
from Mr. Dick Bell's patch, afterward eating their spoils in thickets of grapevines along the
banks of Perkins' Creek.

It was felt that mental befuddlement and mortal folly could reach no greater heights--or no
lower depths--than on a certain hour of a certain day, along toward the end of August, when
O'Day came forth from his quarters in Gafford's stables, wearing a pair of boots that M. Biederman's
establishment had turned out to his order and his measure--not such boots as a sensible man
might be expected to wear, but boots that were exaggerated and monstrous counterfeits of the
red-topped, scroll-fronted, brass-toed, stub-heeled, squeaky-soled bootees that small boys
of an earlier generation possessed.

Very proudly and seemingly unconscious of or, at least, oblivious to the derisive remarks that
the appearance of these new belongings drew from many persons, the owner went clumping about
in them, with the rumply legs of his trousers tucked down in them, and ballooning up and out
over the tops in folds which overlapped from his knee joints halfway down his attenuated calves.

As Deputy Sheriff Quarles said, the combination was a sight fit to make a horse laugh. It may
be that small boys have a lesser sense of humour than horses have, for certainly the boys who
were the old man's invariable shadows did not laugh at him, or at his boots either.

Between the whiskered senior and his small comrades there existed a freemasonry that made them
all sense a thing beyond the ken of most of their elders. Perhaps this was because the elders,
being blind in their superior wisdom, saw neither this thing nor the communion that flourished.
They saw only the farcical joke. But His Honour, Judge Priest, to cite a conspicuous exception,
seemed not to see the lamentable comedy of it.

Indeed, it seemed to some almost as if Judge Priest were aiding and abetting the befogged O'Day
in his demented enterprises, his peculiar excursions and his weird purchases. If he did not
actually encourage him in these constant exhibitions of witlessness, certainly there were no
evidences available to show that he sought to dissuade O'Day from his strange course.

At the end of a fortnight one citizen, in whom patience had ceased to be a virtue and to whose
nature long-continued silence on any public topic was intolerable, felt it his duty to speak
to the Judge upon the subject. This gentleman--his name was S. P. Escott--held, with others,
that, for the good name of the community, steps should be taken to abate the infantile, futile
activities of the besotted legatee.

Afterward Mr. Escott, giving a partial account of the conversation with Judge Priest to certain
of his friends, showed unfeigned annoyance at the outcome.

"I claim that old man's not fittin' to be runnin' a court any longer," he stated bitterly.
"He's too old and peevish--that's whut ails him! Fur one, I'm certainly not never goin' to
vote fur him again. Why, it's gettin' to be ez much ez a man's life is worth to stop that there
spiteful old crank on the street and put a civil question to him--that's whut's the matter!"

"What happened, S. P.?" inquired someone.

"Why, here's whut happened!" exclaimed the aggrieved Mr. Escott. "I hadn't any more than started
in to tell him the whole town was talkin' about the way that daffy Old Peep O'Day was carryin'
on, and that somethin' had oughter be done about it, and didn't he think it was beholdin' on
him ez circuit judge to do somethin' right away, sech ez havin' O'Day tuck up and tried fur
a lunatic, and that I fur one was ready and willin' to testify to the crazy things I'd seen
done with my own eyes--when he cut in on me and jest ez good ez told me to my own face that
ef I'd quit tendin' to other people's business I'd mebbe have more business of my own to tend to.

"Think of that, gentlemen! A circuit judge bemeanin' a citizen and a taxpayer"--he checked
himself slightly--"anyhow, a citizen, thataway! It shows he can't be rational his own self.
Personally I claim Old Priest is failin' mentally--he must be! And ef anybody kin be found
to run against him at the next election you gentlemen jest watch and see who gits my vote!"

Having uttered this threat with deep and significant emphasis Mr. Escott, still muttering,
turned and entered the front gate of his boarding house. It was not exactly his boarding house;
his wife ran it. But Mr. Escott lived there and voted from there.

But the apogee of Peep O'Day's carnival of weird vagaries of deportment came at the end of
two months--two months in which each day the man furnished cumulative and piled-up material
for derisive and jocular comment on the part of a very considerable proportion of his fellow
townsmen.

Three occurrences of a widely dissimilar nature, yet all closely interrelated to the main issue,
marked the climax of the man's new rôle in his new career. The first of these was the arrival
of his legacy; the second was a one-ring circus; and the third and last was a nephew.

In the form of certain bills of exchange the estate left by the late Daniel O'Day, of the town
of Kilmare, in the island of Ireland, was on a certain afternoon delivered over into Judge
Priest's hands, and by him, in turn, handed to the rightful owner, after which sundry indebtednesses,
representing the total of the old Judge's day-to-day cash advances to O'Day, were liquidated.

The ceremony of deducting this sum took place at the Planters' Bank, whither the two had journeyed
in company from the courthouse. Having, with the aid of the paying teller, instructed O'Day
in the technical details requisite to the drawing of personal checks, Judge Priest went home
and had his bag packed, and left for Reelfoot Lake to spend a week fishing. As a consequence
he missed the remaining two events, following immediately thereafter.

The circus was no great shakes of a circus; no grand, glittering, gorgeous, glorious pageant
of education and entertainment, travelling on its own special trains; no vast tented city of
world's wonders and world's champions, heralded for weeks and weeks in advance of its coming
by dead walls emblazoned with the finest examples of the lithographer's art, and by half-page
advertisements in the Daily Evening News. On the contrary, it was a shabby little wagon show,
which, coming overland on short notice, rolled into town under horse power, and set up its
ragged and dusty canvases on the vacant lot across from Yeiser's drug store.

Compared with the street parade of any of its great and famous rivals, the street parade of
this circus was a meagre and disappointing thing. Why, there was only one elephant, a dwarfish
and debilitated-looking creature, worn mangy and slick on its various angles, like the cover
of an old-fashioned haircloth trunk; and obviously most of the closed cages were weather-beaten
stake wagons in disguise. Nevertheless, there was a sizable turnout of people for the afternoon
performance. After all, a circus was a circus.

Moreover, this particular circus was marked at the afternoon performance by happenings of a
nature most decidedly unusual. At one o'clock the doors were opened: at one-ten the eyes of
the proprietor were made glad and his heart was uplifted within him by the sight of a strange
procession, drawing nearer and nearer across the scuffed turf of the common, and heading in
the direction of the red ticket wagon.

At the head of the procession marched Peep O'Day--only, of course, the proprietor didn't know
it was Peep O'Day--a queer figure in his rumpled black clothes and his red-topped brass-toed
boots, and with one hand holding fast to the string of a captive toy balloon. Behind him, in
an uneven jostling formation, followed many small boys and some small girls. A census of the
ranks would have developed that here were included practically all the juvenile white population
who otherwise, through a lack of funds, would have been denied the opportunity to patronise
this circus or, in fact, any circus.

Each member of the joyous company was likewise the bearer of a toy balloon--red, yellow, blue,
green or purple, as the case might be. Over the line of heads the taut rubbery globes rode
on their tethers, nodding and twisting like so many big iridescent bubbles; and half a block
away, at the edge of the lot, a balloon vender, whose entire stock had been disposed of in
one splendid transaction, now stood, empty-handed but full-pocketed, marvelling at the stroke
of luck that enabled him to take an afternoon off and rest his voice.

Out of a seemingly bottomless exchequer Peep O'Day bought tickets of admission for all. But
this was only the beginning. Once inside the tent he procured accommodations in the reserved-seat
section for himself and those who accompanied him. From such superior points of vantage the
whole crew of them witnessed the performance, from the thrilling grand entry, with spangled
ladies and gentlemen riding two by two on broad-backed steeds, to the tumbling bout introducing
the full strength of the company, which came at the end.

They munched fresh-roasted peanuts and balls of sugar-coated pop corn, slightly rancid, until
they munched no longer with zest but merely mechanically. They drank pink lemonade to an extent
that threatened absolute depletion of the fluid contents of both barrels in the refreshment
stand out in the menagerie tent. They whooped their unbridled approval when the wild Indian
chief, after shooting down a stuffed coon with a bow and arrow from somewhere up near the top
of the centre pole while balancing himself jauntily erect upon the haunches of a coursing white
charger, suddenly flung off his feathered headdress, his wig and his fringed leather garments,
and revealed himself in pink fleshings as the principal bareback rider.

They screamed in a chorus of delight when the funny old clown, who had been forcibly deprived
of three tin flutes in rapid succession, now produced yet a fourth from the seemingly inexhaustible
depths of his baggy white pants--a flute with a string and a bent pin affixed to it--and, secretly
hooking the pin in the tail of the cross ringmaster's coat, was thereafter enabled to toot
sharp shrill blasts at frequent intervals, much to the chagrin of the ringmaster, who seemed
utterly unable to discover the whereabouts of the instrument dangling behind him.

But no one among them whooped louder or laughed longer than their elderly and bewhiskered friend,
who sat among them, paying the bills. As his guests they stayed for the concert; and, following
this, they patronised the side show in a body. They had been almost the first upon the scene;
assuredly they were the last of the audience to quit it.

Indeed, before they trailed their confrère away from the spot the sun was nearly down; and
at scores of supper tables all over town the tale of poor old Peep O'Day's latest exhibition
of freakishness was being retailed, with elaborations, to interested auditors. Estimates of
the sum probably expended by him in this crowning extravagance ranged well up into the hundreds
of dollars.

As for the object of these speculations, he was destined not to eat any supper at all that
night. Something happened that so upset him as to make him forget the meal altogether. It began
to happen when he reached the modest home of P. Gafford, adjoining the Gafford stables, on
Locust Street, and found sitting on the lowermost step of the porch a young man of untidy and
unshaven aspect, who hailed him affectionately as Uncle Paul, and who showed deep annoyance
and acute distress upon being rebuffed with chill words.

It is possible that the strain of serving a three-months' sentence, on the technical charge
of vagrancy, in a workhouse somewhere in Indiana, had affected the young man's nerves. His
ankle bones still ached where the ball and chain had been hitched; on his palms the blisters
induced by the uncongenial use of a sledge hammer on a rock pile had hardly as yet turned to
calluses. So it is only fair to presume that his nervous system felt the stress of his recent
confining experiences.

Almost tearfully he pleaded with Peep O'Day to remember the ties of blood that bound them;
repeatedly he pointed out that he was the only known kinsman of the other in all the world,
and, therefore, had more reason than any other living being to expect kindness and generosity
at his uncle's hands. He spoke socialistically of the advisability of an equal division; failing
to make any impression here he mentioned the subject of a loan--at first hopefully, but finally
despairingly.

When he was done Peep O'Day, in a perfectly colourless and unsympathetic voice, bade him good-by--not
good night but good-by! And, going inside the house, he closed the door behind him, leaving
his newly returned relative outside and quite alone.

At this the young man uttered violent language; but, since there was nobody present to hear
him, it is likely he found small satisfaction in his profanity, rich though it may have been
in metaphor and variety. So presently he betook himself off, going straight to the office in
Legal Row of H. B. Sublette, attorney at law.

From the circumstance that he found Mr. Sublette in, though it was long past that gentleman's
office hours, and, moreover, found Mr. Sublette waiting in an expectant and attentive attitude,
it might have been adduced by one skilled in the trick of putting two and two together that
the pair of them had reached a prior understanding sometime during the day; and that the visit
of the young man to the Gafford home and his speeches there had all been parts of a scheme
planned out at a prior conference.

Be this as it may, as soon as Mr. Sublette had heard his caller's version of the meeting upon
the porch he lost no time in taking certain legal steps. That very night, on behalf of his
client, denominated in the documents as Percival Dwyer, Esquire, he prepared a petition addressed
to the circuit judge of the district, setting forth that, inasmuch as Paul Felix O'Day had
by divers acts shown himself to be of unsound mind, now, therefore, came his nephew and next
of kin praying that a committee or curator be appointed to take over the estate of the said
Paul Felix O'Day, and administer the same in accordance with the orders of the court until
such time as the said Paul Felix O'Day should recover his reason, or should pass from this
life, and so forth and so on; not to mention whereases in great number and aforesaids abounding
throughout the text in the utmost profusion.

On the following morning the papers were filed with Circuit Clerk Milam. That vigilant barrister,
Mr. Sublette, brought them in person to the courthouse before nine o'clock, he having the interests
of his client at heart and perhaps also visions of a large contingent fee in his mind. No retainer
had been paid. The state of Mr. Dwyer's finances--or, rather, the absence of any finances--had
precluded the performance of that customary detail; but to Mr. Sublette's experienced mind
the prospects of future increment seemed large.

Accordingly he was all for prompt action. Formally he said he wished to go on record as demanding
for his principal a speedy hearing of the issue, with a view to preventing the defendant named
in the pleadings from dissipating any more of the estate lately bequeathed to him and now fully
in his possession--or words to that effect.

Mr. Milam felt justified in getting into communication with Judge Priest over the long-distance
phone; and the Judge, cutting short his vacation and leaving uncaught vast numbers of bass
and perch in Reelfoot Lake, came home, arriving late that night.

Next morning, having issued divers orders in connection with the impending litigation, he sent
a messenger to find Peep O'Day and to direct O'Day to come to the courthouse for a personal
interview.

Shortly thereafter a scene that had occurred some two months earlier, with His Honour's private
chamber for a setting, was substantially duplicated: There was the same cast of two, the same
stage properties, the same atmosphere of untidy tidiness. And, as before, the dialogue was
in Judge Priest's hands. He led and his fellow character followed his leads.

"Peep," he was saying, "you understand, don't you, that this here fragrant nephew of yours
that's turned up from nowheres in particular is fixin' to git ready to try to prove that you
are feeble-minded? And, on top of that, that he's goin' to ask that a committee be app'inted
fur you--in other words, that somebody or other shall be named by the court, meanin' me, to
take charge of your property and control the spendin' of it frum now on?"

"Yes, suh," stated O'Day. "Pete Gafford he set down with me and made hit all clear to me, yestiddy
evenin', after they'd done served the papers on me."

"All right, then. Now I'm goin' to fix the hearin' fur to-morrow mornin' at ten. The other
side is askin' fur a quick decision; and I rather figger they're entitled to it. Is that agreeable
to you?"

"Whutever you say, Judge."

"Well, have you retained a lawyer to represent your interests in court? That's the main question
that I sent fur you to ast you."

"Do I need a lawyer, Judge?"

"Well, there have been times when I regarded lawyers ez bein' superfluous," stated Judge Priest
dryly. "Still, in most cases litigants do have 'em round when the case is bein' heard."

"I don't know ez I need any lawyer to he'p me say whut I've got to say," said O'Day. "Judge,
you ain't never ast me no questions about the way I've been carryin' on sence I come into this
here money; but I reckin mebbe this is ez good a time ez any to tell you jest why I've been
actin' the way I've done. You see, suh----"

"Hold on!" broke in Judge Priest. "Up till now, ez my friend, it would 'a' been perfectly proper
fur you to give me your confidences ef you were minded so to do; but now I reckin you'd better
not. You see, I'm the judge that's got to decide whether you are a responsible person--whether
you're mentally capable of handlin' your own financial affairs, or whether you ain't. So you'd
better wait and make your statement in your own behalf to me whilst I'm settin' on the bench.
I'll see that you git an opportunity to do so and I'll listen to it; and I'll give it all the
consideration it's deservin' of.

"And, on second thought, p'raps it would only be a waste of time and money fur you to go hirin'
a lawyer specially to represent you. Under the law it's my duty, in sech a case ez this here
one is, to app'int a member of the bar to serve durin' the proceedin's ez your guardian ad litem.

"You don't need to be startled," he added as O'Day flinched at the sound in his ears of these
strange and fearsome words. "A guardian ad litem is simply a lawyer that tends to your affairs
till the case is settled one way or the other. Ef you had a dozen lawyers I'd have to app'int
him jest the same. So you don't need to worry about that part of it.

"That's all. You kin go now ef you want to. Only, ef I was you, I wouldn't draw out any more
money frum the bank 'twixt now and the time when I make my decision."

       *       *       *       *       *

All things considered, it was an unusual assemblage that Judge Priest regarded over the top
rims of his glasses as he sat facing it in his broad armchair, with the flat top of the bench
intervening between him and the gathering. Not often, even in the case of exciting murder trials,
had the old courtroom held a larger crowd; certainly never had it held so many boys. Boys,
and boys exclusively, filled the back rows of benches downstairs. More boys packed the narrow
shelf-like balcony that spanned the chamber across its far end--mainly small boys, barefooted,
sunburned, freckled-faced, shock-headed boys. And, for boys, they were strangely silent and
strangely attentive.

The petitioner sat with his counsel, Mr. Sublette. The petitioner had been newly shaved, and
from some mysterious source had been equipped with a neat wardrobe. Plainly he was endeavouring
to wear a look of virtue, which was a difficult undertaking, as you would understand had you
known the petitioner.

The defending party to the action was seated across the room, touching elbows with old Colonel
Farrell, dean of the local bar and its most florid orator.

"The court will designate Col. Horatio Farrell as guardian ad litem for the defendant during
these proceedings," Judge Priest had stated a few minutes earlier, using the formal and grammatical
language he reserved exclusively for his courtroom.

At once old Colonel Farrell had hitched his chair up alongside O'Day; had asked him several
questions in a tone inaudible to those about them; had listened to the whispered answers of
O'Day; and then had nodded his huge curly white dome of a head, as though amply satisfied with
the responses.

Let us skip the preliminaries. True, they seemed to interest the audience; here, though, they
would be tedious reading. Likewise, in touching upon the opening and outlining address of Attorney-at-Law
Sublette let us, for the sake of time and space, be very much briefer than Mr. Sublette was.
For our present purposes, I deem it sufficient to say that in all his professional career Mr.
Sublette was never more eloquent, never more forceful, never more vehement in his allegations,
and never more convinced--as he himself stated, not once but repeatedly--of his ability to
prove the facts he alleged by competent and unbiased testimony. These facts, he pointed out,
were common knowledge in the community; nevertheless, he stood prepared to buttress them with
the evidence of reputable witnesses, given under oath.

Mr. Sublette, having unwound at length, now wound up. He sat down, perspiring freely and through
the perspiration radiating confidence in his contentions, confidence in the result and, most
of all, unbounded confidence in Mr. Sublette.

Now Colonel Farrell was standing up to address the court. Under the cloak of a theatrical presence
and a large orotund manner, and behind a Ciceronian command of sonorous language, the colonel
carried concealed a shrewd old brain. It was as though a skilled marksman lurked in ambush
amid a tangle of luxuriant foliage. In this particular instance, moreover, it is barely possible
that the colonel was acting on a cue, privily conveyed to him before the court opened.

"May it please Your Honour," he began, "I have just conferred with the defendant here; and,
acting in the capacity of his guardian ad litem, I have advised him to waive an opening address
by counsel. Indeed, the defendant has no counsel. Furthermore, the defendant, also acting upon
my advice, will present no witnesses in his own behalf. But, with Your Honour's permission,
the defendant will now make a personal statement; and thereafter he will rest content, leaving
the final arbitrament of the issue to Your Honour's discretion."

"I object!" exclaimed Mr. Sublette briskly.

"On what grounds does the learned counsel object?" inquired Judge Priest.

"On the grounds that, since the mental competence of this man is concerned--since it is our
contention that he is patently and plainly a victim of senility, an individual prematurely
in his dotage--any utterances by him will be of no value whatsoever in aiding the conscience
and intelligence of the court to arrive at a fair and just conclusion regarding the defendant's
mental condition."

Mr. Sublette excelled in the use of big words; there was no doubt about that.

"The objection is overruled," said Judge Priest. He nodded in the direction of O'Day and Colonel
Farrell. "The court will hear the defendant. He is not to be interrupted while making his statement.
The defendant may proceed." 

Upon the whole, I do foresee what will happen; but I want to be left in peace at present and
not think of anything. "Do not wake me." To-day it was determined that we ought to leave Peli
as soon as the hot weather sets in,--perhaps in the middle of April,--and
go to Switzerland.

Even that terrifies me. I fancy Mrs. Davis will have to place her husband under restraint;
he shows symptoms of insanity. He says not a word for whole days, but sits staring either at
the floor or at his finger-nails; he is afraid they will come off. These are with him the consequences
of a wild life and narcotics.

I leave off writing as it is our time for sailing.

2 April.

Yesterday there was a thunderstorm. A strong southern wind drove the clouds along as a herd
of wild horses. It pulled and tore, chased and scattered them, then got them under and threw
them with a mighty effort upon the sea, which darkened instantly as man in wrath, and began
in its turn to send its foam aloft,--a veritable battle of two furies,
which, battering each other, produce thunder and lightning flashes.

But all this lasted only a short time. We did not go out to sea, as the waves were too rough. Instead
of it we looked at the storm from the glazed balcony, and sometimes looked at each other. It is
no use deluding myself any longer; there is something going on between us,--a subtle change in
our relations to each other.

Neither of us has said a word or overstepped the boundary line of friendship; neither has confessed
to anything, and yet speaking to each other we feel that our words serve only to disguise
our thoughts. It is the same when we are in the boat, reading together, or when I listen to
her music. All our acts seem mere shadows,--an outward form that hides the real essence of
things, with its face still veiled, but following us wherever we go. Neither of us has given
it a name; but we both feel its presence. Manifestations like these take place probably every
time man and woman begin to influence each other. I could not tell exactly when it began; but
I confess it did not come upon me quite unexpectedly.

I accepted their hospitality because Mrs. Davis was my father's friend; and it was she who, after
his death, showed me more sympathy than any one else in Rome.

I have so much consciousness of self, am so able to divide myself, that soon after my arrival
here, in spite of my heavy sorrow I had the presentiment that our mutual relation would undergo
a change. I hated myself that so soon after my father's death I should harbor thoughts like these; but
they were there. I find now that my presentiments were right. If I said that the changed relation
has still its face veiled, I meant to say that I do not know exactly
when the veil will be torn asunder, and I am under the spell of expectation.

I should be unsophisticated indeed, if I supposed she were less conscious of all this than I. She
is probably more so. Most likely she is guiding all these changes; and everything that is
happening happens according to her wishes and cool reflection. Diana the Huntress is spreading
her net for the game! But what does it matter to me? what is there for me to lose? As nearly
every man, I am that kind of game which allows itself to be hunted for the purpose of turning
at a given moment against the hunter. In such circumstances we all have energy enough. In a hand-to-hand
fight, like this, the victory rests always with us.

I know perfectly well that Mrs. Davis does not love me, any more than I love her. We simply
react upon each other through our pagan nature, our sensuous and artistic instincts.

With her it is also a question of vanity,--the worse for her, as it
may lead her whither love leads.

I shall not go too far. In my feeling for her there is neither affection nor tenderness,--nothing
but rapture at the sight of nature's masterwork, and the attraction
natural in a man when that masterwork is a woman.

My father said that the height of victory would be to change an angel into a woman; I maintain
that it is no less a triumph to feel around one's neck the arms,
palpitating with life, of a Florentine Venus.

As far as beauty goes she is the highest expression of whatever the most exalted imagination
is able to conceive. She is a Phryne. It would turn most men's heads to see her in a tight-fitting
riding-habit that shows the outline of her figure as beautiful as that of a statue. In the boat,
reading Dante, she looked like a Sybil, and one could understand
a Nero's sacrilegious passion.

Hers is an almost baleful beauty. Only the joining eyebrows make her appear a woman of our times,
and this makes her all the more irritating. She has a certain habit of pushing back her hair
by putting both hands at the back of her head; then her shoulders are raised; the whole shape
acquires a certain curve, and the breast stands firmly out,--and one feels a desire to carry
her off in one's arms from everybody's eyes.

In each of us there is a hidden Satyr. As to myself, as I said already, I am highly impressionable;
therefore, when I think of it, that there is something going on between me and this live statue
of a Juno, that some mysterious power pushes us towards each other,--my head is in a whirl,
and I ask myself what would I wish for more perfect than this.

3 April.

As much as ever woman can show kindness and sympathy to a friend in trouble, she has shown to me.
And yet, strange to say, all this kindness has upon me the effect of moonlight,--radiance without
warmth; she possesses perfection of form, but there is no soul; with her all is premeditation, but
not nature. There speaks again the sceptic; but I shall never be
so intoxicated as to lose my capacity of observation.

If this divinity were kind, she would be kind to everybody. Thus, for instance, the way she
treats her husband is enough to destroy any illusion as to her heart. The unfortunate Davis is
such a bloodless creature that he feels chilly in the hottest sunshine, and oh! so chilly
at her side. I never noticed in her the slightest sign of compassion for his misery. He simply
does not exist, for her. This millionnaire, in the midst of all his wealth, is so poor that
it would rouse any one's pity. He is apparently indifferent to everything; and yet the human
being, with ever so little consciousness, feels kindness.

The best proof of it is that Davis feels grateful to me because I speak to him now and then about
his health.

Perhaps it is the instinctive attraction of the weaker towards the stronger organism. When I look
at that face as white as chalk, no bigger than my fist, those feet
like walking-sticks, and that shrunken figure, wrapped up in a plaid
during the hottest of weathers, I am truly sorry for him.

But I will not make myself out better than I am. I may pity the man; but compassion will not stand
in my way. It has often struck me that, when woman is in question, man becomes pitiless; it
is still a remnant of the animal instinct that fights to the uttermost for the female. In such
a fight between human beings, whatever shape it takes, the weaker goes to the wall. Even honor
is no curb; it is only religion that condemns it absolutely.

12 April.

I have not written for nearly ten days. The veil was rent a week ago. I always suspected the sea
would help us to an understanding. Women like Laura never forget
the fitting background.

If they do charitable deeds because it enhances their beauty, the
more they want beauty when they fall.

Joined to this is their passion for anything out of the common, which does not spring from the
poetical faculties of their mind, but from a desire to adorn themselves.

I have not so lost my head as not to be able to judge Laura, though really I do not know whether
she has not the right to be what she is, and to think the sun and stars are made on purpose
for her adornment.

Absolute beauty, in the nature of things, must be essentially egotistic, and subject everything
to its rule. Laura is the very incarnation of beauty, and nobody has the right to ask anything
else from her than to be always and everywhere beautiful; at least,
I do not ask for more.

Thanks to my skill in seamanship, we can be alone on our excursions. A week ago, on a sultry day,
Laura expressed a wish to go out in the boat. Like a Hecate, she exults in heat. A gentle breeze
drove us a long distance from the shore, and then the wind fell. The lateen sail hung motionless
from the mast. The rays of the sun, reflected from the glassy surface of the water, increased
the heat, although it was late in the afternoon. Laura threw herself on the Indian matting, and
resting her head against the cushions, remained motionless, all in
a red glow, from the sun filtering through the awning.

A strange laziness had taken possession of me, and at the same time the sight of this woman with
her Greek form that showed through the clinging drapery sent a thrill of admiration through
my veins. Her eyes were veiled, the lips slightly parted; her whole presence expressed powerlessness,
and seemed to say, "I am weak."

We came back late to the villa, and the return will remain for a long
time in my memory.

After a sunset in which sky and earth seemed to be wedded in a splendor without limit and without
division, there came a night of such beauty as I had never seen on
the Riviera.

From the vast deep rose the immense red orb of the moon, which filled the air with a mellow light,
and at the same time made a broad, luminous path on the sea, on which
we glided towards the shore.

There was a gentle swell on the water, like a heaving sigh. From the little harbor the voices
of the Ligurian fishermen, singing a chorus, came up to us. A light breeze from the shore wafted
towards us the scent of orange-blossoms.

Although not prone to let myself be carried away by my sensations, I was under the spell of this
unutterable sweetness that floated over land and sea, and clung like dew to soul and body.

From time to time my eyes rested upon the Helen-like woman whose white draperies glistened in
the moonlight, and I fancied myself living in ancient Greece, and
that we were floating somewhere, maybe towards the sacred olive groves
where the Eleusinian mysteries were enacted.

Our rapture did not seem any more a rapture of the senses, but a cult, a mystic alliance with
that night, that spring, and all nature.

15 April.

The time fixed for our departure has arrived, but we do not depart. My Hecate does not fear the
sun, Mr. Davis likes it, and as far as I am concerned, whether here
or in Switzerland is a matter of indifference.

A strange thought has taken hold of me; I almost shrink from it, but nevertheless will confess:
It seems to me that a Christian soul, though the spring of faith be dried up therein, cannot live
altogether on the mere beauty of form. This means more sorrow in store for me; if the thought
proves true the whole basis of my life falls to the ground.

We are beings of a different culture.

Our souls are full of Gothic arches, pinnacles, twisted traceries we cannot shake off, and of
which Greek minds knew nothing. Our minds shoot upward; theirs, full of repose and simplicity,
rested nearer the earth.

Those of us in whom the spirit of Hellas beats more powerfully consider the beautiful a necessity
of life, and search after it eagerly, but instinctively demand that
Aspasia should have the eyes of Dante's Beatrice.

A similar longing is planted within me. When I think of it, that a beautiful human animal
like Laura belongs to me and will belong as long as I wish it, a twofold joy gets hold of me,--the
joy of the man and the delight of the artist; and yet there is a want and something missing. On
the altar of my Greek temple there is a marble goddess; but my Gothic shrine is empty. I admit
that in her I have found something bordering upon the perfect, and I defend myself from a suspicion
that this perfection throws a big shadow.

I thought once that Goethe's words, "You shall be like unto gods and beasts," embraced all life
and were the highest expression of his wisdom; now, when I follow the commandment, I feel that
he omitted the angel.

17 April.

Mr. Davis came into the room when I was sitting at Laura's feet, my head leaning against her
knees. His bloodless face and dim eyes showed no feeling beyond indifferent sullenness. In
his soft slippers embroidered with Indian suns, he shuffled across the room, and into the library.
Laura looked magnificent, her eyes flashing with unrestrained wrath.

I rose and awaited what would happen.

A thought crossed my mind that Mr. Davis might come back, a revolver
in his hand.

In such a case I should have pitched him through the window, revolver, plaid, and Indian slippers.
But he did not come back; I waited a long time in vain. I do not know what he was doing there;
whether he was thinking over his misery, weeping, or perfectly indifferent. We all three met again
at lunch, and he was sitting there as if nothing unusual had happened. Perhaps it was my fancy
that made me think that Laura looked menacingly at him, and also that his apathetic expression
was even more mournful than usual. I confess that such a tame ending of the business is the most
painful to me. I am not one to provoke a quarrel, but ready to answer for my deeds; finally, I
would rather the man were not so defenceless, such a small, miserable creature. I have a nasty feeling,
as if I had knocked down a cripple, and never yet felt so disgusted
with myself.

We went out in the boat as usual. I did not want Laura to think I was afraid of Davis; but
there we had our first quarrel. I confessed to her my scruples and she laughed at them. I said
to her plainly,--

"The laughter does not become you; and remember, you may do most things, but not what is not
becoming."

There was a deep frown on the meeting eyebrows, and she replied bitterly,--

"After what has passed between us, you may insult me even with more impunity than you could Davis."

After
such a reproach there remained nothing else but to ask her forgiveness; and presently, harmony
being restored, Laura began to talk about herself. I had another instance of her cleverness. Generally
the women I have known intimately showed a desire to tell me their
life.

I do not blame them for it; it shows that they feel the need to justify themselves in their own eyes
and ours. We men do not. Yet I never met a woman either so clever as not to overstep the artistic
proportions in her confession, or so sincere as not to tell lies in order to justify herself.
I call to witness all men who when the occasion occurs may verify how wonderfully similar
all these cases of going astray are, and consequently how tedious. Laura, too, began to talk
about herself with a certain eager satisfaction, but only in this respect did she follow the beaten
track of other fallen angels. In what she told me there was a certain
posing for originality, but she was certainly not posing as a victim.

Knowing she had to deal with a sceptic, she did not want to call forth a smile of incredulity. Her
sincerity was skirting upon the bold, almost the cynical, one might say, were it not that to
her it is a system of life in which aestheticism has taken the place of ethics. She prefers
simply a life in the shape of an Apollo to that of humpbacked Pulcinello; that is her philosophy. She
had married Davis not so much for his wealth as for the purpose of making her life as beautiful
as lay in human power,--beautiful not in the common meaning of the
word, but in the highest artistic sense. Besides she did not consider
she had any duties toward her husband, as she had never even pretended
to love him; she had for him as much pity as repugnance, and as he
was indifferent to everything, he was of no more account than if he
were dead. She added that she did not take account of anything that
was contrary to her ideas of a purely beautiful and artistic life.
Regard for society she had very little, and who thought otherwise
of her would be utterly wrong. She had felt friendship for my father,
not because of his social position, but because she had looked upon
him as a masterwork of nature. As to myself, she had loved me for
a long time. She understood perfectly that I would have prized her
more had the victory been less easy, but she did not care to bargain
when her happiness was at stake.

This kind of principles, announced
by that perfect mouth in a soft voice full of metallic vibrations,
gave me a strange sensation. While speaking to me she drew her draperies
close to her as if to make room for me at her side. At times her eyes
followed the motions of the sea-gulls circling above our heads, then
again they rested keenly upon my face as if she wanted to read the
impression her words had made upon me. I listened to her words with
a certain satisfaction, as they proved to me that I had judged her
pretty correctly. Yet there was something in them quite new to me.
I had always rendered her justice as to her cleverness, but I thought
her acts were the instinctive outcome of her nature. I had never supposed
her capable of inventing a whole system in order to support and justify
the impulses of her nature. This showed her in a somewhat nobler light,
as it proved that where I had suspected her of more or less mean calculation,
she only acted according to her own principles,--maybe bad, even terrible,
but always principles. For instance, I had suspected her of wanting
to marry me after Davis's death,--she proved me utterly in the wrong. What the onlooker had seen--if indeed there were an onlooker--could have been only
this: Two men, one fairly tall and dressed in a sprightly fashion, one short and dark, engaged
in a vehement but whispered quarrel there in the cloaking shadow close up to the locked double
doors of the Jollity; a sudden hostile move on the part of the slighter man, backing away and
reaching for his flank; a quick forward jump by the taller man to close with the other; a short
sharp struggle as the pair of them fought for possession of the revolver which the dark man
had jerked from his flank pocket; then the tall man, victorious, shoving his antagonist clear
of him and stepping back a pace; and on top of this the three sharp reports and the three little
spurts of fire bridging the short gap between the sundered enemies like darting red hyphens
to punctuate the enacted tragedy.

Now the tall man, the one conspicuously dressed, had been Trencher. The shooting accomplished
he stood where he was only long enough to see Sonntag fold up and sink down in a slumped shape
in the doorway. He had seen men, mortally stricken, who folded up in that very same way; therefore
he appraised Sonntag as one already dead, or at least as one who would die very speedily.

As he stepped out across the sidewalk into the roadway he let the automatic fall alongside
the curb. The instant he had done this the heat of his hate departed from him leaving him cool
and clear-minded and alert. It was as though the hot fumes of rage had all evaporated from
his brain in the same twentieth part of a second that he had spent in discarding the weapon.
For the reason that he was again entirely himself, resourceful and steady, he did not fall
into the error of running away. To run away in this instant was to invite pursuit. Instead
he walked to the middle of the street, halted and looked about him--the picture of a citizen
who had been startled by the sound of shots. This artifice, he felt sure, served to disarm
possible suspicion on the part of any one of the persons who came hurrying up from east and
west and from the north, across the street. Two or three of these first arrivals almost brushed
him as they lunged past, drawing in toward the spot where Sonntag's doubled-up body made a
darker blot in the darkened parallelogram beneath the portico.

Trencher had been in close places before now--close places when something smacking of violence
had occurred--and he knew or felt he knew what next would happen to give him the precious grace
of seconds and perhaps of minutes. Those who came foremost upon the scene would, through caution,
hesitate for a brief space of time before venturing close up to where the hunched shape lay.
Then having circled and drawn in about the victim of the shooting they would for another brief
period huddle together, asking excited and pointless questions of one another, some of them
perhaps bending down and touching the victim to see whether he lived, some of them looking
round for a policeman, some of them doing nothing at all--except confusedly to get in the way
of everybody else. This would be true of ninety-nine average individuals out of an average
hundred of city population. But the hundredth man would keep his wits about him, seeking for
the cause of the thing rather than concerning himself with the accomplished effect. For the
moment it was this hundredth man Trencher would have to fear. Nevertheless, it would never
do for him to show undue haste. Bearing himself in the matter of a disinterested citizen who
had business that was not to be interfered with by street brawls, he turned away from the south,
toward which he had been looking, shrugged his shoulders, and moving briskly, but without any
seeming great haste, he made for the revolving door at the Thirty-ninth Street entrance to
Wallinger's Hotel, diagonally across from the Jollity. With one hand on a panel of the door
he stopped again and looked back.

Already, so soon, a crowd was gathering over the way--a little crowd--which at once inevitably
would become a dense jostling crowd. A policeman, not to be mistaken even at a distance of
seventy feet or more for anyone but a policeman, had turned the corner out of Broadway and
was running down the opposite pavement. The policeman's arrival was to be expected; it would
be his business to arrive at the earliest possible moment, and having arrived to lead the man
hunt that would follow. What Trencher, peering over his shoulder, sought for, was the hundredth
man--the man who, ignoring the lesser fact of a dead body, would strive first off to catch
up the trail of whosoever had done this thing.

Trencher thought he made him out. There was to be seen an elderly man, roughly dressed, possibly
the same man whose proximity Trencher had felt rather than observed just before Sonntag made
the gun play, and this man was half-squatted out on the asphalt with his back to where the
rest circled and swirled about the body. Moreover, this person was staring directly in Trencher's
direction. As Trencher passed within the revolving door he saw the man pivot on his heels and
start at an angle toward the policeman just as the policeman was swallowed up in the rings
of figures converging into the theatre doorway.

If the policeman were of a common-enough type of policeman--that is to say, if he were the
sort of policeman who would waste time examining Sonntag's body for signs of life and then
waste more time asking questions of those who had preceded him to the place, and yet more time
peering about for the weapon that had been used; or if, in the excitement with everybody shouting
together, the one man who possibly had a real notion concerning the proper description of the
vanished slayer found difficulty in securing the policeman's attention--why then, in any one
of these cases, or better still, in all of them, Trencher had a chance. With a definite and
intelligently guided pursuit starting forthwith he would be lost. But with three minutes, or
two even, of delay vouchsafed him before the alarm took shape and purpose he might make it.

Accepting the latter contingency as the assured one he formed a plan instantaneously. Indeed,
it sprang full-formed into his mind as the door swung round behind him. It added to the immediate
difficulties of his present situation that he was most notably marked--by his garb. He had
the dramatic sense well developed, as any man must have who succeeds at his calling. When Trencher
played a part he dressed the part. In the staging of the plot for the undoing of the Cheyenne
cattleman his had been the rôle of the sporting ex-telegraph operator, who could get "flashes"
on the result of horse races before the names of the winners came over an imaginary tapped
wire to the make-believe pool room where the gull was stripped; and he had been at some pains
and expense to procure a wardrobe befitting the character.

The worst of it was that he now wore the make-up--the short fawn-coloured overcoat with its
big showy buttons of smoked pearl, the brown derby hat with its striking black band, and the
pair of light-tan spats. Stripped of these things he would be merely a person in a costume
in nowise to be distinguished from the costumes of any number of other men in the Broadway
district. But for the moment there was neither opportunity nor time to get rid of all of them
without attracting the attention that would be fatal to his prospects. Men who have nothing
to hide do not remove spats in a hotel lobby, nor do they go about public places bareheaded
in the nighttime. Now he could do but one thing to alter his appearance.

Midway of the cross hall which he had entered and which opened into the main lobby he slowed
his gait long enough to undo the overcoat and slip out of it. The top button caught fast in
its buttonhole, the coat being new and its buttonholes being stiff. He gave a sharp tug at
the rebellious cloth, and the button, which probably had been insecurely sewed on in the first
place, came away from its thread fastenings and lodged in the fingers of his right hand. Mechanically
he dropped it into a side pocket of the overcoat and a moment later, with the garment turned
inside out so that only its silk lining showed, and held under his arm, he had come out of
the sideway and was in the lobby proper.

He was prepared mentally to find signs of an alarm here--to encounter persons hurrying toward
the Thirty-ninth Street side of the building. But nothing of the sort was afoot. A darky orchestra
was playing a jazz tune very loudly in the café at the left of the Broadway entrance, so it
was not only possible but very likely that the sounds of the shots had not been heard inside
the hotel at all. Certainly his eye, sweeping the place, discovered no evidences of any unusual
stir. Perhaps half a dozen individuals were traversing the tiled floor, but none of them in
any seeming hurry.

With no suggestion of agitation about him anywhere and with nothing furtive or stealthy in
his movements, Trencher boldly passed the corner of the desk, crossed the lobby, went along
the front of the news stand, where a young woman stood among her wares, and through another
set of revolving doors came out upon Broadway. It was that one hour of the night--a quarter
of eleven o'clock, while the last acts are still going on and before the theatres give up their
audiences--when Broadway's sidewalks are not absolutely overflowing with jostling, pouring
currents of people. Numbers were abroad, for numbers always are abroad in this part of the
town, be the time of day or of night what it may, but there was no congestion. This was as
it should be; it suited this man's purposes exactly.

He issued forth, and a few rods north of the corner saw the person for whom he was seeking;
at least he saw a most likely candidate--a ragged darky, in a district where ragged darkies
unless they be beggars are not often seen, who with his hands in his pockets and his coat collar
turned up was staring into the window of a small clothing shop two doors above the narrow-fronted
hotel. Trencher made for him. Remember, all this--from the moment of the shooting until now--had
taken much less time than has been required for me to describe it in sequence or for you to
read about it.

He tapped the darky on the arm.

"Boy," he said sharply, "want to pick up some easy money quick?"

"Yas, suh, I does!" The negro's eyes shone.

"Listen then: I've got to catch a train--sooner than I expected. My bag's packed and waiting
for me up here at my boarding house in West Forty-fifth Street--Number 374 is the address--just
west of Broadway--tall brownstone house with a high stoop. Get me? The bag's downstairs in
the hall. The hall boy--a coloured fellow named Fred--is watching it for me. If I go in a cab
I may not get to the station in time. If you go after it for me at a run I may catch my train.
See? Here's a dollar down in advance. Tell Fred Mr. Thompson sent you--that's me, Thompson.
He'll give it to you--I told him I'd send for it. I'll be waiting right here. If you get back
with it in seven minutes I'll give you another dollar--and if you get back inside of seven
minutes I'll make it two dollars more. Got the number in your mind?"

"Yas, suh--three seventy-fo' Wes' Forty-fift', you said."

"Correct. Now run like the very devil up Broadway to Forty-fifth and turn west!"

"Boss," cried the darky, "Ise gone!"

He was, too. His splay feet in their broken shoes fairly spurned the sidewalk as he darted
northward, boring his way through the lanes of pedestrians, knocking people aside out of their
stride and followed as he went by a wake of curses and grunts and curious glances. On a street
where nearly everyone trots but few gallop, the sight of a running man catches the popular
interest instantly, the common theory being that the runner has done something wrong and is
trying to get away, else he would not run.

The instant the negro turned his back on him, Trencher slid inside the recessed entrance of
the clothing store and flattened himself against its door. If chance had timed the occurrence
just right he would win the reprieve that he required for what he meant next to undertake.
And sure enough, as it turned out, chance had so timed it.

       *       *       *       *       *

For just as he pressed his bulk into the recess the man hunt manifested itself. Bursting headlong
out of the front of Wallinger's Hotel came a policeman--doubtlessly the one already seen by
Trencher--and just behind the policeman a roughly dressed bearded man, and with these two,
at their heels, a jostling impetuous swarm of other men, to be joined instantly by yet more
men, who had run round the corner of the hotel from Thirty-ninth Street, instead of passing
through its lobby. For the veriest fraction of time they all slowed down, casting about them
with their eyes for a trail to follow.

Trencher, looking slantwise to the south, could see them plainly. The foremost members of the
hesitating and uncertain group were not sixty feet from him. He forgot to breathe.

Then, all together, half a dozen pointing arms were flung out to the north.

"There he goes, officer, runnin'! See 'im yonder? See 'im?"

With a forward surge and a great clatter of feet the hunt was renewed. Past Trencher's refuge,
with never a look this way or that, the policeman, the bearded man, all the rest of them, went
pelting along the sidewalk, giving tongue like beagles. He could have put forth his hand and
touched some of them as they sped by him. Numbers of foot travellers joined in the tail of
the chase. Those who did not join it faced about to watch. Knowing that for a bit he would
practically be free of the danger of close scrutiny, Trencher stepped out upon the sidewalk
and looking north caught a glimpse of a bent fleeing figure scuttling up Broadway a block and
a half beyond.

By this trick he had broken the trail and sent the pack off on a wrong scent. So far so good.
He figured the outlook after this fashion: Set upon earning the double fee promised him the
deluded darky, as he could tell, was still going at top speed, unconscious of any pursuit.
If he continued to maintain his gait, if none tripped him, the probabilities were he would
be round the corner in Forty-fifth Street, trying to find a mythical boarding house and a mythical
hall boy named Fred, before the foremost of the runners behind overtook and seized him. Then
would follow shouts, yells, a babble of accusations, denials of all wrongful intent by the
frightened captive and explanations by him to the policeman of his reason for running so hard.

Following on this the chase would double back on its tracks, and at once policemen in numbers,
along with volunteers, would be combing the district for the real fugitive. Still, barring
the unforeseen, a few minutes must intervene before this neighbourhood search would be getting
under way; and meanwhile the real fugitive, calmly enough, was moving along in the rear of
the rearmost of those who ran without knowing why they ran. He did not go far though--he dared
not go far. Any second the darky might be tackled and thrown by someone on ahead, and besides
there might be individuals close at hand who had not joined in the hue and cry, but who in
some way had learned that the man so badly wanted wore such-and-such distinguishing garments.

It was because of this latter contingency that Trencher had not tried to slip back into Thirty-ninth
Street. That had been his first impulse, but he discarded the thought as it came to him. His
mind peopled the vicinity immediately south and east of him with potential enemies. To the
north alone, in the wake of the chase, could he count upon a hope of transient security, and
that would last only for so long as the negro kept going. He could not get away from the spot--yet.
And still it would be the height of recklessness for him, dressed as he was, to linger there.
Temporarily he must bide where he was, and in this swarming, bright-as-day place he must find
a hiding place from which he could see without being seen, spy without being spied upon or
suspected for what he was. Even as he calculated these obstacles he figured a possible way
out of the double-ended dilemma, or at any rate he figured his next step toward safety from
detection for the moment, and, with continued luck, toward ultimate escape from a perilous
spot where now no measure of immunity could be either long-lived or dependable.

I have said he did not go far to reach sanctuary. To be exact he did not go the length of the
block between Thirty-ninth and Fortieth. He went only as far as the Clarenden, newest and smartest,
and, for the time being, most popular of typical Broadway cafés, standing three buildings north
of the clothing shop, or a total distance from it, let us say, of ninety feet. It was while
he traversed those ninety feet that Trencher summed up the contingencies that hedged him in
and reached his conclusion.

In front of the Clarenden against the curbing stood a short line of waiting motor vehicles.
With one exception they were taxicabs. At the lower end of the queue, though, was a vast gaudy
limousine, a bright blue in body colour, with heavy trimmings of brass--and it was empty. The
chauffeur, muffled in furs, sat in his place under the overhang of the peaked roof, with the
glass slide at his right hand lowered and his head poked out as he peered up Broadway; but
the car itself, Trencher saw, contained no occupant.

Trencher, drawing up alongside the limousine, was searching vainly for a monogram, a crest
or a name on its varnished flank while he spoke.

"Driver," he said sharply, "whose car is this?"

"Mr. O'Gavin's," the chauffeur answered without turning to look at the person asking the question.

Trencher played a blind lead and yet not such a very blind lead either. Big as New York was
there was likely to be but one O'Gavin in it who would have a car such as this one anchored
in front of the Clarenden--and that would be the noted bookmaker. Trencher played his card.

"Jerome O'Gavin's, eh?" he inquired casually as though stating a foregone conclusion.

"Yes, sir; it's his car." And now the driver twisted his body and half-faced Trencher. "Say,
boss, what's all the row about yonder?"

"Crowd chasing a pickpocket, I imagine," said Trencher indifferently. Then putting a touch
of impatience in his voice: "Where is O'Gavin--inside?"

"Yes, sir! Said he'd be ready to go uptown at eleven. Must be near that now."

"Pretty near it. I was to meet him here at eleven myself and I thought I recognised his car."

"You'll find him in the grill, I guess, sir," said the driver, putting into the remark the
tone of deference due to someone who was a friend of his employer's. "I understood him to say
he had an appointment with some gentleman there. Was it you?"

"No, but I know who the gentleman is," said Trencher. "The other man's not such a very good
friend of mine--that's why I'd rather wait outside for Jerome than to go in there." He made
a feint at looking at his watch. "Hum, ten minutes more. Tell you what I think I'll do, driver:
I think I'll just hop inside the car until O'Gavin comes out--better than loafing on the sidewalk,
eh?"

"Just as you say. Make yourself comfortable, sir. Shall I switch on the lights?"

"No, never mind the lights, thank you." Trencher was already taking shelter within the limousine,
making himself small on the wide back seat and hauling a thick rug up over his lap. Under the
rug one knee was bent upward and the fingers of one hand were swiftly undoing the buttons of
one fawn-coloured spat. If the chauffeur had chanced to glance back he would have seen nothing
unusual going on. The chauffeur, though, never glanced back. He was staring dead ahead again.

"Say, boss, they've caught the pickpocket--if that's what he was," he cried out excitedly.
"They're bringing him back."

"Glad they nailed him," answered Trencher through the glass that was between them. He had one
spat off and was now unfastening its mate.

"It looks like a nigger," added the chauffeur, supplying a fresh bulletin as the captive was
dragged nearer. "It is a nigger! Had his nerve with him, trying to pull off a trick in this
part of town."

Through the right-hand side window Trencher peered out as the mass moved by--in front a panting
policeman with his one hand gripped fast in the collar of Trencher's late messenger, and all
about the pair and behind them a jostling, curious crowd of men and women.

"De gen'l'man dat sent me fur his bag is right down yere, I keeps tellin' you," Trencher heard
the scared darky babbling as he was yanked past Trencher's refuge.

"All right then, show him to me, that's all," the officer was saying impatiently.

The chauffeur twisted about in his place, following the spectacle with his eyes. But Trencher
had quit looking that way and was looking another way. The centre of excitement had been moved
again--instead of being north of him it was now approximately ninety feet south, and he, thanks
to the shift, was once more behind it. Peering through the glass he watched the entrance to
the Clarenden.

There he saw what he wanted to see--a tall man in a wide-brimmed soft dark hat and a long dark
topcoat going up the short flight of steps that led from the pavement into the building. Trencher
wadded the spats together and rammed them down out of sight between the back cushion and the
under cushion of the car seat, and with his overcoat inside out on his left arm he opened the
door and stepped out of the car. This retreat had served his purpose admirably; it was time
to abandon it.

"Changed my mind," he said, in explanation. "If O'Gavin doesn't hurry up we'll be late for
an engagement we've got uptown. I'm going in after him."

"Yes; all right, sir," assented the chauffeur with his attention very much elsewhere.

In long steps Trencher crossed the sidewalk and ran up the steps so briskly that he passed
through the door at the top of the short flight directly behind and almost touching the tall
man in the dark hat and black coat. His heart beat fast; he was risking everything practically
on the possibilities of what this other man meant to do.

The other man did exactly what Trencher was hoping he would do. He turned left and made for
the Clarenden's famous Chinese lounging room, which in turn opened into the main restaurant.
Trencher slipped nimbly by his quarry and so beat him to where two young women in glorified
uniforms of serving maids were stationed to receive wraps outside the checking booth; a third
girl was inside the booth, her job being to take over checked articles from her sister helpers.

It befell therefore that Trencher surrendered his brown derby and his short tan coat, received
a pasteboard check in exchange for them and saw them passed in over a flat shelf to be put
on a hook, before the other man had been similarly served. When the other, now revealed as
wearing a dinner jacket, came through the Orientalised passageway into the lounge, Trencher
was quite ready for him. In his life Trencher had never picked a pocket, but as one thoroughly
versed in the professionalism of the crime world, in which he was a distinguished figure, he
knew how the trick, which is the highest phase of the art of the pickpocket, is achieved.

The thing was most neatly and most naturally accomplished. As the man in the dinner coat came
just opposite him Trencher, swinging inward as though to avoid collision with the end of an
upholstered couch, bumped into him, breast to breast.

"I beg your pardon," he said in contrite tones for his seeming awkwardness, and as he said
it two darting fingers and the thumb of his right hand found and invaded the little slit of
the stranger's waistcoat pocket, whisking out the check which the stranger had but a moment
before, with Trencher watching, deposited there.

"Granted--no harm done," said the man who had been jostled, and passed on leaving Trencher
still uttering apologetic sounds. Palming the precious pasteboard, which meant so much to him,
Trencher stood where he was until he saw the unsuspecting victim pass on through into the café
and join two other men, who got up from a table in the far corner near one of the front windows
to greet him.

Trencher followed leisurely to where a captain of waiters stood guard at the opening in the
dividing partition between the lounge and the restaurant. Before him at his approach this functionary
bowed.

"Alone, sir?" he inquired obsequiously.

"Yes and no," replied Trencher; "I'm alone now but I'll be back in half an hour with three
others. I want to engage a table for four--not too close to the orchestra." He slipped a dollar
bill into the captain's hand.

"Very good, sir. What name, sir?"

"Tracy is the name," said Trencher.

"Quite so, sir."

The captain turned to serve a party of men and women, and Trencher fell back. He idled back
through the Chinese room, vigilant to note whether any of the persons scattered about it were
regarding him with more than a casual interest or, more important still, whether any there
present knew him personally.

Reassured on this point he stepped out of the room and along with a quarter for a tip tendered
to one of the maids the check he had just pilfered, meanwhile studying her face closely for
any signs that she recalled him as one who had dealt with her within the space of a minute
or so. But nothing in her looks betrayed recognition or curiosity as she bestirred herself
to reclaim the articles for which the check was a voucher of ownership, and to help him into them.

Ten seconds later Trencher, a personality transformed, stood quite at his ease on the top step
of the flight outside the entrance to the Clarenden looking into Broadway. The long dark overcoat
which he now wore, a commonplace roomy garment, fitted him as though it had been his own. With
its collar turned up about his cheeks it helped admirably to disguise him. The soft black hat
was a trifle large for his head. So much the better--it came well down over his face.

The huge illuminated hands of a clock set in the middle of a winking, blinking electric sign
a few blocks north, at the triangular gore where Seventh Avenue crosses Broadway, told him
the time--six minutes of eleven. To Trencher it seemed almost that hours must have passed since
he shot down Sonntag, and yet here was proof that not more than ten minutes--or at the most,
twelve--had elapsed. Well, he had worked fast and with results gratifying. The spats that might
have betrayed him were safely hidden in one place--yonder between the seat cushions of O'Gavin's
car, which stood where he had left it, not thirty feet distant. His telltale overcoat and his
derby hat were safely bestowed in the café check room behind him awaiting a claimant who meant
never to return. Even if they should be found and identified as having been worn by the slayer
of Sonntag, their presence there, he figured, would but serve to confuse the man hunt. Broadway's
living tides flowed by, its component atoms seemingly ignorant of the fact that just round
the corner below a man had been done to death. Only at the intersection of Thirty-ninth Street
was there evidence, in the quick movement of pedestrians out of Broadway into the cross street,
that something unusual served to draw foot passengers off their course.

In front of the clothing shop three doors south of him no special congestion of traffic revealed
itself; no scrouging knot of citizens was to be seen, and by that Trencher reasoned that the
negro had been taken elsewhere by his captors--very probably to where the body would still
be lying, hunched up in the shadow before the Jollity's side doors. From the original starting
point the hunt doubtlessly was now reorganising. One thing was certain--it had not eddied back
this far. The men of the law would be working on a confused basis yet awhile, anyhow. And Trencher
meant to twistify the clews still further, for all that he felt safe enough already. For the
first time a sense of security exhilarated him. Almost it was a sense of exultation.

He descended the steps and went straight to the nearest of the rank of parked taxicabs. Its
driver was nowhere in sight. A carriage starter for the café, in gorgeous livery, understood
without being told what the tall muffled-up gentleman desired and blew a shrill blast on a
whistle. At that the truant driver appeared, coming at a trot from down the street.

"'Scuse me, mister," he said as he mounted to his seat at the wheel. "Been a shootin' down
the street. Guy got croaked, they say, and they can't find the guy that croaked um."

"Never mind the shooting," said Trencher as he climbed into the cab, whose door the starter
had opened for him.

"Where to, gent?"

"Harty's Palm Garden," said Trencher, naming a restaurant a mile and a half away, straight
up Broadway. His main thought now was to get entirely out of this part of town.

Riding along uptown Trencher explored the pockets of the pilfered overcoat. The search produced
a pair of heavy gloves, a wadded handkerchief, two cigars, a box of matches, and, last of all,
a triangular brass token inscribed with a number and a firm name. Without the imprint of the
name Trencher would have recognised it, from its shape alone. It had come from the check room
in the upper-tier waiting room of the Grand Central Station. Discovery of it gave him a new
idea--an idea involving no added risk but having in it added possibilities for insuring the
ultimate success of his get-away. In any event there could be neither harm nor enhanced danger
in putting it into execution.

Therefore, when he had emerged from the cab at Harty's and had paid the fare and had seen the
driver swing his vehicle about and start off back downtown, he walked across Columbus Circle
to the west curve of it, climbed into another taxicab and was driven by way of Fifty-ninth
Street and Fifth Avenue to the Grand Central. Here at the establishment of the luggage-checking
concessionaire on the upper level of the big terminal he tendered the brass token to a drowsy-eyed
attendant, receiving in exchange a brown-leather suit case with letters stenciled on one end
of it, like this:

        M. K. P.
        STAMFORD, CONN.

Waving aside a red-capped negro porter, Trencher, carrying the spoil of his latest coup, departed
via one of the Vanderbilt Avenue exits. Diagonally across the avenue was a small drug store
still open for business at this hour, as the bright lights within proved. Above its door showed
the small blue sign that marked it as containing a telephone pay booth. For Trencher's purposes
a closed booth in a small mercantile establishment was infinitely to be preferred to the public
exchange in the terminal--less chance that the call could be traced back to its source, less
chance, too, that some inquisitive operator, trying to kill time during a dull hour, might
listen in on the wire, and so doing overhear things not meant for her ears. He crossed over
and entered the drug store.

Except for a sleepy clerk at the rear there was no one visible within the place. Trencher crowded
his bulk into the booth, dropped the requisite coin in the slot and very promptly got back
the answering hail from a certain number that he had called--a number at a place in the lower
fringe of the old Tenderloin.

"Is that the Three Deuces?" asked Trencher. Then: "Who's speaking--you, Monty? . . . Know who
this is, at this end? . . . Yes, that's right. Say, is the Kid there--Kid Dineen? . . . Good!
Call him to the phone, will you, Monty? And tell him to hurry--it's devilish important."

A short pause followed and when Trencher spoke again he had dropped his voice to a cautious
half-whisper, vibrant and tense with urgency. Also now he employed some of the argot of the
underworld:

"Hello, Kid, hello! Recognise my voice, don't you? . . . Good! Now listen: I'm in a jam. .
. . What? . . . Never mind what it is; you'll know when you see the papers in the morning if
you don't know sooner. I've got to lam, and lam quick. Right now I've got the bulls stalled
off good and proper, but I can't tell how long they'll stay stalled off. Get me? So I don't
want to be showing my map round any ticket windows. So here's what I want you to do. Get some
coin off of Monty, if you haven't got enough on you. Then you beat it over to the Pennsylvania
Station and buy me a ticket for Pittsburgh and a section in the sleeper on the train that leaves
round one-twenty-five to-night. Then go over on Ninth Avenue to Silver's place----What? . .
. Yes; sure, that's the place. Wait for me there in the little room upstairs over the bar,
on the second floor. They've got to make a bluff of closing up at one, but you know how to
get up into the room, don't you? . . . Good! Wait for me till I show up, or if I get there
first I'll wait for you. I ought to show inside of an hour from now--maybe in less time than
that if things keep on breaking right. Then I'll get the ducats off of you and beat it across
through the Hudson Tube to the Manhattan Transfer and grab the rattler over there in Jersey
when she comes along from this side. That'll be all. Now hustle!"

From the drug store he went, carrying the brown suit case with him, round into Forty-second
Street. He had taken a mental note of the initials on the bag, but to make sure he was right
he looked at them again before he entered the big Bellhaven Hotel by its Forty-second-Street
door. At sight of him a bell boy ran across the lobby and took from him his burden. The boy
followed him, a pace in the rear, to the desk, where a spruce young gentleman awaited their
coming. "Can I get a room with bath for the night--a quiet inside room where I'll be able to
sleep as late as I please in the morning?" inquired Trencher.

"Certainly, sir." The room clerk appraised Trencher with a practiced eye. "Something for about
four dollars?"

"That'll do very well," agreed Trencher, taking the pen which the clerk had dipped in ink and
handed over to him.

Bearing in mind the letters and the address on the suit case, Trencher registered as M. K.
Potter, Stamford, Conn. Meanwhile the clerk had taken a key from a rack containing a vast number
of similar keys.

"I won't leave a call--and I don't want to be disturbed," warned Trencher.

"Very well, sir. Front! Show the gentleman to 1734." Five minutes later Trencher, in an inner
room on the seventeenth floor, with the door locked on the inside, had sprung the catch of
the brown suit case and was spreading its contents out upon the bed, smiling his satisfaction
as he did so. Plainly fortune was favouring him at each new turning.

For here was a somewhat rumpled black suit and along with it a blue-striped shirt, showing
slight signs of recent wear, a turndown collar that was barely soiled, and a plain black four-in-hand
tie. Trencher went through the pockets of the suit, finding several letters addressed to Marcus
K. Parker at an address in Broad Street, down in the financial district. Sewn in the lining
of the inner breast pocket of the coat was a tailor's label also bearing the same name. At
the sight Trencher grinned. He had not missed it very far. He had registered as Potter, whereas
now he knew that the proper owner of the suit case must be named Parker.

Parker, he figured, belonged to the race of commuters; evidently he lived in Stamford and did
business in New York. Accepting this as the correct hypothesis the rest of the riddle was easy
to read. Mr. Parker, coming to town that morning, had brought with him his dinner rig in a
suit case.

Somewhere, probably at his office, he had changed from his everyday garb to the clothes he
brought with him, then he had packed his street clothes into the bag and brought it uptown
with him and checked it at the Grand Central, intending after keeping his evening engagements
to reclaim the baggage before catching a late train for Stamford.

Fine! Results from Trencher's standpoint could hardly have been more pleasing. Exulting inwardly
over the present development and working fast, he stripped off his clothing down to his shoes
and his undergarments--first, though, emptying his own pockets of the money they contained,
both bills and silver, and of sundry personal belongings, such as a small pocketknife, a fountain
pen, a condensed railway guide and the slip of pasteboard that represented the hat and coat
left behind at the Clarenden. Then he put on the things that had come out of the Stamford man's
bag--the shirt, the collar and the tie, and finally the outer garments, incidentally taking
care to restore to Parker's coat pocket all of Parker's letters.

This done he studied himself in the glass of the chiffonier and was deeply pleased. Mirrored
there he saw a different man from the one who had rented the room. When he quit this hotel,
as presently he meant to do, he would not be Trencher, the notorious confidence man who had
shot a fellow crook, nor yet would he be the Thompson who had sent a darky for a bag, nor the
Tracy who had picked a guest's pocket at a fashionable restaurant, nor yet the Potter who had
engaged a room with bath for a night. From overcoat and hat to shoes and undergarments he would
be Mr. Marcus K. Parker, a thoroughly respectable gentleman, residing in the godly town of
Stamford and engaged in reputable mercantile pursuits in Broad Street--with opened mail in
his pocket to prove it.

The rest would be simplicity. He had merely to slip out of the hotel, carrying the key to 1734
with him. Certainly it would be as late as noon the following day before chambermaid or clerk
tried to rouse the supposed occupant of the empty room. In all likelihood it would be later
than noon. He would have at least twelve hours' start, even though the authorities were nimble-witted
enough to join up the smaller mystery of an abandoned suit case belonging to one man and an
abandoned outfit of clothing belonging to another, with the greater and seemingly unconnected
mystery of the vanishment of the suspect in the Sonntag homicide case. Long before this potential
eventuality could by any chance develop, he meant, under another name and in another disguise,
to be hidden away at a quiet boarding house that he knew of in a certain obscure factory town
on a certain trolley line leading out from Pittsburgh.

Now to clear out. He bestowed in various pockets his money, his knife, his pen and his railway
guide, not one of these having upon it any identifying marks; he pouched his small change and
his roll of bills. Nothing remained to be disposed of or accounted for save the pasteboard
square that represented the coat and hat left behind at the Clarenden. When this had been torn
into fine and indistinguishable bits and when as a final precaution the fragments had been
tossed out of the window, the last possible evidence to link the pseudo Parker with the real
Trencher in this night's transactions would be gone.

He had the slip in his hands and his fingers were in the act of twisting it in halves when
the thought that something had been overlooked--something vitally important--came to him; and
he paused to cogitate. What had been forgotten? What had he overlooked? What had he left undone
that should have been done? Then suddenly appreciation of the thing missing came to him and
in a quick panic of apprehension he felt through all the pockets of Parker's suit and through
the pockets of his own garments, where he had flung them down on the bed, alongside the rifled
suit case.

His luck piece was gone--that was it! The old silver trade dollar, worn thin and smooth by
years of handling and with the hole drilled through the centre of it--that was what was gone--his
token, his talisman, his charm against evil fortune. He had carried it for years, ever since
he had turned crook, and for nothing in this world would he have parted from it.

In a mounting flurry of superstitious terror he searched the pockets again, with fingers that
shook--this man who had lost faith in human beings, who had no hope and no fear for the hereafter,
who had felt no stabs of regret or repentance for having killed a man, whose thoughts had never
known remorse for any misdeed of his. The second hunt and the third and the fourth were fruitless
as his first one had been; Trencher's luck piece was gone.

Those wise men, the alienists, say that all of us are insane on certain subjects, however sane
we may be upon other subjects. Certainly in the mental composition of every one of us is some
quirk, some vagary, some dear senseless delusion, avowed or private. As for Trencher, the one
crotchet in his cool brain centred about that worthless trade dollar. With it in his possession
he had counted himself a winner, always. Without it he felt himself to be a creature predestined
and foreordained to disaster.

To it he gave all the credit for the fact that he had never served a prison sentence. But once,
and once only, had he parted company with it, even temporarily. That was the time when Murtha,
that crafty old Central-Office hand, had picked him up on general principles, had taken him
to headquarters, and first stripping him of all the belongings on his person, had carried him
to the Bertillon Bureau, and then and there, without shadow of legal right, since Trencher
was neither formally accused of nor formally indicted for any offence and had no previous record
of convictions, had forced him to undergo the ordeals, ethically so repugnant to the instincts
of the professional thief, of being measured and finger-printed and photographed, side face
and full face. He had cursed and protested and pleaded when Murtha confiscated the luck piece;
he had rejoiced when Murtha, seeing no harm in the thing, had restored it to him before lodging
him in a cell under the all-embracing technical charge of being a suspicious person. Because
he had so speedily got it back, Trencher had gone free again with the loss of but two days
of liberty--or anyway, so Trencher firmly believed. But because it had left his custody for
no more than an hour his pictures were now in the Gallery, and Murtha had learned the secret
of Trencher's one temperamental weakness, one fetish.

And now--at this time, of all times--it was gone again. But where had it gone? Where could
it have gone? Mentally he reconstructed all his acts, all his movements since he had risen
that morning and dressed--and then the solution came to him, and with the solution complete
remembrance. He had slipped it into the right-hand pocket of the new tan-coloured topcoat--to
impregnate the garment with good luck and to enhance the prospects for a successful working-out
of the scheme to despoil the Wyoming cattleman; and he had left it there. And now here he was
up on the seventeenth floor of the Bellhaven Hotel and the fawn-coloured coat with the luck
piece in one of its pockets dangled on a hook in the cloak booth of the Clarenden café, less
than a block away from the spot where he had shot Sonntag.

He marvelled that without his talisman he had escaped arrest up to now; it was inconceivable
that he had won his way thus far. But then the answer to that was, of course, that he had retained
the pasteboard square that stood for possession of the coat itself. He gave thanks to the unclean
spirits of his superstition that apprehension of his loss had come to him before he destroyed
the slip. Had he gone ahead and torn it up he would now count himself as doomed. But he hadn't
torn it up. There it lay on the white coverlet of the bed.

He must make a try to recover his luck piece; no other course occurred to him. Trying would
be beset with hazards, accumulated and thickening. He must venture back into the dangerous
territory; must dare deadfalls and pitfalls; must run the chance of possible traps and probable
nets. By now the police might have definitely ascertained who it was that killed Sonntag; or
lacking the name of the slayer they might have secured a reasonably complete description of
him; might have spread the general alarm for a man of such and such a height and such and such
a weight, with such a nose and such eyes and such hair and all the rest of it. It might be
that the Clarenden was being watched, along with the other public resorts in the immediate
vicinity of where the homicide had been committed. It might even be that back in the Clarenden
he would encounter the real Parker face to face. Suppose Parker had finished his supper and
had discovered his loss--losses rather--and had made a complaint to the management; and suppose
as a result of Parker's indignation that members of the uniformed force had been called in
to adjudicate the wrangle; suppose through sheer coincidence Parker should see Trencher and
should recognise the garments that Trencher wore as his own. Suppose any one of a half dozen
things. Nevertheless, he meant to go back. He would take certain precautions--for all the need
of haste, he must take them--but he would go back.

He put the pink check into his waistcoat pocket, switched out the room light, locked the door
of the room on the outside, took the key with him and went down in an elevator, taking care
to avoid using the same elevator that shortly before brought him up to this floor level. Presently
he was outside the hotel, hurrying afoot on his return to Broadway. On the way he pitched the
key into an areaway.

Turning out of Forty-second Street into Broadway and thence going south to a point just below
the intersection with Fortieth Street, he approached the Clarenden from the opposite side of
Broadway. There was motive in this. One coming across from the opposite side and looking upward
at a diagonal slant could see through the windows along the front side of the Clarenden with
some prospect of making out the faces of such diners as sat at tables near the windows. Straining
his eyes as he crossed over, Trencher thought he recognised his man. He was almost sure he
made out the outlined head and shoulders of Parker sitting at a corner table alongside the
last window in the row. He trusted he was right and trusted still more fervently that Parker
would bide where he was for three or four minutes longer.

Tucking his head well down inside his upturned collar and giving the brim of his hat a tug
to bring it still farther forward over his eyes, he took a long breath, like a man preparing
for a dive in cold water, and went up the flight of stairs from the sidewalk into the building.
No one inside made as if to halt him; no one so far as he could tell gave him in passing even
an impersonal look. There was a wash room, as Trencher knew, at the back end of the ornate
hall which separated the Chinese lounge and the main café on one side, from the private dining
rooms and tea rooms on the other. That wash room was his present destination.

He reached it without mishap, to find it deserted except for a boy in buttons. To the boy he
surrendered hat and overcoat, and then in the midst of a feint at hitching up his shirt cuffs,
as though meaning to wash his hands, he snapped his fingers impatiently.

"I forgot something," he said for the boy's benefit; "left it in the café. Say, kid, watch
my hat and coat, will you? I'll be back in a minute."

"Yes, sir," promised the youth. "I'll take good care of 'em."

Bareheaded as he now was and lacking the overcoat, Trencher realised the chief elements of
his disguise were missing; still there had been for him no other course to follow than this
risky one. He could not claim ownership of one coat and one hat while wearing another coat
and another hat--that was certain. As he neared his goal he noted that both the maids on the
outside of the booth were for the instant engaged in helping the members of a group of men
and women on with their outdoor wraps. So much the better for him. He headed straight for the
third girl of the force, the one whose station was within the open-fronted booth. In front
of her on the flat shelf intervening between them he laid down the numbered pink slip, which
in the scheme of his hopes and fears stood for so much.

"Never mind my hat, miss," he said, making his tone casual; "I'm not through with my supper
yet. But just let me have my coat for one minute, will you, please? I want to get something
out of one of the pockets to show to a friend."

There was nothing unusual, nothing unconventional about the request. The girl glanced at the
figures on the check, then stepped back into her cuddy, seeking among rows of burdened hooks
for whatsoever articles would be on the hook bearing corresponding figures. To Trencher, dreading
the advent of the Stamford man out of the Chinese room alongside him and yet not daring to
turn his head to look, it seemed she was a very long time finding the hook. In reality the
time she took was to be gauged by seconds rather than by minutes.

"Is this the garment you desired, sir?" Speaking with an affected English drawl and with neither
curiosity nor interest in her face, the girl laid across her counter the tan-coloured overcoat,
one of its big smoked-pearl buttons glinting dimly iridescent in the light as she spread it out.

"That's it, thank you. Just one moment and I'll give it back to you."

Trencher strove to throttle and succeeded fairly well in throttling the eager note in his voice
as he took up the coat by its collar in his left hand.

The fingers trembled in spite of him as he thrust his right hand into the right-hand pocket.
Twitching and groping they closed on what was hidden there--a slick, cool, round, flat, thin
object, trade-dollar size. At the touch of the thing he sought and for all, too, that he stood
in such perilous case, Trencher's heart jumped with relief and gratification. No need for him
to look to make sure that he had his luck piece. He knew it by its feel and its heft and its
size; besides the tip of one finger, sliding over its smooth rimless surface, had found in
the centre of it the depression of the worn hole, and the sensitive nerves had flashed the
news to his brain. He slid it into a trousers pocket and passed the coat back to the girl;
and almost before she had restored it to its appointed hook, Trencher had regained the shelter
of the wash room and was repossessing himself of the slouch hat and the long black overcoat.

Back once more to the street he made the journey safely, nothing happening on the way out into
the November night to alarm him. The winking, blinking electrically jewelled clock in the sign
up the street told him it was just five minutes past midnight. He headed north, but for a few
rods only. At Fortieth Street he turned west for a short block and at Seventh Avenue he hailed
a south-bound trolley car. But before boarding the car he cast a quick backward scrutiny along
the route he had come. Cabs moved to and fro, shuttle fashion, but seemingly no pedestrians
were following behind him.

He was not particularly fearful of being pursued. Since he had cleared out from the Clarenden
without mishap it was scarcely to be figured that anyone would or could now be shadowing him.
He felt quite secure again--as secure as he had felt while in the locked room in the Bellhaven,
because now he had in his custody that which gave him, in double and triple measure, the sense
of assurance. One hand was thrust deep into his trousers pocket, where it caressed and fondled
the flat perforated disk that was there. It pleased him to feel the thing grow warmer under
his fingers, guaranteeing him against mischance. He did not so much as twist his head to glance
out of the car window as the car passed Thirty-ninth Street.

At Thirtieth Street he got off the car and walked west to Silver's place. Ninth Avenue was
almost empty and, as compared with Broadway, lay in deep shadows. The lights of the bar, filtering
through the filmed glass in one window of Silver's, made a yellowish blur in what was otherwise
a row of blank, dead house fronts. Above the saloon the squatty three-story building was all
dark, and from this circumstance Trencher felt sure he had come to the rendezvous before the
Kid arrived. Alongside the saloon door he felt his way into a narrow entryway that was as black
as a coal bunker and went up a flight of wooden steps to the second floor. At the head of the
steps he fumbled with his hand until he found a doorknob. As he knew, this door would not be
locked except from the inside; unless it contained occupants it was never locked. He knew,
too, what furniture it contained--one table and three or four chairs. Steering a careful course
to avoid bumping into the table, which, as he recalled, should be in the middle of the floor,
he found the opposite wall and, after a moment's search with his hands, a single electric bulb
set in a wall bracket. He flipped on the light.

"That's right," said a voice behind him. "Now that you've got your mitts up, keep 'em up!"

As regards the position of his hands Trencher obeyed. He turned his head though, and over his
shoulder he looked into the middle-aged face of Murtha, of the Central Office. Murtha's right
hand was in his coat pocket and Trencher knew that Murtha had him covered--through the cloth
of the coat.

"Hello, Murtha," said Trencher steadily enough, "what's the idea?"

"The idea is for you to stand right where you are without making any breaks until I get through
frisking you," said Murtha.

On noiseless feet he stepped across the floor, Trencher's back being still to him, and one
of his hands, the left one, with deft movements shifted about over Trencher's trunk, searching
for a weapon.

"Got no gat on you, eh?" said Murtha. "Well, that's good. Now then, bring your hands down slow,
and keep 'em close together. That's it--slow. I'm taking no chances, understand, and you'd
better not take any either."

Again Trencher obeyed. Still standing behind him Murtha slipped his arms about Trencher's middle
and found first one of Trencher's wrists and then the other. There was a subdued clicking of
steel mechanisms.

"Now then," said Murtha, falling back a pace or two, "I guess you can turn round if you want to."

Trencher turned round. He glanced at his hands, held in enforced companionship by the short
chain of the handcuffs, and then steadily at his captor.

"Why so fussy, Murtha?" he asked in a slightly contemptuous tone. "You never heard of me starting
any rough stuff when there was a pinch coming off, did you?"

"That's true," said the detective; "but when a gun's just bumped off one guy he's liable to
get the habit of bumping off other guys. Even a swell gun like you is. So that's why I've been
just a trifle particular."

"You're crazy, man! Who says I bumped anybody off?"

"I do, for one," replied Murtha cheerfully. "Still that's neither here nor there, unless you
feel like telling me all about what came off over in Thirty-ninth Street to-night.

"You've always been a safety player so far as I know--and I'm curious to know what made you
start in using a cannon on folks all of a sudden. At that, I might guess--knowing Sonntag like
I did."

"I don't know what you're talking about," parried Trencher. "I tell you you've got me wrong.
You can't frame me for something I didn't do. If somebody fixed Sonntag it wasn't me. I haven't
seen him since yesterday. I'm giving it to you straight."

"Oh well, we won't argue that now," said Murtha affably. In his manner was something suggestive
of the cat that has caught the king of the rats. A tremendous satisfaction radiated from him.
"You can stall some people, son, but you can't stall me. I've got you and I've got the goods
on you--that's sufficient. But before you and me glide down out of here together and start
for the front office I'd like to talk a little with you. Set down, why don't you, and make
yourself comfortable?" He indicated a chair.

Trencher took the chair and Murtha, after springing a catch which he found on the inner side
of the door, sat down in another.

"I've got to hand it to you, Trencher," went on the detective admiringly. "You sure do work
swift. You didn't lose much time climbing into that outfit you're wearing. How did you get
into it so quick? And, putting one thing with another, I judge you made a good fast get-away
too. Say, listen, Trencher, you might as well come clean with me. I'll say this for Sonntag--he's
been overdue for a croaking this long time. If I've got to spare anybody out of my life I guess
it might as well be him--that's how I stand. He belonged to the Better-Dead Club to start with,
Sonntag did. If it was self-defence and you can prove it, I've got no kick coming. All I want
is the credit for nailing you all by my lonesome. Why not slip me the whole tale now, and get
it off your chest? You don't crave for any of this here third-degree stuff down at headquarters,
and neither do I. Why not spill it to me now and save trouble all round?"

His tone was persuasive, wheedling, half friendly. Trencher merely shook his head, forcing
a derisive grin to his lips.

"Can the bull, Murtha," he said. "You haven't got a thing on me and you know it."

"Is that so? Well, just to play the game fair, suppose I tell you some of the things I've got
on you--some of them. But before I start I'm going to tell you that your big mistake was in
coming back to where you'd left that nice new yellow overcoat of yours. Interested, eh?" he
said, reading the expression that came into Trencher's face in spite of Trencher's efforts.
"All right then, I'll go on. You had a good prospect of getting out of town before daylight,
but you chucked your chance when you came back to the Clarenden a little while ago. But at
that I was expecting you; in fact, I don't mind telling you that I was standing behind some
curtains not fifteen feet from that check room when you showed up. I could have grabbed you
then, of course, but just between you and me I didn't want to run the risk of having to split
the credit fifty-fifty with any bull, in harness or out of it, that might come butting in.
The neighbourhood was lousy with cops and plain-clothes men hunting for whoever it was that
bumped off Sonntag; they're still there, I guess, hunting without knowing who it is they're
looking for, and without having a very good description of you, either. I was the only fellow
that had the right dope, and that came about more by accident than anything else. So I took
a chance, myself. I let you get away and then I trailed you--in a taxi.

"All the time you was on that street car I was riding along right behind you, and I came up
these steps here not ten feet behind you. I wanted you all for myself and I've got you all
by myself."

"You don't hate yourself, exactly, do you?" said Trencher. "Well, without admitting anything--because
there's nothing to admit--I'd like to know, if you don't mind, how you dope it out that I had
anything to do with Sonntag's being killed--that is if you're not lying about him being killed?"

"I don't mind," said Murtha blithely. "It makes quite a tale, but I can boil it down. I wasn't
on duty to-night--by rights this was a night off for me. I had a date at the Clarenden at eleven-thirty
to eat a bite with a brother-in-law of mine and a couple of friends of his--a fellow named
Simons and a fellow named Parker, from Stamford.

"I judge it's Parker's benny and dicer you're wearing now.

"Well, anyhow, on my way to the Clarenden about an hour or so ago I butt right into the middle
of all the hell that's being raised over this shooting in Thirty-ninth Street. One of the precinct
plain-clothes men that's working on the case tells me a tall guy in a brown derby hat and a
short yellow overcoat is supposed to have pulled off the job. That didn't mean anything to
me, and even if it had I wouldn't have figured you out as having been mixed up in it. Anyway,
it's no lookout of mine. So I goes into the Clarenden and has a rarebit and a bottle of beer
with my brother-in-law and the others.

"About half-past eleven we all start to go, and then this party, Parker, can't find his coat
check. He's sure he stuck it in his vest pocket when he blew in, but it ain't there. We look
for it on the floor but it's not there, either. Then all of a sudden Parker remembers that
a man in a brown derby, with a coat turned inside out over his arm, who seemed to be in a hurry
about something, came into the Clarenden along with him, and that a minute later in that Chinese
room the same fellow butts into him. That gives me an idea, but I don't tell Parker what's
on my mind. I sends the head waiter for the house detective, and when the house detective comes
I show him my badge, and on the strength of that he lets me and Parker go into the cloak room.
Parker's hoping to find his own coat and I'm pretending to help him look for it, but what I'm
really looking for is a brown derby hat and a short yellow coat--and sure enough I find 'em.
But Parker can't find his duds at all; and so in putting two and two together it's easy for
me to figure how the switch was made. I dope it out that the fellow who lifted Parker's check
and traded his duds for Parker's is the same fellow who fixed Sonntag's clock. Also I've got
a pretty good line on who that party is; in fact I practically as good as know who it is.

"So I sends Parker and the others back to the table to smoke a cigar and stick round awhile,
and I hang round the door keeping out of sight behind them draperies where I can watch the
check room. Because, you see, Trencher, I knew you were the guy and I knew you'd come back--if
you could get back."

He paused as though expecting a question, but Trencher stayed silent and Murtha kept on.

"And now I'm going to tell you how I come to know you was the right party. You remember that
time about two years ago when I ran you in as a suspect and down at headquarters you bellyached
so loud because I took a bum old coin off of you? Well, when I went through that yellow overcoat
and found your luck piece, as you call it, in the right-hand pocket, I felt morally sure, knowing
you like I did, that as soon as you missed it you'd be coming back to try to find it. And sure
enough you did come back. Simple, ain't it?

"The only miscalculation I made was in figuring that when you found it gone from the pocket
you'd hang round making a hunt for it on the floor or something. You didn't though. I guess
maybe you lost your nerve when you found it wasn't in that coat pocket. Is that right?"

"But I did find it!" exclaimed Trencher, fairly jostled out of his pose by these last words
from his gloating captor. "I've got it now!"

Murtha's hand stole into his trousers pocket and fondled something there.

"What'll you bet you've got it now?" he demanded gleefully. "What'll you bet?"

"I'll bet my life--that's all," answered Trencher. "Here, I'll show you!"

He stood up. Because his wrists were chained he had to twist his body sidewise before he could
slip one hand into his own trousers pocket.

He groped in its depths and then brought forth something and held it out in his palm.

The poor light of the single electric bulb glinted upon an object which threw off dulled translucent
tints of bluish-green--not a trade dollar, but a big overcoat button the size of a trade dollar--a
flat, smooth, rimless disk of smoked pearl with a tiny depression in the middle where the thread
holes went through. For a little space of time both of them with their heads bent forward contemplated
it.

Then with a flirt of his manacled hands Trencher flung it away from him, and with a sickly
pallor of fright and surrender stealing up under the skin of his cheeks he stared at the detective.

"You win, Murtha," he said dully. "What's the use bucking the game after your luck is gone?
Come on, let's go down-town. Yes, I bumped off Sonntag."

CHAPTER V

QUALITY FOLKS

In our town formerly there were any number of negro children named for Caucasian friends of
their parents. Some bore for their names the names of old masters of the slavery time, masters
who had been kindly and gracious and whose memories thereby were affectionately perpetuated;
these were mainly of a generation now growing into middle age. Others--I am speaking still
of the namesakes, not of the original bearers of the names--had been christened with intent
to do honour to indulgent and well-remembered employers of post-bellum days. Thus it might
befall, for example, that Wadsworth Junius Courtney, Esquire, would be a prominent advocate
practicing at the local bar and that Wadsworth Junius Courtney Jones, of colour, would be his
janitor and sweep out his office for him. Yet others had been named after white children--and
soon after--for the reason that the white children had been given first names having a fine,
full, sonorous sound or else a fascinatingly novel sound.

Of these last there were instances amounting in the aggregate to a small host.

I seem to remember, for example, that once a pink girl-mite came into the world by way of a
bedroom in a large white house on Tilghman Avenue and was at the baptismal font sentenced for
life to bear the Christian name of Rowena Hildegarde.

Or is Rowena Hildegarde a Christian name?

At any rate, within twelve months' time, there were to be found in more crowded and less affluent
quarters of our thriving little city four more Rowena Hildegardes, of tender years, or rather,
tender months--two black ones, one chrome-yellow one, and one sepia-brown one.

But so far as the available records show there was but one white child in our town who bore
for its name, bestowed upon it with due knowledge of the fact and with deliberate intent, the
name of a person of undoubted African descent. However, at this stage to reveal the circumstances
governing this phenomenon would be to run ahead of our tale and to precipitate its climax before
the groundwork were laid for its premise. Most stories should start at the beginning. This
one must.

       *       *       *       *       *

From round the left-hand corner of the house came with a sudden blare the sound of melody--words
and music--growing steadily louder as the unseen singer drew nearer. The music was a lusty,
deep-volumed camp-meeting air, with long-drawn quavers and cadences in it. The words were as
follows:

        Had a lovin' mother,
        Been climbin' up de hill so long;
        She been hopin' git to heaben in due time
        Befo' dem heaben do's close!

And then the chorus, voicing first a passionate entreaty, then rising in the final bars to
a great exultant shout:

        Den chain dat lion down, Good Lawd!
        Den chain dat lion down!
            Oh, please!
        Good Lawd, done chained dat lion down!
        Done chained dat deadly lion down!
            Glor-e-e-e!

The singer, still singing, issued into view, limping slightly--a wizen woman, coal-black and
old, with a white cloth bound about her head, turban fashion, and a man's battered straw hat
resting jauntily upon the knotted kerchief. Her calico frock was voluminous, unshapely and
starch-clean. Her under lip was shoved forward as though permanently twisted into a spout-shape
by the task of holding something against the gums of her lower front teeth, and from one side
of her mouth protruded a bit of wood with the slivered bark on it. One versed in the science
of forestry might have recognised the little stub of switch as a peach-tree switch; one bred
of the soil would have known its purpose. Neither puckered-out lip nor peach-tree twig seemed
to interfere in the least with her singing. She flung the song out past them--over the lip,
round the twig.

With her head thrown away back, her hands resting on her bony hips, and her feet clunking inside
a pair of boys' shoes too large for her, she crossed the lawn at an angle. In all things about
her--in her gait, despite its limp, in her pose, her figure--there was something masterful,
something dominating, something tremendously proud. Considering her sparseness of bulk she
had a most astoundingly big strong voice, and in the voice as in the strut was arrogant pride.

She crossed the yard and let herself out of a side gate opening upon an empty side street and
went out of sight and ultimately out of hearing down the side street in the hot sunshine of
the late afternoon. But before she was out of hearing she had made it plain that not only a
loving mother and a loving father, but likewise a loving brother and a loving sister, a loving
nephew and a loving uncle, a loving grandmother and divers other loving relatives--had all
been engaged in the hill-climbing pilgrimage along a lion-guarded path.

The hush that succeeded her departure was a profound hush; indeed, by comparison with the clamorous
outburst that had gone before it seemed almost ghastly. Not even the shrieks of the caucusing
blue jays that might now be heard in the oak trees upon the lawn, where they were holding one
of their excited powwows, served to destroy the illusion that a dead quiet had descended upon
a spot lately racked by loud sounds. The well-dressed young man who had been listening with
the air of one intent on catching and memorising the air, settled back in the hammock in which
he was stretched behind the thick screen of vines that covered the wide front porch of the house.

"The estimable Aunt Charlotte appears to be in excellent voice and spirits to-day," he said
with a wry smile. "I don't know that I ever heard her when her top notes carried farther than
they did just now."

The slender black-haired girl who sat alongside him in a porch chair winced.

"It's perfectly awful--I know it," she lamented. "I suppose if Mildred and I have asked her
once not to carry on like that here at the front of the house we've asked her a hundred times.
It's bad enough to have her whooping like a wild Indian in the kitchen. But it never seems
to do any good."

"Why don't you try getting rid of her altogether as a remedy?" suggested the young man.

"Get rid of Aunt Sharley! Why, Harvey--why, Mr. Winslow, I mean--we couldn't do that! Why,
Aunt Sharley has always been in our family! Why, she's just like one of us--just like our own
flesh and blood! Why, she used to belong to my Grandmother Helm before the war----"

"I see," he said dryly, breaking in on her. "She used to belong to your grandmother, and now
you belong to her. The plan of ownership has merely been reversed, that's all. Tell me, Miss
Emmy Lou, how does it feel to be a human chattel, with no prospect of emancipation?" Then catching
the hurt look on her flushed face he dropped his raillery and hastened to make amends. "Well,
never mind. You're the sweetest slave girl I ever met--I guess you're the sweetest one that
ever lived. Besides, she's gone--probably won't be back for half an hour or so. Don't hitch
your chair away from me--I've got something very important that I want to tell you--in confidence.
It concerns you--and somebody else. It concerns me and somebody else--and yet only two persons
are concerned in it."

He was wrong about the time, however, truthful as he may have been in asserting his desire
to deal confidentially with important topics. Inside of ten minutes, which to him seemed no
more than a minute, seeing that he was in love and time always speeds fast for a lover with
his sweetheart, the old black woman came hurrying back up the side street, and turned in at
the side gate and retraversed the lawn to the back of the old house, giving the vine-screened
porch a swift searching look as she hobbled past its corner.

Her curiosity, if so this scrutiny was to be interpreted, carried her further. In a minute
or two she suddenly poked her head out through the open front door. She had removed her damaged
straw headgear, but still wore her kerchief. Hastily and guiltily the young man released his
hold upon a slim white hand which somehow had found its way inside his own. The sharp eyes
of the old negress snapped. She gave a grunt as she withdrew her head. It was speedily to develop,
though, that she had not entirely betaken herself away. Almost immediately there came to the
ears of the couple the creak-creak of a rocking-chair just inside the hall, but out of view
from their end of the porch.

"Make the old beldam go away, won't you?" whispered the man.

"I'll try," she whispered back rather nervously. Then, raising her voice, she called out in
slightly strained, somewhat artificial voice, which to the understanding of the annoyed young
man in the hammock appeared to have almost a suggestion of apprehension in it:

"Is--is that you, Aunt Sharley?" 

He was hard pressed several times by Marshall and Oswald, sen., and
had the worst of the tackling, but he generally came up smiling, and
renewed hostilities with Spartan bravery.

~M. M'Keown.~

Mr. M'Keown was decidedly the best back on the losing side that day,
and his defence near goal splendid.

He is not, however, particularly careful in his returns, and sometimes
kicks over his own lines when hard pressed, but there can be only
one opinion as to his genuine ability in close tackling--he can do
it to perfection.

During the game, even Marshall, who is not afraid of anybody, sometimes steered clear of M'Keown
by passing up the ball to Johnstone instead of keeping possession to the last. He played against
Ireland the same year.

~W. Maley.~

The Celtic had as their three half-backs in the contest under review Messrs. W. Maley, J. M'Laren,
and J. Kelly (the latter of whom has already been mentioned in a previous article). Mr. W.
Maley, if I am not mistaken, is a young member of a very young club that has made a name for itself
in a couple of seasons.

He has, however, a deal to learn before he can be classed alongside Kelly and M'Laren. He is kind
of slipshod in his mode of tackling, wanting finish, but nevertheless a dangerous man to meet
in a charge.

~J. M'Laren.~

The finest half-back of the Irish combination is undoubtedly Mr. J.
M'Laren, and in this tie his play was really magnificent.

When the Volunteers' forwards again and again got near the Celtic goal, he was the first to
checkmate them, and, not contented to work his own place successfully, frequently went to the
assistance of some of the forwards when he thought they had more than enough to do. He played
for his old club, the Hibernian, against Wales in 1888, and in 1889 against England for the Celtic.

~M.
Dunbar.~

Mr. Dunbar was one of the most active men in the Celtic forward division in this match, and
showed very good dribbling, but was easily tackled when getting near goal, and more than once
"removed" off the ball by Auld and Lochhead. He is, however, a steady worker, and most reliable
when backing up. Mr. Dunbar, if I am not mistaken, was at one time a member of the Cartvale,
and played for Scotland against Ireland for that club in 1886.

~R. M'Callum.~

In his general style of play Mr. M'Callum was not unlike Mr. William M'Kinnon (Dumbarton), who
flourished from 1881 to 1885, and was one of the best forwards in that county. He was not such
a tricky and cunning tackler, however, but faced up to his man with a confidence that betokened
superiority. He was, like the rest of the Celtic forwards, a good
dribbler, and possessed considerable speed.

For a young player he was also very judicious in passing the ball, and during this contest
he helped to start some of the best runs of the day.

He played against Ireland, at Belfast, in 1888, and is now located
in Blackburn, where he partners Harry Campbell on the right wing of
the Rovers.

~W. Groves.~

It was in the final tie for the Scottish Challenge Cup between the Hibernian and Dumbarton in
1887, which the crack Edinburgh team won by two goals to one, that brought Mr. Groves into
special notice, and it may be, for aught I know, caused him to be carried off by the Celtic later
on.

Like a good many other players, he varies a bit in his style. Some days he is easily tackled;
while at others not a single back or half-back on the field has a
chance with him, and it must be said of him that he is one of the
neatest dribblers of the day.

He played against Wales in 1888.

~J. Coleman.~

Among the forward division of the Celtic, Mr. Coleman was a decided acquisition, and during that
same season scored a lot of goals for the new Irish combination, which came to the front with
something like the rapidity of "Jonah's gourd." A beautiful dribbler and runner, he made several
grand spurts towards the 3rd L.R.V. goal, but had a weakness for keeping the ball too long, and was often
tackled by the sure feet of Rae and Thomson.

In speed and general play he reminded me very much of Mr. William Miller (3rd L.R.V.), an International
against England as far back as 1876.

~T. Maley.~

When the whole of the Celts were at their best, and this happened
pretty often last season in their Challenge Cup ties, Mr. T. Maley
generally rose to the occasion, and led his team brilliantly.

His steady-going style is much liked, not only by his colleagues, but spectators, and it is
quite a rare thing to see him grassed by an opponent. When approaching the goal with the ball,
he is like the priest who had a "wonderful way wid him"--slipping
through the backs in a manner that is sure to make the goalkeeper
gnash his teeth, and wish Maley was far enough away.

V.--THE PIONEERS OF ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL IN SCOTLAND;

OR,

"THE CONQUEROR'S FOOTBALL BOOTS."

My football boots are getting what might be called shabby genteel
now, and no wonder.

If they could speak they would tell you many a strange episode in the life of an Association
football player, and how he kept his place in a leading club for nearly a dozen years. They
have been old and dear friends, those well-worn boots, and although
now somewhat curled up at the toes, have kicked many a good goal out
of a hot and exciting scrummage in front of an opponent's upright
posts, and even in an International tussle; but now that they, like
myself, have retired from active duty, and may reasonably be supposed
not to be encumbered with existing prejudices, which in the nature
of things might more or less interfere with expressing an honest opinion
about the Association football player of the past or his colleagues
and successors, I will introduce them to you, and in figurative language
allow them to tell their own unvarnished tale.

My last advice, however, to you, my old friends, before leaving you to the tender mercies of
a scribbler, is not to answer all the questions he thinks proper to put. Please don't tell him
what you heard or saw after leaving the football field clinging to my sole and instep, of my
love intrigues, my stolen interviews with blue-eyed Annie, and when she jilted me and got married
to Charlie Quilter, who played "left wing" in the Flying Blues. Charlie must have regretted
what he did more than once.

The Blues used to play us a couple of games in the year, and not long
before Charlie got married he was, as a matter of course, one of their
eleven.

On that occasion I felt nettled to think that a big, broosy-faced, lisping fellow like Charlie
should have "put my eye out," and could not resist the temptation of frequently crossing to his
side during the game, and "going" for him. Oh! how my old companions, my boots, behaved on
the occasion--the very laces almost burst with indignation; but Quilter,
poor soul, never gave a winch, and bore it with becoming fortitude.

He has now, like myself, got settled in life (I am a confirmed bachelor),
and we are still the best of friends, for that "blue-eyed Annie loved
him, too," was one of those things I could never forget.

It is too bad, however, in me to block the way with this dissertation, and not allow Mr. Boots
to begin. I shall leave the rest to him with confidence.

Well, once upon a time (began Mr. Boots), I was a combination of circumstances. That is to say, I
went through many processes even before I became mature leather, and one afternoon I was brought
to a small shoemaker's shop in Crosshill tied up in a bundle.

There were lots of cuttings in that bundle--butt, ben, wrapper, cordivan, kid, calf-skin, and
even sheep-skin--but I was then a shapeless piece of wrapper, kipp,
and calf-skin.

When I was trysted there were few, if any, football boots made, and the old man who was entrusted with
my construction was a strange old "cove." He could make a pair of ordinary boots with any one,
but was not so sure about me. I was ordered by a genteel, nice-looking lad, with red cheeks and
clear black eyes. He addressed the representative of St. Crispin in a musical voice, but I then
formed an opinion of my future master, that he would be a little conceited and arrogant at times,
and this has proved correct. The instructions about covering my soles with bars was specially
impressed on the old man's memory, and every detail was carried out to the letter. When we were
completed, my brother and I, you would have admired us. If it were possible to have anything
handsome in the boot line, except, perhaps, a tiny, fur-lined lady's slipper, it was us. We
were sewed with substantial rosen-end, the division between the inseam and soles was filled
up with real leather skivings, and not the trashy "jump" which makes
up the bulk of the soles of football boots nowadays.

The more, in fact, I think of it, the more I am convinced that the present make of football boots
is a new-fangled device in the shoemaking trade, for are they not now got up of American leather,
brass nails, and other abominations, free of import duty! My master, I remember, came for
me (please consider that I am also representing my brother, for, like the Siamese twins, the
one can do nothing without the other) on a Saturday.

He told the old man that he was going to play a match with the Leven
Crowers that very afternoon, and must have me.

I was barely finished, but Tate's son got the bars put on all right, and I was handed over to
the tender mercies of my new master.

He was quite delighted with my appearance, and looked with pride, and even satisfaction, on my well-polished
uppers and wrapper soles. There was even a half-'un going at the paying.

The Leven Crowers were a young and powerful club, possessing more speed in running than any real
football ability at the time.

The club to which my master belonged was the first to introduce the new ideas in the game, as they
were then called, in Scottish soil, and as there were only three clubs in existence at the
time of which I am referring, the contests, as a matter of course, were few and far between,
and, consequently, looked forward to with more than ordinary pleasure. The other two clubs were
the Greenvale and the Kilback, but they were not of much account
(so my master had often said, and he was supposed to be a good judge).

I heard him say the Conquerors had "licked" these clubs over and
over again, and that they weren't in the same street.

When I was being laced up, however, for the fray that afternoon in the old toll-house on the road
to Battlefield (the Conquerors had no such modern requisite as a pavilion then), I heard Bob Gardens
express quite a different opinion about the Greenvale, and even go the length of saying that they
had a draw with them on the previous evening after a hard fight. This demonstrated a fact that
was useful to me in my subsequent career, viz., never to credit what other folks (especially football
players) said about the ability of opponents in the heat of a tussle.

Talking about the Leven Crowers, they were not to be despised. Although the haughty Conquerors
had given them their first lesson in Association football, they were fast coming up on them in some of
the points of the game. I heard my owner say that the first lesson was given at Alexandria, and
on that occasion the Crowers, who were then crack shinty players, arranged themselves in the
field as if for a match at that ancient Scottish game. That they had not forgotten their first
game with the Conquerors was amply illustrated in the present, which, I might again repeat,
was my first outset in public life. I was stiff at first, and pressed my master's instep rather
hard shortly after the kick-off. The contest was played on the Recreation Ground, and was witnessed
by very few spectators. True, there were certainly many choice spirits residing near the spot,
who came out to see us and enjoy a quiet outing, and have a friendly
crack.

Little did these club companions imagine that that small but enthusiastic gathering of spectators
was the harbinger of crowds composed of thousands of excited spectators who now assemble to
witness big Association matches every Saturday, not only to see the Conquerors, but other
clubs, very slightly removed from them in ability, playing "Cup ties." The Crowers' forwards
showed great pace, and one of them, Will Cumming, repeatedly got past me, despite the smart
manoeuvring of my master. Will, however, was somewhat wild in his dribbling, and could not keep the
ball close enough to his toes. Jim Wild was my master's backer up on the occasion, and as Jim
was decidedly the finest dribbler that ever toed a ball, and kept
his place for ten years against all comers, afterwards the pair managed
to intercept Cumming before he got close enough on goal to make a
shot.

The Crowers' goalkeeper was a good one, and could clear his place of defence with great ability,
but the backs were not of much account. Pate M'Wherry and Luke M'Tavish did the work at half-back,
but their kicking was somewhat feeble when compared with those of the Conquerors, Tom James
and Willie Keith. The Conquerors were far too anxious to score, and for some time kept up a
close cannonade at their opponents' goal without effect.

Bob Prentice used his hands cleverly, and, though the goal was again and again endangered, not
one of the forwards on my master's side could get the ball under the tape. A fine run was
made by Wild, Lucky, Grind, Short, and my master, and the ball brought up to within a few feet
of the Crowers' goal, but at the last second, Johnny Forrester, one of their centre forwards,
kicked it behind. This gave the Conquerors the corner flag-kick. My master, who was quite an
adept at corner flag-kicks, was sent to the spot, and placed the ball in a good position, but Bob
Prentice got it up in his hands at a critical moment, and threw it clear. Good runs were eventually
made on both sides, and once the Crowers nearly lowered our colours, but nothing was got by
either, and the game was drawn.

In those days the rules observed were somewhat different from those in vogue now. The game was
far prettier. There was none of that heading which forms such important factors in the style of modern
playing. When the ball was thrown in from the touch-line the rule insisted that it had first to
land on the ground before being touched, and consequently head play was unnecessary, and dribbling
was, as a matter of course, considered the most important point, combined with taking smart possession
of the ball as soon as it touched the ground after being thrown in. My master was smart at getting
on the leather, and, next to Jim Wild, he was the most accomplished dribbler in the Conquerors.
If there is anyone capable of telling what he could do, 'tis I. How
he used to keep my toes in a circle as he left the grass behind his
heels, piloting the ball past the opposing backs, I know to my loss,
and a very great depreciation in tear and wear.

He was a veritable "dodger," this owner of mine. Never afraid of a charge, he would, in order
either to secure the ball or keep it, attack the biggest man in an opposing team, aye, and
knock him over, too. Sometimes he lost his temper when things went against him, and, while
his remarks to an adversary were somewhat cutting and at times verging on impertinence, they were
always within the scope of "Parliamentary." In after life, however, my master found several foemen
worthy of his steel amongst backs and half-backs in the Flying Blues, the Crowers, the Cedargrove,
Red Cross, and North Western, and he sometimes came off second best.

It is all very well to say that there were "great men in those days." So there were, but the same
remark can be made equally applicable now, for they are even more common, and you find them
scattered over the length and breadth of the land. It would decidedly weary you, my friend and
reader, were I to detail all the games in which I have taken an active
part, and you will at once admit that I may succeed in pleasing you
better if I give a short sketch of the leading clubs and players who
have wrought so hard and done so much to make the Association game
so popular.

Jim Wild has been mentioned in connection with his club (the Conquerors), but it is necessary
to give him a line or two more. There was no other Association club in Scotland when the Conquerors
were put into ship-shape order, and consequently no opponents to play. They could not challenge
themselves to mortal combat, and there were none but Rugby clubs, whose members treated the
new order of things in football as childish amusement, and unworthy of free-born Britons.
"Give us," they said, "the exciting runs, the glorious tackling,
the manly maul, and the beautiful dropped goal, and we will meet you
a bit of the way, but not otherwise.

We don't believe in loafing about the field at times, when only one or two of the side are engaged;
we want to be active." "Well," said the Conquerors (one of whom had been offered a place in
the Twenty in the Rugby match between Glasgow and Edinburgh), "you
don't know Association rules, or you would never make such absurd
assertions about the new game. If there is really any inactivity in
football while being played, that inaction is clearly shown in a Rugby
maul, where the one half of the side are merely spectators. It was Aunt Sharley who had skimped and scrimped
to make the available funds cover the necessary expenses of the little household in those two
or three lean years succeeding their mother's death, when dubious investments, which afterward
turned out to be good ones, had chiseled a good half off their income from the estate. It was
Aunt Sharley who, when the question of going away to boarding school rose, had joined by invitation
in the conference on ways and means with the girls' guardians, Judge Priest and Doctor Lake,
and had cast her vote and her voice in favour of the same old-fashioned seminary that their
mother in her girlhood had attended. The sisters themselves had rather favoured an Eastern
establishment as being more fashionable and smarter, but the old woman stood fast in her advocacy
of the other school. What had been good enough for her beloved mistress was good enough for
her mistress' daughters, she insisted; and, anyhow, hadn't the quality folks always gone there?
Promptly Doctor Lake and Judge Priest sided with her; and so she had her way about this important
matter, as she had it about pretty much everything else.

It was Aunt Sharley who had indignantly and jealously vetoed the suggestion that a mulatto
sewing woman, famed locally for her skill, should be hired to assist in preparing the wardrobes
that Emmy Lou and Mildred must take with them. It was Aunt Sharley who, when her day's duties
were over, had sat up night after night until all hours, straining her eyes as she plied needle
and scissors, basting and hemming until she herself was satisfied that her chillen's clothes
would be as ample and as ornate as the clothes which any two girls at the boarding school possibly
could be expected to have. It was Aunt Sharley who packed their trunks for them, who kissed
them good-by at the station, all three of them being in tears, and who, when the train had
vanished down the tracks to the southward, had gone back to the empty house, there to abide
until they came home to her again. They had promised to write to her every week--and they had,
too, except when they were too busy or when they forgot it. Finally, it was Aunt Sharley who
never let them forget that their grandfather had been a governor of the state, that their father
had been a colonel in the Confederacy, and that they were qualified "to hole up they haids
wid de fines' in de land."

When they came to this phase of the recapitulation there sprang into the minds of both of them
a recollection of that time years and years in the past when Aunt Sharley, accompanying them
on a Sunday-school picnic in the capacity of nursemaid, had marred the festivities by violently
snatching Mildred out of a circle playing King Willyum was King James' Son just as the child
was about to be kissed by a knickerbockered admirer who failed to measure up to Aunt Sharley's
jealous requirements touching on quality folks; and, following this, had engaged in a fight
with the disappointed little boy's coloured attendant, who resented this slur upon the social
standing of her small charge. Aunt Sharley had come off victor in the bout, but the picnic
had been spoiled for at least three youngsters. So much for Aunt Sharley's virtues--for her
loyalty, her devotion, her unremitting faithfulness, her championship of their destinies, her
stewardship over all their affairs. Now to turn the shield round and consider its darker side:

Aunt Sharley was hardly a fit candidate for canonisation yet. Either it was too early for that--or
it was too late. She was unreasonable, she was crotchety, she was contentious, she was incredibly
intolerant of the opinions of others, and she was incredibly hardheaded. She had always been
masterful and arrogant; now more and more each day she was becoming a shrew and a tyrant and
a wrangler. She was frightfully noisy; she clarioned her hallelujah hymns at the top of her
voice, regardless of what company might be in the house. She dipped snuff openly before friends
of the girls and new acquaintances alike. She refused point-blank to wear a cap and apron when
serving meals. She was forever quarrelling with the neighbours' servants, with delivery boys,
with marketmen and storekeepers. By sheer obstinacy she defeated all their plans for hiring
a second servant, declaring that if they dared bring another darky on the place she would take
pleasure in scalding the interloper with a kettle of boiling water. She sat in self-imposed
judgment upon their admirers, ruthlessly rejecting those courtiers who did not measure up to
her arbitrary standards for appraising the local aristocracy; and toward such of the young
squires as fell under the ban of her disfavour she deported herself in such fashion as to leave
in their minds no doubt whatsoever regarding her hostility. In public she praised her wards;
in private she alternately scolded and petted them. She was getting more feeble, now that age
and infirmities were coming upon her, wherefore the house showed the lack of proper care. They
were afraid of her, though they loved her with all their hearts and knew she loved them to
the exclusion of every living person; they were apprehensive always of her frequent and unrestrained
outbreaks of temper. She shamed them and she humiliated them and she curbed them in perfectly
natural impulses--impulses that to them seemed perfectly proper also.

Small enough were these faults when set up alongside the tally of her goodnesses; moreover,
neither of the two rebels against her authority was lacking in gratitude. But it is the small
things that are most annoying usually, and, besides, the faults of the old woman were things
now of daily occurrence and recurrence, which chafed their nerves and fretted them, whereas
the passage of time was lessening the sentimental value of her earlier labours and sacrifices
in their behalf.

And here was another thing: While they had been getting older Aunt Sharley had been getting
old; they had grown up, overnight, as it were, and she could not be made to comprehend the
fact. In their case the eternal conflict between youth and crabbed age was merely being repeated--with
the addition in this particular instance of unusual complications.

For an hour or more the perplexed pair threshed away, striving to winnow the chaff from the
pure grain in Aunt Sharley's nature, and the upshot was that Emmy Lou had a headache and Mildred
had a little spell of crying, and they agreed that never had there been such a paradox of part
saint and part sinner, part black ogre and part black angel, as their Auntie was, created into
a troubled world, and that something should be done to remedy the evil, provided it could be
done without grievously hurting the old woman's feelings; but just what this something which
should be done might be neither of them could decide, and so they went to bed and to sleep.

And the next day was another day exactly similar in its petty annoyances to the day before.

But a day was to come before the summer ended when a way out was found. The person who found
the way out--or thought he did--was Mr. Harvey Winslow, the hero or villain of the hammock
episode previously described in this narrative. He did not venture, though, to suggest a definite
course of action until after a certain moonlit, fragrant night, when two happy young people
agreed that thereafter these twain should be one.

Mildred knew already what was impending in the romance of Emmy Lou. So perhaps did Aunt Sharley.
Her rheumatism had not affected her eyesight and she had all her faculties. All the same, it
was to Aunt Sharley that Emmy Lou went next morning to tell of the choice she had made. There
was no one whose consent had actually to be obtained. Both the girls were of age; as their
own master they enjoyed the use and control of their cosy little inheritance. Except for an
aunt who lived in New Orleans and some cousins scattered over the West, they were without kindred.
The Dabneys had been an old family, but not a large one. Nevertheless, in obedience to a feeling
that told her Aunt Sharley should be the first, next only to her sister, to share with her
the happiness that had come into her life, Emmy Lou sought out the old woman before breakfast time.

Seemingly Aunt Sharley approved. For if at the moment she mumbled out a complaint about chillens
too young to know their own minds being prone to fly off with the first young w'ite gen'l'man
that came along frum nobody knowed whar, still there was nothing begrudged or forced about
the vocal jubilations with which she made the house ring during the succeeding week. At prayer
meeting on Wednesday night at Zion Coloured Baptist Church and at lodge meeting on Friday night
she bore herself with an air of triumphant haughtiness which sorely irked her fellow members.
It was agreed privily that Sis' Charlotte Helm got mo' and mo' bigotty, and not alone that,
but mo' and mo' uppety, ever' day she lived.

If young Mr. Winslow had been, indirectly, the cause for her prideful deportment before her
own colour, it was likewise Mr. Winslow who shortly was to be the instrument for humbling her
into the dust. Now this same Mr. Winslow, it should be stated, was a masterful young man. Only
an abiding sense of humour kept him sometimes from being domineering. Along with divers other
qualities it had taken masterfulness for him at twenty-nine to be superintendent of our street-railway
system, now owned and operated by Northern capitalists. Likewise it had taken masterfulness
for him to distance the field of Emmy Lou's local admirers within the space of five short months
after he procured his transfer to our town from another town where his company likewise had
traction interests. He showed the same trait in the stand he presently took with regard to
the future status of Aunt Sharley in the household of which he was to become a member and of
which he meant to be the head.

For moral support--which she very seriously felt she needed--Emmy Lou took her sister with
her on the afternoon when she invaded the kitchen to break the news to Aunt Sharley. The girls
came upon the old woman in one of her busiest moments. She was elbows deep in a white mass
which in due time would become a batch of the hot biscuits of perfection. "Auntie," began Emmy
Lou in a voice which she tried to make matter-of-fact, "we've--I've something I want to say
to you."

"Ise lissenin', chile," stated the old woman shortly.

"It's this way, Auntie: We think--I mean we're afraid that you're getting along so in life--getting
so old that we----"

"Who say Ise gittin' ole?" demanded Aunt Sharley, and she jerked her hands out of the dough
she was kneading.

"We both think so--I mean we all think so," corrected Emmy Lou.

"Who do you mean by we all? Does you mean dat young Mistah Winslow, Esquire, late of de North?"
Her blazing eyes darted from the face of one sister to the face of the other, reading their
looks. "Uh-huh!" she snorted. "I mout 'a' knowed he'd be de ver' one to come puttin' sech notions
ez dem in you chillens' haids. Well, ma'am, an' whut, pray, do he want?" Her words fairly dripped
with sarcasm.

"He thinks--in fact we all three do--that because you are getting along in years--you know
you are, Auntie--and because your rheumatism bothers you so much at times that--that--well,
perhaps that we should make a change in the running of the house. So--so----" She hesitated,
then broke off altogether, anxious though she was to make an end to what she foresaw must be
a painful scene for all three of them. Poor Emmy Lou was finding this job which she had nerved
herself to carry through a desperately hard job. And Aunt Sharley's attitude was not making
it any easier for her either.

"'So' whut?" snapped Aunt Sharley; then answered herself: "An' so de wind blow frum dat quarter,
do hit? De young gen'l'man ain't j'ined de fambly yit an' already he's settin' hisse'f to run
it. All right den. Go on, chile--quit mumblin' up yore words an' please go on an' tell me whut
you got to say! But ef you's fixin' to bring up de subjec' of my lettin' ary one of dese yere
young flighty-haided, flibbertigibbeted, free-issue nigger gals come to work on dis place,
you mout ez well save yore breath now an' yereafter, 'ca'se so long ez Ise able to drag one
foot behine t'other I p'intedly does aim to manage dis yere kitchen."

"It isn't that--exactly," blurted out Emmy Lou. "You see, Auntie," she went on desperately,
"we've decided, Harvey and I, that after our marriage we'll live here. We couldn't leave Mildred
alone, and until she gets married this is going to be home for us all. And so we're afraid--with
one more coming into the household and everything--that the added work is going to be too heavy
for you to undertake. So we've decided that--that perhaps it would be better all round if you--if
we--if you----"

"Go on, chile; say it, whutever it is."

"----that perhaps it would be better if you left here altogether and went to live in that nice
little house that papa left you in his will."

Perhaps they did not see the stricken look that came into the eyes of the old negress or else
she hid the look behind the fit of rage that instantly possessed her. Perhaps they mistook
the grey pallor that overspread the old face, turning it to an ashen colour, for the hue of temper.

"Do it all mean, den, dat after all dese yeahs you's tryin' to git shet of me--tryin' to t'row
me aside lak an' ole worn-out broom? Well, I ain't gwine go!" Her voice soared shrilly to match
the heights of her tantrum.

"Your wages will go on just the same--Harvey insists on that as much as we do," Emmy Lou essayed.
"Don't you see, Auntie, that your life will be easier? You will have your own little home and
your own little garden. You can come to see us--come every day if you want to. We'll come to
see you. Things between us will go on almost exactly the same as they do now. You know how
much we love you--Mildred and I. You know we are trying to think of your comfort, don't you?"

"Of course you do, Aunt Sharley," Mildred put in. "It isn't as if you were going clear out
of our lives or we out of yours. You'll be ever so much happier."

"Well, I jes' ain't gwine go nary step." The defiant voice had become a passionate shriek.
"Think Ise gwine leave yere an' go live in dat little house down dere by dem noisy tracks whar
all dem odds an' ends of pore w'ite trash lives--dem scourin's an' sweepin's whut come yere
to wuk in de new cotton mill! Think Ise gwine be corntent to wuk in a gyarden whilst I knows
Ise needed right yere to run dis place de way which it should be run! Think Ise gwine set quiet
whilst Ise pulled up by de roots an' transported 'way frum de house whar Ise spend purty nigh
de whole of my endurin' life! Well, I won't go--I won't never go! I won't go--'ca'se I jes'
can't!" And then, to the intense distress of the girls, Aunt Sharley slumped into a chair,
threw her floury hands over her face and with the big tears trickling out between her fingers
she moaned over and over again between her gulping breaths:

"Oh, dat I should live to see de day w'en my own chillens wants to drive me away frum 'em!
Oh, dat I should live to see dis day!"

Neither of them had ever seen Aunt Sharley weep like this--shaken as she was with great sobs,
her head bowed almost to her knees, her bared arms quivering in a very palsy. They tried to
comfort her, tried to put their arms about her, both of them crying too. At the touch of their
arms stealing about her hunched shoulders she straightened, showing a spark of the spirit with
which they were more familiar. She wrenched her body free of them and pointed a tremulous finger
at the door. The two sisters stole out, feeling terribly guilty and thoroughly miserable.

It was not the Aunt Sharley they knew who waited upon them that dusk at supper. Rather it was
her ghost--a ghost with a black mask of tragedy for a face, with eyes swollen and reddened,
with lips which shook in occasional spasms of pain, though their owner strove to keep them
firm. With their own faces tear-streaked and with lumps in their throats the girls kept their
heads averted, as though they had been caught doing something very wrong, and made poor pretense
of eating the dishes that the old woman placed before them. Such glances as they stole at her
were sidelong covert glances, but they marked plainly enough how her shoulders drooped and
how she dragged herself about the table.

Within a space of time to be measured by hours and almost by minutes she seemed to have aged years.

It was a mute meal and a most unhappy one for the sisters. More than once Aunt Sharley seemed
on the point of saying something, but she, too, held her tongue until they had risen up from
their places. From within the passageway leading to the rear porch she spoke then across the
threshold of the door at the back end of the dining room.

"You, nur nobody else, can't turn me out of dis house," she warned them, and in her words was
the dead weight of finality. "An' ef you does, I ain't gwine leave de premises. Ise gwine camp
right dere on de sidewalk an' dere I means to stay twell de policemens teks me up fur a vagrom.
De shame of it won't be no greater fur me 'n 'tis fur you. Dat's all!" And with that she was
gone before they could answer, if indeed they had any answer to make.

It was the next day that the Daily Evening News announced the engagement and the date of the
marriage, which would follow within four weeks. Strictly speaking, why do I act as if beyond nerves
and egoism there were nothing else in me? and if there be anything else, why does not my auto-analysis
point it out to me? I have the courage to draw extreme conclusions, and do not hide the truth
from myself, but I decidedly negative the notion. Why? Because I have the unshaken conviction
that I am better than my actions. The cause of the latter is partly a certain incapacity of life,
partly the inheritance of my race and the disease of the times in which I live, and finally
that over-analysis which does not permit me to follow the first, simple impulses of nature, but
criticises until it reduces the soul to utter impotence. When a child I used to amuse myself
by piling up coin upon coin until the column, bending under its own
weight, tumbled down into one chaotic heap.

I am doing now exactly the same with my thoughts and intentions, until they collapse and roll
over each other in a disorderly confusion. For this very reason it has always been easier for
me to play a passive part than an active one. It appears to me that many cultured people are
attacked by the same disease. Criticism of ourselves and everything else is corroding our
active power; we have no stable basis, no point of issue, no faith in life. Therein lies the reason
why I do not care so much to win Aniela as I am afraid of losing her.

In speaking of a disease common to our time, I will not confine myself exclusively to my own
case. That somebody takes to his bed when an epidemic disease is raging is a very common occurrence;
nowadays criticism of everything is the epidemic spreading all over the world. The result is
that various roofs that sheltered men collapse over their heads. Religion, the very name of which
means "ties," is getting unloosened. Faith, even in those who still believe, is getting restive.
Through the roof of what we call Fatherland social currents begin to filter. There remains
only one ideal in presence of which the most hardened sceptic raises
his hat,--the People.

But on the base of this statue mischievous spirits are beginning already to scribble more or
less ribald jokes, and, what is still more strange, the mist of unbelief is rising from the heads
of those who, in the nature of things, ought to bow down reverently. Finally there will come
a gifted sceptic, a second Heine, to spit and trample on the idol, as in his time did Aristophanes;
he will not, however, trample on it in the name of old ideals, but in the name of freedom of
thought, in the name of freedom of doubt; and what will happen then I do not know. Most likely
on the huge, clean-wiped slate the devil will write sonnets. Can anything be done to prevent
all this? Finally, what does it matter to me? To attempt anything is not my business; I have
been trained too carefully as a child of my time.

But if all that is thought, that is achieved and happening, has for
its ultimate aim to increase the sum of general happiness, I permit
myself a personal remark as to that happiness; by which I do not mean
material comfort, but that inward spiritual peace in which I as well
as anybody else may be wanting.

Thus my grandfather was happier than my father, my father happier
than I, and as to my son, if ever I have one, he will simply be an
object of commiseration.

FLORENCE, 20 June.

The house of cards has tumbled down. I received a letter from my aunt. Aniela is engaged to Kromitzki,
and the marriage will take place in a few weeks.

She herself has fixed such a short date. After receiving the news I took a railway ticket, with
the intention of going straight to Ploszow, conscious all the time that it was a foolish thing
to do, which could lead to nothing.

But the impulse was upon me, and carried me along; when, collecting the last remnants of common-sense
and reflection, I stuck fast here.

FLORENCE, 22 June.

Simultaneously with my aunt's letter, I received a "faire part" addressed in a female hand. It is
not Aniela's handwriting, or her mother's; neither of them would have done it. Most likely it is
Pani Sniatynska's malicious device. Upon the whole, what does it matter? I got a blow with a club
on the head, and feel dizzy; it has shaken me more than it has hurt.

I do not know how it will be later on; they say one does not feel
a bullet wound at once.

But I have not sent a bullet through my head, I am not mad; I look
at the Lung Arno; I could sit down to a game of patience if I knew
how to play; in fact, I am quite well.

It is the old story,--among sincere friends the dogs tore the hare
to pieces.

My aunt considered it her Christian duty to show Aniela the letter I had written from Peli.

FLORENCE,
23 June.

In the morning, when I wake up,--or rather, when opening my eyes,--I am obliged to repeat to
myself that Aniela is marrying Kromitzki,--Aniela, so good, so loving, who insisted on sitting
up to take care of me when I returned from Warsaw to Ploszow; who looked into my eyes, hung
upon every word that came from my lips, and with every glance told me she was mine. That same Aniela
will not only be Kromitzki's wife, but within a week from the wedding will not be able to conceive
how she could ever hesitate in her choice between such a man as Ploszowski and a Jupiter like
Kromitzki. Strange things happen in this world,--so terrible and irrevocable that it takes away
the desire to live out the mean remnant of one's existence. Most likely Pani Celina together
with Pani Sniatynska make a great ado about Kromitzki, and praise him at my expense. I hope they
will leave Aniela in peace. It is my aunt's doing; she ought not to have allowed it, if only
for Aniela's sake, as she cannot possibly be happy with him. She herself says Aniela has accepted
him out of despair.

Here is that long, cursed letter:--

"I thank you for the last news,--all the more as that first letter from Peli was not only conclusive,
but also very cruel. I could scarcely believe that you had not only no affection for the girl,
but also neither friendship nor compassion. My dear Leon, I never asked nor advised you to
become engaged to Aniela at once,--I only wanted you to write a few kindly words, not to her
directly, but in a letter to me. And believe me, it would have been sufficient; for she loved
you as only girls like her can love. Put yourself in my position,--what could I do after having
received your letter? How could I conscientiously allow her to remain in her illusion, and at the
same time in that anxiety that evidently undermined her health? Chwastowski always sends a
special messenger for papers and letters, and brings them himself when he comes to breakfast.
Aniela saw there was a letter from you, because the poor child was always on the lookout for
Chwastowski, and took the letters from him under pretext that she
wanted to put them under my napkin; and the real reason was that she
might see whether there was a letter from you.

I noticed how her hands trembled when she poured out the tea. Touched by a sudden foreboding,
I hesitated whether to put off the reading of your letter until I
had gone into my room; but I was anxious about your health, and could
not wait.

God knows what it cost me not to show what I felt, especially as Aniela's eyes were fixed upon
my face. But I got a firm grip of myself, and even managed to say: 'Leon is still sorrowing,
but, thank God! his health is all right, and he sends you kind messages.'
Aniela inquired, as it were in her usual voice, 'Is he going to remain
long in Italy?' I saw how much the question meant to her, and had
not the heart to undeceive her then,--especially as Chwastowski and
the servants were there; so I said merely: 'No, not very long; I believe
he will soon come to see us.' If you had seen the flame that shot
up in her face, the sudden joy that kindled her eyes, and the effort
she made not to burst into tears.

Poor child! I feel inclined to cry every time I think of it. What I went through in the solitude
of my own room, you cannot imagine; but you wrote distinctly, 'I wish her happiness with Kromitzki;'
it was duty, my conscience told me, to open her eyes. There was no need to send for her,--she
came herself. I said to her, 'Aniela, dear, you are a good girl,
and a girl that submits to God's will.

We must be open with each other. I have seen the affection that was springing up between you
and Leon. It was my dearest wish you might come to love each other; but evidently the Lord willed
it otherwise.

If you have still any illusions, you must try to get rid of them.' I took her into my arms; for
she had grown deadly white, and I was afraid she might faint.

But she did not lose consciousness, but hid her head on my knees and said over and over again:
'What message did he send me?' I did not want to tell her, but then it struck me it might be better
for her if she knew the whole truth; and I told her you wished her happiness with Kromitzki.
She rose, and after a moment said, in a quite changed voice: 'Thank him for me, aunty!' and
then left the room. I am afraid you will not thank me for repeating to her your very words,
without disguising them under any kind expressions; but since you do not want Aniela, the more
plainly she is told about it the better.

Convinced that you treated her badly, she may forget you all the sooner. Besides, if it give
you pain, remember how much pain and anxiety you have caused us,--especially Aniela. Yet she
has more control over herself than I even expected. Her eyes were quite dry the whole day, and she gave
no sign of inward trouble; she is anxious to spare her mother, about whose health she is much concerned;
she only clung more to her and to me,--which moved me so deeply that
it made my chin tremble.

Pan Sniatynski, who came to see us the same day, did not notice anything unusual in Aniela.
Knowing he is in your confidence, I told him all about it; and he was dreadfully shocked, and
got into such a rage with you that it made me quite angry with him. I need not repeat what he
said,--you know his ways. You, who do not love Aniela, cannot understand how happy you might
have been with her; but you have done wrong, Leon, in making her believe you loved her. Not
only she,--we all thought the same; and that is where the sting lies. Only God knows how much
she suffered; and it was this that made her accept Kromitzki,--it was done out of despair.
She must have had a long talk with her mother, and then it was decided. When Kromitzki arrived
the day after, she treated him differently; and a week later they were engaged. Pan Sniatynski
heard about it only a few days ago, and he was tearing his hair; and as to my own feelings, I will
not even try to put them into words.

"I was more angry with you than I have ever been in my life with anybody, and only your second
letter has pacified me a little, though it convinced me at the same
time of the futility of my dreams.

I confess that after the first letter, and before Kromitzki had finally
proposed, I still thought: 'Perhaps God will be good to us and change
his heart; maybe he has written thus in a fit of auger!' but when
afterwards you sent kind messages to Aniela without denying or contradicting
what you had written in the first letter, I saw it was of no use deceiving
myself any longer.

Aniela's wedding is to take place on the 25th of July, and I will tell you why they have fixed
upon such a short date. Celina is really very ill, thinks she will soon die, and is afraid her
death might delay the marriage, and thus leave Aniela without a protector. Kromitzki is in a
hurry because he has his business to attend to in the East; lastly, Aniela wishes to drain
the cup with as little delay as possible. Ah! Leon, my boy, why should all this have happened,
and why is that poor child made unhappy?

"I would never have allowed her to marry Kromitzki, but how could I say a word against it, feeling
as I do that I am guilty in regard to Aniela. I was over-anxious to see you settled in life,
and never considered what might be the consequences for her. It is my fault, and consequently
I suffer not a little; I pray every day for the poor child.

"After the ceremony they will immediately leave for Volhynia. Celina remains with me for the
present; she was thinking of Odessa, but I will not let her go on
any account.

You know, my dear boy, how happy I am when you are with me, but do
not come now to Ploszow for Aniela's sake; if you wish to see me I
will come to you, but we must spare Aniela now as much as we can."

Why deceive myself any longer? When I read that letter I felt as if I could ram my head against
the wall,--not in rage or jealousy but in utter anguish.

23 June.

I cannot possibly fold my hands and let things take their own way. This marriage must not take
place; it would be too monstrous. To-day, Thursday, I have sent a telegram to Sniatynski,
entreating him by all the powers to be at Cracow by Sunday.

I shall leave here to-morrow.

I asked him not to mention the telegram to anybody. I will see him, talk to him, and beg him
to see Aniela in my name. I count much upon his influence. Aniela respects and likes him very
much. I did not apply to my aunt, because we men understand one another better. Sniatynski, as
a psychologist, can make allowance for the phase of life I have been
passing through lately.

I can tell him, too, about Laura; if I were to mention such a thing to my aunt she would cross
herself as if in presence of the Evil One.

I first wanted to write to Aniela; but a letter from me would attract attention and cause a
general confusion. I know Aniela's straight-forwardness; she would show the letter to her mother,
who does not like me and might twist the words so as to suit her own schemes, and Kromitzki would
help her. Sniatynski must see Aniela alone. His wife will help him. I hope he will undertake
the mission, though I am fully aware what a delicate task it is.

I have not slept for several nights. When I shut my eyes I see Aniela before me,--her face,
her eyes, her smile,--I even hear her voice. I cannot go on like this.

CRACOW, 26 June.

Sniatynski has arrived. He has promised to do it,--good fellow, God
bless him for it!

It is four o'clock at night, but I cannot sleep, so I sit down to
write, for I can do nothing else.

We talked together, discussed and quarrelled till three o'clock. Now he is sleeping in the adjoining
room. I could not at first persuade him to undertake the mission. "My dear fellow," he said, "what
right have I, a stranger, to meddle in your family affairs, and such a delicate affair too?
Pana Aniela could reduce me to silence at once by saying, 'What business is it of yours?'"

I assured him that Aniela would do nothing of that kind.

I acknowledged he was right in the main, but this was an exceptional case, and general rules could
not apply to it. My argument that it was for Aniela's sake seemed to convince him most; but I think
he is doing it a little for my sake too; he seemed sorry, and said I looked very ill. Besides,
he cannot bear Kromitzki. Sniatynski maintains that money speculations is the same as taking
money out of somebody else's pocket and put it in one's own. He takes many things amiss in Kromitzki,
and says of him: "If he had a higher or honester aim in view I could forgive him; but he tries
to gain money for the mere sake of having it." Aniela's marriage is almost as repugnant to him
as to me, and his opinion is that she is preparing a wretched life for herself. At my entreaties
he promised to take the first train in the morning.

The day after both he and his wife will go to Ploszow, and if they do not find a chance of seeing
Aniela alone, carry her off to Warsaw for a few hours.

He is going to tell Aniela how much I suffer, and that my life is
in her hands.

He is able to do it. He will speak to her with a certain authority, gently and persuasively;
he will convince her that a woman, however wounded her heart may be, has no right to marry the
man she does not love; that doing so she acts dishonestly, and is not true to herself; that,
likewise, she has no right to throw over the man she loves, because in an access of jealousy he
wrote a letter he repents of now from the veriest depths of his heart.

Towards the end Sniatynski said to me:--

"I will do what you wish under one condition: you must pledge me your word that in case my mission
fails, you will not go to Ploszow and make a scene which the ladies might pay for with their
health; you may write to Aniela if you wish, but you will not go, unless she gives you permission."

What
does he take me for? I promised unreservedly, but his words increased my anxiety. But I count
upon Aniela's heart and Sniatynski's eloquence. Ah! how he can speak! He did not encourage my hopes,
but I can see he is hopeful himself. As a last resource he promised
to get Aniela to delay the marriage for six months.

In that case the victory is ours, for Kromitzki will draw back. I shall remember this day for
a long time. Sniatynski, when in presence of a real sorrow, can be as gentle as a woman, and
he was anxious to spare my feelings. Yet it costs me something to lay bare even before such a
friend my madness,--weak points,--and put into his hands my whole fate, instead of fighting it
out by myself. But what does it all matter when Aniela is in question?

27 June.

Sniatynski left early. I went with him to the station. On the way I kept repeating various instructions
as if he were an idiot. He said teasingly that if he were successful in his mission, I would
begin again philosophizing. I felt a desire to shake him. He went away with such a cheerful face
I could swear he feels sure not to fail.

After his departure I went straight to St. Mary's Church, and I, the sceptic, the philosopher,
I who do not know, do not know, do not know, had a mass offered in the names of Leon and Aniela.
I not only remained during mass in church, but put down here, black on white: Perdition upon
all my scepticism, philosophy, and my "I do not know!"

28 June.

It is one o'clock in the afternoon. Sniatynski and his wife are starting for Ploszow. Aniela
ought to agree at least to a postponement of her marriage. Various thoughts cross my mind. That
Kromitzki is greedy for money there is not the slightest doubt; then why did he not fix his attentions
on a richer girl? Aniela's estate is large, but encumbered with debts,--perhaps
it was the landed property he wanted, so as to secure himself a position
and a citizenship.

Yet Kromitzki, with his reputation as a rich man, could have got all this, and money with his
wife besides. Evidently Aniela attracted him personally and for some time. It is not to be wondered
at that Aniela should captivate any one.

And to think that she was waiting, as one waits for one's happiness
or salvation, for one word from me!

My aunt says it, that she was lying in wait for Chwastowski, to take the letters from him.
A terrible fear seizes me that all this may not be forgiven, and that I am doomed and all those
that are like me.

10 o'clock in the evening.

I had a terrible neuralgia in the head; it has passed now, but what with the pain, the sleeplessness,
and anxiety, I feel as if I were hypnotized. My mind, open and excited on one point, concentrated
upon one thought, sees more clearly than it has ever done before how the affair will end. It seems
to me that I am at Ploszow; I listen to what Aniela says to Sniatynski, and I cannot understand
how I could buoy myself up with false hopes. She has no pity on me. These are not mere suppositions,
they are a dead certainty. Truly, something strange is going on with me. A terrible gravity
has suddenly fallen upon me, as if up to this moment I had only been a child,--and such a terrible
sadness. Am I going to be ill? I made Sniatynski promise to send me a telegram. No message
has as yet arrived, though, properly speaking, it will not tell me
anything new.

29 June.

The telegram has come. It contains these words: "It is of no use,--pull yourself together and
travel." Yes, I will do it. Oh, Aniela!

Paris, 2 April.

It is some
ten months since I put down anything in my journal; it had become
such a familiar friend that I missed it. But I said to myself: what
is the use of it? If I put down on paper thoughts worthy of a Pascal;
deeper than the ocean depth; loftier than the Alps,--it would not
change the simple fact that she is married. With that fact staring
at me, my hands dropped powerless. Sometimes life concentrates itself
in one object, not necessarily an important one; but if that fails
us we seem at a loss what to do with ourselves. It is strange,--almost
laughable,--but for a long time I remained in a state of mind in which
the most commonplace functions of life seemed irksome and useless,
and it took me some time to remember that I used to go to clubs and
theatres, shaved, dressed, and dined before I knew her. The first
months I travelled a great deal, straying as far as Iceland. The sight
of Swedish lakes, Norwegian fiords, and Icelandic geysers conveyed
to me no direct impressions; I only tried to imagine what Aniela would
have felt or said to such a view,--in short, I saw with her eyes,
thought her thoughts, and felt with her heart. And when presently
I remembered that she was Aniela no longer, but Pani Kromitzka, I
went straight to the nearest railway station or ship to go somewhere
else, as what I looked upon had ceased to interest me. It did not
matter to me in the least that I played a part in one of the so commonly
ridiculed dramas where thousands of fools have played the same parts
before. And death is a drama; and those who are entering its gates
think the world is coming to an end; and so it is,--for them.

He patted her shoulder gently.

"Well, honey, we did try at first to discourage her from the notion, but we mighty soon seen
it wasn't any use to try, and a little later on, comin' to think it over, we decided mebbe
we didn't want to try any more. There're some impulses in this world too noble to be interfered
with or hampered or thwarted, and some sacrifices so fine that none of us should try to spoil
'em by settin' up ourselves and our own wills in the road. That's how I felt. That's how Lew
Lake felt. That's how we both felt. And anyhow she kept p'intin' out that she wouldn' never
need that there little house, because so long ez she lived she'd have a home with you two girls.
That's whut she said, anyway."

"But why weren't we allowed to know before now? Why didn't we know--Mildred and I--ten days
ago, so that she might have been spared the cruel thing I've done? Why didn't she come out
and tell us when we went to her and I told her she must get off the place? Why didn't you tell
me, Judge, before now--why didn't you give me a hint before now?"

"Honey, I couldn't. I was under a solemn promise not to tell--a promise that I've jest now
broken. On the whole I think I'm glad I did break it. . . . Lemme see ef I kin remember in
her own words whut she said to us? 'Gen'l'mens,' she says, 'dem chillens is of de quality an'
entitled to hole up they haids wid de fines' in de land. I don't want never to have dem demeaned
by lettin' dem know or by lettin' ary other pusson know dat an old black nigger woman furnished
de money to help mek fine young ladies of 'em. So long ez I live,' she says, 'dey ain't never
to heah it frum my lips an' you must both gimme yore word dat dey don't never heah it frum
yourn. W'en I dies, an' not befo' den, dey may know de truth. De day dey lays me in de coffin
you kin tell 'em both de secret--but not befo'!' she says.

"So you see, child, we were under a pledge, and till to-day I've kept that pledge. Nobody knows
about the sale of that little piece of property except Aunt Sharley and Lew Lake and me and
the man who bought it and the man who recorded the deed that I drew up. Even the man who bought
it never learned the real name of the previous owner, and the matter of the recordin' was never
made public. Whut's the good of my bein' the circuit judge of this district without I've got
influence enough with the county clerk to see that a small real-estate transaction kin be kept
frum pryin' eyes? So you see only five people knowed anything a-tall about that sale, and only
three of them knowed the true facts, and now I've told you, and so that makes four that are
sharin' the secret. . . . Don't carry on so, honey. 'Tain't ez ef you'd done somethin' that
couldn't be mended. You've got all your life to make it up to her. And besides, you were in
ignorance until jest now. . . . Now, Emmy Lou, I ain't goin' to advise you; but I certainly
would like to hear frum your own lips whut you do aim to do?"

She raised her head and through the brimming tears her eyes shone like twin stars.

"What am I going to do?" she echoed. "Judge, you just said nobody knew except four of us. Well,
everybody is going to know--everybody in this town is going to know, because I'm going to tell
them. I'll be a prouder and a happier girl when they do know, all of them, than I've ever been
in my whole life. And I warn you that neither you nor Aunt Sharley nor any other person alive
can keep me from telling them. I'm going to glory in telling the world the story of it."

"Lord bless your spunky little soul, honey, I ain't goin' to try to hender you frum tellin',"
said Judge Priest. "Anyhow, I expect to be kept busy durin' the next few days keepin' out of
that old nigger woman's way. . . . So that's the very first thing you aim to do?"

"No, it isn't, either," she exclaimed, catching the drift of his meaning. "That is going to
be the second thing I do. But the first thing I am going to do is to go straight back home
as fast as I can walk and get down on my knees before Aunt Sharley and beg her forgiveness
for being so unjust and so unkind."

"Oh, I reckin that won't hardly be necessary," said Judge Priest. "I kind of figger that ef
you'll jest have a little cryin' bee with her that'll answer every purpose. Jest put your young
arms round her old neck and cry a spell with her. It's been my observation that, black or white,
cryin' together seems to bring a heap of comfort to the members of your sex."

"I think perhaps I shall try that," she agreed, smiling in spite of herself; and her smile
was like sunshine in the midst of a shower. "I'll begin by kissing her right smack on the mouth--like
this." And she kissed the Judge squarely on his.

"Judge Priest," she stated, "this town is due for more than one surprise. Do you know who's
going to be the matron of honour at my wedding three weeks from now? I'll give you just one guess."

He glanced up at her quizzically.

"Whut do you s'pose the young man is goin' to have to say about that?" he asked.

"If he doesn't like it he can find some other girl to marry him," she said.

"Oh, I kind of imagine he'll listen to reason--especially comin' frum you," said Judge Priest.
"He will ef he's the kind of young man that's worthy to marry Tom Dabney's daughter."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is possible that some of the bridegroom's kinspeople, coming down from the North for the
wedding, were shocked to find a wizen, coal-black woman, who was lame of one leg, not only
taking part in the ceremony, filling a place next in importance to that of the contracting
pair and the maid of honour, but apparently in active and undisputed charge of the principal
details. However, being well-bred persons, they did not betray their astonishment by word,
look or deed. Perhaps they figured it as one of the customs of the country that an old shrill-voiced
negress, smelling of snuff and black silk, should play so prominent a rôle in the event itself
and in the reception that followed.

However, all that is ancient history now. What I have to add is a commingling of past local
history and present local history. As I said at the outset, there were formerly any number
of black children in our town who bore the names of white friends and white patrons, but to
my knowledge there was never but one white child named for a black person. The child thus distinguished
was a girl child, the first-born of Mr. and Mrs. Harvey Winslow. Her full name was Charlotte
Helm Winslow, but nearly everybody called her Little Sharley. She is still called so, I believe,
though growing now into quite a sizable young person.

CHAPTER VI

JOHN J. COINCIDENCE

Somebody said once that facts are stubborn things, which is a lie. Facts are almost the most
flexible things known to man. The historian appreciates the truth of this just as the fictionist
recognises and is governed by the opposite of it, each according to his lights. In recording
the actual, the authentic, the definite, your chronicler may set down in all soberness things
which are utterly inconceivable; may set them down because they have happened. But he who deals
with the fanciful must be infinitely more conventional in his treatment of the probabilities
and the possibilities, else the critics will say he has let his imagination run away with him.
They'll tell him to put ice on his brow and advise sending his creative faculty to the restcure.

Jules Verne was a teller of most mad tales which he conjured up out of his head. The Brothers
Wright and Edison and Holland, the submarine man, worked out their notions with monkey wrenches
and screw drivers and things, thereby accomplishing verities far surpassing the limit where
common sense threw up a barrier across the pathway of Verne's genius. H. G. Wells never dreamed
a dream of a world war to equal the one which William Hohenzollern loosed by ordering a flunky
in uniform to transmit certain dispatches back yonder in the last week of July and the first
week of August, 1914.

So always it has gone. So always, beyond peradventure, it must continue to go.

If in his first act the playwright has his principal characters assembled in a hotel lobby
in Chicago and in Act II has them all bumping into one another--quite by chance--in a dugout
in Flanders, the reviewers sternly will chide him for violating Rule 1 of the book of dramatic
plausibilities, and quite right they will be too. But when the identical event comes to pass
in real life--as before now it has--we merely say that, after all, it's a small world now,
isn't it? And so saying, pass along to the next preposterous occurrence that has just occurred.
In fiction coincidence has its metes and bounds beyond which it dare not step. In human affairs
it has none.

Speaking of coincidences, that brings me round to the matter of a certain sergeant and a certain
private in our American Expeditionary Force which is a case that is a case in point of what
I have just been saying upon this subject. If Old Man Coincidence had not butted into the picture
when he did and where he did and so frequently as he did, there would be--for me--no tale to
tell touching on these two, the sergeant and the private. But he did. And I shall.

To begin at the remote beginning, there once upon a time was a fight in front of the public
school in Henry Street over on the East Side, in which encounter one Pasquale Gallino licked
the Semitic stuffings out of a fellow-pupil of his--by name Hyman Ginsburg. To be explicit
about it, he made the Ginsburg boy's somewhat prominent nose to bleed extensively and swelled
up Hyman's ear until for days thereafter Hyman's head, viewed fore or aft, had rather a lop-sided
appearance, what with one ear being so much thicker than its mate. The object of this mishandlement
was as good as whipped before he started by reason of the longer reach and quicker fist play
of his squat and swarthy opponent. Nevertheless, facing inevitable and painful defeat, he acquitted
himself with proper credit and courage.

Bearing his honourable wounds, Master Ginsburg went home from battle to a tenement in Allen
Street, there to be licked again for having been licked before; or, speaking with exactitude,
for having been in a fight, his father being one who held by the theory that diplomacy ever
should find the way out to peace when blows threatened to follow on disputation. With view,
therefore, to proving his profound distaste for physical violence in any form he employed it
freely upon the body of his son, using to that end a strap. Scarred in new places, the victim
of two beatings in one day went weeping and supperless to bed.

Now this fight in Henry Street took place some sixteen years ago, and in sixteen years a great
deal of water runs under the bridges provided for that purpose and for other purposes. Two
separate currents of the water that flowed caught up Hyman Ginsburg and Pasquale Gallino and
carried them along differing channels toward differing destinies. While Hyman was in the grammar
grades, a brag pupil, Pasquale was in the Protectory, a branded incorrigible. While Hyman was
attending high school, Pasquale was attending reform school. When Hyman, a man grown, was taking
his examinations with the idea of getting on the police force, Pasquale was constructing an
alibi with the idea of staying out of Sing Sing. One achieved his present ambition--that was Hyman.

The next period of their respective developments found this pair in a fair way each to achieve
a definite niche in his chosen profession. Patrolman Hyman Ginsburg, after walking post for
some months, had been taken out of uniform and put into civilian garb as a plain-clothes man
on the Headquarters staff. Here he was making good. Having intelligence and energy and the
racial persistence which is as much a part of his breed as their hands and their feet are,
he was looked upon in the department as a detective with a future ahead of him.

As for him who had once been Pasquale Gallino, he now occupied a position of prominence amid
congenial surroundings while following after equally congenial pursuits. There was a gang.
Despite the fact that it was such a new gang, this gang before the eyes of law and order stood
high upon a pinnacle of evil eminence, overtopping such old-established gangs as the Gas House
and the Gophers, the Skinned Rabbits and the Pearl Button Kid's. Taking title from the current
name of its chieftain, it was popularly known as the Stretchy Gorman gang. Its headquarters
was a boozing den of exceeding ill repute on the lower West Side. Its chief specialties were
loft robberies and dock robberies. Its favourite side lines were election frauds and so-called
strike-breaking jobs. The main amusement of its members was hoodlumism in its broader and more
general phases. Its shield and its buckler was political influence of a sort; its keenest sword
was its audacious young captain. You might call it a general-purposes gang. Contemporary gangsters
spoke of it with respect and admiration. For a thing so young it gave great promise.

A day came, though, when the protection under which the Stretchy Gormans had flourished ceased
to protect. It is not known, nor yet is it written, what the reason for this was. Perhaps there
was a breaking off of the friendly relations theretofore existing between one of the down-town
district leaders and one of the powers--name deleted--higher up. Perhaps the newspapers had
scolded too shrilly, demanding the house-cleaning of a neighbourhood which had become a bad
smell in the sensitive nostrils of honest taxpayers and valued advertisers. Certainly burglaries
in the wholesale silk district had occurred so numerously as to constitute a public scandal.

Then, besides, there was the incident of the night watchman of a North River freight pier,
a worthy enough person though a nonvoter and therefore of small account from the viewpoint
of ward politics, who stood up in single-handed defence of his employer's premises and goods
against odds of at least four to one. Swinging a cold chisel, someone chipped a bit of bone
out of the watchman's skull as expeditiously and almost as neatly as a visiting Englishman
chips the poll of his breakfast egg; so that forever after the victim nursed an achesome and
slightly addled brain. Then there were other things.

Be the cause what it may, it certainly is the fact that on a pleasant autumnal afternoon Inspector
Krogan summoned to his presence two members of the Central Office staff and told them to go
get Stretchy Gorman. Stretchy was to be gone after and got on the blanket charge--the rubber
blanket charge, as one might say, since it is so elastic and covers such a multitude of sins--of
being a suspicious character.

Now Stretchy Gorman had no character to speak of; so therein the accusation appeared faulty.
But equally was it true as Holy Gospel that he was suspicious of nearly everybody on earth
and that nearly everybody on earth had reasons to be suspicious of him. So, balancing one word
against the other, the garment might be said to fit him. At any rate, it was plain the supreme
potentates had decreed for him that he was to wear it.

One of the detectives detailed to this assignment was Hyman Ginsburg. His partner on the job
was a somewhat older man named Casane. These two frequently worked together. Pulling in double
harness they made a dependable team. Both had wit and shrewdness. By sight, Casane knew the
individual they were deputed to take; Ginsburg, to his knowledge, had never seen him.

Across his roll-top desk the inspector, speaking as follows, according to the mode of the fellowcraft,
gave them their instructions:

"You'll likely be findin' this here party at the Stuffed Owl. That's his regular hang-out.
My information is that he's usually there regular this time of the day. I've just had word
that he went in there fifteen minutes ago; it's likely he'll be stayin' a while.

"Now, if he's in there don't you two go and send for him to come outside to you; nothin' like
that. See? You go right in after him and nail him right in front of his own pals. Understand?
I want him and his bunch and the reporters all to know that this here alleged drag of his that
the newspapers've been beefin' so loud about is all bogus. And then you fetch him here to me
and I'll do the rest. Don't make no gun play nor nothin' of that nature without you have to,
but at the same time and nevertheless don't take no foolish chances. This party may act up
rough and then again he may not. Get me? My guess is he won't. Still and notwithstandin', don't
leave no openin's. Now get goin'."

Sure enough it was at the sign of the Stuffed Owl, down in a basement bat cave of a place and
in the dusk of the evening, that they found their man. To Ginsburg's curious eyes he revealed
himself as a short, swart person with enormously broad shoulders and with a chimpanzee's arm
reach. Look at those arms of his and one knew why he was called Stretchy. How he had acquired
his last name of Gorman was only to be guessed at. It was fair to assume, though, he had got
it by processes of self-adoption--no unusual thing in a city where overnight a Finkelstein
turns into a Fogarty and he who at the going down of the sun was Antonio Baccigaluppi has at
the upcoming of the same become Joseph Brown. One thing, though, was sure as rain: This particular
Gorman had never been a Gorman born.

Not the blackest of the "Black Irish," not the most brunette of brunette Welshmen ever had
a skin of that peculiar brownish pallor, like clear water in a cypress swamp, or eyes like
the slitted pair looking out obliquely from this man's head.

Taking their cue of action from their superior's words, Casane and Ginsburg, having come down
the short flight of steps leading from the sidewalk, went directly across the barroom to where
their man sat at a small table with two others, presumably both of his following, for his companions.

The manner of the intruders was casual enough; casual and yet marked by a businesslike air.
They knew that at this moment they were not especially attractive risks for an accident insurance
company. The very sawdust on the floor stank of villainy; the brass bar rail might have been
a rigid length of poison snake; the spittoons were small sinks of corruption. Moreover, they
had been commissioned to take a monarch off his throne before the eyes of his courtiers, and
history records that this ever was a proceeding fraught with peril.

Still they went straight toward him. Before they spoke a word--almost before they were well
inside the street door--he must have recognised them as Headquarters men. Being what he was,
he instantly would have appraised them for what they were had the meeting taken place in the
dead vast and middle of Sahara's sandy wastes. Even the seasoned urbanite who is law-abiding
and who has no cause to fear the thief-taker can pick out a detective halfway up the block.

Besides, in the same instant that they descended from the street level, the barkeeper with
his tongue had made a small clucking sound, thrice repeated, and with all four fingers of his
right hand had gripped the left lapel of his unbuttoned waistcoat. Thereat there had been a
general raising of heads all over the place. Since the days of Jonathan Wild and even before
that--since the days when the Romany Rye came out of the East into England--the signal of the
collar has been the sign of the collar, which means the cop.

The man they sought eyed them contemptuously from under the down-tilted visor of his cap as
they approached him. His arms were folded upon the table top and for the moment he kept them so.

"Evening," said Casane civilly, pausing alongside him. "Call yourself Gorman, don't you?"

"I've been known to answer to that name," he answered back in the curious flat tone that is
affected by some of his sort and is natural with the rest of them. "Wot of it?"

"There's somebody wants to have a talk with you up at the front office--that's all," said Casane.

"It's a pinch, then, huh?" The gangster put his open hands against the edge of the table as
though for a rearward spring.

"I'm tellin' you all we know ourselves?" countered Casane. His voice was conciliatory--soothing
almost. But Ginsburg had edged round past Casane, ready at the next warning move to take the
gang leader on the flank with a quick forward rush, and inside their overcoats, the shapes
of both the officers had tensed.

"Call it a pinch if you want to," went on Casane. "I'd call it more of an invitation just to
take a little walk with us two and then have a chat with somebody else. Unless you or some
of your friends here feel like startin' something there'll be no rough stuff--that's orders.
We're askin' you to go along--first. How about it?"

"Oh, I'll go--I'll go! There's nobody got anything on me. And nobody's goin' to get anything
on me neither."

He stood up and with a quick movement jerked back the skirts of his coat, holding them aloft
so that his hip pockets and his waistband, showed.

"Take notice!" he cried, invoking as witnesses all present. "Take notice that I'm carryin'
no gat! So don't you bulls try framin' me under the Sullivan Law for havin' a gat on me. There's
half a dozen here knows I ain't heeled and kin swear to it--case of a frame-up. Now go ahead
and frisk me!"

"That'll be all right--we could easy take your word for it," said Casane, still maintaining
his placating pose. Nevertheless he signed to Ginsburg and the latter moved a step nearer their
man and his practiced fingers ran swiftly over the unresisting form, feeling beneath the arms,
down the flanks, about the belt line and even at the back of the neck for a suspicious hard
bulge inside the garments, finally giving the side coat pockets a perfunctory slap.

"Unless you make it necessary, we won't be callin' for the wagon," Casane stated. "Just the
three of us'll take a little stroll, like I'm telling you--just stroll out and take the air
up to Headquarters."

He slipped into position on one side of the gangster, Ginsburg on the other. Over his shoulder
the man thus placed between them looked round to where his two underlings still sat at the
table, both silent as the rest of the company were, but both plainly prepared for any contingencies;
both ready to follow their chief's lead in whatsoever course, peaceable or violent, he might
next elect to follow.

"Here you, Louie," he bade one of them, "jump to the telephone and notify a certain party to
have me mouthpiece at Headquarters by the time I kin get there with these two dicks. Tell him
the cops've got nothin' on me, but I wants me mouthpiece there just the same--case of a tie."

Until now the preliminaries had been carried on with a due regard for the unwritten but rigid
code of underworld etiquette. From neither side had there issued a single unethical word. The
detectives had been punctilious to avoid ruffling the sensibilities of any and all. All the
same, the prisoner chose of a sudden to turn nasty. It was at once manifest that he aimed to
give offence without giving provocation or real excuse for reprisals on the part of the invaders.
He spat sidewise across Casane's front and as he took the first step forward he brought the
foot down upon one of Ginsburg's feet, grinding his heel sharply into the toes beneath. Ginsburg
winced at the pain but did not speak; he had not spoken at all up until now, leaving it to
Casane as the elder man to conduct the preliminaries.

"Why don't you say something, you Jew!" taunted the prisoner. "Don't you even know enough to
excuse yourself when you stick your fat feet in people's way?"

"That'll be all right," said Ginsburg crisply. It was his business to avoid the issue of a
clash. "And it'll be all right your calling me a Jew. I am a Jew and I'm proud of it. And I'm
wearing the same name I started out with too."

"Is that so?"

Except in the inspired pages of fiction city thugs are singularly barren of power to deliver
really snappy, really witty retorts.

"Is that so, Jew?" He stared at Ginsburg and a derisive grin opened a gap in his broad dark
face. "Oh, be chee! We ain't strangers--you and me ain't! We've met before--when we was kids.
Down in Henry Street, it was. I put me mark on you oncet, and if I ever feel like it I'll do
it again sometime."

Like a match under shavings the words kindled half-forgotten memories in the young detective's
brain and now--for his part--recognition came flashing back out of the past.

"I thought so," he said, choosing to ignore the gangster and addressing Casane. "I thought
from the first Gorman wasn't his right name. I've forgotten what his right name is, but it's
nothing that sounds like Gorman. He's a wop. I went to the same school with him over on the
East Side a good many years ago."

"Don't forget to tell him how the wop licked the Jew," broke in the prisoner. "Remember how
the scrap started?"

He spat again and this time he did not miss. Ginsburg put up his gloved hand and wiped clean
a face that with passion had turned a mottle of red-and-white blotches. His voice shook from
the strain of his effort to control himself.

"I'll get you for that," he said quietly. "And I'll get you good. The day'll come when I'll
walk you in broad daylight up to the big chief, and I'll have the goods on you too."

"Forget it," jeered the ruffian triumphantly. Before the eyes of his satellites he had--by
his standards--acquitted himself right creditably. "You got nothin' on me now, Jew, and you
never will have. Well, come on, you bulls, let's be goin' along. I wouldn't want the neither
one of you for steady company. One of you is too polite and the other'n too meek for my tastes."

       *       *       *       *       *

The man who was called Stretchy Gorman spoke a prophetic word when he said the police had nothing
on him. Since they had nothing on him, he was let go after forty-eight hours of detention;
but that is not saying they did not intend, if they could--and in such cases they usually can--to
get something on him.

No man in the department had better reason to crave that consummation than Hyman Ginsburg had.
With him the hope of achieving revenge became practically an obsession. It rode in his thoughts.
Any hour, in a campaign to harry the gangster to desperation by means of methods that are common
enough inside the department, he might have invoked competent and willing assistance, for the
word had filtered down from on high, where the seats of the mighty are, that those mysterious
forces aloft would look complacently upon the eternal undoing of the Stretchy Gormans and their
titular leader, no matter how accomplished.

But this notion did not match in with the colour of Ginsburg's desires. Single-handed, he meant
to do the trick. Most probably then the credit would be all his; assuredly the satisfaction
would. When he considered this prospect his mind ran back along old grooves to the humiliating
beating he had suffered in front of the Henry Street school so long before and of a most painful
strapping that followed; these being coupled always with a later memory scar of a grievous
insult endured in the line of duty and all the more hateful because it had been endured.

Once Ginsburg had read a book out of a public library--a book which mentally he called Less
Miserables. Through the pages of that book there had walked a detective whom Ginsburg in his
mind knew by the name of Jawbert. Now he recalled how this Jawbert spent his life tracking
down an offender who was the main hero of the book. He told himself that in the matter of Stretchy
Gorman he would be as another Jawbert.

By way of a beginning he took advantage of leisure hours to trace out the criminal history
of his destined victim. In the gallery he found numbered and classified photographs; in the
Bertillon bureau, finger prints; and in the records, what else he lacked of information--as
an urchin, so many years spent in the protectory; as a youth, so many years in the reformatory;
as a man, a year on Blackwell's Island for a misdemeanour and a three-year term at Sing Sing
for a felony; also he dug up the entry of an indictment yet standing on which trial had never
been held for lack of proof to convict; finally a long list of arrests for this and that and
the other thing, unproved. From under a succession of aliases he uncovered Gorman's real name.

But a sequence of events delayed his fuller assumption of the rôle of Jawbert. He was sent
to Rio de Janeiro to bring back an absconder of note. Six months he worked on the famous Gonzales
child-stealing mystery. He made two trips out to the Pacific Coast in connection with the Chappy
Morgan wire-tapping cases. Few of the routine jobs about the detective bureau fell to him.
He was too good for routine and his superiors recognised the fact and were governed thereby.

By the rules of tradition, Ginsburg--as a successful detective--should have been either an
Irishman or of Irish descent. But in the second biggest police force in the world, wherein
twenty per cent of the personnel wear names that betoken Jewish, Slavic or Latin forebears,
tradition these times suffers many a body wallop.

On a night in early April, Ginsburg, coming across from New Jersey, landed off a ferryboat
at Christopher Street. He had gone across the river to gather up a loose end of the evidence
accumulating against Chappy Morgan, king of the wireless wire-tappers. It was nearly midnight
when he emerged from the ferryhouse. In sight was no surface car; so he set out afoot to walk
across town to where he lived on the East Side.

Going through a side street in a district which mainly is given over to the establishments
of textile jobbers, he observed, half a block away, a fire escape that bore strange fruit.
The front line of a stretch of tallish buildings stood out in relief against the background
of a wet moon and showed him, high up on the iron ladder which flighted down the face of one
house of the row, two dark clumps, one placed just above the other.

Ginsburg slipped into a protecting ledge of shadow close up against the buildings and edged
along nearer. The clumps resolved into the figures of men. One--the uppermost shape of a man--was
receiving from some unseen sources flat burdens that came down over the roof coping and passing
them along to the accomplice below. The latter in turn stacked them upon the grilled floor
of the fire balcony that projected out into space at the level of the fourth floor, the building
being five floors in height. By chance Ginsburg had happened upon a loft-robbing enterprise.

He shifted his revolver from his hip pocket to the side pocket of his overcoat and crept closer,
planning for the pair so intently engaged overhead a surprise when they should descend with
their loot. There was no time now to seek out the patrolman on the post; the job must be all his.

Two doors from the building that had been entered he crept noiselessly down into a basement
and squatted behind an ash barrel. It was inky black in there; so inkily black he never suspected
that the recess held another tenant. Your well-organised loft-robbing mob carries along a lookout
who in case of discovery gives warning; in case of attack, repels the attack, and in case of
pursuit acts as rear guard. In Stretchy Gorman's operations Stretchy acted as his own lookout,
and a highly competent one he was, too, with a preference for lurking in areaways while his
lieutenants carried forward the more arduous but less responsible shares of the undertaking.

In the darkness behind Ginsburg where he crouched a long gorilla's arm of an arm reached outward
and downward, describing an arc. You might call it the long arm of coincidence and be making
no mistake either. At the end of the arm was a fist and in the fist a length of gas pipe wrapped
in rags. This gas pipe descended upon the back of Ginsburg's skull, crushing through the derby
hat he wore. And the next thing Ginsburg knew he was in St. Vincent's Hospital with a splitting
headache and the United States Government had gone to war against the German Empire.

Ginsburg did not volunteer. The parent who once had wielded the disciplinary strap-end so painstakingly
had long since rejoined his bearded ancestors, but there was a dependent mother to be cared
for and a whole covey of younger brothers and sisters to be shepherded through school and into
sustaining employment. So he waited for the draft, and when the draft took him and his number
came out in the drawing, as it very soon did, he waived his exemptions and went to training
camp wearing an old suit of clothes and an easy pair of shoes. Presently he found himself transferred
to a volunteer outfit--one of the very few draft men who were to serve with that outfit.

In camp the discipline he had acquired and the drilling he had done in his prentice days on
the force stood him in good stead. Hard work trimmed off of him the layers of tissue he had
begun to take on; plain solid food finished the job of unlarding his frame. Shortly he was
Corporal Ginsburg--a trim upstanding corporal. Then he became Sergeant Ginsburg and soon after
this was Second Sergeant Ginsburg of B Company of a regiment still somewhat sketchy and ragged
in its make-up, but with promise of good stuff to emerge from the mass of its material. When
his regiment and his division went overseas, First Sergeant Ginsburg went along too.

The division had started out by being a national guard division; almost exclusively its rank
and file had been city men--rich men's sons from uptown, poor men's sons with jaw-breaking
names from the tenements. At the beginning the acting major general in command had been fond
of boasting that he had representatives of thirty-two nations and practitioners of fifty-four
creeds and cults in his outfit. Before very long he might truthfully expand both these figures.

To stopper the holes made by the wear and tear of intensive training, the attritions of sickness
and of transfers, the losses by death and by wounding as suffered in the first small spells
of campaigning, replacements came up from the depots, enriching the local colour of the division
with new types and strange accents. Southern mountaineers, Western ranch hands and farm boys
from the Middle States came along to find mates among Syrians, Jews, Italians, Armenians and
Greeks. Cotton Belt, Corn Belt, Wheat Belt and Timber Belt contributed. Born feudists became
snipers, counter jumpers became fencibles, yokels became drillmasters, sweat-shop hands became
sharpshooters, aliens became Americans, an ex-janitor--Austrian-born--became a captain, a rabble
became an organised unit; the division became a tempered mettlesome lance--springy, sharp and
dependable.

This miracle so often repeated itself in our new army that it ceased to be miraculous and became
commonplace. During its enactment we as a nation accepted it with calmness, almost with indifference.
I expect our grandchildren will marvel at it and among them will be some who will write large,
fat books about it.

On that great day when a new definition for the German equivalent of the English word "impregnable"
was furnished by men who went up to battle swearfully or prayerfully, as the case might be,
a-swearing and a-praying as they went in more tongues than were babbled at Babel Tower; in
other words, on the day when the never-to-be-broken Hindenburg line was broken through and
through, a battalion of one of the infantry regiments of this same polyglot division formed
a little individual ground swell in the first wave of attack.

That chill and gloomy hour when condemned men and milkmen rise up from where they lie, when
sick folk die in their beds and the drowsy birds begin to chirp themselves awake found the
men of this particular battalion in shallow front-line trenches on the farther edge of a birch
thicket. There they crouched, awaiting the word. The flat cold taste of before sunup was clammy
in their throats; the smell of the fading nighttime was in their nostrils.

And in the heart of every man of them that man over and over again asked himself a question.
He asked himself whether his will power--which meant his soul--was going to be strong enough
to drag his reluctant body along with it into what impended. You see, with a very few exceptions
none of this outfit had been beyond the wires before. They had been under fire, some of them--fire
of gas shells and of shrapnel and of high explosives in dugouts or in rear positions or as
they passed along roads lying under gun range of the enemy. But this matter would be different;
this experience would widely differ from any they had undergone. This meant going out into
the open to walk up against machine-gun fire and small-arm fire. So each one asked himself
the question.

Take a thousand fighting men. For purposes of argument let us say that when the test of fighting
comes five men out of that thousand cannot readjust their nerves to the prospect of a violent
end by powder and ball from unseen sources. Under other circumstances any one of the five might
face a peril greater than that which now confronts him. Conceivably he might flop into a swollen
river to save a drowning puppy; might dive into a burning building after some stranger's pet
tabby cat. But this prospect which lies before him of ambling across a field with death singing
about his ears, is a thing which tears with clawing fingers at the tuggs and toggles of his
imagination until his flesh revolts to the point where it refuses the dare. It is such a man
that courts-martial and the world at large miscall by the hateful name of coward.

Out of the remaining nine hundred and ninety-five are five more--as we allow--who have so little
of perception, who are so stolid, so dull of wit and apprehension that they go into battle
unmoved, unshaken, unthinking. This leaves nine hundred and ninety who are afraid--sorely and
terribly afraid. They are afraid of being killed, afraid of being crippled, afraid of venturing
out where killings and cripplings are carried on as branches of a highly specialised business.

But at the last they find that they fear just one thing more than they fear death and dismemberment;
and that this one supremest thing is the fear that those about them may discover how terribly
afraid they are. It is this greater fear, overriding all those lesser terrors, that makes over
ordinary men into leaders of forlorn hopes, into holders of last ditches, into bearers of heroic
blazons, into sleepers under memorial shafts erected by the citizens of a proud, a grateful
and a sorrowing country. A sense of self-respect is a terrific responsibility.

Under this double stress, torn in advance of the actual undertaking by primitive emotions pulling
in opposite directions, men bear themselves after curious but common fashions. To a psychologist
twenty men chosen at random from the members of the battalion, waiting there in the edge of
the birch thicket for their striking hour to come, would have offered twenty contrasting subjects
for study.

Here was a man all deathly white, who spoke never a word, but who retched with sharp painful
sounds and kept his free hand gripped into his cramping belly. That dread of being hit in the
bowels which so many men have at moments like this was making him physically sick.

Here again was a man who made jokes about cold feet and yellow streaks and the chances of death
and the like and laughed at his own jokes. But there was a quiver of barely checked hysteria
in his laughing and his eyes shone like the eyes of a man in a fever and the sweat kept popping
out in little beads on his face.

Here again was a man who swore constantly in a monotonous undertone. Always I am reading where
a man of my race under strain or provocation coins new and apt and picturesque oaths; but myself,
I have never seen such a man. I should have seen him, too, if he really existed anywhere except
in books, seeing that as a boy I knew many steamboat mates on Southern waters and afterward
met socially many and divers mule drivers and horse wranglers in the great West.

But it has been my observation that in the matter of oaths the Anglo-Saxon tongue is strangely
lacking in variety and spice. There are a few stand-by oaths--three or four nouns, two or three
adjectives, one double-jointed adjective--and these invariably are employed over and over again.
The which was undeniably true in this particular instance. This man who swore so steadily merely
repeated, times without number and presumably with reference to the Germans, the unprettiest
and at the same time the most familiar name of compounded opprobrium that our deficient language
yields.

For the fiftieth time in half as many minutes, a captain--his name was Captain Griswold and
he was the captain of B Company--consulted the luminous face of his wrist watch where he stooped
behind shelter. He spoke then, and his voice was plainly to be heard under the whistle and
whoop of the shells passing over his head from the supporting batteries behind with intent
to fall in the supposed defences of the enemy in front. Great sounds would have been lost in
that crashing tumult; by one of the paradoxes of battle lesser sounds were easily audible.

"All right," said Captain Griswold, "it's time! If some damn fool hasn't gummed things up the
creeping barrage should be starting out yonder and everything is set. Come on, men--let's go!"

They went, each still behaving according to his own mode. The man with the gripes who retched
was still retching as he heaved himself up over the parapet; the man who had laughed was still
laughing; the man who had sworn was mechanically continuing to repeat that naughty pet name
of his for the Fritzies. Nobody, though, called on anybody else to defend the glory of the
flag; nobody invited anybody to remember the Lusitania; nobody spoke a single one of the fine
speeches which the bushelmen of fiction at home were even then thinking up to put into the
mouths of men moving into battle.

Indeed, not in any visible regard was the scene marked by drama. Merely some muddied men burdened
with ironmongery and bumpy with gas masks and ammunition packs climbed laboriously out of a
slit in the wet earth and in squads--single filing, one man behind the next as directly as
might be--stepped along through a pale, sad, slightly misty light at rather a deliberate pace,
to traverse a barb-wired meadowland which rose before them at a gentle incline. There was no
firing of guns, no waving of swords. There were no swords to wave. There was no enemy in sight
and no evidence as yet that they had been sighted by any enemy. As a matter of fact, none of
them--neither those who fell nor those who lived--saw on that day a single living individual
recognisable as a German.

A sense of enormous isolation encompassed them. They seemed to be all alone in a corner of
the world that was peopled by diabolical sounds, but not by humans. They had a feeling that
because of an error in the plans they had been sent forward without supports; that they--a
puny handful--were to be sacrificed under the haunches of the Hindenburg line while all those
thousands of others who should have been their companions upon this adventure bided safely
behind, held back by the countermand which through some hideous blunder had failed to reach
them in time. But they went on. Orders were to go on--and order, plus discipline, plus the
individual's sense of responsibility, plus that fear of his that his mates may know how fearful
of other things he is--make it possible for armies to be armies instead of mobs and for battles
to be won.

They went on until they came to an invisible line drawn lengthwise across the broad way of
the weed field, and here men began to drop down. Mainly those stricken slid gently forward
to lie on their stomachs. Only here and there was there a man who spun about to fall face upward.
Those who were wounded, but not overthrown, would generally sit down quite gently and quite
deliberately, with puzzled looks in their eyes. Since still there was neither sign nor sight
of the well-hidden enemy the thought took root in the minds of the men as yet unscathed that,
advancing too fast, they had been caught in the drop curtain of their own barrage.

Sergeant Hyman Ginsburg, going along at the head of his squad, got this notion quite well fixed
in his mind. Then, though, he saw smoke jets issuing from bushes and trees on ahead of him
where the ridges of the slope sharpened up acutely into a sort of natural barrier like a wall;
and likewise for the first time he now heard the tat-tat-tat of machine guns, sounding like
the hammers of pneumatic riveters rapidly operated. To him it seemed a proper course that his
squad should take such cover as the lay of the land afforded and fire back toward the machine
guns. Almost simultaneously came a second individual from the vicinity of Crossmyloof, smoking
a cigar. There was no doubt about it, for on closer inspection the figure was that of Lambert,
who generally indulged in a good cigar, as he had a friend in the
Anchor Line who was always supplying him with "weeds."

A very short time sufficed to measure the distance, but the would-be murderers, no doubt, considered
it an age. When the seconds advanced along with their men to the fatal spot, and placed them twenty
paces apart, Charlie put one in mind of the poor misguided boy in "The Rivals." His hand shook,
and his knees almost touched one another.

The signal was given,
and bang went the revolvers from both sides.

So far as he could tell, nobody gave the word to retire. He found himself going back at the
tail of his squad where before he had been its head. Subconsciously he was surprised to observe
that the copse from which they had emerged but a minute or two earlier, as he had imagined,
was a considerable distance away from them, now that they had set their faces toward it. It
did not seem possible that they could have left it so far behind them. Yet returning to it
the men did not perceptibly hurry their steps. They retreated without evidences of disorder--almost
reluctantly--as though by this very slowness of movement to signify their disgust for the supposed
fiasco that had enveloped them, causing them to waste lives in an ill-timed and futile endeavour.

Ginsburg reëntered the covert of birches with a sense of gratitude for its protection and let
himself down into the trench. He faced about, peering over its rim, and saw that his captain--Captain
Griswold--was just behind him, returning all alone and looking back over his shoulder constantly.

Captain Griswold was perhaps twenty yards from the thicket when he clasped both hands to the
pit of his stomach and slipped down flat in the trampled herbage. In that same moment Ginsburg
saw how many invisible darting objects, which must of course be machine-gun bullets, were mowing
the weed stems about the spot where the captain had gone down. Bits of turf flew up in showers
as the leaden blasts, spraying down from the top of the ridge, bored into the earth.

Well, somebody would have to bring the captain in out of that. He laid his rifle against the
wall of the trench and climbed out again into plain view. So far as he knew he was going as
a solitary volunteer upon this errand. He put one arm across his face, like a man fending off
rain drops, and ran bent forward.

The captain, when he reached him, was lying upon his side with his face turned away from Ginsburg
and his shrapnel helmet half on and half off his head. Ginsburg stooped, putting his hands
under the pits of the captain's arms, and gave a heave. The burden of the body came against
him as so much dead heft; a weight limp and unresponsive, the trunk sagging, the limbs loose
and unguided.

Ginsburg felt a hard buffet in his right side. It wasn't a blow exactly; it was more like a
clout from a heavily-shod blunt-ended brogan. His last registered impression as he collapsed
on top of the captain was that someone, hurrying up to aid him, had stumbled and driven a booted
toe into his ribs. Thereafter for a space events--in so far as Ginsburg's mind recorded them--were
hazy, with gaps between of complete forgetfulness. He felt no pain to speak of, but busybodies
kept bothering him. It drowsily annoyed him to be dragged about, to be lifted up and to be
put down again, to be pawed over by unseen, dimly comprehended hands, to be ridden in a careening,
bumping vehicle for what seemed to him hours and hours. Finally, when he was striving to reorganise
his faculties for the utterance of a protest, someone put something over his nose and he went
sound asleep.

Ensued then a measureless period when he slept and dreamed strange jumbled dreams. He awakened,
clear enough in his thoughts, but beset with a queer giddiness and a weakness, in a hospital
sixteen miles from where the mix-up had started, though he didn't know about that of course
until subsequent inquiry enabled him to piece together a number of fragmentary recollections.
For the present he was content to realise that he lay on a comfortable cot under a tight roof
and that he had his full complement of arms and legs and could move them, though when he moved
the right leg the ankle hurt him. Also he had a queer squeezed-in sensation amidships as though
broad straps had been buckled tightly about his trunk.

Upon top of these discoveries came another. Sitting up in the next-hand cot to his on the right
was a member of his own company, one Paul Dempsey, now rather elaborately bandaged as to his
head and shoulders, but seemingly otherwise in customary good order and spirits.

"Hello, Dempsey," he said.

"Hello, sarge," answered back Dempsey. "How you feelin' by now--all right?"

"Guess so. My ankle is sprained or something and my side feels sort of funny."

"I shouldn't wonder," said Dempsey. "I got a dippy kind of feelin' inside my own headpiece--piece
of shell casin' come and beaned me. It don't amount to much, though; just enough to get me
a wound stripe. You're the lucky guy, sarge. Maybe it's so you won't have to go back and prob'ly
I will."

The speaker sighed and grinned and then confessed to a great perception which many before him
had known and which many were to know afterward, but which some--less frank than he--have sought
to conceal.

"I'll go back of course if they need me--and if I have to--but I'd just as lief not. You kin
take it from me, I've had plenty of this gettin' all-shot-up business. Oncet is enough for
First-Class Private Dempsey.

"Say," he went on, "looks like you and me are goin' partners a lot here lately. I get mine
right after you get yours. We ride back here together in the same tin Lizzie--you and me do--and
now here we are side by each again. Well, there's a lot of the fellows we won't neither of
us see no more. But their lives wasn't wasted, at that. I betcher there's a lot of German bein'
spoke in hell these last two or three days.

"Oh, you ain't heard the big news, have you? Bein' off your dip and out of commission like
you was. Well, we busted old Mister Hindenburg's line in about nine places and now it looks
like maybe we'll eat Thanksgivin' dinner in Berlin or Hoboken--one."

Dempsey went on and every word that he uttered was news--how the seemingly premature advance
of the battalion had not been a mistake at all; how the only slip was that the battalion walked
into a whole cote of unsuspected machine-gun nests, but how the second battalion going up and
round the shore of the hill to the left had taken the boche on the flank and cleaned him out
of his pretty little ambuscade; how there were tidings of great cheer filtering back from all
along the line and so forth and so on. Ginsburg broke in on him:

"How's Captain Griswold?"

"Oh, the cap was as good as dead when this here guy, Goodman, fetched him in on his back after
he'd went out after you fell and fetched you back in first. I seen the whole thing myself--it
was right after that that I got beaned. One good scout, the cap was. And there ain't nothin'
wrong with this Goodman, neither; you kin take it from me."

"Goodman?" Ginsburg pondered. The name was a strange one. "Say, was it this Goodman that kicked
me in the ribs while I was tryin' to pick up the captain?"

"Kicked you nothin'! You got a machine-gun bullet glancin' on your short ribs and acrost your
chest right under the skin--that was what put you down and out. And then just as Goodman fetched
you in acrost over the top here come another lot of machine-gun bullets, and one of 'em drilled
you through the ankle and another one of them bored Goodman clean through the shoulder; but
that didn't keep him from goin' right back out there, shot up like he was, after the captain.
Quick as a cat that guy was and strong as a bull. Naw, Goodman he never kicked you--that was
a little chunk of lead kicked you."

"But I didn't feel any pain like a bullet," protested Ginsburg. "It was more like a hard wallop
with a club or a boot."

"Say, that's a funny thing too," said Dempsey. "You're always readin' about the sharp dartin'
pain a bullet makes, and yet nearly everybody that gets hit comes out of his trance ready to
swear a mule muster kicked him or somethin'. I guess that sharp-dartin' pain stuff runs for
Sweeney; the guys that write about it oughter get shot up themselves oncet. Then they'd know."

"This Goodman, now?" queried Ginsburg, trying to chamber many impressions at once. "I don't
seem to place him. He wasn't in B Company?"

"Naw! He's out of D Company. He's a new guy. He's out of a bunch of replacements that come
up for D Company only the day before yistiddy. Well, for a green hand he certainly handled
himself like one old-timer."

Dempsey, aged nineteen, spoke as the grizzled veteran of many campaigns might have spoken.

"Yes, sir! He certainly snatched you out of a damn bad hole in jig time."

"I'd like to have a look at him," said Ginsburg. "And my old mother back home would, too, I know."

"Your mother'll have to wait, but you kin have your wish," said Dempsey gleefully. He had been
saving his biggest piece of news for the last. "If you've got anything to ask him just ask
him. He's layin' there--right over there on the other side of you. We all three of us rode
down here together in the same amb'lance load."

Ginsburg turned his head. Above the blanket that covered the figure of his cot neighbour on
the right he looked into the face of the man who had saved him--looked into it and recognised
it. That dark skin, clear though, with a transparent pallor to it like brown stump water in
a swamp, and those black eyes between the slitted lids could belong to but one person on earth.
If the other had overheard what just had passed between Ginsburg and Dempsey he gave no sign.
He considered Ginsburg steadily, with a cool, hostile stare in his eyes.

"Much obliged, buddy," said Ginsburg. Something already had told him that here revealed was
a secret not to be shared with a third party.

"Don't mention it," answered his late rescuer shortly. He drew a fold of the blanket up across
his face with the gesture of one craving solitude or sleep.

"Huh!" quoth Dempsey. "Not what I'd call a talkative guy."

This shortcoming could not be laid at his own door. He talked steadily on. After a while, though,
a reaction of weariness began to blunt Dempsey's sprightly vivacity. His talk trailed off into
grunts and he slept the sleep of a hurt tired-out boy.

Satisfied that Dempsey no longer was to be considered in the rôle of a possible eavesdropper,
Ginsburg nevertheless spoke cautiously as again he turned his face toward the motionless figure
stretched alongside him on his left.

"Listening?" he began.

"Yes," gruffly.

"When did you begin calling yourself Goodman?"

"That's my business."

"No, it's not. Something has happened that gives me the right to know. Forget that I used to
be on the cops. I'm asking you now as one soldier to another: When did you begin calling yourself
Goodman?"

"About a year ago--when I first got into the service."

"How did you get in?"

"Enlisted."

"Where? New York?"

"No. Cleveland."

"What made you enlist?"

"Say, wot's this--thoid-degree stuff?"

"I told you just now that I figured I had a right to know. When a man saves your life it puts
him under an obligation to you--I mean puts you under an obligation to him," he corrected.

"Well, if you put it that way--maybe it was because I wanted to duck out of reach of you bulls.
Maybe because I wanted to go straight a while. Maybe because I wanted to show that a bad guy
could do somethin' for his country. Dope it out for yourself. I like the motion, the light, the flowers,
and the gauzy material which enwraps the young girls as in a soft
mist; and then those shoulders, necks, and arms which released from
the warm cloaks seem at once to grow firm and crisp as marble.

My sense of smell, too, is gratified, for I delight in good perfumes.

The picnic was a great success.

To give Staszewski his due, he knows how to arrange these things.

I arrived together with my aunt, but lost sight of her in the entrance hall, for Staszewski
himself came down to lead her upstairs.

The dear old lady had on her ermine cloak she uses on great occasions,
and which her friends call her robe of state.

When I entered the ballroom I remained near the door and looked around. What a strange sensation
when, after a long interval, one comes back to once familiar scenes. I feel I am a part of them,
and yet I look at them and criticise them as if I were a stranger. Especially the women attracted
my attention,--I must admit, fastidious as I am, that our society
is very choice.

I saw pretty faces and plain faces, but all stamped with the same
well-bred refinement.

The necks and shoulders, in spite of the softly rounded contours, simply reminded me of Sevres
china.

There is a restful elegance, something daintily finished, in all of them. Truly, they do not
imitate Europe,--they are Europe.

I remained there about a quarter of an hour indolently musing which of all these dainty damsels
my aunt had chosen for me, when Sniatynski and his wife came up. I had seen him only a few months
ago at Rome, and had known her, too, for some time. I like her very much; she has a sweet face
and belongs to those exceptional Poles that do not absorb their husband's whole life, but surrender
their own. Presently a young girl slipped in between us, and while greeting Pani Sniatynska, put
out a small hand encased in a white kid glove and said:--

"Don't you know me, Leon?"

I felt slightly perplexed at this question, for indeed I did not know who it was that greeted me
thus familiarly; but not wishing to seem rude, I smiled and pressed
the little hand, saying, "Of course I do."

I must have looked a little foolish because, presently Pani Sniatynska burst out laughing and
said, "But he does not recognize you; it is Aniela P."

Aniela, my cousin! No wonder I did not recognize her. The last time I saw her, some ten or eleven
years ago at Ploszow, she wore a short frock and pink stockings.

       I remember the midges had stung her about the legs, and she stamped
on the ground like a little pony.

How could I dream that these white shoulders, this breast covered with violets, this pretty
face with the dark eyes, in short, this girl in the full bloom of maidenhood, was the same as
the little wagtail on thin feet I had known formerly. How pretty she had grown; a fine butterfly
had come from that chrysalis. I renewed my greeting very heartily. Afterwards when the Sniatynskis
had left us she told me that my aunt and her mother had sent her to fetch me. I offered my arm
and we went across the room.

All at once it burst in upon me. It was she, Aniela, my aunt had in her mind. That then was the
secret, the surprise meant for me. My aunt always used to be fond of her, and troubled herself
not a little over Pani P.'s financial difficulties. I only wondered why these ladies were not stopping
with my aunt; but I did not ponder over it long; I preferred to look
at Aniela, who naturally interested me more than the average girl.

As we had to make our way to the other end of the room and the crush was great, I had ample
time for conversation and scrutiny. Fashion this year has it that gloves should be worn halfway
up the elbow, so I noticed that the arm which rested on mine had a slightly dusky shade, covered as it
was with a light down. And yet she could not be called a brunette. Her hair is a light brown with a
gleam of bronze. Her eyes are light too, but appear dark, shaded as they are by long eyelashes; the
eyebrows, on the contrary, are dark and very pretty. The characteristic of this little head with
the low brow is that exuberance of hair, eyebrows, eyelashes, and that down, which on the face
is very slight. This at some future time may spoil her beauty, but at present she is so young that
it points only to an exuberance of organism, and shows that she is not a doll, but a woman
full of warm, active life.

I do not deny that, fastidious as are my nerves and not easily thrilled,
I fell under a spell.

She is my type exactly. My aunt, who, if she ever heard about Darwin would call him a wicked writer,
has unconsciously adopted his theory of natural selection. Yes, she is my type. They have
baited the hook this time with a dainty morsel.

An electric current seemed to pass from her arm into mine. Besides I noticed that she too seemed pleased with
me, and that naturally raises one's spirits.

My scrutiny from an artistic point of view proved highly satisfactory. There are faces that
seem to be a translation from music or poetry into human shape. Such a face is Aniela's. There
is nothing commonplace about it. As children are inoculated for small-pox so the upper classes
inoculate modesty in their girls; there is something so very innocent in this face, but through
that very innocence peeps out a warm temperament. What a combination!--as if some one said, "An
innocent Satan!"

Unsophisticated as Aniela is, she is yet a little bit of a coquette, and quite conscious of
her attractions.

Knowing for instance that she has beautiful eyelashes, she very often drops her eyes. She has also
a graceful way of lifting her head and looking at the person she is speaking to. In the beginning
she was slightly artificial, from shyness I fancy, but soon afterwards we chatted together as
if we had never been separated since those times at Ploszow. My aunt is highly amusing with
her absentmindedness, but I should not care to have her for a fellow-conspirator. Scarcely had
we approached the two elderly ladies and I exchanged greetings with
Aniela's mother, when my aunt, noticing my animation, turned to her
companion and said aloud, "How pretty she looks in those violets!

It was, after all, a happy thought that he should see her the first time at a ball."

Aniela's mother grew very confused, and so did Aniela, and the truth
began to dawn upon me why it was the ladies were not staying with
my aunt.

This had been Pani P.'s idea; she and my aunt had been plotting together.

I suppose Aniela had not been taken into confidence, but thanks to female perspicacity could not
help guessing how matters stood.

To put an end to the embarrassing situation I turned to her and said, "I warn you that I am
not very proficient at dancing, but as they will carry you off any moment, will you grant me
a waltz?"

Aniela for all answer handed me her tablets and said resolutely, "Put
down as many as you like."

I confess that I do not like the rôle of a puppet pulled by a string,
therefore I resolved to take an active part in the old ladies' politics.

I took the tablets and wrote, "Did you understand that they want us
to marry?"

Aniela read it and changed color. She remained silent for a moment, as if not trusting her voice,
or hesitating what to say; at last she lifted her eyelashes and looking
straight into my eyes she replied, "Yes."

It was now her turn to question me, not in words but with her eyes. I already knew I had made a favorable
impression on her, and if she had an inkling of the truth her mind must needs dwell a good deal
on me. I interpreted the look of her eyes thus: "I am aware my mother and my aunt want us to become
acquainted, to know each other well. And you?"

Instead of an answer I put my arm around her waist, and lightly drawing her towards me, led her
into the mazes of a waltz. I remembered my fencing practice.

A mute answer could not but stir up fancies in a girl's mind, especially after what I had written
on the tablets. I thought to myself: "What harm is there if her fancy turns into my direction?
As far as I am concerned I shall not go a step further than I intend, and if her fancy travels
further I cannot help it." Aniela dances exquisitely, and she danced this waltz as a woman should,
with a certain vehemence and self-abandon at the same time. I noticed that the violets on her
breast rose and fell far quicker than the quiet step of the dance warranted. I understood that
she felt agitated. Love is a law of nature, kept under control by a careful bringing-up. But once
the girl is told that she may love this one or that, the chance is she will obey very readily. Aniela
evidently expected that after I had been bold enough to write those few words I would allude to
it further, but I kept aloof on purpose to leave her in suspense.

I wished also to look at her from a distance. Decidedly she is my type. Women of that kind have
a special attraction for me. Oh, if only she were thirty, and not a girl they expect me to
marry!

WARSAW, 30 January.

They have come to stay with us.

Yesterday I spent all the day with Aniela. She has more pages to her soul than most girls at
her age. On many of these pages the future will write, but there is room for many beautiful
things. She feels and understands everything, and is an excellent listener, and follows the
conversation with her large, intelligent eyes. A woman that can listen possesses one more attraction,
because she flatters man's vanity. I do not know whether Aniela is conscious of this, or whether it
be her womanly instinct. Maybe she has heard so much about me from my aunt that she deems
every word I say an oracle. She is decidedly not without coquetry. To-day I asked her what she
wished for most in life. She answered, "To see Rome;" then her eyelashes fell, and she looked
indescribably pretty. She sees that I like her, and it makes her happy. Her coquetry is charming,
because it comes straight from a delighted heart, and tries to please
the chosen object.

I have not the slightest doubt that her heart is fluttering towards me, as a moth flutters into
the candle. Poor child! she feels the elders have given their mute consent, and she obeys only
too willingly. I can watch the process from hour to hour.

Perhaps I ought to inquire of myself, "If you do not want to marry her, why are you trying to
make her love you?" But I do not choose to answer that question. I feel at peace here, and restful!
After all, what is it I am doing? I try not to appear more foolish or disagreeable or less
courteous than I am by nature, that is all.

Aniela appeared to-day at breakfast in a loose sailor-dress, which only just betrayed the outline
of her shape, and she looked bewitching. Her eyes were still full of dreaminess and sleep. It
is something wonderful what an impression she is making on me.

31 January.

My aunt is giving an entertainment in honor of Aniela. I am paying visits and leaving cards
right and left. I called upon the Sniatynskis, and sat with them for a long time, because I feel
there at home. Sniatynski and his wife are always wrangling with each other, but their life
is different from that of most other married people. As a rule, it happens when there is one
cloak, each tries to get possession of it; these two dispute because he wishes her to have
it, and she wants it all for him. I like them immensely,--it is so refreshing to see there
is still happiness out of novels. With all that, he is so clever; as sensitive as a Stradivarius
violin, and quite conscious of his happiness. He wanted it, and has got it. I envy him. I
always used to like his conversation. They offered me some black coffee; it is only at literary people's
houses one can get such coffee.

He asked me what I thought of Warsaw after so long an absence. There was also some talk about
the ball, especially from the lady's part. She seems to guess something about my aunt's plans,
and wants to have one of her rosy fingers in the pie,--especially as she comes from the same
part of the country as Aniela.

We touched personal matter very slightly, but had a lively discussion about society in general.
I told him what I thought about its refinement; and as Sniatynski, though he criticises it himself
mercilessly, is always greedy to hear its praises sung, it put him into capital spirits.

"I like to hear you say so," he remarked, "as you have so many chances to make comparisons, and
are rather inclined to look at the world from a pessimist's point of view."

"I do not know whether what I just said does not lean that way."

"How do you prove that?" asked Sniatynski, quickly.

"You see, refined culture might be compared to cases with glass and china, upon which is written,
'Fragile.' For you, a spiritual son of Athens, for me and a few others, it is pleasant to be in
touch with it; but if you want to build anything on such foundation, you will find the beams coming
down on your head. Don't you think those refined dilettanti of life are bound to get the worst
in a struggle with a people of strong nerves, a tough skin, and iron muscles?"

Sniatynski, who is very lively, jumped up and walked about the room, then rushed at me impetuously.
"You have seen only one side of the picture, and not the best one, either; do not think there
is nothing more to be seen. You come from abroad, and pronounce judgment upon us as if you had
lived here all your life."

"I do not know what else there may be, but I know that nowhere in the world is there such a
vast difference between the classes. On one side, the most refined culture,--over-refined, if
anything; on the other, absolute barbarism and ignorance."

A long discussion followed, and it was dusk before I left them. He said if I came oftener to see
them, he would show me the connecting link between the two classes, introduce me to men who
were neither over-refined, ignorant, nor sickening with dilettantism, but strong men, who knew
what they wanted, and were going straight for it.

When I was going away, Sniatynski called out after me:

"From such
as you nothing good will come, but your children may be men; but you
and such like must lose every penny you possess, otherwise even your
grandchildren will do nothing useful."

I still think that on the whole I was right. I have taken special notice of this conversation,
as this discrepancy has occupied my thoughts ever since my arrival. The fact is that between the
classes there is a vast gulf that precludes all mutual understanding,
and makes simultaneous efforts simply impossible.

At least, I look upon it in that light. Sèvres china and common clay,--nothing between; one
très fragile, the other, Ovidius's "rudis indigestaque moles." Of course Sèvres china sooner
or later breaks, and from the clay the future may mould anything it likes.

2 February.

Yesterday my aunt's entertainment took place. Aniela was the cynosure
of every eye.

Her white shoulders peeping out from a cloud of muslin, gauze, or whatever it is called, she
looked like a Venus rising from the foam. I fancy it is already gossiped about that I am going to
marry her. I noticed that her eyes often strayed in my direction, and she listened to her partners
with an absent, distracted expression.

Guileless child! she cannot hide the truth, and shows so plainly what is going on in her heart
that I could not help seeing it, unless I were blind. And she is so humble and quietly happy
when I am with her! I like her immensely, and begin to waver. Sniatynski is so happy in his home
life! It is not the first time I have asked myself whether Sniatynski be more foolish or wiser
than I. Of the many problems of life, I have not solved one. I am nothing; scepticism is sapping
my whole system; I am not happy, and am very tired. He, with less knowledge than I, does useful
work, has a good and handsome wife, the rogue! and his very philosophical
principles, adapted to life, help to make him happy.

No, it must be acknowledged, it is I who am the more foolish of the two.

The keynote of Sniatynski's philosophy is found in his dogmas of life. Before he was married he
said to me: "There are two things I never approach with scepticism, and do not criticise: to me
as a literary man, the community is a dogma; as a private individual, the beloved woman." I thought
to myself then: "My mind is bolder,--it analyzes even that." But I see now that this boldness
has not led me to anything. And how lovely she is,--that little dogma of mine with the long eyelashes!
Decidedly, I am going the way I did not mean to go.

The singular attraction which draws me towards her cannot be explained by the law of natural selection.
Ho! there is something more, and I know what it is. She loves me with all the freshness of her
honest heart, as I was never loved before. How different from the fencing practice of former
years, when thrusts were dealt or guarded against! The woman who is much liked, and who in her
turn loves, is sure to win in the end if she perseveres.

"The stray bird," says the poet Slowacki, "comes back to his haven of rest and peace all the more
eagerly after the lonesomeness of his stormy flight. Nothing takes so firm a hold upon a man's
heart as the consciousness that he is loved."

A few pages before, I wrote God knows what about Polish women; but if any one fancies that for the sake
of a few written sentences I feel myself bound to pursue a certain
course, he is vastly mistaken.

How that girl satisfies my artistic taste is simply wonderful. After the ball, came the pleasantest
moment when, everybody gone, we sat down and had some tea. Wanting to see how the world looked
outside, I drew back the heavy curtains. It was eight o'clock in the morning and a flood of
daylight poured into the room. It was so perfectly blue, seen by the glare of the lamps, that
it reminded me of the Capri grotto. And there stood Aniela, with that blue haze around her white shoulders.
She looked so lovely that all my resolutions tottered and fell to
pieces; I felt positively grateful to her for this glimpse of beauty,
as if it were her doing.

I pressed her hand more tenderly than I had ever done before when saying good-night to her.

"Good-morning,
you mean, not good-night,--good-morning."

Either I am blind and deaf or her eyes and voice expressed: "I love you, I love you."

I do the same--almost.

My aunt looking at us gave a low grunt of contentment. I saw tears shining in her eyes.

To-morrow we leave here for Ploszow.

PLOSZOW, 5 February.

This is my second day in the country. We had a splendid drive. The weather was clear and frosty. The snow
creaked under the runners of the sledge and glittered and sparkled in the fields. Towards sunset
the vast plain assumed pink and purple shades. The rooks, cawing and flapping their wings, flew
in and out the lime trees. Winter, the strong, homely winter, is
a beautiful thing.

There is a certain vigor in it, and dignity, and what is more, so much sincerity. Like a true
friend, who, regardless as to consequences, hurls cutting truths, it smites you between the
eyes without asking leave. By way of compensation it bestows upon you some of its own vigor. We were
all of us glad to leave the town--the elder ladies, that their pet scheme might be brought to a
climax by closer companionship; I, because I was near Aniela; she, maybe for the same reason,
felt happy too. She bent down several times to kiss my aunt's hands, apropos of nothing, out
of sheer content. She looked very pretty in a long, fluffy boa and a coquettish fur cap, from under
which the dark eyes and the almost childish face peeped forth.

How young she looks.

I feel at home in Ploszow, it is so quiet and
restful; and I like the huge, old-fashioned chimneys. The woods are
to my aunt as the apple of her eye, but she does not grudge herself
fuel; and big logs, which are crackling and burning there from morning
until night, make it look bright and cheerful. We sat around the fire
the whole afternoon. I brought out some of my reminiscences, and told
them about Rome and its treasures. The three women listened with such
devoutness that it made me feel ridiculous in my own eyes. From time
to time, while I was talking, my aunt cast a searching glance at Aniela
to see whether she expressed enough admiration. But there is too much
of that already. Yesterday she said to me:--

"Another man might spend
there his whole life and not see half the beautiful things you do."

My
aunt added with dogmatic firmness,--

"I have always said so."

It
is as well that there is not another sceptic here, for his presence
would embarrass me not a little.

A certain dissonant chord in our
little circle is Aniela's mother. The poor soul has had so many sorrows
and anxieties that her cheerfulness, if ever she had any, is a thing
of the past. She is simply afraid of the future, and instinctively
suspects pitfalls even in good fortune. She was very unhappy in her
married life, and afterwards has had continual worries about her estate,
which is very much involved. In addition to all this she suffers from
nervous headaches.

Aniela belongs to that category of women who never
trouble themselves about money matters. I like her for that, for it
proves that she thinks of higher things. For the matter of that, everything
in her pleases and delights me now.

Tenderness grows on the soil
of attraction by the senses, as quick as flowers after a warm rain.
To-day, in the morning, I saw the maid carrying up her gown and boots;
this moved me very much, especially the little, little boots, as if
the wearing of them was the crown of all virtues in Aniela.

PLOSZOW,
8 or 9 February.

My aunt has taken up her visual warfare with Pan
Chwastowski. This is such an original habit of hers that I must describe
one of their disputes. The dear lady can evidently not exist without
it, or at least not enjoy her dinner; Chwastowski, again, who, by
the bye, is an excellent manager, is a compound of brimstone and saltpetre,
and does not allow anybody to thwart him; therefore the quarrels sometimes
reach the acute state. When entering the dining-room they eye each
other with suspicious glances. The first shot is fired by my aunt
while eating her soup.

"It is a very long time, Pan Chwastowski,
since I heard anything about the winter crops, and Pan Chwastowski,
instead of giving me the information, speaks about anything but what
I want to know."

"They were very promising in autumn, my lady; now
they are covered by a yard or two of snow,--how am I to know the state
they are in? I am not the Lord Almighty."

"I beg of you, Pan Chwastowski,
not to take the Lord's name in vain."

"I do not look under His snow,
therefore do not offend Him."

"Do you mean to insinuate that I do?"

"Most
certainly."

"Pan Chwastowski, you are unbearable."

"Oho! bearable
enough because he bears a great deal."

In this or that way the screw
goes round. There is scarcely a meal but they have some differences.
Then my aunt at last subsides, and seems to wreak the remnants of
her anger on the dinner. She enjoys a hearty appetite. As the dinner
goes on she gradually brightens up and recovers her usual spirits.
After dinner, I offer my arm to Aniela's mother, my aunt accepts Pan
Chwastowski's, and presently they sip their black coffee in peace
and perfect amity. My aunt inquires after his sons, and he kisses
her hands. I saw those sons of his when they were at the university,
and I hear they are promising young men, but great radicals.

Aniela
used to get frightened at first at these prandial disputes, until
I gave her the clue to the real state of things. So now when the first
signal of battle is given, she looks at me slyly from under those
long lashes, and there is a little smile lurking in the corners of
her mouth. She is so pretty then I feel tempted to take her in my
arms. I have never met a woman with such delicate veins on her temples.

12
February.

Truly a metamorphosis of Ovidius on the earth and within
me! The frost has gone, the fine weather vanished, and there is Egyptian
darkness. I cannot describe it better than by saying the weather is
foul. What an abominable climate! In Rome, at the worst, the sun shines
at intervals half a dozen times a day; here lamps ought to be lit
these two days. The black, heavy mist seems to permeate one's thoughts,
and paint them a uniform gray. My aunt and Pan Chwastowski were more
intent than usual upon warfare. Even more he despised the hectoring
Germans with their flaming red and yellow beards, their thick-lensed spectacles, their gross
manners when among their own kind and their brutishness in all their dealings with the natives--a
brutishness so universal among them that no Polynesian would work at any price for a German,
and every German had to depend for his plantation labour upon imported black boys from the
Solomons and from New Guinea, who having once been trapped or, to use the trade word, indented,
were thereafter held in an enforced servitude and paid with the bond-man's wage of bitter bread
and bloody stripes.

He had never been able to get under the skin of a native; indeed he had never tried. In all
the things that go to make up an understanding of a fellow mortal's real nature they still
were to him as completely strangers as they had been on the day he landed in this place. Set
down in the midst of a teeming fecundity he nevertheless remained as truly a castaway as though
he had floated ashore on a bit of wreckage. He could have been no more and no less a maroon
had the island which received him been a desert island instead of a populous one.

When a chief paid him a formal visit, bringing a gift of taro root and sitting for hours upon
his veranda, the grave courtesy of the ceremony, in which a white man differently constituted
might have taken joy, merely bored him unutterably. As for the native women, they had as little
of sex appeal for him as he had for them--which was saying a good deal now, because he was
short and of a meagre shape, and the scorn of the Polynesian girl for a little man is measureless.
The girls of Good Friday Island called him by a name which sounded like "Pooh-pooh."

Among an English-speaking people it would have been a hard-enough lot to be pooh-poohed through
life by every personable female one met. Here the coupled syllables carried an added sting
of contemptuousness. In the language of the country they meant runty, mean-figured, undersized.
A graceful girl, her naked limbs glistening with coconut oil, a necklet of flowers about her
throat and a hibiscus bloom pasted to her cheek like a beauty spot, meeting him in the road
would give him a derisive smile over her shoulder and with the unconscious cruelty of primitive
folk would softly puff out "Pooh-pooh" through her pursed lips as she passed him by. And it
hurt. Certain of the white residents called him Pooh-pooh too, which hurt more deeply.

How he hated the whole thing--the dampness which mildewed his shoes and rusted out his nettings;
the day heat which kept him bathed in clamminess; the pestiferous insects; the forest with
its voices like sobbings and hammerings and demoniac chatterings; the food he had to eat; the
company he had to keep; the chiefs who bored him; the girls who derided him; the beachcombers
who nauseated him; the white sands, the blue waters, the smells, the sounds, the routine of
existence with one day precisely like another--the whole thing of it. We may picture him as
a humid duck-legged little man, most terribly homesick, most tremendously lonely, most distressingly
alien. We may go further and picture him as a sort of combination of Job with his afflictions,
Robinson Crusoe with no man Friday to cheer him in his solitude, and Peter the Hermit with
no dream of a crusade to uplift him. In these four years his hair had turned almost white,
yet he was still under forty.

To all about him, white people and brown people alike, the coming of the steamer was an event
of supremest importance. For the islanders it meant a short season of excitement, most agreeable
to their natures. For the whites it meant a fleeting but none the less delectable contact with
the world outside, with lands beyond, upon which all of them, for this reason or that, had
turned their backs, and to which some of them dared never return.

In his case the world did not mean the world at large but merely the small circumscribed world
of South New Medford, which was his world. To him South New Medford comprehended and summed
up all that was really worth while. He welcomed the steamer not because it brought news of
wars and rumours of wars nor tales of great events on this continent or in that archipelago,
but because it brought to him a sheaf of letters, all addressed in the same prim handwriting
and bearing the same postmark; and a sheaf of copies of the South New Medford Daily Republican.
The letters he read at once greedily, but with the newspapers he had a different way. He shucked
them out of their wrappers, arranged them in proper chronological order with those bearing
the later dates at the bottom and those bearing the older dates upon the top of the heap, then
stacked them on a shelf in his living room. And each morning he read a paper.

In the beginning of his sojourn on Good Friday Island he had made a grievous mistake. Following
the arrival of the first steamer after he took over his duties as resident manager for the
British Great Eastern he had indulged himself in a perfect orgy of reading. He had read all
his Daily Republicans in two days' time, gorging himself on home news, on mention of familiar
names and on visions of familiar scenes. Then had ensued sixty-odd days of emptiness until
the steamer brought another batch of papers to him.

From that time on he read one paper a day and one only. Reading it he lived the life of the
town and became one of its citizens; a sharer at long distance in its joys, its sorrows and
its small thrills. But never now did he read more than one paper in a single day; the lesson
of those two months had sunk in. No temptation, howsoever strong--the desire to know how the
divorce trial of the H. K. Peabodys turned out, the itch of yearning to learn whether the body
of the man found drowned in Exeter Pond was identified--proved potent enough to pull him away
from his rule. That the news he read was anywhere from ten weeks to four months old when it
reached him did not matter; in fact he very soon forgot that such was the case. For two precious
hours a day he was translated back to the day and date that the rumpled sheet in his hands
carried on its first page. Afterward he reverted quite naturally and without conscious jar
to the proper time of the year as advertised by the calendar.

His routine would be like this: He would rise early, before the heat of the day was upon Good
Friday Island to make it steam and sweat and give off smells. He would shave himself and bathe
and put on clean loose garments, all white except where the stains of the wild, yellow berries
had blotched them. His breakfast he prepared himself, afterward washing the dishes. Then he
would light his pipe or his cigar and take from the shelf the uppermost copy of the pile of
Daily Republicans there. With the love for tidiness and kemptness that was a part of him he
would smooth out its creases, then sit down on his veranda to read it. Immediately he became
detached from all his surroundings. By his concentration he was isolated from and insulated
against all external influences. He was not in Good Friday Island then; he was in South New
Medford.

Each morning he read his paper through from the top line of the first column of the first page
to the bottom line of the last column of the fourth, or last, page. He read it all--news matter,
local items, clippings, advertisements, want notices, church notices, lodge notices, patent
insides of boiler plate, fashion department, household hints, farm hints, reprint, Births,
Weddings and Deaths; syndicate stuff, rural correspondence--no line of its contents did he
skip. With his eyes shut he could put his finger upon those advertisements which ran without
change and occupied set places on this page or that; such, for instance, as the two-column
display of J. Wesley Paxon, Livery Barn, Horses Kept and Baited, Vehicles at all hours, Funeral
Attendance a Specialty; and the two-inch notice of the American Pantorium and Pressing Club,
Membership $1.00 per Month, Garments Called For and Delivered, Phone No. 41, M. Pincus, Prop.
He was like a miser with a loaf; no crumb, however tiny, got away from him. To him there was
more of absorbing interest in the appearance of the seventeen-year locust in Chittenden County
than in a Balkan outbreak; less of interest in the failing state of health of the Czar than
in the prospects for the hay crop in the Otter Creek valley.

When he had read on through to the last ink-smudged line he would reread the accounts of those
matters which particularly attracted him on their first reading. Then reluctantly and still
in his state of absorption, he would put the paper aside and going inside to a small desk would
write his daily chapter in a bulky letter, the whole to be posted on the next steamer day.
It was characteristic of the man that in his letter writing he customarily dealt in comment
upon the minor affairs of South New Medford as they had passed in review before him in the
printed columns, rather than in observations regarding witnessed occurrences in Good Friday
Island. This writing stunt done, his day was done. The rest was dulness. Unutterable, grinding
dulness--the monotony of dealing out wares to customers, of keeping his accounts, of posting
his records to date, of performing his domestic chores.

From this dulness, though, there was sometimes an escape. To relieve the monotony of his cheerless
grind of duties and obligations there came to him visions. And these visions, we may be very
sure, mainly were induced by what he had that day read and that day written. By virtue of a
special conjury residing in these waking dreams of his, the little man peering nearsightedly
at the shimmering white beach saw instead of a beach the first heavy fall of snow upon the
withers of the Green Mountains; saw not unchanging stretches of sand but a blanket of purest
fleece, frilled and flounced and scrolled after the drift wind had billowed it up in low places
but otherwise smooth and fair except where it had been rutted by sleigh runners and packed
by the snow-boltered hoofs of bay Dobbins and sorrel Dollies, the get of Morgan stock.

In the insane forest voices he heard the contented cacklings of fat hens scratching for provender
beneath the gnarled limbs of ancient apple trees whose trunks all were so neatly whitewashed
up to the lowermost boughs. Looking upon the settlement where he lived, set as it was like
a white-and-green jewel in a ring of lush barbaric beauty, his fancy showed him the vista of
a spinsterish-looking Main Street lined by dooryards having fences of pointed painted pickets,
and behind the pickets, peonies and hollyhocks encroaching upon prim flagged walks which led
back to the white-panelled doors of small houses buried almost to their eaves in lilac bushes
and golden glow.

The magic of it made all things to match in with the image: Thus, for example, the tall palms
with their feather-duster tops, bending seaward, turned into broad elms standing in regular
double rank, like Yankee militiamen on a muster day. And night times, when through his windows
there came floating in the soft vowelsome voices of native fishermen paddling their canoes
upon the lagoon and singing as they paddled, he felt himself translated many thousands of miles
away to Wednesday evening prayer meeting in a squat, brick church with a wooden belfry rearing
above its steep slated roof.

But in this last conjuring-up of a beloved scene there lay at the back of the trick more of
reminiscence than imagination, since the airs the fishermen chanted were based, nearly all,
upon Christian songs that the earlier missionaries had brought hither; the words might be Polynesian
but the cadence that carried the words was likely to be the cadence of some pioneer hymnster.

And ever and always the vision had a certain delectable climax; a definite consummation most
devoutly wished for. For its final upshot would be that Ethan Pratt would behold himself growing
old in the peaceful safe harbour of South New Medford, anchored fast by his heartstrings to
a small white cottage, all furbished and plenished within, all flowers and shrubs roundabout,
with a kitchen garden at its back, and on beyond an orchard of whitewashed trees where buff
cochins clucked beneath the ripening fruit, and on beyond this in turn a hay meadow stretching
away toward rising foothills.

He saw himself working in the flowers and tilling the vegetable garden. He watched himself
quitting this haven to walk a sedate way to worship of a Sunday morning. With his mind's eye
he followed his own course in a buggy along a country road in the fall of the year when the
maples had turned and the goldenrod spread its carpet of tawny glory across the fields. And
invariably his companion in these simple homely comfortable employments was a little woman
who wore gold-rimmed glasses and starchy print frocks.

Into the picture no third figure ever obtruded. With her alone he conceived of himself as walking
side by side through all the remaining days of his life. For this mousy methodical little man
had his great romance. Unsuspected and undetected, inside the commonplace cover of his body
it burned with a clear and a steady flame. It had burned there, never flickering, never wavering,
through all the days of his faring into far and foreign parts. Since childhood the two of them
had been engaged. It was she who wrote him the letters that came, a fat sheaf of them, by every
steamer; it was to her that he wrote in reply. It was for the sake of her and in the intention
of making a home for her that through four years he had endured this imprisonment or this martyrdom
or this whatever you may be pleased to call it, away off here on the opposite side of the world
from her. She was saving and he was saving, both for a common purpose. Back there at home it
cost her little to live, and out here it cost him less. In fact, it cost him almost nothing.
Ninety per cent of his pay went into his share of the pool.

Within another year the requisite sum which this pair of canny prudent souls had set as their
modest goal would be reached; and then he could bid an everlasting farewell to these hated
islands and go sailing home--home to South New Medford and to Miss Hetty Stowe. And then she
would surrender the place she had held for so long as the teacher of District School Number
Four, to become Mrs. Ethan Allen Pratt, a wife honoured, a helpmate well-beloved.

So to him the coming of the steamer meant more than an orgy of drunken beachcombers and a bustle
of life and activity upon the beach; it meant more than a thin-strained taste of contact with
a distant world of white men and white men's ways; meant more, even, than letters and papers.
To him it was a renewal of the nearing prospect of an eternal departure out of these lands.
By the steamer's movements he marked off into spaced intervals the remaining period of his
exile, he thought of the passage of time not in terms of days or weeks but in terms of two-month
stretches. Six visits more of the ship, or possibly seven, and this drear life would come to
an end and another life, the one of his hopes and plans, would begin.

For its next time of coming the boat was due on or about August the first. She failed to come
on the first, but on the second, early in the morning, she came nosing into the lagoon. In
a canoe with a brown man to paddle him Pratt put off for her. He was alongside by the time
her anchor chains had rattled out, and the skipper with his own hands passed down to him a
mail bag. He brought it ashore and from it took out his packet of letters and his sheaf of
Daily Republicans. These he carried to his quarters.

First he read the letters, finding them many fewer in number than was usual. By his private
system of chronological accounting there should have been one letter for every day from the
eighteenth of March well on into May. But here were but a scant dozen instead of the expected
fifty-odd. On the other hand there seemed to be a fairly complete file of the papers, except
that about ten or twelve of the earlier-dated numbers were missing. By some freakishness in
the handling of the post at this port or that a batch of the older papers and a larger batch
of the newer letters had failed of ultimate delivery to the steamer; so he figured it. This
thing had happened before, causing a vexatious break in his routine. Plainly it had happened
again. Well, away out here off the beat of travel such upsettings must be endured.

He arranged the papers upon their proper shelf and in their proper order; then, as was his
wont, he turned to the letters and read them one by one. To another they might have seemed
stiff and precise in their language; almost formal, faintly breathing as they did the restrained
affections of a woman no longer young and coming of a breed of women who almost from the cradle
are by precept and example taught how to cloak the deeper and the more constant emotions beneath
the ice skim of a ladylike reserve. But they satisfied their reader; they were as they always
had been and as they always would be. His only complaint, mentally registered, was that the
last one should bear the date of March twenty-ninth.

Having read them all he filed them away in a safe place, then brought the topmost copy of his
just-received file of newspapers out upon the veranda and sat himself down to read it.

The first column always contained local news. He read of the wand drill given by the graduating
class of the South New Medford Girls' High School; of a demonstration of Wheat-Sweet Breakfast
Food in the show window of Cody's drug store; of a fire from unknown causes in Lawyer Horace
Bartlett's offices upstairs over G. A. R. Hall, damage eighty dollars; of the death of Aunt
Priscilla Lyon, aged ninety-two; of a bouncing, ten-pound boy born to Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Purdy,
mother and child doing well--all names familiar to him. He came to the department devoted to
weddings. There was but one notice beneath the single-line head; it made a single paragraph.

He read it and as he read the words of it burned into his brain like a fiery acid. He read
it, and it ran like this:

"We are informed that a surprise marriage took place this morning at Rutland. In that city
Miss Hetty Stowe, of near this place, was united in the holy bonds of wedlock to Mr. Gabriel
Eno, of Vergennes. We did not get the name of the officiating minister. The bride is an estimable
lady who for years past has taught District School Number Four in the county. We have not the
pleasure of the happy bridegroom's acquaintance but assume he is in every way worthy of the
lady he has won for a wife. Ye Editor extends congratulations to the happy pair and will print
further details when secured."

He read it through again, to the last blurred word. And as he reread a roaring and a crashing
filled his ears. It was the castle of his hopes crashing down in ruins. So this, then was why
the sequence of letters had been so abruptly broken off. She had lacked the courage to tell
him of her faithlessness; she had chosen the course of silence, leaving him to learn of the
treachery through other sources. It was cruelty piled upon cruelty compounded.

For such a sorry ending he had cut four years out of his life. For this reward of all his constancy
he had endured what had been wellnigh unendurable--loneliness, homesickness, isolation, discomfort.
For this he had kept his body clean and his soul clean where all about him was sloth and slackness.
He thought backward upon that which he had undergone; he thought forward upon the dreary purposeless
prospect that stretched unendingly before him. Never now could he bring himself to go back
to the spot of his shattered dreams. And to him that was the one place in all the world worth
going back to.

He put his face down upon his crossed arms, and presently there began to escape from him strangled
sobs sounding most grotesquely like some strange mimicry of the name the native girls had for
him--"Pooh-pooh, pooh-pooh, pooh-pooh," over and over again repeated. Beyond his doorstep the
life of the station hummed and throbbed, quickened into joyous activity by the coming of the
steamer. He was not conscious of it. That roaring still was in his ears.

Now between his racking sobs he began to pray aloud a broken prayer. He did not pray for divine
forgiveness of the thing he meant to do. By the narrow tenets of his faith his soul, through
the deliberate act of his hands, would go forth from the body, doomed to everlasting torment.
It did not appear feasible to him that God might understand. The God he believed in was a stern
God of punishments, sitting in strict judgment upon mortal transgressions. So he prayed not
for mercy but for strength to carry him through that which faced him.

In a cupboard in the inner room was a single-barreled, muzzle-loading fowling piece made at
Liege, in Belgium, many years before. His predecessor in the station had left it behind him
and Pratt had succeeded to possession of it. He knew how to load and fire and clean it. Occasionally
he had used it in shooting at wood pigeons. He went inside and took it from its place and charged
it with black powder from an old-fashioned metal powder flask and with heavy shot from a worn
shot pouch. For wadding he tore apart the front page of the uppermost copy of the file of Daily
Republicans lying upon the shelf where he had placed them less than half an hour before.

He rammed the charge home, with wadding between powder and shot, with more wadding on top of
the shot. He withdrew the ramrod and cast it aside; he brought the hammer back to full cock
and fixed a cap upon the nipple. He stood the gun upright upon the floor and leaned forward,
the muzzle against his upper chest, the stock braced against the edge of a crack in the planking.
With the great toe of his bare right foot he pressed the trigger.

Two natives, passing, heard the booming report and ran in to see what had caused it. They quickly
ran out again and brought white men. After the body had been moved from where it had fallen
but before the scanty personal belongings of the dead man had been sealed up and before the
store had been put under lock and key, the white men made search about the place for any farewell
message, or lacking that, any physical evidence that might furnish a possible explanation for
the cause of the suicide. They found neither message nor clew. In searching about one of them
came upon a tattered scrap of newspaper. Its burnt edges and its general singed condition proved
that it had been used for wadding. The force of the discharge had blown it out, almost intact,
to flutter off into a corner.

Moved by a curiosity natural under the circumstances the finder deciphered the smudged and
blackened reading that he found upon the two surfaces of the fragment. On one side appeared
part of an advertisement of a merchant tailor; on the other side he made out this, which he
read with a casual interest only:

"The Editor regrets exceedingly that in yesterday's issue he was victimised and imposed upon
to the extent of printing an erroneous and entirely incorrect item, for which mistake we now
hasten to make prompt correction and due amends. Some person unknown, taking advantage of the
fact that yesterday was April the first, or All Fools' Day, telephoned to our sanctum the information
that Miss Hetty Stowe, the well-known teacher, of near here, had been married yesterday morning
at Rutland to a Mr. Gabriel Eno, of Vergennes. Accepting the report in good faith, this paper
printed it in good faith, as an item of news. We now learn that the entire story was untrue,
being, not to mince words, a lie manufactured out of the whole cloth. We learn that Miss Stowe
knows the gentleman whose name was given as bridegroom but very slightly, having met him but
once, as we are now reliably informed. In fact, nothing could be farther from her thoughts
than marriage with the gentleman in question, he being considerably her junior in years. The
cruelty of the hoax thus perpetrated is increased by the fact that for the past several days
Miss Stowe has been confined to the bed of illness, suffering from a sudden and violent attack
of fever, which illness has naturally been enhanced by the embarrassing position in which she
has been placed through the act of an anonymous practical joker. Such jokes are entirely out
of place and cannot be too strongly reprehended. In correcting this falsehood the Daily Republican
wishes to state that the perpetrator of the same is deserving of severe----"

Here the fragment was torn across.

To the tale there is no moral unless it be an indirect moral to be derived from contemplation
of a strange contradiction in our modern life, to wit: That practical burglary is by law sternly
discouraged and practical joking is not.

CHAPTER VIII

HOODWINKED

Spy stories rather went out of fashion when the armistice was signed. But this one could not
have been told before now, because it happened after the armies had quit fighting and while
the Peace Conference was busily engaged in belying its first name. Also, in a strict manner
of speaking, it is not a spy story at all.

So far as our purposes are concerned, it began to happen on an afternoon at the end of the
month of March of this present year, when J. J. Mullinix, of the Secret Service, called on
Miss Mildred Smith, the well-known interior decorator, in her studio apartments on the top
floor of one of the best-looking apartment houses in town. For Mullinix there was a short delay
downstairs because the doorman, sharp on the lookout to bar pestersome intruders who might
annoy the tenants, could not at first make up his mind about Mullinix. In this building there
was a rule against solicitors, canvassers, collectors, pedlar men and beggar men; also one
against babies, but none against dogs--excepting dogs above a certain specified size, which--without
further description--should identify our building as one standing in what is miscalled the
exclusive residential belt of Manhattan Island.

The doorman could not make up his mind offhand whether Mullinix was to be classified as a well-dressed
mendicant or an indifferently dressed book agent; he was pretty sure, though, that the stranger
fell somewhere within the general ban touching on dubious persons having dubious intentions.
This doubt on the part of the doorman was rather a compliment to Mullinix, considering Mullinix's
real calling. For Mullinix resembled neither the detective of fiction nor yet the detective
of sober fact, which is exactly what the latter usually is--a most sober fact; sober, indeed,
often to the point of a serious and dignified impressiveness. This man, though, did not have
the eagle-bird eye with which the detective of fiction so often is favoured. He did not have
the low flattened arches--frontal or pedal--which frequently distinguish the bona-fide article,
who comes from Headquarters with a badge under his left lapel and a cigar under his right moustache
to question the suspected hired girl. About him there was nothing mysterious, nothing portentous,
nothing inscrutable. He had a face which favourably would have attracted a person taking orders
for enlarging family portraits. He had the accommodating manner of one who is willing to go
up when the magician asks for a committee out of the audience to sit on the stage.

Not ten individuals alive knew of his connection with the Secret Service. Probably in all his
professional life not ten others--outsiders--had ever appraised him for what he was. His finest
asset was a gift of Nature--a sort of protective colouration which enabled him to hide in the
background of commonplaceness and do his work with an assurance which would not have been possible
had he worn an air of assurance. In short and in fine, Mullinix no more resembled the traditional
hawkshaw than Miss Mildred Smith resembled the fashionable conception of a fashionable artist.
She never gestured with an upturned thumb; nor yet made a spy-glass of her cupped hand through
which to gaze upon a painting. She had never worn a smock frock in her life.

The smartest of smart tailor-mades was none too smart for her. Nothing was too smart for her,
who was so exquisitely fine and well-bred a creature. She was wearing tailor-mades, with a
trig hat to match, when she opened the door of her entry hall for Mullinix.

"Just going out, weren't you?" he asked as they shook hands.

"No, just coming in," she said. "I had only just come in when the hall man called me up saying
you were downstairs."

"I had trouble getting him to send up my name at all," he said with a half smile on his face.
"He insisted on knowing all about me and my business before he announced me. So I told him
everything nearly--except the truth."

"I gathered from his tone he was a bit doubtful about you; but I was glad to get the word.
This is the third time you've favoured me with a visit and each of the other times something
highly exciting followed. Come in and let me make you a cup of tea, won't you? Is it business
that brings you?"

"Yes," he said, "it's business."

They sat down in the big inner studio room; on one side of the fireplace the short, slow-speaking,
colourless-looking man who knew the inner blackness of so many whited sepulchres; and on the
other side, facing him from across the tea table, this small patrician lady who, having rich
kinfolk and friends still richer and a family tree deep-rooted in the most Knickerbockian stratum
of the Manhattan social schist, nevertheless chose to earn her own living; and while earning
it to find opportunity for service to her Government in a confidential capacity. Not all the
volunteers who worked on difficult espionage jobs through the wartime carried cards from the
Intelligence Department.

"Yes," he repeated, "it's business--a bigger piece of business and a harder one and probably
a more interesting one than the last thing you helped on. If it weren't business I wouldn't
be coming here to-day, taking up your time. I know how busy you are with your own affairs."

"Oh, I'm not busy," she said. "This is one of my loafing days. Since lunch time I've been indulging
in my favourite passion. I've been prowling through a secondhand bookstore over on Lexington
Avenue, picking up bargains. There's the fruit of my shopping."

She indicated a pile of five or six nibbled-looking volumes in dingy covers resting upon one
corner of the low mantelshelf.

"Works on interior decorating?" he guessed.

"Goodness, no! Decorating is my business; this is my pleasure. The top one of the heap--the
one bound in red--is all about chess."

"Chess! Did anybody ever write a whole book about chess?"

"I believe more books have been written on chess than on any other individual subject in the
world, barring Masonry," she said. "And the next one to it--the yellow-bound one--is a book
about old English games; not games of chance, but games for holidays and parties. I was glancing
through it in my car on the way here from the shop. It's most interesting. Why, some of the
games it tells about were played in England before William the Conqueror landed; at least so
the author claims. Did you ever hear of a game called Shoe the Wild Mare? It was very popular
in Queen Elizabeth's day. The book yonder says so."

"No, I never heard of it. From the name it sounds as though it might be rather a rough game
for indoors," commented Mullinix. "For a busy woman who's made such a big success at her calling,
I wonder how you find time to dig into so many miscellaneous subjects."

"I don't call the time wasted," she said. "For example, there's one book in that lot dealing
with mushroom culture. It seems there's ever so much to know about mushrooms. Besides, who
knows but what some day I might have a wealthy client who would want me to design him a mushroom
cellar, combining practicability with the decorative. Then, you see, I would have the knowledge
at my finger tips." She smiled at the conceit, busying herself with the tea things.

"Well, I suppose I'm a one-idea-at-a-time sort of person," he said.

"No, you aren't! You only think you are," she amended. "Just now I suppose you are all so wrapped
up in the business you mentioned a moment ago that you can't think of anything else."

"That's a fact," he confessed. "And yet all my thinking doesn't seem to have got me anywhere
in particular." He paused to glance about. "Where's your maid? Is she, by any chance, where
she could overhear us?"

"No, she's out. This is her afternoon off."

"Good! Then I'll start at the beginning and tell you in as few words as possible the whole
thing. But before I do begin, let me ask you a question. It may simplify matters. Anyhow it
has a bearing on my principal reason for coming to see you to-day. Isn't Mrs. Howard Hadley-Smith
your cousin?"

"Only by marriage. Her husband was my second cousin. He belonged to the branch of the family
that owns the hyphen and most of the money. He died six or seven years ago. He was not the
most perfect creature in the world, but Claire, his wife--his widow, I mean--is a trump. She's
one of the finest women and one of the sanest in New York."

"I'm glad to hear that. Because before we're through with this job--you see I'm assuming in
advance that you are going to be willing to help me on it--I say, before we get through it,
providing of course we do get through it, it may be necessary to take her into our confidence.
That is, if you are sure we can trust absolutely to her discretion."

"We can. But please remember that I don't know what the business is all about."

"I'm coming to that. Oh, by the way, there is one question more: To-morrow night your cousin
is giving a costume party or a fancy-dress party of some sort or other, isn't she?"

"Yes; an All Fools' Day party; not a very large one though."

"And you will be going to it, won't you?"

"Yes, indeed! I'm doing the decorating and acting as sort of assistant director of the affair.
But what can my cousin and her April Fools' Day party and all that have to do with the matter
that brings you here?"

"A good deal, I hope. But I expect I had better go back to the beginning and tell you the tale
in some sort of orderly way. Of course I am telling it to you as one responsible representative
of our Government to another."

"I understand. But go ahead, won't you? My curiosity is increasing by the moment."

"Well then, here it is: Six days ago there arrived from the conference at Versailles a high
army officer, acting for this occasion as a confidential messenger of the Administration. He
brought with him a certain communication--a single small sheet or strip of parchment paper
containing about twelve or fifteen typewritten lines. But those few lines were about as important
and, under certain circumstances, as dangerous a collection of typewritten lines as it is possible
to conceive of."

"Weren't they in code?"

"Naturally. But the signature was not. The signature was in the handwriting of the man--let
us say the personage--who dictated the wording of the dispatch. You would know that handwriting
if you saw it. Nearly every man, woman and child in this country who can read would know it
and would recognise it at a glance. Even between us, I take it that there is no need of mentioning
the name."

"No. Please go on. The thing has a thrilling sound already."

"That communication dealt directly with perhaps the most important single issue now in controversy
at the Peace Conference--a phase of the Asiatic muddle. In fact, it was an outline of the private
agreement that has been reached as between our envoys and the envoys representing sundry friendly
powers in regard to this particular question. If it should fall into the hands of a certain
other power--and be translated--the entire negotiation would be jeopardised. Almost inevitably
at least one Oriental nation would withdraw from the conference. The future of the great thing
for which our own statesmen and the statesmen of some of the countries provisionally leagued
together with us are working--well, that result, to put the thing mildly, would be jeopardised.
The very least that could happen would be that four governments would be tremendously embarrassed.

"Indeed it is hard offhand to calculate the possibilities of disaster, but this much is quite
sure: Our enemy--and Germany is as much our enemy now as she was during active hostilities--would
almost inevitably succeed in the very thing she has been plotting to bring about, which is
the sowing of discord among the Allies, not to mention the increase of a racial distrust and
a racial antagonism which exist in certain quarters, and, on top of all that, the widening
and deepening of a problem which already has been sufficiently difficult and delicate."

"I see. Well?"

"Well, naturally everything possible was done at Washington to safeguard a dispatch of such
tremendous importance. No copies of the communication were made. The original was put in a
place where it was presumed to be absolutely safe. But within forty-eight hours it disappeared
from the place where it had been put."

"How did it disappear? Is that known?"

"It was stolen. A government clerk named Westerfeltner, a man who held a place of trust and
confidence, was the man who stole it. For it he was offered a sum of money which would make
him independent for life, and under the temptation he weakened and he stole it. But first he
stole the key to the cipher, which would make it possible for anyone having both the key and
the message to decode the message. Once this is done the damage is done, for the signature
is ample proof of the validity of the document. That is the one thing above all others we are
trying to prevent now."

"But why couldn't the thief have decoded the dispatch?"

"He might have, excepting for two things. In the first place his principal, the man who corrupted
him to betray his honour and incidentally to betray his Government, would not trust him to
do this. The head plotter demanded the original paper. In the second place an interval of a
day and a half elapsed between the theft of the code and the theft of the dispatch. Before
the thief secured the dispatch the key had already passed out of his possession."

"How do you know these things with such certainty?"

"Because Westerfeltner has confessed. He confessed to me at three o'clock yesterday morning
after the thefts had practically been traced to his door. He made a clean breast of it all
right enough. The high points of his confession have all been verified. I am sure that he was
honest with me. Fear and remorse together made him honest. At present he is--well, let's call
it sequestered. No outsider knows he is now under arrest; or perhaps I should say in custody.
No interested party is likely to feel concern regarding his whereabouts, because so far as
he was concerned the crooked contract had been carried out and completed before he actually
fell under suspicion."

"Meaning by that, what?"

"Meaning just this: On the night he secured possession of the key he handed it over to his
principal, who still has it unless he has destroyed it. It is fair to assume that this other
man, being a code expert, already has memorised the key so that he can read the dispatch almost
offhand. At least that is the assumption upon which I am going."

"All this happened in Washington, I suppose?"

"Yes, in Washington. The original understanding was that as soon as possible after stealing
the dispatch Westerfeltner would turn it over to the other man. But something--we don't know
yet just what--frightened the master crook out of town. With the job only partially accomplished
he left Washington and came to New York. But before leaving he gave to Westerfeltner explicit
instructions for the delivery of the dispatch--when he had succeeded in getting his hands on
it--to a third party, a special go-between, with whom Westerfeltner was to communicate by telephone.

"Late the next day Westerfeltner did succeed in getting his hands on the document. That same
evening, in accordance with his instructions, he called up from his house a certain number.
He had been told to call this number exactly at eight o'clock and to ask for Mrs. Williams.
Without delay he got Mrs. Williams on the wire. Over the wire a woman's voice told him to meet
her at the McPherson Statue in McPherson Square at eleven-fifteen o'clock that night. He was
there at the appointed hour, waiting. According to what he tells me, almost precisely on the
minute a woman, wearing plain dark clothes and heavily veiled, came walking along the path
that leads to the statue from Fifteenth Street. It was dark there, anyhow, and for obvious
reasons both the conspirators kept themselves well shielded in the shadows.

"As she came up and saw him waiting there, she uttered the catchwords which made him know her
for the right person. The words were simple enough. She merely said to him 'Did you go to the
pawnshop?' He answered 'Yes, I went there and I got your keepsake.' 'Thank you,' she answered,
'then give it to me.' 'Here it is, safe and sound,' he replied and passed to her the paper,
which was wadded up, he says, in a pellet about the size of a hazelnut.

"Up to this point the pair had been speaking in accordance with a sort of memorised ritual,
each knowing from the instructions given to both by their employer what the other would say.
But before they parted they exchanged a few other words. Westerfeltner tells me that, having
his own safety in mind as well as a natural anxiety for the safe delivery of the paper to its
real purchaser, he said to her: 'I hope you understand that you should keep this thing in your
possession for every minute of the time until you hand it over to our mutual friend.'

"As he recalls her answer, as nearly as possible in the words she used, she said: 'Certainly
I do. It will be kept on my person where I can put my hand on it, but where no one else can
see it and where no one else will ever suspect it of being.' Then she asked him: 'Was there
anything else you wanted to say to me?' He told her there was nothing else and she said good
night to him and turned and walked away in the direction from which she had come. He waited
a minute or so and then walked off, leaving the square on the opposite side--the Vermont Avenue
side. He went directly home and went to bed.

"He is unmarried and lives alone, taking his luncheons and dinners out, but preparing his own
breakfasts in his rooms. At three o'clock in the morning he was in bed and asleep when I rang
his doorbell. In his night clothes he got up and let me in; and as soon as I was in I accused
him. As a matter of fact the double theft had been discovered the evening before, but unfortunately
by then several hours had elapsed from the time the dispatch was taken, and already, as you
know, the dispatch had changed hands.

"Within an hour after the discovery of the loss I had been set to work on the job. At once
suspicion fell upon three men, one after the other. It didn't take very long to convince me
that two of these men were innocent. So these two having been eliminated by deductive processes,
I personally went after the third man, who was this Westerfeltner. The moment I walked in on
him I was convinced from his behaviour that I had made no mistake. So I took a chance. I charged
him point-blank with being the thief. Almost immediately he weakened. His denials turned to
admissions. As a conspirator Westerfeltner is a lame duck. I only wish I had started after
him three or four hours earlier than I did; if only I had done so I'm satisfied the paper would
be back where it belongs and no damage done. Well, anyhow, if I am one to judge, he told me
everything frankly and held back nothing."

"Well, then, who is the woman in the case?"

"He didn't know. To his best knowledge he had never seen her before that night. He is sure
that he had never heard her voice before. Really, all he does know about her is that she is
a small, slender woman with rather quick, decided movements and that her voice is that of a
refined person. He is sure she is a young woman, but he can furnish no better description of
her than this. He claims he was very nervous at the time of their meeting. I figure he was
downright excited, filled as he was with guilty apprehensions, and no doubt because of his
excitement he took less notice of her than he otherwise might. Besides, you must remember that
the place of rendezvous was a fairly dark spot on rather a dark night."

"He has absolutely no idea of his own, then, as to the identity of Mrs. Williams?"

"He hasn't; but I have. The telephone number which figures in the case is the number of a pay
station in an all-night drug store in Washington. Westerfeltner freely gave me the number.
Both the proprietor of this drug store and his clerk remember that night before last, shortly
before eight o'clock, a rather small, slight woman wearing a black street costume with a dark
veil over her face came into the place and said she was expecting a telephone call for Mrs.
Williams. Within two or three minutes the bell rang and the clerk answered and somebody asked
for Mrs. Williams. The woman entered the booth, came out almost immediately, and went away.
All that the drugstore man and his clerk remember about her is that she was a young woman,
plainly dressed but well-groomed. The druggist is positive she had dark hair; the clerk is
inclined to think her hair was a deep reddish-brown. Neither of them saw her face; neither
of them remarked anything unusual about her. To them she was merely a woman who came in to
keep a telephone engagement, and having kept it went away again. So, having run into a blind
alley at that end of the case, I started in at the other end of it to find the one lady to
whom naturally the chief conspirator would turn for help in the situation that confronted him
when he ran away from Washington. And I found her--both of her in fact."

"Both of her! Then there are two women involved?"

"No, only one; but which one of two suspects she is I can't for the life of me decide. I know
who she is, and yet I don't know. I'll come to that part of it in a minute or two. I haven't
told you the name of the head devil of the whole intrigue yet, have I? You've met him, I imagine.
At any rate you surely have heard of him.

"You know him, or else you surely know of him, as the Hon. Sidney Bertram Goldsborough, of
London, England, and Shanghai, China."

"Goodness gracious me!" In her astonishment Miss Smith had recourse to an essentially feminine
exclamation. "Why, that does bring it close to home! Why, he is among the persons invited to
my cousin's house to-morrow night. I remember seeing his name on the invitation list. That's
why you asked me about her party a while ago. My cousin met him somewhere and liked him. I've
never seen him, but I've heard about him. A big mining engineer, isn't he?"

"A big international crook, posing as a mining engineer and ostensibly in this country to finance
some important Korean concessions--that's what he is. His real name is Geltmann. Here's his
pedigree in a nutshell: Born in Russia of mixed German and Swiss parentage. Educated in England,
where he acquired his accent and the monocle habit. Perfected himself in scoundrelism in the
competent finishing schools of the Far East. Speaks half a dozen languages, including Chinese
and Japanese. Carries gilt-edged credentials made in the Orient. That, briefly, is your Hon.
Mr. Sidney Bertram Goldsborough, when you undress him. He was officially suspected of being
something other than what he claimed to be, even before Westerfeltner divulged his name. In
fact, he fell under suspicion shortly after he turned up in Paris in January of this year,
he having obtained a passport for France on the strength of his credentials and on the representation
that he wanted to go abroad to interest European financiers in that high-sounding Korean development
scheme of his--which, by the way, is purely imaginary. He hung about Paris for three months.
How he found out about the document which the army officer was bringing home, and how he found
out that the officer--in order to save time--would travel on a French liner instead of on a
transport, are details that are yet to be cleared up by our people on the other side. There
has been no time yet of course to take up the chase over there in Paris. But obviously there
must have been a leak somewhere. Either some one abroad was in collusion with him or perhaps
indiscreetness rather than guilty connivance was responsible for his learning what he did learn.
As to that, I can't say.

"But the point remains that Geltmann sailed on the same ship that brought the army officer.
Evidently he hoped to get possession of the paper the officer carried on the way over. Failing
there, he tried other means. He followed the officer down to Washington, seduced Westerfeltner
by the promise of a fat bribe, and then, just when his scheme was about to succeed, became
frightened and returned to New York, trusting to a woman confederate to deliver the paper to
him here. And now he's here, awaiting her arrival, and from all the evidence available he expects
to get it from her to-morrow night at your cousin's party."

"Then the woman is to be there too?" Miss Smith's eyes were stretched wide.

"She certainly is."

"And who is she--or, rather, who do you think she is?"

"Miss Smith, prepare for a shock. Either that woman is Mme. Josephine Ybanca, the wife of the
famous South American diplomat, or else she is Miss Evelyn Ballister, sister of United States
Senator Hector Ballister. And I am pretty sure that you must know both of them."

"I do! I do! I know Miss Ballister fairly well, and I have met Madame Ybanca twice--once here
in New York, once at Washington. And let me say now, that at first blush I do not find it in
my heart to suspect either of them of deliberate wrongdoing. I don't think they are that sort."

"I don't wonder you say that," answered Mullinix. "Also I think I know you well enough to feel
sure that the fact that both of them are to be guests of your cousin, Mrs. Hadley-Smith, to-morrow
night has no influence upon you in forming your judgments of these two young women."

"I know Miss Ballister has been invited and has accepted. But I think you must be wrong when
you say Madame Ybanca is also expected."

"When was the last time you saw your cousin?"

"The day before yesterday, I think it was, but only for a few minutes."

"Well, yesterday she sent a telegram to Madame Ybanca saying she understood Madame Ybanca would
be coming up from Washington this week and asking her to waive formality and come to the party."

"You say my cousin sent such a wire?"

"I read the telegram. Likewise I read Madame Ybanca's reply, filed at half after six o'clock
yesterday evening, accepting the invitation."

"But surely"--and now there was mounting incredulity and indignation in Miss Smith's tone--"but
surely no one dares to assert that my cousin is conniving at anything improper?"

"Certainly not! If I thought she was doing anything wrong I would hardly be asking you to help
trap her, would I? Didn't I tell you that we might even have to enlist your cousin's co-operation?
But I imagine, when you make inquiry, as of course you will do at once, you'll find that since
you saw your cousin she has seen Goldsborough, or Geltmann--to give him his real name--and
that he asked her to send the wire to Madame Ybanca."

"That being assumed as correct, the weight of the proof would seem to press upon the madame
rather than upon Miss Ballister, wouldn't it?"

"Frankly I don't know. At times to-day, coming up here on the train, I have thought she must
be the guilty one, and at times I have felt sure that she was not. But this much I do know:
One of those two ladies is absolutely innocent of any wrongdoing, and the other one--pardon
my language--is as guilty as hell. But perhaps it is only fair to both that you should suspend
judgment altogether until I have finished telling you the whole business, as far as I know it.

"Let us go back a bit. Half an hour after I had heard Westerfeltner's confession and fifteen
minutes after I had seen the druggist and his clerk, the entire machinery of our branch of
the service had been set in motion to find out what women in Washington were friends of Geltmann.
For Geltmann spent most of last fall in Washington. Now while in Washington he was noticeably
attentive to just two women--Miss Ballister and Madame Ybanca. Now mark a lengthening of the
parallel: Both of them are small women; both of them are slender; both are young, and both
of course have refined voices. Neither speaks with any special accent, for the madame, though
married to a Latin, is an American woman. She has black hair, while Miss Ballister's hair is
a golden red-brown. So far, you see, the vague description furnished by the three men who spoke
to the mythical Mrs. Williams might apply to either."

"Then which of the two is supposed to have been most attracted to Geltmann, as you call him?"

Mullinix smiled a trifle.

"I was rather expecting that question would come along about here," he said. "I only wish I
could tell you; it might simplify matters. But so far as the available evidence points, there
is nothing to indicate that either of them really cared for him or he for either of them. The
attentions which he paid them both, impartially, were those which a man might pay to any woman,
whether she was married or unmarried, without creating gossip. There is no suggestion here
of a dirty scandal. The woman who is serving Geltmann's ends is doing it, not for love of him
and not even because she is fascinated by him, but for money. She has agreed to sell out her
country, the land she was born in, for hire. I'm sure of that much."

"Then which of them is presumed to be in pressing need of funds?"

"Again you score. I was expecting that question too. As a matter of fact both of them need
money. Madame Ybanca belongs to a bridge-playing set--a group of men and women who play for
high stakes. She has been a heavy loser and her husband, unlike many politically prominent
South Americans, is not a fabulously wealthy man. I doubt whether he would be called wealthy
at all, either by the standards of his own people or of ours. As for Miss Ballister, I have
reports which prove she has no source of income except a modest allowance from her brother,
the senator, who is in moderate circumstances only; yet it is common talk about Washington
that she is extravagant beyond her means. She owes considerable sums to tradesmen for frocks
and furs, millinery, jewelry and the like. It is fair to assume that she is harassed by her
debts. On the other hand, Madame Ybanca undoubtedly wants funds with which to meet her losses
at bridge. So the presumption in this direction runs as strongly against one as against the other."

"Well then, barring these slight clews--which to my way of thinking really aren't clews at
all--and when you have eliminated the circumstance of Goldsborough's having paid perfectly
proper attentions to both of them simultaneously, what is there to justify the belief that
one or the other must be guilty?" 

On each side of this branched, right and left, other roads or galleries
that had been formed by the taking away of the coal; from these again
branched other roads, and so on, that you might walk for miles under
ground, in and out of the workings of the mine.

 On a mere hazard you
cannot go to the beautiful young wife of the distinguished representative of a friendly nation,
and a woman besides of irreproachable character, and accuse her of being in the pay of an international
crook. You cannot do this any more than you could attempt a similar liberty with regard to
an equally beautiful woman of equally good repute who happens to be a prominent figure in the
most exclusive circles of this country and the favourite sister of a leader on the Administration
side in the United States Senate. Of course since the developments began to focus suspicion
upon them, they have been watched. Yesterday at church Miss Ballister's wrist bag was picked.
Along with things of no apparent significance, it contained a note received by her the day
before from Goldsborough--Geltmann rather--reminding her that they were to meet to-morrow night
at your cousin's party. Later in the afternoon Madame Ybanca received a telegram and sent an
answer, as I have told you; a telegram inviting her to the very same party. Putting two and
two together, I think I see Geltmann's hand showing. Having put two and two together, I came
to New York to get in touch with you and to enlist your help."

"But why me?"

"Why not you? I remembered that Mrs. Hadley-Smith was related to you. I felt pretty sure that
you would be going to her party. And I am morally sure that at the party Geltmann means to
meet his confederate--Miss Ballister or Madame Ybanca, as the case may be--and to receive from
her the bit of paper that means so much to him and to those he is serving in the capacity of
a paid agent. It will be easy enough to do the thing there; whereas a meeting in any other
place, public or private, might be dangerous for both of them.

"Miss Ballister will be coming over from Washington to-morrow. She has a chair-car reservation
on the Pennsylvania train leaving there at ten o'clock in the morning. I don't know what train
Madame Ybanca will take, but the news will be coming to me by wire before she is aboard the
train. Each one of them is now being shadowed; each one of them will be shadowed for every
moment while she is on her way and during her stay here; and of course Geltmann cannot stir
a step outside his suite at the Hotel Atminster, on Fortieth Street, without being under observation.
He didn't know it, but he was under observation when he woke up yesterday morning.

"But I think these precautions are of mighty little value; I do not expect any important result
from them. On the other hand, I am convinced that the transfer of the dispatch will be attempted
under your cousin's roof. I do not need to tell you why Geltmann should have sought to insure
the presence of both women here at one time. He is smart enough; he knows that in this case
there is an added element of safety for him in numbers--that it is better to have both present.
Then unwittingly the innocent one will serve as a cover for the guilty one. I think he figures
that should discovery of the theft come soon--he not knowing it already has come--then in such
case there will be a divided trail for us to follow, one end pointing toward Miss Ballister
and the other toward the madame. Or, at least, so I diagnose his mental processes.

"If I have diagnosed them correctly, the big part of the job, Miss Smith, is now up to you.
We figure from what she told Westerfeltner that the paper will be concealed on the person of
the woman we are after--in her hair perhaps, or in her bosom; possibly in that favourite cache
of a woman--her stocking. At any rate she will have it hidden about her; that much we may count
on for a certainty. And so it must be your task to prevent that paper from changing hands;
better still, to get it into your own possession before it possibly can come under Geltmann's
eyes even for a moment. But there must be no scene, no violence used, no scandal; above all
things there must be no publicity. Publicity is to be dreaded almost as much as the actual
transfer.

"For my part I can promise you this: I shall be in the house of your cousin to-morrow night,
if you want me to be there. That detail we can arrange through her: but naturally I must stay
out of sight. You must do your work practically unaided. I guarantee though to insure you plenty
of time in which to do it. Geltmann will not reach the party until later than he expects. The
gentleman will be delayed by one or a number of annoying but seemingly unavoidable accidents.
Beyond these points I have to confess myself helpless. After those two women pass inside Mrs.
Hadley-Smith's front door the real job is in your hands. You must find who has the paper and
you must get it away from its present custodian without making threats, without using force--in
short, without doing anything to rouse the suspicions beforehand of the person we are after,
or to make the innocent woman aware that she is under scrutiny.

"Above all, nothing must occur to make any of the other guests realise that anything unusual
is afoot. For that would mean talk on the outside, and talk on the outside means sensational
stories in the newspapers. You can make no mistake, and yet for the life of me I cannot see
how you are going to guard against making them. Everything depends on you, and that everything
means a very great deal to our country. Yes, everything depends on you, because I am at the
end of my rope."

He finished and sat back in his chair, eyeing her face. Her expression gave him no clew to
any conclusions she might have reached.

"I'll do my best," she said simply, "but I must have full authority to do it in my own way."

"Agreed. I'm not asking anything else from you."

In a study she rose and went to the mantelpiece and took one book from the heap of books there.
She opened it and glanced abstractedly through the leaves as they flittered under her fingers.

With her eyes on the page headings she said to him: "I quarrel with one of your premises."

"Which one?"

"The one that the woman we want will have the paper hidden in her hair or in her corsage or
possibly in her stocking."

"Well, I couldn't think of any other likely place in which she might hide it. She wouldn't
have it in a pocket, would she? Women don't have pockets in their party frocks, do they?"

Disregarding his questions she asked one herself:

"You say it is a small strip of paper, and that probably it is rolled up into a wad about the
size of a hazelnut?"

"It was rolled up so when Westerfeltner parted from it--that's all I can tell you. Why do you
ask that?"

"Oh, it doesn't particularly matter. I merely was thinking of various possibilities and contingencies."

Apparently she now had found the place in the book which, more or less mechanically, she had
been seeking. She turned down the upper corner of a certain page for a marker and closed the book.

"Well, in any event," she said, "I must get to work. I think I shall begin by calling up my
cousin to tell her, among other things, that her party may have some rather unique features
that she had not included in her program. And where can I reach you by telephone or by messenger--say,
in an hour from now?"

A number of small things, seemingly in no wise related to the main issue, occurred that evening
and on the following morning. In the evening, for example, Mrs. Hadley-Smith revised the schedule
of amusements she had planned for her All Fools' party, incorporating some entirely new notions
into the original scheme. In the morning Miss Mildred Smith visited the handkerchief counter
of a leading department store, where she made selections and purchases from the stocks, going
thence to a shop dealing in harness and leather goods. Here she gave a special commission for
immediate execution.

Toward dusk of the evening of April first a smallish unobtrusive-looking citizen procured admittance
to Mrs. Hadley-Smith's home, on East Sixty-third Street just off Fifth Avenue. With the air
of a man having business on the premises he walked through the front door along with a group
of helpers from the caterer's. Once inside, he sent a name by the butler to Mrs. Hadley-Smith,
who apparently awaited such word, for promptly she came downstairs and personally escorted
the man to a small study at the back of the first floor; wherein, having been left alone, he
first locked the door leading to the hall and drew the curtains of the windows giving upon
a rear courtyard, and proceeded to make himself quite at home.

He ate a cold supper which he found spread upon a table and after that he used the telephone
rather extensively. This done, he lit a cigar and stretched himself upon a sofa, smoking away
with the air of a man who has finished his share of a given undertaking and may take his ease
until the time arrives for renewed action upon his part. Along toward nine-thirty o'clock,
when he had smoked his third cigar, there came a soft knock thrice repeated upon the door,
whereupon he rose and unlocked the door, but without opening it to see who might be outside
he went back to his couch, lay down and lit a fourth cigar. For the next little while we may
leave him there to his comfortable solitude and his smoke haze.

Meanwhile the Hon. Sidney Bertram Goldsborough, so called and so registered at the Hotel Atminster,
grew decidedly peevish over the unaccountable failure of his order to arrive from a theatrical
costumer's, where he had selected it some three days earlier. He was morally sure it had been
sent hours earlier by special messenger from the costume shop. In answer to his vexed inquiries
the parcels department of the hotel was equally sure that no box or package consigned to Mr.
Goldsborough had been received. Finally, after ten o'clock, the missing costume was brought
to the gentleman's door with a message of profound regret from the assistant manager, who expressed
sorrow that through the stupidity of some member or members of his force a valued guest had
been inconvenienced. Hastily slipping into the costume and putting a light overcoat on over
it Mr. Goldsborough started in a taxicab up Fifth Avenue. But at Forty-eighth Street a government
mail van, issuing suddenly out of the sideway, smashed squarely into the side of the taxicab
bearing him, with the result that the taxi lost a wheel and Mr. Goldsborough lost another half
hour.

This second delay was due to the fact that his presence upon the spot was required by a plain-clothes
man who took over the investigation of the collision from the patrolman on the post. To Mr.
Goldsborough, inwardly fuming but outwardly calm and indifferent, it seemed that the plain-clothes
person took an unreasonably long time for his inquiries touching on the accident. At length,
with apologies for detaining him, the headquarters man--now suddenly become accommodating where
before he had been officially exact and painstaking in his inquisition into causes and circumstances--personally
hailed another taxicab for Mr. Goldsborough and sent him upon his way.

But, Mr. Goldsborough's chapter of petty troubles was not yet ended; for the driver of the
second taxi stupidly drove to the wrong address, landing his fare at a house on West Sixty-third
Street, clear across Central Park and nearly halfway across town from Mrs. Hadley-Smith's home.
So, what with first one thing and then another, eleven o'clock had come and gone before the
indignant passenger finally was set down at his proper destination.

We go back to nine-thirty, which was the hour set and appointed for inaugurating the All Fools'
Day party. Nine-thirty being the hour, very few of the prospective celebrants arrived before
ten. But by ten, or a little later, most of them were assembled in the big twin drawing-rooms
on the first floor of the Hadley-Smith establishment. These two rooms, with the study behind
them and the wide reception hall that ran alongside them, took up the most of the first-floor
ground space of the town house. As the first arrivals noted, they had been stripped of furniture
for dancing. One room was quite empty, save for decorations; the other contained only a table
piled with favours. Even the chairs had been removed, leaving clear spaces along the walls.

It was not such a very large party as parties go, for Mrs. Hadley-Smith had a reputation for
doing her entertaining on a small but an exceedingly smart scale. All told, there were not
more than fifty on hand--and accounted for--by ten o'clock. A good many had come in costume--as
zanies, Pantaloons, witches, Pierrots, Columbines, clowns and simples. For those who wore evening
dress the hostess had provided a store of dunce caps and dominos of gay colours. Nearly everybody
present already knew nearly everybody else. There were only five or six guests from out of
town, and of these Mme. Josephine Ybanca, wife of the great South American diplomat, and Miss
Evelyn Ballister, sister of the distinguished Western statesman, were by odds the handsomest.
Of women there were more than men; there usually are more women than men in evidence at such
affairs.

At about ten o'clock, Mrs. Hadley-Smith stood out on the floor under the arch connecting but
not exactly separating the joined rooms.

"Listen, please, everybody!" she called, and the motley company, obeying the summons, clustered
about her. "The musicians won't be here until midnight. After they have come and after we've
had supper there will be dancing. But until midnight we are going to play games--old games,
such as I'm told they played in England two hundred years ago on May Day and on All Fools'
Day and on Halloween. There'll be no servants about and no one to bother us and we'll have
these rooms to ourselves to do just as we please in."

A babble of politely enthusiastic exclamations rose. The good-looking widow could always be
depended upon to provide something unusual when she entertained.

"I've asked my cousin, Mildred, to take charge of this part of our party," went on the hostess.
"She has been studying up on the subject, I believe." She looked about her. "Oh, Mildred, where
are you?"

"Here," answered Miss Smith, emerging from a corner, pretty Madame Ybanca coming with her.
"Madame Ybanca has on such marvellous, fascinating old jewelry to-night; I was just admiring
it. Are you ready to start?"

"Quite ready, if you are."

Crossing to the one table in sight Miss Smith took the party-coloured cover from a big square
cardboard box. Seemingly the box was filled to the top with black silk handkerchiefs; thick,
heavy black handkerchiefs they were.

"As a beginning," she announced, "we are going to play a new kind of Blind Man's Buff. That
is to say, it may be new to us, though some of our remote ancestors no doubt played it a century
or so back. In the game we played as children one person was blindfolded and was spun about
three times and then had to lay hands upon one of the others, all of whom were duty bound to
stand where they were, without moving or speaking--but you remember, I'm sure, all of you?
In this version the rules are different, as you'll see.

"First we'll draw lots to see who's going to be It, as we used to say when we were kiddies.
Wait a minute though--it will take too long to choose from among so many. I think I'll save
time by finding a victim in this little crowd here." And she indicated ten or twelve who chanced
to be clustered at her right.

"You, Mr. Polk, and you, Miss Vane, and you and you and you--and, oh yes, I'll take in Madame
Ybanca too; she makes an even dozen. I shan't include myself, because I rather think I had
better act as referee and general factotum until you learn the game."

The chosen group faced her while the others pressed up in anticipation. From a pocket in her
red-and-white clown's blouse Miss Smith produced a sheaf of folded bits of tissue paper.

"One of these papers bears a number," she went on, as she made a selection of twelve slips
from the handful. "All the others are blank. I know which one is marked, but no one else does.
Now then, take a slip, each of you. The person who draws the numbered slip is It."

In mock solemnity each of the selected twelve in turn drew from between Miss Smith's fingers
a colored scrap.

"Mine's a blank," called out Miss Vane, opening her bit of paper.

"Mine too."

"And mine."

"And mine is."

"Who has it, then?"

"I seem to have drawn the fatal number," said Madame Ybanca, holding up her slip for all to
see the markings on it.

"So you have," agreed Miss Smith. "Now then, everybody pick out a black handkerchief from this
box--they're all exactly alike. Not you, though, madame. I'll have to prepare you for your
rôle myself." So saying, she took one of the handkerchiefs and folded it into a long flat strip.

"Now, madame, please put your arms back of you--so! You see, I'm going to tie your hands behind
your back."

"Oh, does everybody have to be tied?" demanded Miss Vane.

"No, but everybody excepting the madame must be blindfolded," stated Miss Smith. "I'll explain
in just one minute when I'm done with the madame here." With fast-moving fingers she firmly
drew the handkerchief about the young matron's crossed wrists. Madame Ybanca uttered a sharp
little "Ouch!"

"Oh, I'm so sorry," said Miss Smith. "Am I binding you too tightly?"

"No, not that; but I think you are making one of my bracelets press into my flesh. It's such
a thick cumbersome thing anyway."

"Shall I slip it farther up your arm?" asked Miss Smith.

"No, take it off entirely, won't you, and keep it for me? It fastens with a little clasp."

So Miss Smith undid the bracelet, which was a band of curiously chased heavy gold, studded
with big bosses containing blue stones, and dropped it into her handy blouse pocket.

Then swiftly she finished her task of knotting the handkerchief ends and Madame Ybanca, very
securely bound, stood forth in the midst of a laughing ring, making a pretty and appealing
picture, her face slightly flushed by embarrassment.

"One thing more for your adornment and you'll be ready," promised Miss Smith.

Burrowing beneath the remaining handkerchiefs in the box she produced a collarlike device of
soft russet leather, all hung with fat silver sleigh bells which, being loosely sewed to the
fabric by means of twisted wire threads, jingled constantly and busily. The slightest movement
set the wires to quivering like antennae and the bells to making music. Miss Smith lifted the
leather circlet down over Madame Ybanca's head so that it rested upon her shoulders, looping
across just below the base of the throat.

"Take a step forward," she bade the madame, and as the latter obeyed, all the bells tinkled
together with a constant merry clamour.

"Behold!" said Miss Smith. "The lady of the bells is caparisoned for her part. Now then, let
each person blindfold his or her eyes with the handkerchief you have; but take care that you
are well blinded.

"Oh, Miss Ballister, let me adjust your handkerchief, won't you? I'm afraid you might disarrange
that lovely hair ornament of yours unless you have help. There! How's that! Can you see anything
at all? How many fingers do I hold up?"

"Oh, I'm utterly in the dark," said Miss Ballister. "I can't see a thing."

"Are you all hooded?" called Miss Smith.

A chorus of assents went up.

"Good! Then listen a moment: It will be Madame Ybanca's task to catch hold of some one of you
with her hands fastened as they are behind her. It is your task to keep out of her way; the
bells are to warn you of her approach. Whoever is caught takes her place and becomes It.

"Ready--go!"

Standing a moment as though planning a campaign Madame Ybanca made a quick dash toward where
the others were grouped the thickest. But her bells betrayed her. From before her they scattered
and broke apart, stumbling, groping with outstretched hands to find the wall, jostling into
one another, caroming off again, whooping with laughter. Fast as Madame Ybanca advanced, the
rest all managed to evade her. She halted, laughing in admission of the handicap upon her,
when before she had been so confident of a capture; then, changing her tactics, she undertook
to stalk down some member of the blindfolded flock by stealthy, gentle forward steps. But softly
though she might advance, the telltale bells gave ample notice of her whereabouts, and the
troop fled. Moreover, even when she succeeded--as she soon did--in herding someone into a corner,
the prospective victim, a man, managed to slip past her out of danger, being favoured by the
fact that to grasp him with one of her fettered hands she must turn entirely about. So he was
able to wriggle out of peril and her clutching fingers closed only on empty air.

"It's not so easy as it seemed," she confessed.

"Keep trying," counselled the referee, keeping pace with her. Miss Smith's eyes were darting
everywhere at once, watching the hooded figures keenly, as though to detect any who might seek
to cheat by lifting his or her mufflings. "You're sure to catch somebody presently. They can't
dodge you every time, you know."

So Madame Ybanca tried again. Ahead of her the fugitives stampeded, milling about in uncertain
circles, gliding past her along the walls, fleeing from one room to the other and back again--singly,
by pairs and threes. They touched her often, but by reason of her hampered state she never
could touch, with her hands, any of them in their flight.

As Mrs. Hadley-Smith, fleeing alone, came through the doorway with both her arms outstretched
to fend off possible collisions, a sharp low whisper spoken right alongside of her made her
halt. The whisperer was her cousin. Unobserved by the madame and unheard by any one else, Miss
Smith spoke a word or two in her cousin's ear. The next instant almost Mrs. Hadley-Smith, apparently
becoming confused as to the direction from which the sounds of bells approached, hesitated
in indecision and was fairly trapped by the pursuer.

"Who's caught? Who's caught?" cried several together.

"You're not supposed to know--that makes the fun all the better," cried Miss Smith. "You may
halt a bit to get your breath, but nobody is to touch his or her blindfold."

"I'm sure you took pity on me and let me tag you," said Madame Ybanca in an undertone to her
victim as Miss Smith, deftly freeing the younger woman's hands, proceeded to bind the hostess'
wrists at her back.

"Not at all," replied Mrs. Hadley-Smith, also under her breath. "I was stupid or awkward or
perhaps both at once--that's all."

A moment later when the collar of bells had been shifted to the new wearer's shoulders, the
madame, covering up her own eyes, moved away to join the ranks of the blindfolded.

Before taking up the chase Mrs. Hadley-Smith cast a quick look toward her cousin and the cousin
replied with a nod and a significant glance toward a certain quarter of the same room in which
they stood. Raising her eyebrows to show she understood the widow moved toward the place that
had been indicated. From her path the gaily clad figures retreated, eddying and tacking in
uncertain flight away from the jingle of the bells.

Had any third person there had the use of his or her eyes that person would have witnessed
now a strange bit of byplay and--given a fair share of perception--would have realised that
something more important than a petty triumph in the playing of a game was afoot. Having vision
this third person would have seen how Mrs. Hadley-Smith, disregarding easier chances to make
a capture, strove with all her power to touch one particular chosen quarry; would have seen
how twice, by a quick twist of a graceful young body, the hunted one eluded those two tied
hands outthrust to seize her; how at the third time of trying the huntress scored a victory
and laid detaining hold upon a fold of the fugitive's costume; and how at this Miss Smith,
so eagerly watching the chase, gave a gesture of assent and satisfaction over a thing accomplished,
as she hurried toward the pair of them to render her self-appointed service upon the winner
and the loser.

But having for the moment no eyes with which to see, no third person there witnessed these
little interludes of stratagem and design, though it was by no means hard for them to sense
that again a coup had been scored. What they did not know was that the newest victim was Evelyn
Ballister.

"Oh, somebody else has been nabbed! Goody! Goody! I'm glad I got away," shouted Miss Vane,
who was by nature exuberant and of a high spirit. "I wonder who it is now?" She threw back
her head, endeavouring to peep out along her tilted nose. "I hope it's a man this time. It's
more exciting--being pursued by a man."

"Don't forget--no one is to look," warned Miss Smith as keeper of the rules. "It would spoil
the sport if you knew who'll be pursuing you next."

Already she had stripped the blindfold from about Miss Ballister's head and with a quick jerk
at the master knot had freed her cousin from bondage. With flirting motions she twisted the
folded kerchief into a rope. Practice in the work seemed to have given to her added deftness
and speed, for in no more time than it takes to tell of it she had drawn Miss Ballister's smooth
arms round behind their owner's back and was busied at the next step of her offices. Almost
it seemed the girl surrendered reluctantly, as though she were loath to go through with the
rôle that had fallen to her by penalty of being tagged. But if Miss Smith felt unwillingness
in the sudden rebellious tensing of the limbs she touched, the only response on her part was
an added quickness in her fingers as she placed one veined wrist upon the other and with double
wraps made them snugly fast.

"It hurts--it pinches! You've bound me too tightly," murmured the prisoner, as involuntarily
she strained against the pull of the trussings.

"Oh, I'm so sorry," whispered Miss Smith. "I'll ease you in just a second." But despite her
promise she made no immediate move to do so. Instead she concerned herself with lifting the
collaret of bells off over Mrs. Hadley-Smith's head and bestowing it upon the rounded shoulders
of the girl. As she brought the jingling harness down in its place her hands lingered for one
fleeting space where a heavy, quaint, old-fashioned gold locket--an heirloom that might have
come down from a grandmother's days--was dangling from a gold chain that encircled the girl's
neck. Apparently she caught a finger in the chain and before she could free it she had given
a sharp tug at the chain, thereby lifting the locket from where it rested against the white
flesh of its wearer's throat.

"I--I'm afraid I can't play," Miss Ballister almost gasped out the words; then drawing in her
breath with a sharp catch: "This room--it's so warm. I feel a bit faint, really I do. Please
untie me. I shan't be able to go on." Her voice, though pitched still in a low key, was sharpened
with a nervous entreaty.

"I will of course if you really do feel badly," said Miss Smith. Then an inspiration seemed
to come to her. Her eyes sparkled.

"Oh," she said, "I've a beautiful idea! We'll play an April Fools' joke on them. We'll make
them all think you still are here and while they're dodging about trying to keep away from
you we'll slip away together and be at the other end of the house." By a gesture of one hand
and with a finger of the other across her lips to impress the need of secrecy, she brought
Mrs. Hadley-Smith into the little conspiracy.

"Don't blindfold yourself, Claire," she whispered. "You must help Miss Ballister and me to
play a joke on the others. You are to keep the bells rattling after we are gone. See? This way."

With that she shifted the leathern loop from about Miss Ballister's neck and replaced it over
Mrs. Hadley-Smith's head which bent forward to receive it. Smiling in appreciation of the proposed
hoax the widow took a step or two.

"Watch!" whispered Miss Smith in Miss Ballister's ear. "See how well the trick works. There--what
did I tell you?"

For instantly all the players, deceived by the artifice, were falling back, huddling away from
the fancied danger zone as Mrs. Hadley-Smith went toward them. In the same instant Miss Smith
silently had opened the nearest door and, beckoning to Miss Ballister to follow her, was tiptoeing
softly out into the empty hall. The door closed gently behind them.

Miss Ballister laughed a forced little laugh. She turned, presenting her back to Miss Smith.

"Now untie me, please do." In her eagerness to be free she panted out the words.

"Surely," agreed Miss Smith. "But I think we should get entirely away, out of sight, before
the bells stop ringing and the hoax begins to dawn on them. There's a little study right here
at the end of the hall. Shall we go there and hide from them? I'll relieve you of that handkerchief
then."

"Yes, yes; but quickly, please!" Miss Ballister's note was insistent; you might call it pleading,
certainly it was agitated. "Being tied this way gives one such a trapped sort of feeling--it's
horrid, really it is. I'll never let any one tie my hands again so long as I live. It's enough
to give one hysterics--honestly it is.

"I understand. Come on, then."

With one hand slipped inside the curve of the other's elbow Miss Smith hurried her to the study
door masked beneath the broad stairs, and opening it, ushered her into the inner room.

It contained an occupant: a smallish man with mild-looking gray eyes, who at their entrance
rose up from where he sat, staring steadily at them. At sight of the unexpected stranger Miss
Ballister halted. She uttered a shocked little exclamation and recoiled, pulling away from
her escort as though she meant to flee back across the threshold. But her shoulders came against
the solid panels.

The door so soon had been shut behind her, cutting off retreat.

"Well?" said the stranger.

Miss Smith stood away from the shrinking figure, leaving it quite alone.

"This is the woman," she said, and suddenly her voice was accusing and hard. "The stolen paper
is in that necklace she is wearing round her neck."

For proof of the truth of the charge Mullinix had only to look into their captive's face. Her
first little fit of distress coming on her so suddenly while she was being bound had made her
pale. Now her pallor was ghastly. Little blemishes under the skin stood out in blotches against
its dead white, and out of the mask her eyes glared in a dumb terror. She made no outcry, but
her lips, stiff with fright, twisted to form words that would not come. Her shoulders heaved
as--futilely--she strove to wrench her arms free. Then quickly her head sank forward and her
knees began to bend under her.

"Mind--she's going to faint!" warned Mullinix.

Both of them sprang forward and together they eased the limp shape down upon the rug. She lay
there at their feet, a pitiable little bundle. But there was no compassion, no mercifulness
in their faces as they looked down at her.

Alongside the slumped form Miss Smith knelt down and felt for the clasp of the slender chain
and undid it. She pressed the catch of the locket and opened it, and from the small receptacle
revealed within, where a miniature might once have been, she took forth a tightly folded half
sheet of yellow parchment paper, which had it been wadded into a ball would have made a sphere
about the size of the kernel of a fair-sized filbert.

Mullinix grasped it eagerly, pressed it out flat and took one glance at the familiar signature,
written below the close-set array of seemingly meaningless and unrelated letters.

"You win, young lady," he said, and there was thanksgiving and congratulation in the way he
said it. "But how did you do it? How was it done?"

She looked up from where she was casting off the binding about the relaxed hands of the unconscious
culprit.

"It wasn't hard--after the hints you gave me. I made up my mind yesterday that the paper would
probably be hidden in a piece of jewelry--in a bracelet or under the setting of a ring possibly;
or in a hair ornament possibly; and I followed that theory. Two tests that I made convinced
me that Madame Ybanca was innocent; they quite eliminated Madame Ybanca from the equation.
So I centred my efforts on this girl and she betrayed herself soon enough."

"Betrayed herself, how?"

"An individual who has been temporarily deprived of sight will involuntarily keep his or her
hands upon any precious object that is concealed about the person--I suppose you know that.
And as I watched her after I had blindfolded her----"

"After you had what?"

"Blindfolded her. Oh, I kept my promise," she added, reading the expression on his face. "There
was no force used, and no violence. She suffered herself to be blindfolded--indeed, I did the
blinding myself. Well, after she had been blindfolded with a thick silk handkerchief I watched
her, and I saw that while with one hand she groped her way about, she kept the other hand constantly
clutched upon this locket, as though to make sure of the safety of something there. So then
I was sure; but I was made doubly sure by her actions while I was tying her hands behind her.
And then, after I had her tied and helpless, I could experiment further--and I did--and again
my experiment convinced me I was on the right track."

"Yes--but tying her hands--didn't she resist that?"

"No; you see, she let me tie her hands too. It was a part of a game. They all played it."

"Some of the others were blinded, eh?"

"All of them were; every single one of them was. They still are, I imagine, providing my cousin
is doing her part--and I am sure she is. There'll be no suspicion of the truth, even after
their eyes are unhooded. Claire has her explanations all ready. They'll miss this girl of course
and wonder what has become of her, but the explanation provides for that: She was taken with
a sudden indisposition and slipped away with me, not wishing to spoil the fun by staying on
after she began to feel badly. That's the story they'll be told, and there's no reason why
they shouldn't accept it as valid either. See! She's coming to."

"Then I'll get out and leave you to attend to her. Keep her here in this room until she's better,
and then you may send her back to her hotel. You might tell her that there is to be no prosecution
and no unpleasant notoriety for her if only she keeps her mouth shut about all that's happened.
Probably she'll be only too glad to do that, for I figure she has learned a lesson."

"You won't want to question her, then, after she has been revived?"

"It's quite unnecessary. I have the other ends of the case in my hands. And besides I must
go outside to meet our dear friend Geltmann when he arrives. He should be driving up to the
house pretty soon--I had a telephone message five minutes ago telling me to expect him shortly.
So I'm going out to break some sad news to him on the sidewalk. He doesn't know it yet, but
he's starting to-night on a long, long trip; a trip that will take him clear out of this country--and
he won't ever, ever be coming back.

"But I'll call on you to-morrow, if I may--after I've seen to getting him off for the West.
I want to thank you again in behalf of the Service for the wonderful thing you've done so wonderfully
well. And I want to hear more from you about that game you played."

"I'll do better than that," she promised: "I'll let you read about it in a book--an old secondhand
book, it is; you saw it yesterday. Maybe I can convert you to reading old books; they're often
full of things that people in your line should know."

"Lady," he said reverently, "you've made a true believer of me already."

CHAPTER IX

THE BULL CALLED EMILY

We were sitting at a corner table in a certain small restaurant hard by where Sixth Avenue's
L structure, like an overgrown straddlebug, wades through the restless currents of Broadway
at a sharpened angle. The dish upon which we principally dined was called on the menu Chicken
a la Marengo. We knew why. Marengo, by all accounts, was a mighty tough battle, and this particular
chicken, we judged, had never had any refining influences in its ill-spent life. From its present
defiant attitude in a cooked form we figured it had pipped the shell with a burglar's jimmy
and joined the Dominecker Kid's gang before it shed its pin-feathers. There were two of us
engaged in the fruitless attack upon its sinewy tissues--the present writer and his old un-law-abiding
friend,--Scandalous Doolan.

For a period of minutes Scandalous wrestled with the thews of one of the embattled fowl's knee-joints.
After a struggle in which the honours stood practically even, he laid down his knife and flirted
a thumb toward a bottle of peppery sauce which stood on my side of the table.

"Hey, bo," he requested, "pass the liniment, will you? This sea gull's got the rheumatism."

The purport of the remark, taken in connection with the gesture which accompanied it, was plain
enough to my understanding; but for the nonce I could not classify the idiom in which Scandalous
couched his request. It could not be Underworld jargon; it was too direct and at the same time
too picturesque. Moreover, the Underworld, as a rule, concerns itself only with altering such
words and such expressions as strictly figure in the business affairs of its various crafts
and pursuits. Nor to me did it sound like the language of the circus-lot, for in such case
it probably would have been more complex. So by process of elimination I decided it was of
the slang code of the burlesque and vaudeville stage, with which, as with the other two, Scandalous
had a thorough acquaintance. I felt sure, then, that something had set his mind to working
backward along the memory-grooves of some one or another of his earlier experiences in the
act-producing line of endeavour, and that, with proper pumping, a story might be forthcoming.
As it turned out, I was right.

"Where did you get that one, Scandalous?" I asked craftily. "Your own coinage, or did you borrow
it from somebody else?"

He only grinned cryptically. After a bit he hailed the attendant waiter, who because he plainly
suffered from fallen arches had already been rechristened by Scandalous as Battling Insteps.

"Say, Battling," he said, "take away the emu; he's still the undefeated champion of the ages.
Tidy him up a little and serve him to the next guy that feels like he needs exercise more'n
he does nourishment. The gravy may be mussed up a trifle, but the old ring-general ain't lost
an ounce. I fought him three rounds and didn't put a bruise on him."

"Couldn't I bring you somethin' else?" said the waiter. "The Wiener Schnitzel with noodles
is very----"

"Nix," said Scandalous; "if the cassowary licked us, what chance would we stand against the
bison? That'll be all for the olio; I'll go right into the after-show now. Slip me a dipper
of straight chicory and one of those Flor de Boiled Dinners, and then you can break the bad
news to my pal here." By this I knew he meant that he craved a cup of black coffee and one
of the domestic cigars to which he was addicted, and that I could pay the check.

He turned to me:

"How're you goin' to finish your turn?" he asked. "They've got mince pie here like Mother Emma
Goldman used to make. Only you want to be careful it don't explode in your hand."

I shook my head. "I'll nibble at these," I said, "until you get through." And I reached for
a little saucer of salted peanuts that lurked in the shadow of the bowl containing the olives
and the celery. For this, you should know, was a table d'hôte establishment, and no such place
is complete without its drowned olives and its wilted celery.

"Speaking of peanuts," he said, "I don't seem to care deeply for such. I lost my taste for
them dainties quite some time back."

"What was the occasion?" I prompted, for I saw the light of reminiscence smouldering in his eye.

"It wasn't no occasion," he said; "it was a catastrophe. Did I ever happen to tell you about
the time I furnished the financial backing for Windy Jordan and his educated bull, and what
happened when the blow-off came?"

I shook my head and in silence hearkened.

"It makes quite an earful," he continued. "Business for gents in my profession was very punk
here on the Main Stem that season. By reason of the dishonest police it was mighty hard for
an honest grafter to make a living. It certainly was depressing to trim an Ezra for his roll
and then have to cut up the net proceeds with so many central-office guys that you had to go
back and borrow car-fare from the sucker to get home on. Besides, I was somewhat lonely and
low in my peace of mind on account of my regular side-kick the Sweet Caps Kid being in the
hospital. He'd made the grievous mistake of trying to sell a half-interest in the Aquarium
to a visiting Swede. Right in the middle of the negotiations something came up that made the
Swede doubtful that all was not well, and he betrayed his increasing misgivings by hauling
out a set of old-fashioned genuine antique brass knucks and nicking up Sweet Caps' scalp to
such an extent my unfortunate companion had to spend three weeks on the flat of his back in
the casualty ward, with a couple of doctors coming in every morning to replace the divots. This
day has been to me of so much importance that I am obliged to muster all my calmness and self-possession
to put down everything in its proper order. Nevertheless, I cannot contain myself. The die is
cast, or as good as cast. I could not have gone on quietly, had I
not put that down.

And now I can begin. Sniatynski and his wife arrived here towards noon, for an early dinner.
He had to go back, as a new play of his is coming out at the theatre. However happy we may be
in our rural seclusion, we are always delighted to see them.

Aniela is great friends with Pani Sniatynska, and I suppose there
will be an exchange of confidences.

Pani Sniatynska guessed at the state of things, and tried to put
her hand to the wheel, to make the cart go a little faster.

She had only just arrived, when she said to my aunt:--

"How lovely
and peaceful everything is here!

No wonder the young people there do not pine after the dissipations of town."

We both, Aniela and I, understood perfectly well that Pani Sniatynska, calling us the young
people, was not referring only to our age. Besides, she repeated the same thing several times
during dinner: "the young people," "the young couple," as if making a pointed difference between
us two and the elder ladies.

But there was such real sympathy for us in the friendly eyes; such a pricking up of her little ears
to hear what we were saying to each other; and the little woman looked so charming withal that
I forgive her readily her good-natured meddling. I have arrived at such a state of infatuation
that this coupling of our names rather gladdens than irritates me. Aniela too seemed to hear
it with pleasure. In her efforts to please the Sniatynskis and the attentions she bestowed on them
during dinner, she truly looked like a young bride, who receives dear visitors for the first
time in her new home. At the sight of this my aunt's heart seemed to swell, and she said many kind
and polite things to both Sniatynskis.

I noticed a wonderful thing, which I should not believe had I not seen it with my own eyes.
Pani Sniatynska blushes up to her ears when anybody praises her husband! To blush with pleasure
when her husband is praised after eight years of married life! Surely, I committed an egregious
mistake writing as I did about Polish women.

The dinner passed off very pleasantly. A married couple, like these two, are born matchmakers.
The very sight of them sets people thinking: "If married life is like that, let us go and
commit matrimony." I at least saw it for the first time in a quite different light,--not as the
prose of life, a commonplace, more or less skilfully disguised indifference,
but as a thing to be desired.

Aniela evidently read our future in the same light; I saw it in her eyes shining with happiness.

After
dinner I remained in the dining-room with Sniatynski, who liked a quiet talk over a glass of
cognac after his coffee. The elder ladies went to the drawing-room, and Aniela took Pani Sniatynska
upstairs to show her some photographs of Volhynia.

I questioned Sniatynski about his new play, the fate of which seemed to make him a little anxious.
Our conversation drifted on to those times when we both tried our sprouting wings. He told me
how afterwards, step by step, he had worked his way upward; how he had been full of doubts,
and still doubted his power, in spite of having acquired a certain reputation.

"Tell me," I asked, "what do you do with your fame?"

"How do you mean what I do with my fame?"

"For instance, do you wear it as a crown on your head, or as a golden fleece round your neck?
do you put it over your writing-desk, or hang it up in your drawing-room? I only ask as a man
who has no idea what to do with it if he once obtains it?"

"Let us suppose I have won it; the man must be deuced ill-bred mentally
either to wear the so-called fame as an ornament or to put it up for
show.

I confess that at first it gratifies one's vanity; but only a spiritual parvenu would find it
sufficient to fill the whole life, or take the place of real happiness. It is quite another
thing to be conscious you are doing good work; that the public appreciates it, and that your work
calls forth an echo in other minds,--a public man has the right to feel pleased with that. But
as to feeling gratified when somebody, looking more or less foolish, comes up and says: 'We
are indebted to you for so much pleasure;' or, when a dinner does not agree with me, our daily
press remarks: 'We communicate to our readers the sad news that our famous XX suffers from
a stomachache,'--pshaw! what do you take me for, that such a thing could give me satisfaction?"

"Listen,"
I said, "I am not inordinately vain; but I confess that, when people speak of my extraordinary talents,
and regret that I make not a better use of them, it flatters me; and though I feel more than
ever my uselessness, it gives me pleasure; humankind is fond of approbation."

"That is because you pity yourself, and in that you are quite right. But you are turning away from
the question. I do not say that it would give one pleasure to be called an ass."

"But the public esteem that goes hand in hand with fame?"

Sniatynski, who is very lively and always walks about the room, sitting down on any table or
chair, now sat on the window-sill, and replied:--

"Public esteem? You are wrong there, old fellow; there is no such thing. Ours is a strange society,
dominated by a pure republican jealousy.

I write plays, work for the stage; very good. I have gained a certain reputation; better still.
Now, these plays excite the jealousy,--of another playwright, you think? Not at all; it is the engineer,
the bank clerk, the teacher, the physician, the railway official,--in short, people who never
wrote a play in their lives,--that envy you. All these in their intercourse will show that they
do not think much of you, will speak slightingly of you behind your back, and belittle you
on purpose, so as to add an inch or two to their own height. 'Sniatynski? who is he? Yes, I remember;
he dresses at the same tailor as I.' Such is fame, my dear fellow."

"But if must be worth something, since people risk their lives for it?"

Sniatynski grew thoughtful, and replied with a certain gravity:--

"In private life it is worth something; you can make a footstool of it for the woman you love."

"You
will gain a new fame by this definition."

Sniatynski rushed at me with lively impetuosity.

"Yes, yes; put all your laurels into a cushion, go to the dear one, and say to her: 'This for
which people risk their lives; this which they consider supreme happiness, appreciate more than
wealth,--I have got it, striven for it; and now put your dear feet on it at once.' If you do
this, you will be loved all your life. You wanted to know what fame is good for, and there
you are."

Further discussions were cut short by the entrance of Pani Sniatynska and Aniela. They were
dressed for going out to the hot-houses. What an imp of mischief lurks in that little woman.
She came up to her husband to ask his permission to go out, which
he granted, insisting only that she should wrap herself up warm; she
turned to me and said with a roguish smile,--

"You will let Aniela
go, will you not?"

That Aniela should blush furiously was only natural, but that I, an old stager, a razor sharpened
against the strops of so many experiences, should have betrayed so much confusion, I cannot
forgive myself.

But, putting on a semblance of self-possession, I went up to Aniela, and raising her hand to my
lips, said:--

"It is Aniela who gives orders at Ploszow, and I am her humble subject."

I should have liked to take Sniatynski with me and join the excursion,
but refrained.

I felt a want to speak about Aniela, my future marriage, and I knew that sooner or later Sniatynski
himself would broach the question. I gave him an opening after the ladies had left us by saying:--

"And
do you still believe as firmly as ever in your life-dogmas?"

"More than ever, or rather, the same as ever. There is no expression more worn to tatters than
the word 'love;' one scarcely likes to use it; but between ourselves, I tell you; love in the
general meaning, love in the individual sense does not permit of
criticism.

It is one of the canons of life. My philosophy consists in not philosophizing about it at all,--and
the deuce take me if for the matter of that, I consider myself more
foolish than other people.

With love, life is worth something; without, it is not worth a bag of chaff."

"Let us see what you have to say about individual love,--or better still, put in its place woman."

"Very
well, let it be woman."

"My good friend, do you not perceive on what brittle foundation you are building human happiness?"

"On
about as brittle a foundation as life,--no more nor less!"

I did not want to drift into a discussion of life and death, and pulled
Sniatynski up.

"For mercy's sake, do not generalize about individual happiness. You chanced to find the right woman,
another might not."

He would not even listen to that. According to his view, ninety out of a hundred were successful.
Women were better, purer, and nobler than men.

"We are rascals all, in comparison with them!" he shouted, waving
his arms and snaking his leonine mane.

"Nothing but rascals! It is I who say it,--I, who study mankind closely, if only for the reason
that I am a playwright."

He was sitting astride on his chair, attacking me, as it were, with
the chairback, and went on with his usual impetuosity:--

"There are,
as Dumas says, apes from the land of Nod, who know neither curb nor
bridle; but what are eyes given for but to see that you do not take
to wife an ape from Nod?

Generally speaking a woman does not betray her husband nor deceive him, unless he himself
corrupts her heart, tramples on her feelings, or repulses and estranges her by his meanness,
his selfishness, narrowness, and his miserable, worthless nature. You must love her! Let her
feel that she is not only your female, but the crown of your head, as precious as your child and
friend; wear her close to your heart, let her feel the warmth of
it, and you may rest in peace; year after year she will cling closer
to you, until you two are like Siamese twins.

If you do not give her all that, you pervert her, estrange her by
your worthlessness,--and she will leave you.

She will leave you as soon as she sees nobler hands stretched out for her; she is forced to
do it, as this warmth, this appreciation, are as necessary to her life as the air she breathes."

He
charged me with the chairback as with a battering ram. I retreated before him until we had
come close to the window; there he jumped up.

"How blind you are! In presence of such social drought, such utter absence of general happiness
as stamps our time, not to grasp this felicity that is within reach! Shiver on the forum, and
not light a fire at home!

Idiotism can go no farther! I tell you plainly, go and get married."

He pointed through the window at Aniela, who with his wife was coming back from the hot-houses,
and added: "There is your happiness. There it patters in fur boots on the frozen snow. Take
her by weight of gold, by weight in carats rather! You simply have no home, not only in a physical
sense, but in a moral, intellectual meaning; you have no basis, no point of rest, and she will
give you all that. But do not philosophize her away as you have philosophized away your abilities
and your thirty-five years of life!"

He could not have told me anything better, nobler, or what chimed in more with my own desires. I pressed
his hands and replied:--

"No, I will not philosophize her away, because I love her."

Upon this the ladies entered, and Pani Sniatynska observed:--

"We heard some disputes when we were leaving, but I see peace is restored. May I ask what you
have been discussing?"

"Woman, madame," I said.

"And what was the result?"

"As you see, a treaty of peace sealed by a grasp of the hand, and
something further may come of it in the course of time."

The sledge was already waiting at the door. The short day was drawing to its close, and they
had to go back; but as the weather was calm, and the snow on the drive as smooth as a parquetted
floor, we resolved, Aniela and I, to accompany them as far as the
high-road.

And so we did. After having said good-by to our charming visitors, we went slowly homeward.
It was already dusk; in the dim light I could still see Aniela's face. She seemed moved, perhaps
had opened her heart to Pani Sniatynska, and even now hoped for the long deferred word. It was
almost burning on my tongue; but, oh, wonder! I who never yet had lost all my self-possession,
I who was used to play upon heartstrings, who at a fencing match of that kind, if not cleverly,
at least with perfect composure guarded myself against the most masterly strokes, I was as deeply
moved as a lad in his teens. What a difference from former sentiments.

I was afraid I could not find words to express myself,--and remained silent.

Thus in silence we approached the veranda. The snow was slippery; I offered her my arm, and
when she leaned on it I felt how all my desires were centred in her. The feeling grew so intense
that it thrilled my nerves like electric sparks. We entered the hall. There was nobody there;
not even the lamps were lit, the only light came in fitful gleams from the open stoves. In
this half-light and in silence I began to relieve Aniela of her furs,
when suddenly the warmth emanating from her body seemed to enter into
my veins; I put my arm around her, and drawing her close to me I pressed
my lips on her brow.

It was done almost unconsciously, and Aniela must have been greatly startled, for she made not
the slightest resistance. Presently a footstep became audible; it
was the servant with the lamps.

She went upstairs, and I, deeply moved, entered the dining-room.

To every man who is ever so little enterprising, similar events occur in the course of life. I
am no exception, but, as a rule, I always kept the mastery over myself. Now it was different. Thoughts
and sensations whirled across my brain like leaves before a gale.

Fortunately the dining-room was empty; my aunt and Aniela's mother were in the drawing-room,
where I joined them after a while. My thoughts were so far away that I scarcely heard what they
were saying to me. I felt restless. I seemed to see Aniela sitting in her room, pressing her
hands to her temples, trying to realize what it all meant.

Soon Aniela herself came down. I felt relieved, as I had feared she might not come down again
for the evening.

She had two burning spots on either side of her face, and eyes bright as if from recent slumber.
She had tried to cool her face with powder; I saw the traces on her left temple. The sight
of her moved me; I felt that I loved her deeply.

Presently she stooped over some needlework. I saw that her breath
came and went irregularly, and once or twice I intercepted a quick
glance full of unsettled questions and trouble.

In order to set her
mind at rest I thrust myself into the conversation of the elder ladies,
who were speaking about Sniatynski, and said:--

"Sniatynski considers
me a kind of Hamlet, and says I philosophize too much; but I am going
to show him that he is mistaken, and that not later than to-morrow."

I
laid some stress on the "to-morrow," and Aniela caught the meaning,
for she gave me a long look; but my aunt, all unconscious, asked:--

"Are
you going to see him to-morrow?"

"We ought to go and see his play,
and if Aniela agrees we will all go to-morrow."

The dear girl looked
at me shyly but trustingly, and said, with indescribable sweetness:--

"I
will go with great pleasure."

There was a moment when I could scarcely
contain myself, and felt I ought to speak there and then; but I had
said "to-morrow," and refrained.

I feel like a man who shuts his
eyes and ears before taking the final plunge. But I really think it
is a costly pearl I shall find at the bottom of the deep.

CASA OSORIA,
6 March.

Yesterday I arrived at Rome. My father is not quite so bad
as I had feared. His left arm and the left side of his body are almost
paralyzed, but the doctor tells me his heart is not threatened, and
that he may live for years.

7 March.

I left Aniela in doubt, expectation,
and suspense. But I could not do otherwise. The day following the
Sniatynskis' visit, the very day I was going to ask Aniela to be my
wife, I received a letter from my father telling me about his illness.

"Make
haste, dear boy," he wrote, "for I should like to see you before I
die, and I feel my bark very close to the shore."

After the receipt
of such a letter I took the first train, and never stopped until I
reached Rome. When leaving Ploszow I had very little hope to find
my father alive. In vain my aunt tried to comfort me, saying if things
were so bad he would surely have sent a telegram instead of a letter.

I
know my father's little oddities, among which is a rooted dislike
to telegrams. But my aunt's composure was only put on, at the bottom
she felt as frightened as myself.

In the hurry, the sudden shock,
and under the horror of my father's likely death, I could not speak
of love and marriage. It seemed against nature, almost a brutal thing,
to whisper words of love, not knowing whether at the same time my
father might not be breathing his last. They all understood that,
and especially Aniela.

"I will write to you from Rome," I said before
starting; to which she replied: "May God comfort you first."

She
trusts me altogether. Rightly or wrongly, I have the reputation of
fickleness in regard to women, and Aniela must have heard remarks
about it; maybe it is for that very reason the dear girl shows such
unbounded confidence in me. I understand, and can almost hear the
pure soul saying: "They wrong you,--you are not fickle; and those
who accuse you of fickleness do not know what love means, and did
not love you as truly and deeply as I love you."

Perhaps I am a little
fickle by nature, and this disposition, developed under the influence
of the barren, empty, worthless sentiments I met with in the world,--this
might have dried up my heart and corrupted it altogether; in which
case Aniela would have to pay for the sins of others. But I believe
the case is not hopeless, and the blessed physician has not come too
late. Who knows whether it be ever too late, and that the pure, honest
love of a woman does not possess the power to raise the dead? Perhaps,
too, the masculine heart has a greater power of recuperation. There
is a legend about the rose of Jericho, which, though dry to the core,
revives and brings forth leaves when touched by a drop of dew. I have
noticed that the male nature has more elasticity than the female.
A man steeped in such utter corruption that half of its venom would
cover the woman with moral leprosy is able to throw off the contagion,
and recover easily not only his moral freshness, but even a certain
virginity of heart. It is the same with the affections. I have known
women whose hearts were so used up that they lost every capacity of
loving, even of respecting anything or anybody. I have never known
men like that. Likewise her work ain't clean
and smooth like it was. Her underlip is swinging down, and she's beginning to drool loose goobers
off the lower end of it, and her low but intelligent forehead is all furrowed up as if with
deep thought.

"Observing all of which, I says to myself, I says: 'If ever Emily should start to cramp, the
world's cramping record is also in a fair way to be busted this afternoon. I certainly do hope,'
I says, 'that Emily don't go and get herself overextended.'

"You see, I'm trusting for the best, because I realises that it wouldn't do to call off the
reception right in the middle of it on account of the disappointment amongst the tiny tots
that ain't passed in review yet and the general ill-feeling that's sure to follow.

"I should say about two hundred tiny tots have gone by, with maybe five hundred more still
in line waiting their turn, when there halts in front of Emily a fancy-dressed tiny tot which
he must've been the favourite tiny tot of the richest man in town, because he's holding in
his hands a bag of peanuts fully a foot deep. It couldn't of cost a cent less'n half a dollar,
that bag. Emily reaches for the contribution, fondles it for a second or two and starts to
upend it down her throat; and then with a low, sad, hopeless cry she drops it on the stage
and sort of shrugs her front legs forward and stands there with her head bent and her ears
twitching same as if she's listening for something that's still a long ways off but coming
closter fast. And at that precise instant I sees the first cramp start from behind her right-hand
shoulder-blade and begin to work south. Say, it was just like being present at the birth of
an earthquake.

"Moving slow and deliberate, Emily turns around in her tracks, shivering all over, and then
I sees the cramp ripple along until it reaches her cargo-hold and strikes inward. It lifts
all four of her feet clean off the floor, and when she comes down again, she comes down travelling.
There's some scenery in her way, and some furniture and props and one thing and other, but
she don't trouble to go round 'em. She goes through 'em, as being a more simple and direct
way, and a minute later she steps out through the stage entrance into the crowded marts of
trade with half of a centre door fancy hung around her neck. Me and Windy is trailing along,
urging her to be ca'm but keeping at a reasonably safe distance while doing so. Behind us as
we comes forth we can hear the voices of many tiny tots upraised in skeered cries.

"Being a Saturday afternoon, the business section is fairly well crowded with people, and I
suppose it's only natural that the unexpected appearance upon the main street of the largest
bull in captivity, wearing part of a cottage set for a collar and making sounds through her
snout like a switch-engine in distress, should cause some surprised comment amongst the populace.
In fact, I should say the surprised comment might of been heard for fully half a mile away.

"Emily hesitates as she reaches the sidewalk, as though she ain't decided yet in her own mind
just where she'll go, and then her agonised eye falls on all them peanut-roasters standing
in a double row alongside the curbings on both sides of the street. The Italian and Greek gents
who owns 'em are already departing hence in a hurried manner, but they've left their outfits
behind, and right away it's made plain to me by her actions that Emily regards the sight as
a part of a general conspiracy to feed her some peanuts when she already has more peanuts than
what she really required for personal use. She reaches out for the first peanut-machine in
the row, curls her trunk around it and slams it against a brick wall so hard that it immediately
begins to look something like a flivver car which has been in a severe collision and something
like a tin accordion that's had hard treatment from a careless owner. With this for a beginning,
Emily starts in to get real rough with them roasters. For about three minutes it's rainin'
hot charcoal and hot peanuts and wooden wheels and metal cranks and sheet-iron drums all over
that part of the fair city.

"Having put the enemy's batteries out of commission, Emily now swings around and heads back
in the opposite direction with everybody giving her plenty of room. I heard afterward that
some citizens went miles out of their way in order to give her room. Emily's snout is aimed
straight up as though she's craving air, and her tail is standing straight out behind, stiff
as a poker except that about every few seconds a painful quiver runs through it from the end
that's nearest Emily to the end that's furtherest away from her. Windy is hoofing it along
about fifty feet back of her, uttering soothing remarks and entreating her to listen to reason,
and I'm trailing Windy; but for oncet Emily don't hearken none to her master's voice.

"Out of the tail of my eye I see a fat lady start to faint, and when she's right in the middle
of the faint, change her mind about it and do a back flip into a plumber's shop, the purtiest
you ever seen. I see a policeman dodge out from behind a lamp-post as Emily approaches, and
reach for his gun. I yells to him not to shoot, but it's unnecessary advice, because he's only
chucking his hardware away so's to lighten him up for a couple of hundred yards of straightaway
sprinting. I see Emily make a side-swipe with her nozzle at a stout gent who's in the act of
climbing a telegraph-pole hand over hand. She misses the seat of his pants by a fraction of
an inch, and as he reaches the first cross-arm out of her reach, and drapes his form acrosst
it, the reason for her sudden animosity towards him is explained. A glass jar falls out of
one of his hip pockets and is dashed to fragments on the cruel bricks far below, and its contents
is then seen to be peanut butter.

"I sees these things as if in a troubled dream, and then, all of a sudden, me and Emily are
all alone in a deserted city. Exceptin' for us two, there ain't a soul in sight nowheres. Even
Windy has mysteriously vanished. And now Emily, in passing along, happens to look inside a
fruitstore, and through the window her unhappy glance rests upon a bin full of peanuts. So
she just presses her face against the pane like Little Mary in the po'm, and at that the entire
front end of that establishment seems to give away in a very simultaneous manner, and Emily
reaches in through the orifices and plucks out the contents of that there store, including
stock, fixtures and good will, and throws 'em backward over her shoulder in a petulant and
hurried way. But I takes notice that she throws the bin of peanuts much farther than the grapefruit
or the pineapples or the glass show-cases containing the stick candy. The proprietor must of
been down in the cellar at the moment, else I judge she'd of fetched him forth too.

"Thus we continues on our way, me and Emily, in the midst of a vast but boisterous solitude,--for
while we can't see the inhabitants, we can hear 'em,--until we arrive at the foot of Main Street,
and there we beholds the railroad freight-depot looming before us. I can tell that Emily is
wishful to pass through this structure. There ain't no opening on the nigh side of it, but
that don't hinder Emily none. She gives one heave with her shoulders and makes a door and passes
on in and out again on the far side by the same methods. I arrives around the end of the shed
just in time to see her slide down a steep grade through somebody's truck-garden and sink down
upon her heaving flank in a little hollow. As I halts upon the brow of the hill, she looks
up at me very reproachful, and I can see that her prevalent complexion is beginning to turn
awful wan and pale. Son, take it from me, when a full-grown she-bull gets wan, she's probably
the wannest thing there is in the world.

"'Stand back, Scandalous,' she moans to me in bull-language. 'I don't bear you no grudge,--it
was a mistake in judgment on the part of all of us,--but stand back and give me room. Up till
this time,' she says, 'I've been po'rly, but something seems to tell me that now I'm about
to be what you might call real indisposed.'

"Which she certainly was.

"So, after a while, a part of the police force come along, stepping slow and cautious, and
they halts themselves in the protecting shadows of the freight-shed or what's left of it, and
they beckon me to come near 'em, and when I responds, they tell me I'm under arrest for inciting
riots and disturbances and desecration of property and various other crimes and misdemeanours.
I suggests to 'em that if they're really craving to arrest anybody, they should oughter begin
with Emily, but they don't fall in with the idea. They marches me up to the police-station,
looking over their shoulders at frequent intervals to be sure the anguished Emily ain't coming
too, and when we get there, I find Windy in the act of being forcibly detained in the front office.

"Immediately after I arrived, the payoff started and continued unabated for quite a period
of time. First we settled in full with the late proprietors of them defunct peanut-roasting
machines; and then the owner of the wrecked fruitstore, and the man that owned the opera-house,
and the stout lady who'd fainted from the waist up but was now entirely recovered, and the
fleshy gent who'd climbed the telegraph-pole, and the railroad agent and some several hundred
others who had claims for property damage or mental anguish or shockages to their nervous systems
or shortage of breath or loss of trade or other injuries--all these were in line, waiting.

"We was reduced to a case ten-spot before the depot agent, who came last, lined up for his'n;
but he took one good look and said he wouldn't be a hog about it--we could keep that ten-specker,
and he'd be satisfied just to take over our private car in consideration of the loss inflicted
by Emily to his freight-shed. I was trying to tell him how much we appreciated his kindness,
but the chief of police wouldn't let me finish--said he couldn't permit that kind of language
to be used in a police-station, said it might corrupt the morals of some of his young policemen. 

Perhaps she is right, and I look upon it from a fox's point of view. There is also not the slightest
doubt that if I were to marry, especially a Pole, I not only should
search for her among the high flying doves, but I should choose a
perfectly white one.
Along toward morning she felt easier, although sadly depleted in general appearance, and about
daylight her and Windy bid me good-by and went off acrosst-country afoot, aiming to catch up
with Ringbold Brothers' circus, which was reported to be operating somewhere in that vicinity.
As for me, I'd had enough for the time being of the refined amusement business. I took my half
of that lone sawbuck which was all that was left to us from our frittered and dissipated fortunes,
and I started east, travelling second class and living very frugally on the way. He could scarcely
see anything at first, the change from broad daylight to the glimmering light of the lamps that the
men carried was so great.

"Are you all right, my boy?" said Brownlee's cheery voice; "keep
up your heart, we shall soon be out of this.

"I had just one thin dime left," said Scandalous, "and I explained my predicament to the butch,
saying as how I wanted what was the most filling thing he had for the price--and he offered
me a sack of peanuts!"

       *       *       *       *       *

   Obvious punctuation errors corrected.

   Inconsistent hyphenation was retained where a majority
   consensus could not be ascertained.

   Page vii, "wrs" changed to "was" (Second was April)

   Page 88, "noisely" changed to "noisily" (noisily up too)

