"The Jivros are a very ancient, very widespread race. The Croens came into our space-area recently,
as time goes, only three centuries by your time. They were lost. There were only a few hundred
in a great ship, and they settled upon a small uninhabited and airless satellite of our home
planet, were there for many years before they were discovered. When the Jivros attacked them
to destroy them, they found in spite of their innumerable ships and countless warriors they
could not harm them. But their attacks angered the superior ones, and they began a campaign
of extermination against the insect men's empire. Since the Croen were few, they began to recruit
from among the Zervs and other groups who were subservient to the Schrees. The Schrees were
the ancient tools of the Jivros, and have always held positions as tributary rulers, since
the insect-men themselves found subject peoples obeyed the Schrees more readily. They have
always kept the priest-like power and, by poisoning and other devices, remove any Schree puppet
who displeases them."

"Go on," I said huskily, her rapt face and intent manner, her utterly lovely ivory body, glittering
everywhere with the shining powder which she used, the subtle penetrative scent of her--I was
hard put to concentrate upon her words.

"I plan to have the crystal pillar opened, perhaps, have Cyane brought to my own chambers,
and I will pretend to set up apparatus to read her sleeping mind and so learn from her. Naturally
the Jivros will become suspicious of me if I do so, as they fear the knowledge of the Croen
which has always proved too great for them. There will be but a few days time between my action
in bringing her here, and my own death or her confiscation by the Jivros. But in order to overrule
me in this, they will have to make a pretext, charge me with infidelity, convince the old Jivro
that I intend harm to him and his. During that time you must find a way to release Cyane and
escape with her."

"Why don't you yourself release her and escape with her?" I asked.

"Because I can be useful to her when she attacks us. Besides, I am constantly under the Jivro
eyes, and they know me so well they would see my perturbation, they would know something was
wrong and forestall me. You alone could do it, and, too, I depend upon your alien knowledge
to provide a barrier or two to their overcoming you. Your weapons which you bore when we captured
you--do they fear them?"

"I never shot any of them; I don't know."

"Perhaps I will send you with the party to get Cyane. That way you can find a chance to inject
the stimulant when they are not looking. They must remove the crystal from about her to move
her; it is too heavy to carry otherwise. Then when she awakes, you can find a way to divert
their pursuit, provide a false trail. Do you understand?"

"I could try, but I cannot tell if I could outwit them or not."

"They are really very stupid things, the Jivros. Like an insect, their patterns are fixed and
repetitive. They are almost incapable of original thought. Once you know them, you can always
outwit them. With you will go my brother, Genner. He may be successful where you are not."

"It is agreed then." I stood up; this low couch made my knees stiff. She took my movement as
a dismissal of her, and flushed deeply. I smiled at her embarrassment, and went down on one
knee to bring my face level with hers where she half reclined on the bench-like lounge.

"Dear lady," I said in English, not finding the necessary Schree words in my artificial memory
for a term of respect--then in Schree phrases, "I will do my utter best to help you and your
people. It is my duty to my own race, too, as it is yours to yours. Trust me, so far as good-will
may go. Together, we will rid ourselves of these unclean Jivros of yours!"

She rose then, and I stood too, still holding her hand that I had seized in my own to impress
her with my sincerity. For an instant she looked at our two hands clasped together, then she
placed an arm on my shoulder, leaning against me and trembling slightly with emotion. Tears
sprang out in her eyes. She brushed them aside.

I did not know what to do. For fear of offending her, I restrained the impulse to take her
in my arms, and it took great willpower.

Something about her aroused my deepest admiration. Here was a woman who had been playing a
difficult part for years, whose heart was sore with sorrow for her blighted people, and who
must yet seem to approve. The signs of long strain were very plain on her face. I understood
that this was one of her greatest fears, that her mind would give way and betray her true emotions
to the Jivros.

Clumsily I patted her bare shoulder. For an instant her wet cheek was pressed against my own,
then she went gliding swiftly away, her face once again proud and empty of all human feeling.
At the door she turned, swept her palm once over her face, removing the tears and as the hand
passed upward she smiled as sweetly as a young girl, with a pathetic and utterly charming mischievous
expression. Then the palm passed downward, and her face was left again stiff and masklike,
the lips twisted a little into a cruel thinness, her eyes hard as agates on my own. She was
superb, and I silently applauded. Then she was gone.

As I stood there, musing on the nature and the strange life of Wananda, a mocking, sultry laugh
made me whirl, for I had thought I was alone.

Standing beside the tall, open window--a window I had examined and found impossible of exit
because beneath it was a straight drop of some seventy or eighty feet--was my erstwhile companion
and prisoner, the Zoorph, Carna!

Still in her hand was the long, fantastically ornamented drape behind which she had been concealed
during my "secret" interview with the puppet queen.

"You!" I exploded. "Where did you come from and what did you hear?"

"Very interesting things, friend Keele. She is a fascinating woman, is she not?" Carna made
a pretty mouth, as if kissing something, and with her fingers a gesture new to me, but one
unmistakable in meaning. "She now has your simple heart in her hand, to do with as she wishes.
You are a fine fool, you!"

"I thought you had psychic powers. You claim to read minds and foretell the future, and you
do not understand that she is fine and honest and utterly admirable! You are the fool, Carna!"

She laughed.

"You are right, and not so simple. I said that only to know if your perceptions were keen enough
to know that what she said was true."

"Now you know. How did you get here, what do you want, what have they done to you?"

She snapped her fingers, and gave the Zerv equivalent of "pouf."

"They gave me their tongue, as they did you, I notice. They questioned me much longer than
you, as they thought I knew the Zervs might be caught. I did not tell them much. But it was
my fault that poor Holaf was caught. I did know he was going to try to revive the Croen captive.
They wrung that out of me, and then put me in a room directly above this one. I knew that you
were below me from the talk of the guards. I made a rope from the hangings and slipped down
to see you. I may go back up when I get ready."

She came toward me as she spoke, her hips undulating exquisitely, that sultry smile of completely
improper intent on her beautiful face. She wore still the silkily gleaming black net in which
I had first met her. It was torn now and even more revealing.

I fixed my eyes on the wide web of linked emeralds at her throat to keep my eyes from hers,
for she had a disturbing power to make a man's head swim and his will disappear. It was perhaps
no greater power than many another woman possesses, but to me she was particularly devastating.
I moved back as she came toward me, smiling a little, and said in spite of my liking for her:

"Keep away from me, Zoorph! You will destroy my soul!"

She laughed huskily.

"What is a soul or so to the passion that could burn us, my Carl? Do you really fear me, stranger
from a strange people? Don't you know how much I thirst to drink of your lips! Look at me,
you coward. Are you afraid of a woman? Don't you know how curious I am as to how you of this
planet make love? I who am a student of love, am most curious about you. Stand still. Here
we are prisoners, about to die, perhaps, and you refuse me one sup of pleasure before we die?
You are a cruel, and a spineless creature. I despise you, and yet I want you very much."

I kept backing away, around the room, and she pursued me at arm's length, her long graceful
legs dramatically striding, making of her pursuit a humorous burlesque, yet I knew she was
quite serious about it. If little Nokomee had not warned me against her, I might have succumbed
then and there, for, as she said--"What good is a tomorrow that may never exist for us?"

"What did you come for, Carna? To make a fool of me?"

"I thought we might try to escape again, but this pretty queen of the accursed Schrees has
charmed you to her will, and I must await a better opportunity. But that does not prevent me
from trying to outdo her attraction for you. Do you love her already, Carl?"

"Of course not, I just met her."

This was utterly ridiculous, yet it was a lot of fun and I could see no real reason why I should
resist Carna's advances. To me she was about the most attractive woman I had ever met, and
I might never see her again. I gave up my retreat, seized the girl almost roughly in my arms,
bent her back with a savage, long-drawn kiss and embrace. Then I released her, to see what
she would make of an earthman's kiss.

She stood for an instant, her hand pressed to her lips, her eyes wide with surprise, one hand
raised as if to push me away. Then she giggled like a young girl, and put both hands on my
shoulders.

"So that is what you call love, strange one? Shall I show you how we of far-off Calmar do the
first steps of courtship?"

"That would be interesting," I said huskily, my lips burning.

Her voice became low and penetrating.

"You will be two, yet alone, above the all." She said other words whose meanings I did not
know. My head swam, my soul seemed to be floating in a sea of new and strange emotions. I sank
into a dream state, and with her low suggestive words in my ears, a new world came gradually
into form about us, we were two lovers walking among plumed fern-trees, beside deliciously
tinkling streams, the songs of birds rang like little bells all about. I was conscious of her
warm lips upon my own and of her eyes like two deep dark pools in which my own gaze swam and
sank and rose.

Suddenly a rude, loud voice broke in, the dream of paradise vanished from about us.

Before us stood Genner, his face angry, and in the wall I saw the panel by which he had entered
where I had thought was only blank wall. He cried:

"You, Zoorph, I had thought not to interfere. But you are not going to enslave this man to
your will. We need him, and your people need him too, and what you do is not right, for you
know as well as I that if he falls entirely under your spell he will be left no will of his own!"

Carna, not even abashed at the intrusion, almost spit as she angrily retorted:

"What is the difference whose will he obeys so long as it is what we all desire that gets accomplished?
He would be better off with my experienced direction than with his own ignorance of our ways,
in anything you plan. Do you think I want to be left out? Do you think I do not desire freedom
from the Jivros, too? Do you think I want to be made into a mindless thing when I fail to please
them?"

"Never mind; get back where you came from. This man is our ally, not our slave, and your behavior
is bad. I will hold this against you. Go!" He pointed at the window with one rigid, outstretched
arm, and Carna moved slowly away, saying:

"No, Prince, do not think me an enemy! It is only that my heart is moved toward this strange
one, I wanted him very much, and how else can a Zoorph love than as she has been taught?"

The prince smiled at her words, his arm fell to his side.

"Very well, little temptress. Kiss your love goodbye. It may be a long time before I let you
see him again. If he desires it, you may meet later on. But I will warn him, so that he does
not become your slave."

"I would not rob him of his self, my Prince. I have an affection for this one!"

"We will see that you do not, sweet Carna. Now get out, and be quick. The time approaches."

She darted to my side, where I sat still bewildered by the eerie yet utterly delightful experience
with the witchery of a Zoorph, pressed burning lips to my own, caressed my cheek with her fingertips,
gave my hand a quite American squeeze. Then I watched her slender legs swing up and out of
sight as she went up her improvised ladder hand over hand. She was athletic as a dancer.

"Whew," I said, passing my hand over my heated face, and grinning at the Prince.

"Yes, whew! If it had not been for me you would have become her property, for they are very
accomplished in making people do what they want."

"Hypnotism, developed beyond anything I ever heard of! It must be hereditary, such power!"
I mused aloud. Genner answered as if I spoke to him.

"The word hypnotism I know not, I guess you mean what we call Zoorph. It is a cult, teaching
the art of enslaving others to your will. But she is a good girl, and her Zoorph qualities
are not evil. For your own sake, remember always to hold yourself in check, or she will automatically
become your mistress. A man does not like to be a slave even to so charming a mistress."

I did not say anything. I saw nothing wrong with the idea just then.

"Were you there behind the panel while your sister and I talked?" I asked.

"Of course. To make sure nothing went amiss. If some curious Jivro had come to the door, she
would have joined me in the passage."

The Prince sat down across from me on a low stool.

"I will lead this group she will send to bring the Croen. You will naturally accompany us,
as I am to keep an eye on you. Wananda will give you the fluid to inject into her veins. You
must not be seen making the injection. Somewhere along the way she will revive. She is an extremely
strong creature, and will immediately make her escape. I will order none to shoot at her with
vibro guns, as we do not wish her harmed. We will hurry back to get ships to pursue and capture
her. But we will be unable to capture her.

"If you can manage to keep up with her in her flight, do so. You should be able to outrun a
Jivro; they are not very fast. But whether you can keep up with the Croen, that I doubt. However,
make the attempt, and when you are alone with her, explain why we want her to escape, who her
friends are. If you do not do that, she may elect to make her way through the wilderness, which
would be fatal for her. Knowing she has allies among us, she will find a way to attack us."

I grunted. I did not see how they expected one lone woman, however fantastically gifted with
wits and know-how, to overcome the ships, armament and organization of the Jivros, even with
Wananda working to neutralize their power.

"She must be a wizard; you expect such wonders of her!"

"There will be a ship waiting to pick her up as soon as she is out of sight of the Jivros who
will accompany us. I have sent it already. It waits in the hills by the barrier. With you along,
you can contact the remaining Zervs. They will augment your power. I can send more ships manned
with my men, later. We have been preparing for this a long time."

"Aren't you doing a lot of talking? Walls have ears, you know, and those Jivros of yours look
pretty shifty to me."

"It is the hour of their sleep. They are creatures of regularity, like ants, you know. They
live by routine. There are only guards awake. I know exactly where every one of them stands
at this moment, where every one of them sleeps. I have not been inactive."

       *       *       *

We filed out of the city gate, a party of nearly fifty, a score of them bearers of a big palanquin-like
vehicle in which they proposed to carry the Croen's inert body.

I was remembering the brief examination of her that I had made when I entered the cavern of
the golden statue.

A four-armed female of near-human aspect, but with a single horn on her forehead. A member
of a race from distant space, alien even to these visitors to earth. She had been utterly different
from anything I had even imagined as human--yet somewhere, somehow the origin of that race
had been similar to our own. I wondered if space was peopled with such near-human races, all
descendant from some ancient space-traveling race who had colonized--then passed on into forgotten
time?

The party wound on, taking that same trail by which I had entered the cavern with Hank and
Jake and Frans. Silently I blessed the fate that had spared me the things that had been done
to them. Their only release, I imagined, could be death.

Overhead the rocky walls began to close, the light grew dim, ahead came that eerie glow from
the magnetic statue. The prince's eyes caught mine in a swift, silent order to be ready, and
the two of us drew ahead of the column. In my jacket pocket I held the hypodermic, one of Schree
design, different from a modern medical hypodermic only in that it was decorated with incut
figures of glorified Jivros, carved in the crystalline cylinder, and the metal was of gold.

There were only two of the repellent insect-men with us. I surmised they were there only as
observers, but that was not the case. They were there because they had to be. I could see an
unusual agitation on their blank, bulge-eyed faces, if those insect masks could be called faces.
They were afraid of this Croen female, even in her inert condition.

The tall, graceful Schree warriors followed us into the cavern, and last of all came the two
hopping Jivros. The intense attraction of the statue drew me, but I remembered how I had avoided
it before, and kept my eyes averted. Like light on a moth's eyes, the power of it seemed to
strike into the will only when the eyes were upon it.

We gathered around the column of crystal. The Schrees attached a loop of rope to the top, pulled
it carefully from the base. When it was stretched out horizontal upon the floor, the two Jivros
set to work with little spinning metal disk-saws, cutting a line entirely around it lengthwise.
Then they tapped it with small hammers, and the cut cracked through. Lifting off the top section
like the lid of a sarcophagus, the Croen lay exposed to the light of day.

I stood entranced by the exquisite beauty and majesty of the naked creature until Prince Genner
nudged me with an elbow. Even as he did so, he whirled, pointed, cried out:

"There, through that doorway, one of the traitorous Zervs spies upon us. Catch him, my warriors,
before they bring the others down upon us!"

As if drilled or awaiting this order, the tall Schrees set off as one man, running through
the same doorway by which I had followed the angry Nokomee.

The prince and I were left alone with the two Jivros, who stood beside the nude figure of the
alien Croen. They eyed us, their eyes jerking nervously from our faces to the body of the Croen.
Quite calmly the Prince tugged a vibro-gun, very like the weapon Holaf had worn at his waist,
from his belt and trained it upon the two horrors.

"This day will come for all the Jivros," cried the prince in a triumphant voice, and shot a
terrible blue bolt of force into the body of each of them. The second had snapped a little
weapon from his breast, hidden in the folds of his white robe, and as he fell, the beam of
it cut a long smoking channel in the floor rock. The prince calmly picked it up, pressed the
trigger lever, handed the thing to me. I pocketed it, then stepped over to the nude body of
the Croen. I inserted the needle carefully in the artery at her inner elbow, pushed the plunger
slowly home, my eyes on her face with a deep awe.

The prince bent beside me, watching her face intently, and both of us stood rapt, waiting for
I knew not what except that it would be more marvelous to meet such a god-like creature as
this face to face than anything else that had ever happened to me.

But a sound of feet up the corridor made Prince Genner spring to his feet.

"Quick, man, help me get these dead horrors out of sight! I do not trust all those warriors,
though most of them are in sympathy with us."

We sprang to the dead things. I bent and picked one up by the shoulders. Surprisingly, frighteningly
light they were, as if filled with cotton. Their limbs were truly skeletal, and curiously I
tugged the white robe from the strange insect body as I followed the prince. The thorax, the
wasp-waist, the long pendulous abdomen, the atrophied center limbs folded across the wasp-waist--the
whole thing was like a great white wasp without wings. As we flung them into an empty chamber,
I turned the burden face down, and on the back were two thin wisps of residual wings. Once
these things had been winged!

We sped back to the side of the sleeping Croen.

I stopped ten feet from the giant figure, surprise, awe, a thrill of admiration filling me!
She was sitting up, her hands at her temples, peering about with her great eyes distracted.
On her face, even in this condition of tension, still unaware of her surroundings, was the
greatest evidence of intelligence I had ever sensed. This Croen race, I realized, was something
truly beyond an earthman's understanding.

But the prince had no time for the awed, stupefied condition into which sight of her had struck me.

"Come, Cyane, great one, we have released you, but you must flee at once. I know how weak you
must be, but if you can, please rise and flee. This man will accompany you. He is alien to
us, and it is better that he be out of the hands of the Jivros as quickly as possible. Go,
dear one, swiftly, swiftly--we will find you later!"

The great body moved, gathered itself, stood tottering, gazing wildly about. The prince pointed
at the cavern entrance where our footprints still showed in the dust. To me he cried: "Go up
the rocky side as far as you can when you reach the slopes. The north side, earthman. Keep
going, and conceal yourselves in the bush. I will guide the search away from you."

I ran ahead of the tottering figure and she followed, her steps gathering strength. Faster
she followed until we raced along the dim cavern way. The rocky roof opened out and the blue
sky showed overhead. The prince had gestured to me when we had entered to a ledge that angled
upward from the gully, and I knew now what he had meant.

I could not keep up with the great strides of the now fully aroused Croen goddess. She turned
back, picked me up like a child, and in great leaps bounded up the side of the canyon along
the ledge. Up and up and over, and still she ran, untiring. I was not rescuing, I was being
rescued!

As we ran beneath the shadow of the trees, a figure rose suddenly up before us. I was astounded
to see it was Holaf, whom I had thought the Jivros had already dealt with.

"I await you, Cyane, great one, to guide you to safety. The prince has sent me," he cried.

