Frank raised his frightened blue eyes entreatingly to the rector's face without speaking; he
saw something in the kind rugged features which encouraged him, for with sudden energy he wriggled
himself loose from Andrew and threw himself on his knees.

"Don't let them lock me up, sir," he sobbed.  "I've allers bin a honest lad."

"Was it your companion who broke into this room this morning and stole my inkstand?" pursued
the rector.

"I dunno," repeated Frank.  "I didn't see him steal nuthin', I was asleep."

"Would he be likely to do it?"

"I dunno," said Frank under his breath, deeply conscious that he did know very well.

"Is he your brother?"

"No," cried Frank with a sudden burst of eloquence, "he's no kin to me. I'm Frank Darvell's
lad, what lives at Green Highlands.  And Parson knows me--and Schoolmaster.  And I've niver
stolen nowt in my life. Don't ye let 'em lock me up!"

"A likely story!" growled Andrew.  "Honest lads don't go trampin' round with thieves."

The rector, whose face had softened at the boy's appeal, seemed to pull himself together sternly
at this remark; he frowned, and said, turning away a little from Frank's tear-stained face:
"I would gladly believe you, my boy, but it is too improbable.  As Andrew says, honest boys
do not associate with thieves."

"Ask any of 'em at Danecross, sir," pleaded poor Frank in despair; "anyone ull tell ye I belong
to honest folk."

"That's no proof you're not a thief," put in the persistent Andrew; "there's many a rotten
apple hangs on a sound tree."

The rector looked up impatiently.

"Leave the boy alone with me, Andrew," he said, "I wish to ask him some questions;" and as
the man left the room he seated himself in his big leather chair and beckoned Frank to him.
"Come here," he said, "and answer me truthfully."

Frank stood at his elbow, trembling still in fear of being sent to prison, and yet with a faint
hope stealing into his heart.

Bit by bit he sobbed forth his story in answer to the rector's questions, and finally raising
his swollen eyelids to the kind face he said:

"If so be as mother was to know I wur sent to prison it 'ud break her 'art."

"Tell me," said the rector, "have your parents lived long at Green Highlands?  Are they well-known
there?"

"Father, he's lived there all his life," said Frank; "and granther, he used to live there too.
Father can do a better day's work nor any man in Danecross," he added with conscious pride.

"Ah!" said the rector, "it's a fine thing to be a good workman, and to have earned a good name,
isn't it?"

Frank hung his head.

"But it isn't done by tramping about the country with bad companions.  A good name's a precious
thing, and like all precious things it's got by trouble and labour.  It's the best thing a
father can hand down to his son.  When he begins life, men say, `He's Frank Darvell's son,
he comes of a good stock;' and so the `good name' his father earned is of great use to him.
But he can't live on that; he has to make one of his own too, so that he can hand it on to
his sons and daughters and say, `There's my father's name, I've never disgraced it; now it's
your turn to use it well.'  But suppose that the son doesn't value his father's good name.
Suppose that he chooses an idle good-for-nothing life and his own pleasure, rather than to
work hard and live honestly; what happens then?  Why, then, men soon leave off trusting him,
and say, `He's not the man his father was;' and so the name of Darvell, which used to be so
honoured and respected, comes to be connected with evil things.  Then, perhaps too late, the
son finds that `a good name is more to be desired than great riches, and loving favour rather
than silver and gold.'  But he has thrown away the good name and the loving favour too, for
he has drifted away from his old friends and companions.  He can never get back to where he
started from."

The solemn monotonous voice--for the rector had dropped unconsciously into his sermon tones--and
the emphasis on the last words completed Frank's misery of spirit.

Clasping his hands, he fell on his knees and said imploringly:

"Let me go home, sir.  Let me go back.  I'd be proper glad to see 'em all again."

"Whom would you like to see again?" asked the rector kindly.

"There's mother first," said Frank, "and father on Sundays, and then Schoolmaster, and Jack
Gunn, and little Phoebe Redrup."

"My little lad," said the rector, laying his hand on the boy's shoulder, "you see there's no
place like home.  Home, where people know us and love us in spite of our faults.  I think you
won't want to run away again?"

"Niver no more," sobbed Frank.

"And now," said the rector rising, and reassuming the air of severity which he had quite laid
aside during the last part of the interview.  "I am going to write to the vicar of Danecross,
who is a friend of mine. If I find that what you have told me is true we will say no more about
the inkstand, and I will believe that you had no knowledge of the theft. Until then you must
be treated as under suspicion, though we will not send you to prison."

He summoned Andrew, and delivered Frank over to his charge.  Disgusted to find that he was
not to be "run in" as an example to tramps, from whom his master's orchard and garden had suffered
so frequently, Andrew was determined that his captive should have no chance of escape, and
as rigorous a confinement as possible.  Frank was therefore locked up in a small harness-room,
as the place of greatest security and discomfort; and here he passed the lonely day in much
distress of mind, troubled with many fears concerning his late friend and companion Barney.

The rector himself was hardly more at his ease, however, for he would willingly have dispensed
with the zeal of his parishioners, who had been scouring the country since daybreak in search
of the thief, and kept him in a constant tremor.  The good people of Crowhurst seldom had the
chance of such an excitement as this unexpected robbery, and though few things would have embarrassed
the rector more than a successful end to the chase, he did not dare to check their ardour.

His peaceful solitude was therefore perpetually disturbed throughout the day by the arrival
of breathless parties of scouts.  He would sally out to the gate to meet them, and ask nervously:
"Well, my lads, seen anything of him, eh?"  Deep was his inward relief when the day closed
in with no news of the thief, for he would have cheerfully sacrificed many silver inkstands
rather than have been obliged to deliver the unfortunate Barney into the hands of justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two evenings later than this, the vicar of Danecross stood at the open door of the Darvells'
cottage at Green Highlands, and looked into the room.  Mrs Darvell was alone, scrubbing away
at her brick floor on her knees, and surrounded by a formidable array of pails, and brushes,
and mops.  The place had a comfortless air, and there was no fire on the hearth.

"Late at work, Mrs Darvell, eh?" was the vicar's greeting as he stood on the threshold.

Mrs Darvell got up quickly, and dropped her usual brisk courtesy, but her face looked dull
and spiritless.

"I'm in too much of a muss to ask you in, sir," she said, glancing round.

"Oh, never mind," said the clergyman; "where's Darvell?  Isn't he back from work yet?"

Mrs Darvell shrugged her shoulders, and made an expressive movement with her head in the direction
of Danecross.

"I reckon he's where he generally is now," she answered moodily, "at the `Nag's Head.'"

"Why, that's something new, isn't it?  I always consider Darvell one of the steadiest men in
my parish."

Mrs Darvell looked up defiantly.

"Maybe it's partly my fault," she said; "but we've never had a minute's comfort since the little
lad went.  And things get worse and worse.  I don't care no more to keep the place nice, and
I ups and speaks sharp to Darvell, and he goes off to the `Nag's Head.'"

The vicar nodded his head slowly, as though Darvell's conduct was not quite incomprehensible
under such circumstances, and Mrs Darvell continued in a lower tone:

"You know, sir, it wur because my man lifted his hand to Frank that the lad went off; and I
don't seem as how I can forget it.  When I look at Darvell I keep on rememberin' as how, if
he'd bin more patient with the boy we should ha' had him with us still.  Darvell's been a good
man to me, but I can't help speaking sharp to him; though maybe I'm sorry after I done it,
for there's only the two on us now, and we'll have to worry along together."

The vicar shook his head.

"Hard blows are bad things, Mrs Darvell, but hard words do quite as much mischief in their
way.  If your husband has driven Frank from home, does it mend matters for you to drive your
husband to the public-house?"

"There's truth in what you say, sir," said Mrs Darvell, rubbing her arms with her apron; "but
I don't seem as if I cared to do any different now the boy's gone.  I've allers had a quick
tongue from a gall, and Darvell, he must just take the consequences."

"But suppose," said the vicar, looking earnestly at her, "suppose that Frank were to come back
to you safe and well, and Darvell were to promise never to be so harsh to him again, wouldn't
you try then to keep from saying sharp things?"

Mrs Darvell's black eyes fixed themselves keenly on the vicar's face.

"You've heard summat, sir?" she said, laying one damp red hand on his coat-sleeve.  "Is the
lad livin'?  Just tell me that.  Is he livin'?"

"Look there," said the vicar.

He turned and pointed down the road, where, at the top of the hill leading up from Danecross,
two figures were just visible.  They came nearer and nearer.  One was that of Darvell, broad-shouldered
and heavily built, but the other one was small and slender, and had rough yellow hair.

Mrs Darvell was a woman of decisive action as well as of a quick tongue.  One look was enough
for her.  She immediately took off her pattens, which had iron rings to them, and were not
adapted for rapid movement, and placed them quickly and quite unconsciously in the vicar's
arms as he stood beside her.

"Bless you, sir!" she said.

Before he had realised his situation she had flown down the road, reached the two figures,
and enveloped Frank in her embrace, Darvell standing by meanwhile with a broad smile on his
fair and foolish countenance.

The neighbours gathered round the group, and all the dogs, and pigs, and chickens belonging
to the settlement also drew near.  Jack Gunn's donkey looked over the hedge, his furry ears
showing a pointed interest in the affair, and in the distance the vicar surveyed the scene
from the cottage door, still holding Mrs Darvell's pattens.

So Frank had got home again; and after all his wanderings he found that:

  "From east to west
  At home is best."

STORY TWO, CHAPTER 1.

FAITHFUL MOSES--A SHORT STORY.

Those of you who live near any of the great high-roads that lead to London may remember to
have been awake sometimes in the middle of the night, and to have heard the sound of horses'
feet, and of cart wheels rumbling slowly and heavily along.

If it be winter, frosty and dry, you hear them very sharply and distinctly; and perhaps you
wonder, drowsily, who it is that has business so late, and whither they are bound.  "How cold
it must be outside!" you think, and it is quite a pleasure to snuggle cosily down in your comfortable
bed and feel how warm you are.

Gradually, as the sounds grow less and less, and die away mysteriously in the distance, your
eyes close; soon you are fast asleep again, and that is all you know about the cold, dark night
outside.

But Tim, the van-boy, knew a great deal more about it than this, for he had now been "on the
road" between Roydon and London for more than a year.  The carrier's cart started at eleven
o'clock in the morning, and having distributed and received parcels on the way the driver put
up his horses at an inn called "The Magpie and Stump," in a part of London named the Borough.
So far it was all very well, and not at all hard work; but then came the return journey at
night, which began just at the moment when a boy, after a good warm supper, naturally thinks
of going to bed.  This was trying, and at first Tim felt it a good deal, for he never got home
until three o'clock in the morning; he was so anxious, too, to do his duty and fill his post
well, that he would not have closed his eyes for the world, though he might well have taken
a nap without anyone's knowledge.  His "mate" as he called him, whose name was Joshua, sat
in front driving his two strong black horses, and Tim's place was at the other open end of
the van, so that he might keep his eye on the parcels and prevent their being stolen or lost.

It was a responsible situation he felt for a boy of thirteen, and he meant to do his very best
to keep it now that he had been lucky enough to get it; in the far-off future, too, he saw
himself no longer the van-boy, but in the proud position now occupied by Joshua as driver,
and this he considered, though a lofty, was by no means an unreasonable ambition.

When Tim first began his work it was summertime, and the nights were so balmy, and soft, and
light that it was not so very difficult to keep awake--there seemed so many other thing's awake
too.  After they were well out of London, and the horses no longer clattered noisily over the
stones, it was like getting into another world.  The stars looked brightly down from the clear
smokeless sky.  Soft little winds blew a thousand flowery scents from over the fields, and
sometimes, singing quite close to the road, Tim heard the nightingale.  Even Joshua, a gruff
man, was affected by the sweet influence of the season, for Tim noticed that he always sang
one particular song on fine nights in summer.  Joshua's voice was hoarse from much exposure
to weather, but Tim thought he sang with great expression.  The words were not easy to follow,
because the middle of the verse always became inaudible; but by degrees the boy made out that
it was the description of a letter received by a rustic from his sweetheart.  It began:

  "All on a summer's day
  As I pursued my way."

Then came some lines impossible to hear, and then each verse ended with:

  "Com--mencing with `my dearest,'
  And con--cluding with her name--"

Joshua's song and the steady tramp, tramp of the horses were sometimes the only sounds disturbing
the still night, and Tim, a small erect figure with widely opened eyes, would sit perched on
a convenient packing-case at the back of the cart, and listen admiringly.

But the winter!  That was another matter.  Joshua did not sing then, but kept his teeth clenched,
and his head bent, before the sleet, or wind, or driving rain.  Then the brightly lighted London
streets seemed cheerful, and much to be preferred to the lonely open country, where the bitter
wind swept across the wide fields, and, gathering strength as it came, rushed in among Tim
and the parcels.  That was hard to bear, but of all kinds of weather, and he knew them all
pretty well now, he thought the very worst was a fog.  It was not only that it penetrated everywhere,
and laid its cold damp finger on everything; but it spread such a thick veil of dreadful mystery
over well-known objects.  Nothing looked the same.  The houses in the streets towered up like
giant castles, and if Tim had read fairy tales he might well have fancied them inhabited by
ogres.  But he had not.  He only felt a dim sense of discomfort and fear, as though he were
lost in a strange place.  Then it was a comfort to know that Joshua was there, almost invisible
indeed, but making himself evident by hoarse shouts, now of encouragement to his horses, and
now of derision at some luckless driver.  Out in the country, when the heavily laden market
carts loomed slowly out of the fog as they passed, they had the appearance of being miles up
in the air, and as if they must inevitably topple over.  Joshua knew all the carters, not by
sight, for he could not see them, but by the time and place he met them on his nightly journey.
Tim could reckon pretty well that after he had heard his gruff salutation of "a dark night,
mate," repeated a certain number of times, that they must be nearing home, for they always
met about the same number of Joshua's friends; as he had no watch this was a comfort to him
on the dark nights.  Taught by experience, he learned to contrive for himself a sort of Robinson
Crusoe but with the various hampers and boxes, and in this he lay curled round in tolerable
comfort, covered with an old horse-cloth; nevertheless, it was often very cold, and then the
only consolation was in thinking that Joshua must be cold also.  It is always easier to bear
things if there is some one to bear them with you--unless you are a hero.

One December evening the carrier's cart was just starting homewards from the door of the Magpie
and Stump.  Joshua, reins in hand, and closely buttoned up to the chin, stood ready to mount
to his perch, saying a few last words to the landlord, who was a crony of his; Tim was already
in his place.  From where he sat he could see something which interested and excited him a
good deal, and this was an old woman close by who was selling roasted chestnuts.  They did
look good!  So beautifully done, with nice cracks in their brown skins showing just a little
bit of the soft yellow nut inside.  Tim looked and longed, and fingered a penny in his pocket.
How jolly it would be to have a penn'orth of hot chestnuts to eat on his way home!  They would
keep his hands warm too.  Joshua still talked, there was yet time, he would give himself a
treat.  He scrambled down from the cart and went up to the old woman, who sat crouched on a
stool warming her hands over her little charcoal brazier. She looked a cross old thing, he
thought, but she was not, for when he had paid for his chestnuts she picked out an extra fine
one and gave it him "for luck," with a kind grin on her wrinkled face.  He was turning away
with a warm pocketful, when he saw, sitting on the edge of the pavement near, a very poor thin
dog, who trembled with cold or fear, and blinked his eyes sorrowfully at the glowing coals.
He was not at all a pretty dog, and probably never had been, even in the days of his prosperity,
and these were evidently gone by.  He was long-legged and rough-coated, with coarse black hair
mingled with yellowish brown, and his large bright eyes had a timid look in them as though
he feared ill-treatment; he sat with his thin body drawn together as closely as possible, as
if anxious to escape observation.

Tim stood and looked at him, and felt sorry.  He was such a very miserable dog, and yet so patient.

"Is he your dog?" he asked the old woman.

"Bless yer 'art, no," she answered.  "He's a stray, he is; he'll come and sit there often at
nights, and I sometimes give him a mouthful o' supper."

"I suppose he's rare and 'ungry?" pursued Tim.

"He's starving, that's what he is," said the woman, "and he's hurt his leg badly besides. 
The boys are allers ready to chuck stones at him when they see him prowlin' round.  He don't
belong to no one."

