"Then should I go also. Your uncle has been very kind, but I sometimes feel that his kindness
is a burden which I should not be strong enough to bear solely on my own shoulders. And what
should keep me here, then?" Mrs Dale as she said this felt that the "here" of which she spoke
extended beyond the limits of the home which she held through the charity of her brother-in-law.
Might not all the world, far as she was concerned in it, be contained in that "here"? How was
she to live if both her children should be taken away from her? She had already realised the
fact that Crosbie's house could never be a home to her,--never even a temporary home. Her visits
there must be of that full-dressed nature to which Lily had alluded. It was impossible that
she could explain this to Lily. She would not prophesy that the hero of her girl's heart would
be inhospitable to his wife's mother; but such had been her reading of Crosbie's character.
Alas, alas, as matters were to go, his hospitality or inhospitality would be matter of small
moment to them.

Again in the afternoon the two sisters were together, and Lily was still more serious than
her wont. Even the effect of such a wild performance at the very climax and end of a tragedy
may be questioned; but there can be little doubt that the great violence exerted before in describing
her horrible suspicions merely, deprives the actress of power to
throw increased stress into her performance as the play moves to its
close, and she is confronted with a far more horrible reality.

As though she feels that her power of melodramatic declamation has
been weakened, Miss Neilson in the graveyard seems to rely more on
melodramatic action.

 He's not to be talked about even yet, is he?"

"I didn't say he was not to be talked about. You know what I meant, Lily; and what I meant
then, I mean now."

"And how long will it be before you mean something else? I do hope it will come some day,--I
do indeed."

"It never will, Lily. I once fancied that I cared for Dr Crofts, but it was only fancy. I know
it, because--" She was going to explain that her knowledge on that point was assured to her,
because since that day she had felt that she might have learned to love another man. But that
other man had been Mr Crosbie, and so she stopped herself.

"I wish he would come and ask you himself."

"He will never do so. He would never ask such a question without encouragement, and I shall
give him none. Nor will he ever think of marrying till he can do so without--without what he
thinks to be imprudence as regards money. He has courage enough to be poor himself without
unhappiness, but he has not courage to endure poverty with a wife. I know well what his feelings
are."

"Well, we shall see," said Lily. "I shouldn't wonder if you were married first now, Bell. For
my part I'm quite prepared to wait for three years."

Late on that evening the squire returned to Allington, Bernard having driven over to meet him
at the station. He had telegraphed to his nephew that he would be back by a late train, and
no more than this had been heard from him since he went. I do not distinctly recall all the
nasty tastes which have afflicted my palate, but I am quite sure this was one of the vilest.
It was a combination of acid, sulphur and saline, like a diabolic julep of lucifer-matches, bad eggs,
vinegar and magnesia.
He had not known himself, when he had gone about his wooing so lightly, thinking it a slight
thing, whether or no he might be accepted. Now it was no longer a slight thing to him. I do
not know that it was love that made him so eager; not good, honest, downright love. But he
had set his heart upon the object, and with the wilfulness of a Dale was determined that it
should be his. He had no remotest idea of giving up his cousin, but he had at last persuaded
himself that she was not to be won without some toil, and perhaps also some delay.

Nor had he been in a humour to talk either to Mrs Dale or to Lily. He feared that Lady Julia's
news was true,--that at any rate there might be in it something of truth; and while thus in
doubt he could not go down to the Small House. So he hung about the place by himself, with
a cigar in his mouth, fearing that something evil was going to happen, and when the message
came for him, almost shuddered as he seated himself in the gig. What would it become him to
do in this emergency if Crosbie had truly been guilty of the villainy with which Lady Julia
had charged him? Thirty years ago he would have called the man out, and shot at him till one
of them was hit. Nowadays it was hardly possible for a man to do that; and yet what would the
world say of him if he allowed such an injury as this to pass without vengeance?

His uncle, as he came forth from the station with his travelling-bag in his hand, was stern,
gloomy, and silent. He came out and took his place in the gig almost without speaking. There
were strangers about, and therefore his nephew at first could ask no question, but as the gig
turned the corner out of the station-house yard he demanded the news.

"What have you heard?" he said.

But even then the squire did not answer at once. He shook his head, and turned away his face,
as though he did not choose to be interrogated.

"Have you seen him, sir?" asked Bernard.

"No, he has not dared to see me."

"Then it is true?"

"True?--yes, it is all true. Why did you bring the scoundrel here? It has been your fault."

"No, sir; I must contradict that. I did not know him for a scoundrel."

"But it was your duty to have known him before you brought him here among them. Poor girl!
how is she to be told?"

"Then she does not know it?"

"I fear not. Have you seen them?"

"I saw them yesterday, and she did not know it then; she may have heard it to-day."

"I don't think so. I believe he has been too great a coward to write to her. A coward indeed!
How can any man find the courage to write such a letter as that?"

By degrees the squire told his tale. How he had gone to Lady Julia, had made his way to London,
had tracked Crosbie to his club, and had there learned the whole truth from Crosbie's friend,
Fowler Pratt, we already know. "The coward escaped me while I was talking to the man he sent
down," said the squire. "It was a concerted plan, and I think he was right. I should have brained
him in the hall of the club." On the following morning Pratt had called upon him at his inn
with Crosbie's apology. "His apology!" said the squire. "I have it in my pocket. Poor reptile;
wretched worm of a man! I cannot understand it. On my honour, Bernard, I do not understand
it. I think men are changed since I knew much of them. It would have been impossible for me
to write such a letter as that." He went on telling how Pratt had brought him this letter,
and had stated that Crosbie declined an interview. "The gentleman had the goodness to assure
me that no good could come from such a meeting. 'You mean,' I answered, 'that I cannot touch
pitch and not be defiled!' He acknowledged that the man was pitch. Indeed, he could not say
a word for his friend."

"I know Pratt. He is a gentleman. I am sure he would not excuse him."

"Excuse him! How could any one excuse him? Words could not be found to excuse him." And then
he sat silent for some half mile. "On my honour, Bernard, I can hardly yet bring myself to
believe it. It is so new to me. It makes me feel that the world is changed, and that it is
no longer worth a man's while to live in it."

"And he is engaged to this other girl?"

"Oh, yes; with the full consent of the family. It is all arranged, and the settlements, no
doubt, in the lawyer's hands by this time. He must have gone away from here determined to throw
her over. Indeed, I don't suppose he ever meant to marry her. He was just passing away his
time here in the country."

"He meant it up to the time of his leaving."

"I don't think it. Had he found me able and willing to give her a fortune he might, perhaps,
have married her. But I don't think he meant it for a moment after I told him that she would
have nothing. Well, here we are. I may truly say that I never before came back to my own house
with so sore a heart."

They sat silently over their supper, the squire showing more open sorrow than might have been
expected from his character. "What am I to say to them in the morning?" he repeated over and
over again. "How am I to do it? And if I tell the mother, how is she to tell her child?"

"Do you think that he has given no intimation of his purpose?"

"As far as I can tell, none. That man Pratt knew that he had not done so yesterday afternoon.
I asked him what were the intentions of his blackguard friend, and he said that he did not
know--that Crosbie would probably have written to me. Then he brought me this letter. There
it is," and the squire threw the letter over the table; "read it and let me have it back. He
thinks probably that the trouble is now over as far as he is concerned."

It was a vile letter to have written--not because the language was bad, or the mode of expression
unfeeling, or the facts falsely stated--but because the thing to be told was in itself so vile.
There are deeds which will not bear a gloss,--sins as to which the perpetrator cannot speak
otherwise than as a reptile; circumstances which change a man and put upon him the worthlessness
of vermin. Crosbie had struggled hard to write it, going home to do it after his last interview
on that night with Pratt. But he had sat moodily in his chair at his lodgings, unable to take
the pen in his hand. Pratt was to come to him at his office on the following morning, and he
went to bed resolving that he would write it at his desk. On the next day Pratt was there before
a word of it had been written.

"I can't stand this kind of thing," said Pratt. "If you mean me to take it, you must write
it at once." Then, with inward groaning, Crosbie sat himself at his table, and the words at
last were forthcoming. Such words as they were! "I know that I can have no excuse to make to
you,--or to her. But, circumstanced as I now am, the truth is the best. I feel that I should
not make Miss Dale happy; and, therefore, as an honest man, I think I best do my duty by relinquishing
the honour which she and you had proposed for me." There was more of it, but we all know of
what words such letters are composed, and how men write when they feel themselves constrained
to write as reptiles.

"As an honest man!" repeated the squire. "On my honour, Bernard, as a gentleman, I do not understand
it. I cannot believe it possible that the man who wrote that letter was sitting the other day
as a guest at my table."

"What are we to do to him?" said Bernard, after a while.

"Treat him as you would a rat. Throw your stick at him, if he comes under your feet; but beware,
above all things, that he does not get into your house. That is too late for us now."

"There must be more than that, uncle."

"I don't know what more. There are deeds for committing which a man is doubly damned, because
he has screened himself from overt punishment by the nature of his own villainy. We have to
remember Lily's name, and do what may best tend to her comfort. Poor girl! poor girl!"

Then they were silent, till the squire rose and took his bed candle. "Bernard," he said, "let
my sister-in-law know early to-morrow that I will see her here, if she will be good enough
to come to me after breakfast. Do not have anything else said at the Small House. It may be
that he has written to-day."

Then the squire went to bed, and Bernard sat over the dining-room fire, meditating on it all.
How would the world expect that he should behave to Crosbie? and what should he do when he
met Crosbie at the club?

CHAPTER XXVIII

The Board

Crosbie, as we already know, went to his office in Whitehall on the morning after his escape
from Sebright's, at which establishment he left the Squire of Allington in conference with
Fowler Pratt. He had seen Fowler Pratt again that same night, and the course of the story will
have shown what took place at that interview.

He went early to his office, knowing that he had before him the work of writing two letters,
neither of which would run very glibly from his pen. One was to be his missive to the squire,
to be delivered by his friend; the other, that fatal epistle to poor Lily, which, as the day
passed away, he found himself utterly unable to accomplish. The letter to the squire he did
write, under certain threats; and, as we have seen, was considered to have degraded himself
to the vermin rank of humanity by the meanness of his production.

But on reaching his office he found that other cares awaited him,--cares which he would have
taken much delight in bearing, had the state of his mind enabled him to take delight in anything.
On entering the lobby of his office, at ten o'clock, he became aware that he was received by
the messengers assembled there with almost more than their usual deference. He was always a
great man at the General Committee Office; but there are shades of greatness and shades of
deference, which, though quite beyond the powers of definition, nevertheless manifest themselves
clearly to the experienced ear and eye. He walked through to his own apartment, and there found
two official letters addressed to him lying on his table. The first which came to hand, though
official, was small, and marked private, and it was addressed in the handwriting of his old
friend, Butterwell, the outgoing secretary. "I shall see you in the morning, nearly as soon
as you get this," said the semi-official note; "but I must be the first to congratulate you
on the acquisition of my old shoes. They will be very easy in the wearing to you, though they
pinched my corns a little at first. I dare say they want new soling, and perhaps they are a
little down at the heels; but you will find some excellent cobbler to make them all right,
and will give them a grace in the wearing which they have sadly lacked since they came into
my possession. I wish you much joy with them," &c., &c. He then opened the larger official
letter, but that had now but little interest for him. He could have made a copy of the contents
without seeing them. The Board of Commissioners had had great pleasure in promoting him to
the office of secretary, vacated by the promotion of Mr Butterwell to a seat at their own Board;
and then the letter was signed by Mr Butterwell himself.

How delightful to him would have been this welcome on his return to his office had his heart
in other respects been free from care! And as he thought of this, he remembered all Lily's
charms. He told himself how much she excelled the noble scion of the de Courcy stock, with
whom he was now destined to mate himself; how the bride he had rejected excelled the one he
had chosen in grace, beauty, faith, freshness, and all feminine virtues. If he could only wipe
out the last fortnight from the facts of his existence! But fortnights such as those are not
to be wiped out,--not even with many sorrowful years of tedious scrubbing.

And at this moment it seemed to him as though all those impediments which had frightened him
when he had thought of marrying Lily Dale were withdrawn. That which would have been terrible
with seven or eight hundred a year, would have been made delightful with twelve or thirteen.
Why had his fate been so unkind to him? Why had not this promotion come to him but one fortnight
earlier? Why had it not been declared before he had made his visit to that terrible castle?
He even said to himself that if he had positively known the fact before Pratt had seen Mr Dale,
he would have sent a different message to the squire, and would have braved the anger of all
the race of the de Courcys. But in that he lied to himself, and he knew that he did so. An
earl, in his imagination, was hedged by so strong a divinity, that his treason towards Alexandrina
could do no more than peep at what it would. It had been considered but little by him, when
the project first offered itself to his mind, to jilt the niece of a small rural squire; but
it was not in him to jilt the daughter of a countess.

That house full of babies in St. John's Wood appeared to him now under a very different guise
from that which it wore as he sat in his room at Courcy Castle on the evening of his arrival
there. Then such an establishment had to him the flavour of a graveyard. It was as though he
were going to bury himself alive. Now that it was out of his reach, he thought of it as a paradise
upon earth. And then he considered what sort of a paradise Lady Alexandrina would make for
him. It was astonishing how ugly was the Lady Alexandrina, how old, how graceless, how destitute
of all pleasant charm, seen through the spectacles which he wore at the present moment.

During his first hour at the office he did nothing. One or two of the younger clerks came in
and congratulated him with much heartiness. He was popular at his office, and they had got
a step by his promotion. Then he met one or two of the elder clerks, and was congratulated
with much less heartiness. "I suppose it's all right," said one bluff old gentleman. "My time
is gone by, I know. I married too early to be able to wear a good coat when I was young, and
I never was acquainted with any lords or lords' families." The sting of this was the sharper
because Crosbie had begun to feel how absolutely useless to him had been all that high interest
and noble connection which he had formed. He had really been promoted because he knew more
about his work than any of the other men, and Lady de Courcy's influential relation at the
India Board had not yet even had time to write a note upon the subject.

At eleven Mr Butterwell came into Crosbie's room, and the new secretary was forced to clothe
himself in smiles. Mr Butterwell was a pleasant, handsome man of about fifty, who had never
yet set the Thames on fire, and had never attempted to do so. He was perhaps a little more
civil to great men and a little more patronising to those below him than he would have been
had he been perfect. But there was something frank and English even in his mode of bowing before
the mighty ones, and to those who were not mighty he was rather too civil than either stern
or supercilious. He knew that he was not very clever, but he knew also how to use those who
were clever. He seldom made any mistake, and was very scrupulous not to tread on men's corns.
Though he had no enemies, yet he had a friend or two; and we may therefore say of Mr Butterwell
that he had walked his path in life discreetly. At the age of thirty-five he had married a
lady with some little fortune, and now he lived a pleasant, easy, smiling life in a villa at
Putney. When Mr Butterwell heard, as he often did hear, of the difficulty which an English
gentleman has of earning his bread in his own country, he was wont to look back on his own
career with some complacency. He knew that he had not given the world much; yet he had received
largely, and no one had begrudged it to him. "Tact," Mr Butterwell used to say to himself,
as he walked along the paths of his Putney villa. "Tact. Tact. Tact."

"Crosbie," he said, as he entered the room cheerily, "I congratulate you with all my heart.
I do, indeed. You have got the step early in life, and you deserve it thoroughly;--much better
than I did when I was appointed to the same office."

"Oh, no," said Crosbie, gloomily.

"But I say, oh, yes. We are deuced lucky to have such a man, and so I told the commissioners."

"I'm sure I'm very much obliged to you."

"I've known it all along,--before you left even. Sir Raffle Buffle had told me he was to go
to the Income-tax Office. The chair is two thousand there, you know; and I had been promised
the first seat at the Board."

"Ah;--I wish I'd known," said Crosbie.

"You are much better as you are," said Butterwell. "There's no pleasure like a surprise! Besides,
one knows a thing of that kind, and yet doesn't know it. I don't mind saying now that I knew
it,--swearing that I knew it,--but I wouldn't have said so to a living being the day before
yesterday. There are such slips between the cups and the lips. Suppose Sir Raffle had not gone
to the Income-tax!"

"Exactly so," said Crosbie.

"But it's all right now. Now, the whole world before the Change was as sick and feverish as that, it was
worried and overworked and perplexed by problems that would not get
stated simply, that changed and evaded solution, it was in an atmosphere
that had corrupted and thickened past breathing; there was no thorough
cool thinking in the world at all.

There was nothing in the mind of the world anywhere but half-truths,
hasty assumptions, hallucinations, and emotions.

Nothing. . . .

I know it seems incredible, that already some of the younger men are beginning to doubt the greatness
of the Change our world has undergone, but read--read the newspapers
of that time.

Every age becomes mitigated and a little ennobled in our minds as it recedes into the past.
It is the part of those who like myself have stories of that time to tell, to supply, by a scrupulous
spiritual realism, some antidote to that glamour.

Section 4

Always with Parload I was chief talker.

I can look back upon myself with, I believe, an almost perfect detachment,
things have so changed that indeed now I am another being, with scarce
anything in common with that boastful foolish youngster whose troubles
I recall.

I see him vulgarly theatrical, egotistical, insincere, indeed I do
not like him save with that instinctive material sympathy that is
the fruit of incessant intimacy.

Because he was myself I may be able to feel and write understandingly
about motives that will put him out of sympathy with nearly every
reader, but why should I palliate or defend his quality?

Always, I say, I did the talking, and it would have amazed me beyond measure if any one had
told me that mine was not the greater intelligence in these wordy encounters. Parload was a quiet
youth, and stiff and restrained in all things, while I had that supreme gift for young men and
democracies, the gift of copious expression. Parload I diagnosed in my secret heart as a trifle
dull; he posed as pregnant quiet, I thought, and was obsessed by the congenial notion of "scientific
caution." I did not remark that while my hands were chiefly useful for gesticulation or holding
a pen Parload's hands could do all sorts of things, and I did not think therefore that fibers
must run from those fingers to something in his brain. Nor, though I bragged perpetually of my shorthand,
of my literature, of my indispensable share in Rawdon's business,
did Parload lay stress on the conics and calculus he "mugged" in the
organized science school.

Parload is a famous man now, a great figure in a great time, his work upon intersecting radiations
has broadened the intellectual horizon of mankind for ever, and I, who am at best a hewer of
intellectual wood, a drawer of living water, can smile, and he can
smile, to think how I patronized and posed and jabbered over him in
the darkness of those early days.

That night I was shrill and eloquent beyond measure. Rawdon was, of course, the hub upon which
I went round--Rawdon and the Rawdonesque employer and the injustice of "wages slavery" and
all the immediate conditions of that industrial blind alley up which it seemed our lives were
thrust. But ever and again I glanced at other things. Nettie was always there in the background
of my mind, regarding me enigmatically. It was part of my pose to Parload that I had a romantic love-affair
somewhere away beyond the sphere of our intercourse, and that note gave a Byronic resonance to many
of the nonsensical things I produced for his astonishment.

I will not weary you with too detailed an account of the talk of a foolish youth who was also
distressed and unhappy, and whose voice was balm for the humiliations that smarted in his eyes.
Indeed, now in many particulars I cannot disentangle this harangue of which I tell from many of
the things I may have said in other talks to Parload.

For example, I forget if it was then or before or afterwards that, as it were by accident, I
let out what might be taken as an admission that I was addicted to drugs.

"You shouldn't do that," said Parload, suddenly. "It won't do to poison your brains with that."

My brains, my eloquence, were to be very important assets to our party in the coming revolution.
. . .

But one thing does clearly belong to this particular conversation I am recalling. When I started
out it was quite settled in the back of my mind that I must not leave Rawdon's. I simply wanted
to abuse my employer to Parload. But I talked myself quite out of touch with all the cogent
reasons there were for sticking to my place, and I got home that night irrevocably committed
to a spirited--not to say a defiant--policy with my employer.

"I can't stand Rawdon's much longer," I said to Parload by way of a flourish.

"There's hard times coming," said Parload.

"Next winter."

"Sooner.

The Americans have been overproducing, and they mean to dump. The iron trade is going to have convulsions."

"I
don't care. Pot-banks are steady."

"With a corner in borax? No. I've heard--"

"What have you heard?"

"Office secrets. But it's no secret there's trouble coming to potters. There's been borrowing
and speculation. The masters don't stick to one business as they used to do. I can tell that
much. Half the valley may be 'playing' before two months are out." Parload delivered himself
of this unusually long speech in his most pithy and weighty manner.

"Playing" was our local euphemism for a time when there was no work and no money for a man,
a time of stagnation and dreary hungry loafing day after day. Such interludes seemed in those days
a necessary consequence of industrial organization.

"You'd better stick to Rawdon's," said Parload.

"Ugh," said I, affecting a noble disgust.

"There'll be trouble," said Parload.

"Who cares?" said I. "Let there be trouble--the more the better. This system has got to end, sooner
or later. These capitalists with their speculation and corners and trusts make things go from
bad to worse. Why should I cower in Rawdon's office, like a frightened dog, while hunger walks
the streets? Hunger is the master revolutionary. When he comes we ought to turn out and salute
him. Anyway, I'M going to do so now."

"That's all very well," began Parload.

"I'm tired of it," I said. "I want to come to grips with all these Rawdons. I think perhaps if
I was hungry and savage I could talk to hungry men--"

"There's your mother," said Parload, in his slow judicial way.

That WAS a difficulty.

I got over it by a rhetorical turn. "Why should one sacrifice the future of the world--why
should one even sacrifice one's own future--because one's mother is totally destitute of imagination?"

Section
5

It was late when I parted from Parload and came back to my own home.

Our house stood in a highly respectable little square near the Clayton parish church. Mr. Gabbitas,
the curate of all work, lodged on our ground floor, and upstairs there was an old lady, Miss
Holroyd, who painted flowers on china and maintained her blind sister in an adjacent room;
my mother and I lived in the basement and slept in the attics. The front of the house was veiled
by a Virginian creeper that defied the Clayton air and clustered in untidy dependent masses over
the wooden porch.

As I came up the steps I had a glimpse of Mr. Gabbitas printing photographs by candle light in his
room.

It was the chief delight of his little life to spend his holiday
abroad in the company of a queer little snap-shot camera, and to return
with a great multitude of foggy and sinister negatives that he had
made in beautiful and interesting places.

These the camera company would develop for him on advantageous terms, and he would spend his
evenings the year through in printing from them in order to inflict copies upon his undeserving
friends. There was a long frameful of his work in the Clayton National School, for example,
inscribed in old English lettering, "Italian Travel Pictures, by the Rev. E. B. Gabbitas." For this
it seemed he lived and traveled and had his being. It was his only real joy. By his shaded
light I could see his sharp little nose, his little pale eyes behind his glasses, his mouth
pursed up with the endeavor of his employment.

"Hireling Liar," I muttered, for was not he also part of the system, part of the scheme of robbery
that made wages serfs of Parload and me?--though his share in the
proceedings was certainly small.

"Hireling Liar," said I, standing in the darkness, outside even his faint glow of traveled culture.
. .

My mother let me in.

She looked at me, mutely, because she knew there was something wrong and that it was no use for
her to ask what.

"Good night, mummy," said I, and kissed her a little roughly, and lit and took my candle and
went off at once up the staircase to bed, not looking back at her.

"I've kept some supper for you, dear."

"Don't want any supper."

"But, dearie------"

"Good night, mother," and I went up and slammed my door upon her, blew out my candle, and lay
down at once upon my bed, lay there a long time before I got up to undress.

There were times when that dumb beseeching of my mother's face irritated me unspeakably. It
did so that night. I felt I had to struggle against it, that I could not exist if I gave way
to its pleadings, and it hurt me and divided me to resist it, almost beyond endurance. It was
clear to me that I had to think out for myself religious problems, social problems, questions
of conduct, questions of expediency, that her poor dear simple beliefs could not help me at
all--and she did not understand! Hers was the accepted religion, her only social ideas were blind
submissions to the accepted order--to laws, to doctors, to clergymen, lawyers, masters, and
all respectable persons in authority over us, and with her to believe
was to fear.

She knew from a thousand little signs--though still at times I went to church with her--that
I was passing out of touch of all these things that ruled her life, into some terrible unknown.
From things I said she could infer such clumsy concealments as I made. She felt my socialism,
felt my spirit in revolt against the accepted order, felt the impotent resentments that filled
me with bitterness against all she held sacred.

Yet, you know, it was not her dear gods she sought to defend so much
as me!

She seemed always to be wanting to say to me, "Dear, I know it's
hard--but revolt is harder.

Don't make war on it, dear--don't! Don't do anything to offend it. I'm sure it will hurt you if
you do--it will hurt you if you do."

She had been cowed into submission, as so many women of that time had been, by the sheer brutality
of the accepted thing. The existing order dominated her into a worship of abject observances.
It had bent her, aged her, robbed her of eyesight so that at fifty-five she peered through cheap
spectacles at my face, and saw it only dimly, filled her with a habit of anxiety, made her hands------
Her poor dear hands! Not in the whole world now could you find a woman with hands so grimy, so
needle-worn, so misshapen by toil, so chapped and coarsened, so evilly entreated. . . . At
any rate, there is this I can say for myself, that my bitterness against the world and fortune
was for her sake as well as for my own.

Yet that night I pushed by her harshly. I answered her curtly, left her concerned and perplexed
in the passage, and slammed my door upon her.

And for a long time I lay raging at the hardship and evil of life, at the contempt of Rawdon,
and the loveless coolness of Nettie's letter, at my weakness and insignificance, at the things
I found intolerable, and the things I could not mend. Over and over went my poor little brain, tired
out and unable to stop on my treadmill of troubles. Nettie. Rawdon. My mother. Gabbitas. Nettie.
. .

Suddenly I came upon emotional exhaustion. Some clock was striking midnight. After all, I was young;
I had these quick transitions. I remember quite distinctly, I stood up abruptly, undressed very
quickly in the dark, and had hardly touched my pillow again before I was asleep.

But how my mother slept that night I do not know.

Oddly enough, I do not blame myself for behaving like this to my mother, though my conscience
blames me acutely for my arrogance to Parload. I regret my behavior to my mother before the days
of the Change, it is a scar among my memories that will always be a little painful to the end
of my days, but I do not see how something of the sort was to be escaped under those former conditions.
In that time of muddle and obscurity people were overtaken by needs and toil and hot passions
before they had the chance of even a year or so of clear thinking; they settled down to an intense
and strenuous application to some partial but immediate duty, and the growth of thought ceased
in them. They set and hardened into narrow ways. Few women remained capable of a new idea
after five and twenty, few men after thirty-one or two. Discontent with the thing that existed
was regarded as immoral, it was certainly an annoyance, and the only
protest against it, the only effort against that universal tendency
in all human institutions to thicken and clog, to work loosely and
badly, to rust and weaken towards catastrophes, came from the young--the
crude unmerciful young.

It seemed in those days to thoughtful men the harsh law of being--that either we must submit to
our elders and be stifled, or disregard them, disobey them, thrust them aside, and make our
little step of progress before we too ossified and became obstructive in our turn.

My pushing past my mother, my irresponsive departure to my own silent meditations, was, I now
perceive, a figure of the whole hard relationship between parents and son in those days. There
appeared no other way; that perpetually recurring tragedy was, it seemed, part of the very nature
of the progress of the world.

We did not think then that minds might grow ripe without growing
rigid, or children honor their parents and still think for themselves.

We were angry and hasty because we stifled in the darkness, in a poisoned and vitiated air. That
deliberate animation of the intelligence which is now the universal
quality, that vigor with consideration, that judgment with confident
enterprise which shine through all our world, were things disintegrated
and unknown in the corrupting atmosphere of our former state.

(So the first fascicle ended. I put it aside and looked for the second.

"Well?" said the man who wrote.

"This is fiction?"

"It's my story."

"But you-- Amidst this beauty--
You are not this ill-conditioned, squalidly bred lad of whom I have
been reading?"

He smiled. "There intervenes a certain Change," he
said. "Have I not hinted at that?"

I hesitated upon a question, then
saw the second fascicle at hand, and picked it up.)

CHAPTER THE SECOND

NETTIE

Section
1

I CANNOT now remember (the story resumed), what interval separated
that evening on which Parload first showed me the comet--I think I
only pretended to see it then--and the Sunday afternoon I spent at
Checkshill.

Between the two there was time enough for me to give
notice and leave Rawdon's, to seek for some other situation very strenuously
in vain, to think and say many hard and violent things to my mother
and to Parload, and to pass through some phases of very profound wretchedness.
There must have been a passionate correspondence with Nettie, but
all the froth and fury of that has faded now out of my memory. All
I have clear now is that I wrote one magnificent farewell to her,
casting her off forever, and that I got in reply a prim little note
to say, that even if there was to be an end to everything, that was
no excuse for writing such things as I had done, and then I think
I wrote again in a vein I considered satirical. To that she did not
reply. That interval was at least three weeks, and probably four,
because the comet which had been on the first occasion only a dubious
speck in the sky, certainly visible only when it was magnified, was
now a great white presence, brighter than Jupiter, and casting a shadow
on its own account. It was now actively present in the world of human
thought, every one was talking about it, every one was looking for
its waxing splendor as the sun went down--the papers, the music-halls,
the hoardings, echoed it.

Yes; the comet was already dominant before
I went over to make everything clear to Nettie. And Parload had spent
two hoarded pounds in buying himself a spectroscope, so that he could
see for himself, night after night, that mysterious, that stimulating
line--the unknown line in the green. How many times I wonder did I
look at the smudgy, quivering symbol of the unknown things that were
rushing upon us out of the inhuman void, before I rebelled? But at
last I could stand it no longer, and I reproached Parload very bitterly
for wasting his time in "astronomical dilettantism."

"Here," said
I. "We're on the verge of the biggest lock-out in the history of this
countryside; here's distress and hunger coming, here's all the capitalistic
competitive system like a wound inflamed, and you spend your time
gaping at that damned silly streak of nothing in the sky!"

Parload
stared at me. "Yes, I do," he said slowly, as though it was a new
idea. "Don't I? . . . I wonder why."

"I want to start meetings of
an evening on Howden's Waste."

"You think they'd listen?"

"They'd
listen fast enough now."

"They didn't before," said Parload, looking
at his pet instrument.

"There was a demonstration of unemployed at
Swathinglea on Sunday. They got to stone throwing."

Parload said
nothing for a little while and I said several things. He seemed to
be considering something.

"But, after all," he said at last, with
an awkward movement towards his spectroscope, "that does signify something."

"The
comet?"

"Yes."

"What can it signify? You don't want me to believe
in astrology. What does it matter what flames in the heavens--when
men are starving on earth?"

"It's--it's science."

"Science! What
we want now is socialism--not science."

He still seemed reluctant
to give up his comet.

"Socialism's all right," he said, "but if that
thing up there WAS to hit the earth it might matter."

"Nothing matters
but human beings."

"Suppose it killed them all."

"Oh," said I, "that's
Rot,"

"I wonder," said Parload, dreadfully divided in his allegiance.

He
looked at the comet. He seemed on the verge of repeating his growing
information about the nearness of the paths of the earth and comet,
and all that might ensue from that. So I cut in with something I had
got out of a now forgotten writer called Ruskin, a volcano of beautiful
language and nonsensical suggestions, who prevailed very greatly with
eloquent excitable young men in those days. Something it was about
the insignificance of science and the supreme importance of Life.
Parload stood listening, half turned towards the sky with the tips
of his fingers on his spectroscope. He seemed to come to a sudden
decision.

"No. I don't agree with you, Leadford," he said. Had it been possible that she should know how very weak and
cowardly was the enemy against whom she was called upon to put herself in action, she might
probably have fought her battle somewhat differently, and have achieved a speedy victory, at
the cost of an energetic shot or two. But she did not know. She thought it probable that she
might obtain power over him and manage him; but it did not occur to her that his legs were
so weak beneath him that she might almost blow him over with a breath. None but the worst and
most heartless of women know the extent of their own power over men;--as none but the worst
and most heartless of men know the extent of their power over women. Amelia Roper was not a
good specimen of the female sex, but there were worse women than her.

"She ain't there, Mr Eames; but you'll see her in the drawen-room," said the girl. "And it's
she'll be glad to see you back again, Mr Eames." But he scrupulously passed the door of the
upstairs sitting-room, not even looking within it, and contrived to get himself into his own
chamber without having encountered anybody. "Here's yer 'ot water, Mr Eames," said the girl,
coming up to him after an interval of half-an-hour, "and dinner'll be on the table in ten minutes.
Mr Cradell is come in, and so is missus's son."

It was still open to him to go out and dine at some eating-house in the Strand. He could start
out, leaving word that he was engaged, and so postpone the evil hour. He had almost made up
his mind to do so, and certainly would have done it, had not the sitting-room door opened as
he was on the landing-place. The door opened, and he found himself confronting the assembled
company. First came Cradell, and leaning on his arm, I regret to say, was Mrs Lupex--Egyptia
conjux! Then there came Miss Spruce with young Roper; Amelia and her mother brought up the
rear together. There was no longer question of flight now; and poor Eames, before he knew what
he was doing, was carried down into the dining-room with the rest of the company. They were
all glad to see him, and welcomed him back warmly, but he was so much beside himself that he
could not ascertain whether Amelia's voice was joined with the others. He was already seated
at table, and had before him a plate of soup, before he recognised the fact that he was sitting
between Mrs Roper and Mrs Lupex. The latter lady had separated herself from Mr Cradell as she
entered the room. "Under all the circumstances perhaps it will be better for us to be apart,"
she said. "A lady can't make herself too safe; can she, Mrs Roper? There's no danger between
you and me, is there, Mr Eames,--specially when Miss Amelia is opposite?" The last words, however,
were intended to be whispered into his ear.

But Johnny made no answer to her; contenting himself for the moment with wiping the perspiration
from his brow. There was Amelia opposite to him, looking at him,--the very Amelia to whom he
had written, declining the honour of marrying her. Of what her mood towards him might be, he
could form no judgment from her looks. Her face was simply stern and impassive, and she seemed
inclined to eat her dinner in silence. A slight smile of derision had passed across her face
as she heard Mrs Lupex whisper, and it might have been discerned that her nose, at the same
time, became somewhat elevated; but she said not a word.

"I hope you've enjoyed yourself, Mr Eames, among the vernal beauties of the country," said
Mrs Lupex.

"Very much, thank you," he replied.

"There's nothing like the country at this autumnal season of the year. As for myself, I've
never been accustomed to remain in London after the breaking up of the beau monde. We've usually
been to Broadstairs, which is a very charming place, with most elegant society, but now--"
and she shook her head, by which all the company knew that she intended to allude to the sins
of Mr Lupex.

"I'd never wish to sleep out of London for my part," said Mrs Roper. "When a woman's got a
house over her head, I don't think her mind's ever easy out of it."

She had not intended any reflection on Mrs Lupex for not having a house of her own, but that
lady immediately bristled up. "That's just what the snails say, Mrs Roper. And as for having
a house of one's own, it's a very good thing, no doubt, sometimes; but that's according to
circumstances. It has suited me lately to live in lodgings, but there's no knowing whether
I mayn't fall lower than that yet, and have--" but here she stopped herself, and looking over
at Mr Cradell nodded her head.

"And have to let them," said Mrs Roper. "I hope you'll be more lucky with your lodgers than
I have been with some of mine. Jemima, hand the potatoes to Miss Spruce. Miss Spruce, do let
me send you a little more gravy? There's plenty here, really." Mrs Roper was probably thinking
of Mr Todgers.

"I hope I shall," said Mrs Lupex. "But, as I was saying, Broadstairs is delightful. Were you
ever at Broadstairs, Mr Cradell?"

"Never, Mrs Lupex. I generally go abroad in my leave. One sees more of the world, you know.
I was at Dieppe last June, and found that very delightful--though rather lonely. I shall go
to Ostend this year; only December is so late for Ostend. It was a deuced shame my getting
December, wasn't it, Johnny?"

"Yes, it was," said Eames. "I managed better."

"And what have you been doing, Mr Eames?" said Mrs Lupex, with one of her sweetest smiles.
"Whatever it may have been, you've not been false to the cause of beauty, I'm sure." And she
looked over to Amelia with a knowing smile. But Amelia was engaged upon her plate, and went
on with her dinner without turning her eyes either on Mrs Lupex or on John Eames.

"I haven't done anything particular," said Eames. "I've just been staying with my mother."

"We've been very social here, haven't we, Miss Amelia?" continued Mrs Lupex. "Only now and
then a cloud comes across the heavens, and the lights at the banquet are darkened." Then she
put her handkerchief up to her eyes, sobbing deeply, and they all knew that she was again alluding
to the sins of her husband.

As soon as dinner was over the ladies with young Mr Roper retired, and Eames and Cradell were
left to take their wine over the dining-room fire,--or their glass of gin and water, as it
might be. "Well, Caudle, old fellow," said one. "Well, Johnny, my boy," said the other. "What's
the news at the office?" said Eames.

"Muggeridge has been playing the very mischief." Muggeridge was the second clerk in Cradell's
room. "We're going to put him into Coventry and not speak to him except officially. But to
tell you the truth, my hands have been so full here at home, that I haven't thought much about
the office. What am I to do about that woman?"

"Do about her? How do about her?"

"Yes; what am I to do about her? How am I to manage with her? There's Lupex off again in one
of his fits of jealousy."

"But it's not your fault, I suppose?"

"Well; I can't just say. I am fond of her, and that's the long and the short of it; deuced
fond of her."

"But, my dear Caudle, you know she's that man's wife."

"Oh, yes, I know all about it. I'm not going to defend myself. It's wrong, I know,--pleasant,
but wrong. But what's a fellow to do? I suppose in strict morality I ought to leave the lodgings.
But, by George, I don't see why a man's to be turned out in that way. And then I couldn't make
a clean score with old mother Roper. But I say, old fellow, who gave you the gold chain?"

"Well; it was an old family friend at Guestwick; or rather, I should say, a man who said he
knew my father."

"And he gave you that because he knew your governor! Is there a watch to it?"

"Yes, there's a watch. It wasn't exactly that. There was some trouble about a bull. To tell
the truth, it was Lord De Guest; the queerest fellow, Caudle, you ever met in your life; but
such a trump. I've got to go and dine with him at Christmas." And then the old story of the
bull was told.

"I wish I could find a lord in a field with a bull," said Cradell. We may, however, be permitted
to doubt whether Mr Cradell would have earned a watch even if he had had his wish.

"You see," continued Cradell, reverting, to the subject on which he most delighted to talk,
"I'm not responsible for that man's ill-conduct."

"Does anybody say you are?"

"No; nobody says so. But people seem to think so. When he is by I hardly speak to her. She
is thoughtless and giddy as women are, and takes my arm, and that kind of thing, you know.
It makes him mad with rage, but upon my honour I don't think she means any harm."

"I don't suppose she does," said Eames.

"Well; she may or she mayn't. I hope with all my heart she doesn't."

"And where is he now?"

"This is between ourselves, you know; but she went to find him this afternoon. Unless he gives
her money she can't stay here, nor, for the matter of that, will she be able to go away. If
I mention something to you, you won't tell any one?"

"Of course I won't."

"I wouldn't have it known to any one for the world. I've lent her seven pounds ten. It's that
which makes me so short with mother Roper."

"Then I think you're a fool for your pains."

"Ah, that's so like you. I always said you'd no feeling of real romance. If I cared for a woman
I'd give her the coat off my back."

"I'd do better than that," said Johnny. "I'd give her the heart out of my body. I'd be chopped
up alive for a girl I loved; but it shouldn't be for another man's wife."

"That's a matter of taste. But she's been to Lupex to-day at that house he goes to in Drury
Lane. She had a terrible scene there. He was going to commit suicide in the middle of the street,
and she declares that it all comes from jealousy. Think what a time I have of it--standing
always, as one may say, on gunpowder. He may turn up here any moment, you know. But, upon my
word, for the life of me I cannot desert her. If I were to turn my back on her she wouldn't
have a friend in the world. And how's L. D.? I'll tell you what it is--you'll have some trouble
with the divine Amelia."

"Shall I?"

"By Jove, you will. But how's L. D. all this time?"

"L. D. is engaged to be married to a man named Adolphus Crosbie," said poor Johnny, slowly.
"If you please, we will not say any more about her."

"Whew--w--w! That's what makes you so down in the mouth! L. D. going to marry Crosbie! Why,
that's the man who is to be the new secretary at the General Committee Office. Old Huffle Scuffle,
who was their chair, has come to us, you know. There's been a general move at the G. C., and
this Crosbie has got to be secretary. He's a lucky chap, isn't he?"

"I don't know anything about his luck. He's one of those fellows that make me hate them the
first time I look at them. I've a sort of a feeling that I shall live to kick him some day."

"That's the time, is it? Then I suppose Amelia will have it all her own way now."

"I'll tell you what, Caudle. I'd sooner get up through the trap-door, and throw myself off
the roof into the area, than marry Amelia Roper."

"Have you and she had any conversation since you came back?"

"Not a word."

"Then I tell you fairly you've got trouble before you. Amelia and Maria,--Mrs Lupex, I mean,--are
as thick as thieves just at present, and they have been talking you over. Maria,--that is,
Mrs Lupex,--lets it all out to me. You'll have to mind where you are, old fellow."

Eames was not inclined to discuss the matter any further, so he finished his toddy in silence.
Cradell, however, who felt that there was something in his affairs of which he had reason to
be proud, soon returned to the story of his own very extraordinary position. "By Jove, I don't
know that a man was ever so circumstanced," he said. "She looks to me to protect her, and yet
what can I do?"

At last Cradell got up, and declared that he must go to the ladies. "She's so nervous, that
unless she has some one to countenance her she becomes unwell."

Eames declared his purpose of going to the divan, or to the theatre, or to take a walk in the
streets. The smiles of beauty had no longer charms for him in Burton Crescent.

"They'll expect you to take a cup of tea the first night," said Cradell; but Eames declared
that they might expect it.

"I'm in no humour for it," said he. "I'll tell you what, Cradell, I shall leave this place,
and take rooms for myself somewhere. I'll never go into a lodging-house again."

As he so spoke, he was standing at the dining-room door; but he was not allowed to escape in
this easy way. Jemima, as he went out into the passage, was there with a three-cornered note
in her hand. "From Miss Mealyer," she said. "Miss Mealyer is in the back parlour all by herself."

Poor Johnny took the note, and read it by the lamp over the front door.

"Are you not going to speak to me on the day of your return? It cannot be that you will leave
the house without seeing me for a moment. I am in the back parlour."

When he had read these words, he paused in the passage, with his hat on. Jemima, who could
not understand why any young man should hesitate as to seeing his lady-love in the back parlour
alone, whispered to him again, in her audible way, "Miss Mealyer is there, sir; and all the
rest on 'em's upstairs!" So compelled, Eames put down his hat, and walked with slow steps into
the back parlour.

How was it to be with the enemy? Was he to encounter Amelia in anger, or Amelia in love? She
had seemed to be stern and defiant when he had ventured to steal a look at her across the dining-table,
and now he expected that she would turn upon him with loud threatenings and protestations as
to her wrongs. But it was not so. When he entered the room she was standing with her back to
him, leaning on the mantel-piece, and at the first moment she did not essay to peak. He walked
into the middle of the room and stood there, waiting for her to begin.

"Shut the door!" she said, looking over her shoulder. "I suppose you don't want the girl to
hear all you've got to say to me!"

Then he shut the door; but still Amelia stood with her back to him, leaning upon the mantel-piece.

It did not seem that he had much to say, for he remained perfectly silent.

"Well!" said Amelia, after a long pause, and she then again looked over her shoulder. "Well,
Mr Eames!"

"Jemima gave me your note, and so I've come," said he.

"And is this the way we meet!" she exclaimed, turning suddenly upon him, and throwing her long
black hair back over her shoulders. There certainly was some beauty about her. Her eyes were
large and bright, and her shoulders were well turned. She might have done as an artist's model
for a Judith, but I doubt whether any man, looking well into her face, could think that she
would do well as a wife. "Oh, John, is it to be thus, after love such as ours?" And she clasped
her hands together, and stood before him.

"I don't know what you mean," said Eames.

"If you are engaged to marry L. D., tell me so at once. Be a man, and speak out, sir."

"No," said Eames; "I am not engaged to marry the lady to whom you allude."

"On your honour?"

"I won't have her spoken about. I'm not going to marry her, and that's enough."

"Do you think that I wish to speak of her? What can L. D. be to me as long as she is nothing
to you? Oh, Johnny, why did you write me that heartless letter?" Then she leaned upon his shoulder--or
attempted to do so.

I cannot say that Eames shook her off, seeing that he lacked the courage to do so; but he shuffled
his shoulder about so that the support was uneasy to her, and she was driven to stand erect
again. "Why did you write that cruel letter?" she said again.

"Because I thought it best, Amelia. What's a man to do with ninety pounds a year, you know?"

"But your mother allows you twenty."

"And what's a man to do with a hundred and ten?"

"Rising five pounds every year," said the well-informed Amelia. "Of course we should live here,
with mamma, and you would just go on paying her as you do now. If your heart was right, Johnny,
you wouldn't think so much about money. If you loved me--as you said you did--" Then a little
sob came, and the words were stopped. The words were stopped, but she was again upon his shoulder.
What was he to do? In truth, his only wish was to escape, and yet his arm, quite in opposition
to his own desires, found its way round her waist. In such a combat a woman has so many points
in her favour! "Oh, Johnny," she said again, as soon as she felt the pressure of his arm. "Gracious,
what a beautiful watch you've got," and she took the trinket out of his pocket. "Did you buy that?"

"No; it was given to me."

"John Eames, did L. D. give it you?"

"No, no, no," he shouted, stamping on the floor as he spoke.

"Oh, I beg your pardon," said Amelia, quelled for the moment by his energy. "Perhaps it was
your mother."

"No; it was a man. Never mind about the watch now."

"I wouldn't mind anything, Johnny, if you would tell me that you loved me again. Perhaps I
oughtn't to ask you, and it isn't becoming in a lady; but how can I help it, when you know
you've got my heart. Come upstairs and have tea with us now, won't you?"

What was he to do? He said that he would go up and have tea; and as he led her to the door
he put down his face and kissed her. Oh, Johnny Eames! But then a woman in such a contest has
so many points in her favour.

CHAPTER XXX

"Is It from Him?"

I have already declared that Crosbie wrote and posted the fatal letter to Allington, and we
must now follow it down to that place. On the morning following the squire's return to his
own house, Mrs Crump, the post-mistress at Allington, received a parcel by post directed to
herself. She opened it, and found an enclosure addressed to Mrs Dale, with a written request
that she would herself deliver it into that lady's own hand at once. This was Crosbie's letter.

"It's from Miss Lily's gentleman," said Mrs Crump, looking at the handwriting. "There's 'something
up, or he wouldn't be writing to her mamma in this way." But Mrs Crump lost no time in putting
on her bonnet, and trudging up with the letter to the Small House. "I must see the missus herself,"
said Mrs Crump. Whereupon Mrs Dale was called downstairs into the hall, and there received
the packet. Lily was in the breakfast-parlour, and had seen the post-mistress arrive;--had
seen also that she carried a letter in her hand. For a moment she had thought that it was for
her, and imagined that the old woman had brought it herself from simple good-nature. But Lily,
when she heard her mother mentioned, instantly withdrew and shut the parlour door. Her heart
misgave her that something was wrong, but she hardly tried to think what it might be. After
all, the regular postman might bring the letter she herself expected. Bell was not yet downstairs,
and she stood alone over the tea-cups on the breakfast-table, feeling that there was something
for her to fear. Her mother did not come at once into the room, but, after a pause of a moment
or two, went again upstairs. So she remained, either standing against the table, or at the
window, or seated in one of the two arm-chairs, for a space of ten minutes, when Bell entered
the room.

"Isn't mamma down yet?" said Bell.

"Bell," said Lily, "something has happened. Mamma has got a letter."

"Happened! What has happened? Is anybody ill? Who is the letter from?" And Bell was going to
return through the door in search of her mother.

"Stop, Bell," said Lily. "Do not go to her yet. I think it's from--Adolphus."

"Oh, Lily, what do you mean?"

"I don't know, dear. We'll wait a little longer. Don't look like that, Bell." And Lily strove
to appear calm, and strove almost successfully.

"You have frightened me so," said Bell.

"I am frightened myself. He only sent me one line yesterday, and now he has sent nothing. If
some misfortune should have happened to him! Mrs Crump brought down the letter herself to mamma,
and that is so odd, you know."

"Are you sure it was from him?"

"No; I have not spoken to her. I will go up to her now. Don't you come, Bell. Oh! Bell, do
not look so unhappy." She then went over and kissed her sister, and after that, with very gentle
steps, made her way up to her mother's room. "Mamma, may I come in?" she said.

"Oh! my child!"

"I know it is from him, mamma. Tell me all at once."

Mrs Dale had read the letter. With quick, glancing eyes, she had made herself mistress of its
whole contents, and was already aware of the nature and extent of the sorrow which had come
upon them. It was a sorrow that admitted of no hope. The man who had written that letter could
never return again; nor if he should return could he be welcomed back to them. The blow had
fallen, and it was to be borne. Inside the letter to herself had been a very small note addressed
to Lily. "Give her the enclosed," Crosbie had said in his letter, "if you do not now think
it wrong to do so. I have left it open, that you may read it." Mrs Dale, however, had not yet
read it, and she now concealed it beneath her handkerchief.

I will not repeat at length Crosbie's letter to Mrs Dale. It covered four sides of letter-paper,
and was such a letter that any man who wrote it must have felt himself to be a rascal. We saw
that he had difficulty in writing it, but the miracle was, that any man could have found it
possible to write it. "I know you will curse me," said he; "and I deserve to be cursed. I know
that I shall be punished for this, and I must bear my punishment. My worst punishment will
be this, that I never more shall hold up my head again." And then, again, he said:--"My only
excuse is my conviction that I should never make her happy. She has been brought up as an angel,
with pure thoughts, with holy hopes, with a belief in all that is good, and high, and noble.
I have been surrounded through my whole life by things low, and mean, and ignoble. How could
I live with her, or she with me? I know now that this is so; but my fault has been that I did
not know it when I was there with her. I choose to tell you all," he continued, towards the
end of the letter, "and therefore I let you know that I have engaged myself to marry another
woman. Ah! I can foresee how bitter will be your feelings when you read this: but they will
not be so bitter as mine while I write it. Yes; I am already engaged to one who will suit me,
and whom I may suit. You will not expect me to speak ill of her who is to be near and dear
to me. But she is one with whom I may mate myself without an inward conviction that I shall
destroy all her happiness by doing so. Lilian," he said, "shall always have my prayers; and
I trust that she may soon forget, in the love of an honest man, that she ever knew one so dishonest
as--Adolphus Crosbie."

Of what like must have been his countenance as he sat writing such words of himself under the
ghastly light of his own small, solitary lamp? Had he written his letter at his office, in
the day-time, with men coming in and out of his room, he could hardly have written of himself
so plainly. He would have bethought himself that the written words might remain, and be read
hereafter by other eyes than those for which they were intended. But, as he sat alone, during
the small hours of the night, almost repenting of his sin with true repentance, he declared
to himself that he did not care who might read them. They should, at any rate, be true. Now
they had been read by her to whom they had been addressed, and the daughter was standing before
the mother to hear her doom.

"Tell me all at once," Lily had said; but in what words was her mother to tell her?

"Lily," she said, rising from her seat, and leaving the two letters on the couch; that addressed
to the daughter was hidden beneath a handkerchief, but that which she had read she left open
and in sight. She took both the girl's hands in hers as she looked into her face, and spoke
to her. "Lily, my child!" Then she burst into sobs, and was unable to tell her tale.

"Is it from him, mamma? May I read it? He cannot be--"

"It is from Mr Crosbie."

"Is he ill, mamma? Tell me at once. If he is ill I will go to him."

"No, my darling, he is not ill. Not yet;--do not read it yet. Oh, Lily! It brings bad news;
very bad news."

"Mamma, if he is not in danger, I can read it. Is it bad to him, or only bad to me?"

At this moment the servant knocked, and not waiting for an answer half opened the door.

"If you please, ma'am, Mr Bernard is below, and wants to speak to you."

"Mr Bernard! ask Miss Bell to see him."

"Miss Bell is with him, ma'am, but he says that he specially wants to speak to you."

Mrs Dale felt that she could not leave Lily alone. She could not take the letter away, nor
could she leave her child with the letter open.

"I cannot see him," said Mrs Dale. "Ask him what it is. Tell him I cannot come down just at
present." And then the servant went, and Bernard left his message with Bell.

"Bernard," she had said, "do you know of anything? Is there anything wrong about Mr Crosbie?"
Then, in a few words, he told her all, and understanding why his aunt had not come down to
him, he went back to the Great House. Bell, almost stupefied by the tidings, seated herself
at the table unconsciously, leaning upon her elbows.

"It will kill her," she said to herself. "My Lily, my darling Lily! It will surely kill her!"

But the mother was still with the daughter, and the story was still untold.

"Mamma," said Lily, "whatever it is, I must, of course, be made to know it. I begin to guess
the truth. It will pain you to say it. Shall I read the letter?"

Mrs Dale was astonished at her calmness. It could not be that she had guessed the truth, or
she would not stand like that, with tearless eyes and unquelled courage before her.

"You shall read it, but I ought to tell you first. Oh, my child, my own one!" Lily was now
leaning against the bed, and her mother was standing over her, caressing her.

"Then tell me," said she. "But I know what it is. He has thought it all over while away from
me, and he finds that it must not be as we have supposed. Before he went I offered to release
him, and now he knows that he had better accept my offer. Is it so, mamma?" In answer to this
Mrs Dale did not speak, but Lily understood from her signs that it was so.

"He might have written it to me, myself," said Lily very proudly. "Mamma, we will go down to
breakfast. He has sent nothing to me, then?"

"There is a note. He bids me read it, but I have not opened it. It is here."

"Give it me," said Lily, almost sternly. "Let me have his last words to me;" and she took the
note from her mother's hands.

"Lily," said the note, "your mother will have told you all. Before you read these few words
you will know that you have trusted one who was quite untrustworthy. I know that you will hate
me. I cannot even ask you to forgive me. You will let me pray that you may yet be happy.--A. C."

She read these few words, still leaning against the bed. Then she got up, and walking to a
chair, seated herself with her back to her mother. Mrs Dale moving silently after her stood
over the back of the chair, not daring to speak to her. So she sat for some five minutes, with
her eyes fixed upon the open window, and with Crosbie's note in her hand.

"I will not hate him, and I do forgive him," she said at last, struggling to command her voice,
and hardly showing that she could not altogether succeed in her attempt. "I may not write to
him again, but you shall write and tell him so. Now we will go down to breakfast." And so saying,
she got up from her chair.

Mrs Dale almost feared to speak to her, her composure was so complete, and her manner so stern
and fixed. She hardly knew how to offer pity and sympathy, seeing that pity seemed to be so
little necessary, and that even sympathy was not demanded. And she could not understand all
that Lily had said. What had she meant by the offer to release him? Had there, then, been some
quarrel between them before he went? Crosbie had made no such allusion in his letter. But Mrs
Dale did not dare to ask any questions.

"You frighten me, Lily," she said. "Your very calmness frightens me."

"Dear mamma!" and the poor girl absolutely smiled a she embraced her mother. "You need not
be frightened by my calmness. I know the truth well. I have been very unfortunate;--very. The
brightest hopes of my life are all gone;--and I shall never again see him whom I love beyond
all the world!" Then at last she broke down, and wept in her mother's arms.

There was not a word of anger spoken then against him who had done all this. Mrs Dale felt
that she did not dare to speak in anger against him, and words of anger were not likely to
come from poor Lily. She, indeed, hitherto did not know the whole of his offence, for she had
not read his letter.

"Give it me, mamma," she said at last. "It has to be done sooner or later."

"Not now, Lily. I have told you all--all that you need know at present."

"Yes; now, mamma," and again that sweet silvery voice became stern. "I will read it now, and
there shall be an end." Whereupon Mrs Dale gave her the letter and she read it in silence.
Her mother, though standing somewhat behind her, watched her narrowly as she did so. She was
now lying over upon the bed, and the letter was on the pillow, as she propped herself upon
her arm. Her tears were running, and ever and again she would stop to dry her eyes. Her sobs,
too, were very audible, but she went on steadily with her reading till she came to the line
on which Crosbie told that he had already engaged himself to another woman. Then her mother
could see that she paused suddenly, and that a shudder slightly convulsed all her limbs.

"He has been very quick," she said, almost in a whisper; and then she finished the letter.
"Tell him, mamma," she said, "that I do forgive him, and I will not hate him. You will tell
him that,--from me; will you not?" And then she raised herself from the bed.

Mrs Dale would give her no such assurance. In her present mood her feelings against Crosbie
were of a nature which she herself hardly could understand or analyse. She felt that if he
were present she could almost fly at him as would a tigress. She had never hated before as
she now hated this man. He was to her a murderer, and worse than a murderer. He had made his
way like a wolf into her little fold, and torn her ewe-lamb and left her maimed and mutilated
for life. How could a mother forgive such an offence as that, or consent to be the medium through
which forgiveness should be expressed?

"You must, mamma; or, if you do not, I shall do so. Remember that I love him. You know what
it is to have loved one single man. He has made me very unhappy; I hardly know yet how unhappy.
But I have loved him, and do love him. I believe, in my heart, that he still loves me. Where
this has been there must not be hatred and unforgiveness."

"I will pray that I may become able to forgive him," said Mrs Dale.

"But you must write to him those words. Indeed you must, mamma! 'She bids me tell you that
she has forgiven you, and will not hate you.' Promise me that!"

"I can make no promise now, Lily. I will think about it, and endeavour to do my duty."

Lily was now seated, and was holding the skirt of her mother's dress.

"Mamma," she said, looking up into her mother's face, "you must be very good to me now; and
I must be very good to you. We shall be always together now. I must be your friend and counsellor;
and be everything to you, more than ever. I must fall in love with you now;" and she smiled
again, and the tears were almost dry upon her cheeks.

At last they went down to the breakfast-room, from which Bell had not moved. Mrs Dale entered
the room first, and Lily followed, hiding herself for a moment behind her mother. Then she
came forward boldly, and taking Bell in her arms, clasped her close to her bosom.

"Bell," she said, "he has gone."

"Lily! Lily! Lily!" said Bell, weeping.

"He has gone! We shall talk it over in a few days, and shall know how to do so without losing
ourselves in misery. To-day we will say no more about it. I am so thirsty, Bell; do give me
my tea;" and she sat herself down at the breakfast-table.

Lily's tea was given to her, and she drank it. Beyond that I cannot say that any of them partook
with much heartiness of the meal. They sat there, as they would have sat if no terrible thunderbolt
had fallen among them, and no word further was spoken about Crosbie and his conduct. Immediately
after breakfast they went into the other room, and Lily, as was her wont, sat herself immediately
down to her drawing. Her mother looked at her with wistful eyes, longing to bid her spare herself,
but she shrank from interfering with her. For a quarter of an hour Lily sat over her board,
with her brush or pencil in her hand, and then she rose up and put it away.

"It is no good pretending," she said. "I am only spoiling the things; but I will be better
to-morrow. I'll go away and lie down by myself, mamma." And so she went.

Soon after this Mrs Dale took her bonnet and went up to the Great House, having received her
brother-in-law's message from Bell.

"I know what he has to tell me," she said; "but I might as well go. It will be necessary that
we should speak to each other about it." So she walked across the lawn, and up into the hall
of the Great House. "Is my brother in the book-room?" she said to one of the maids; and then
knocking at the door, went in unannounced.

The squire rose from his arm-chair, and came forward to meet her.

"Mary," he said, "I believe you know it all."

"Yes," she said. "You can read that," and she handed him Crosbie's letter. "How was one to
know that any man could be so wicked as that?"

"And she has heard it?" asked the squire. "Is she able to bear it?"

"Wonderfully! She has amazed me by her strength. It frightens me; for I know that a relapse
must come. She has never sunk for a moment beneath it. For myself, I feel as though it were
her strength that enables me to bear my share of it." And then she described to the squire
all that had taken place that morning.

"Poor child!" said the squire. "Poor child! What can we do for her? Would it be good for her
to go away for a time? She is a sweet, good, lovely girl, and has deserved better than that.
Sorrow and disappointment come to us all; but they are doubly heavy when they come so early."

Mrs Dale was almost surprised at the amount of sympathy which he showed.

"And what is to be his punishment?" she asked.

"The scorn which men and women will feel for him; those, at least, whose esteem or scorn are
matters of concern to any one. I know no other punishment. You would not have Lily's name brought
before a tribunal of law?"

"Certainly not that."

"And I will not have Bernard calling him out. Indeed, it would be for nothing; for in these
days a man is not expected to fight duels."

"You cannot think that I would wish that."

"What punishment is there, then? I know of none. There are evils which a man may do, and no
one can punish him. I know of nothing. I went up to London after him, but he contrived to crawl
out of my way. What can you do to a rat but keep clear of him?"

Mrs Dale had felt in her heart that it would be well if Crosbie could be beaten till all his
bones were sore. I hardly know whether such should have been a woman's thought, but it was
hers. She had no wish that he should be made to fight a duel. In that there would have been
much that was wicked, and in her estimation nothing that was just. But she felt that if Bernard
would thrash the coward for his cowardice she would love her nephew better than ever she had
loved him. Bernard also had considered it probable that he might be expected to horsewhip the
man who had jilted his cousin, and, as regarded the absolute bodily risk, he would not have
felt any insuperable objection to undertake the task. But such a piece of work was disagreeable
to him in many ways. He hated the idea of a row at his club. He was most desirous that his
cousin's name should not be made public. He wished to avoid anything that might be impolitic.
A wicked thing had been done, and he was quite ready to hate Crosbie as Crosbie ought to be
hated; but as regarded himself, it made him unhappy to think that the world might probably
expect him to punish the man who had so lately been his friend. And then he did not know where
to catch him, or how to thrash him when caught. He was very sorry for his cousin, and felt
strongly that Crosbie should not be allowed to escape. But what was he to do?

"Would she like to go anywhere?" said the squire again, anxious, if he could, to afford solace
by some act of generosity. At this moment he would have settled a hundred a year for life upon
his niece if by so doing he could have done her any good.

"She will be better at home," said Mrs Dale. "Poor thing. For a while she will wish to avoid
going out."

"I suppose so;" and then there was a pause. "I'll tell you what, Mary; I don't understand it.
On my honour I don't understand it. It is to me as wonderful as though I had caught the man
picking my pence out of my pocket. I don't think any man in the position of a gentleman would
have done such a thing when I was young. I don't think any man would have dared to do it. But
now it seems that a man may act in that way and no harm come to him. He had a friend in London
who came to me and talked about it as though it were some ordinary, everyday transaction of
life. Yes; you may come in, Bernard. The poor child knows it all now."

Bernard offered to his aunt what of solace and sympathy he had to offer, and made some sort
of half-expressed apology for having introduced this wolf into their flock. "We always thought
very much of him at his club," said Bernard.

"I don't know much about your London clubs nowadays," said his uncle, "nor do I wish to do
so if the society of that man can be endured after what he has now done."

"I don't suppose half-a-dozen men will ever know anything about it," said Bernard.

"Umph!" ejaculated the squire. He could not say that he wished Crosbie's villainy to be widely
discussed, seeing that Lily's name was so closely connected with it. But yet he could not support
the idea that Crosbie should not be punished by the frown of the world at large. It seemed
to him that from this time forward any man speaking to Crosbie should be held to have disgraced
himself by so doing.

"Give her my best love," he said, as Mrs Dale got up to take her leave; "my very best love.
If her old uncle can do anything for her she has only to let me know. She met the man in my
house, and I feel that I owe her much. Bid her come and see me. It will be better for her than
moping at home. And Mary"--this he said to her, whispering into her ear--"think of what I said
to you about Bell."

Mrs Dale, as she walked back to her own house, acknowledged to herself that her brother-in-law's
manner was different to her from anything that she had hitherto known of him.

During the whole of that day Crosbie's name was not mentioned at the Small House. Neither of
the girls stirred out, and Bell spent the greater part of the afternoon sitting, with her arm
round her sister's waist, upon the sofa. Each of them had a book; but though there was little
spoken, there was as little read. Who can describe the thoughts that were passing through Lily's
mind as she remembered the hours which she had passed with Crosbie, of his warm assurances
of love, of his accepted caresses, of her uncontrolled and acknowledged joy in his affection?
It had all been holy to her then; and now those things which were then sacred had been made
almost disgraceful by his fault. And yet as she thought of this she declared to herself over
and over again that she would forgive him;--nay, that she had forgiven him. "And he shall know
it, too," she said, speaking almost out loud.

"Lily, dear Lily," said Bell, "turn your thoughts away from it for a while, if you can."

"They won't go away," said Lily. And that was all that was said between them on the subject.

Everybody would know it! I doubt whether that must not be one of the bitterest drops in the
cup which a girl in such circumstances is made to drain. Lily perceived early in the day that
the parlour-maid well knew that she had been jilted. The girl's manner was intended to convey
sympathy; but it did convey pity; and Lily for a moment felt angry. But she remembered that
it must be so, and smiled upon the girl, and spoke kindly to her. What mattered it? All the
world would know it in a day or two.

On the following day she went up, by her mother's advice, to see her uncle.

"My child," said he, "I am sorry for you. My heart bleeds for you."

"Uncle," she said, "do not mind it. Only do this for me--do not talk about it,--I mean to me."

"No, no; I will not. That there should ever have been in my house so great a rascal--"

"Uncle! uncle! I will not have that! I will not listen to a word against him from any human
being,--not a word! Remember that!" And her eyes flashed as she spoke.

He did not answer her, but took her hand and pressed it, and then she left him. "The Dales
were ever constant!" he said to himself, as he walked up and down the terrace before his house.
"Ever constant!"

CHAPTER XXXI

The Wounded Fawn

Nearly two months passed away, and it was now Christmas time at Allington. It may be presumed
that there was no intention at either house that the mirth should be very loud. Such a wound
as that received by Lily Dale was one from which recovery could not be quick, and it was felt
by all the family that a weight was upon them which made gaiety impracticable. As for Lily
herself it may be said that she bore her misfortune with all a woman's courage. For the first
week she stood up as a tree that stands against the wind, which is soon to be shivered to pieces
because it will not bend. During that week her mother and sister were frightened by her calmness
and endurance. She would perform her daily task. She would go out through the village, and
appear at her place in church on the first Sunday. She would sit over her book of an evening,
keeping back her tears; and would chide her mother and sister when she found that they were
regarding her with earnest anxiety.

"Mamma, let it all be as though it had never been," she said.

"Ah, dear! if that were but possible!"

"God forbid that it should be possible inwardly," Lily replied, "but it is possible outwardly.
I feel that you are more tender to me than you used to be, and that upsets me. If you would
only scold me because I am idle, I should soon be better." But her mother could not speak to
her as she perhaps might have spoken had no grief fallen upon her pet. She could not cease
from those anxious tender glances which made Lily know that she was looked on as a fawn wounded
almost to death.

At the end of the first week she gave way. "I won't get up, Bell," she said one morning, almost
petulantly. "I am ill;--I had better lie here out of the way. Don't make a fuss about it. I'm
stupid and foolish, and that makes me ill."

Thereupon Mrs Dale and Bell were frightened, and looked into each other's blank faces, remembering
stories of poor broken-hearted girls who had died because their loves had been unfortunate,--as
small wax tapers whose lights are quenched if a breath of wind blows upon then too strongly.
But then Lily was in truth no such slight taper as that. Nor was she the stem that must be
broken because it will not bend. She bent herself to the blast during that week of illness,
and then arose with her form still straight and graceful, and with her bright light unquenched.

After that she would talk more openly to her mother about her loss,--openly and with a true
appreciation of the misfortune which had befallen her; but with an assurance of strength which
seemed to ridicule the idea of a broken heart. "I know that I can bear it," she said, "and
that I can bear it without lasting unhappiness. Of course I shall always love him, and must
feel almost as you felt when you lost my father."

In answer to this Mrs Dale could say nothing. She could not speak out her thoughts about Crosbie,
and explain to Lily that he was unworthy of her love. Love does not follow worth, and is not
given to excellence;--nor is it destroyed by ill-usage, nor killed by blows and mutilation.
When Lily declared that she still loved the man who had so ill-used her, Mrs Dale would be
silent. Each perfectly understood the other, but on that matter even they could not interchange
their thoughts with freedom.

"You must promise never to be tired of me, mamma," said Lily.

"Mothers do not often get tired of their children, whatever the children may do of their mothers."

"I'm not so sure of that when the children turn out old maids. And I mean to have a will of
my own, too, mamma; and a way also, if it be possible. When Bell is married I shall consider
it a partnership, and I shan't do what I'm told any longer."

"Forewarned will be forearmed."

"Exactly;--and I don't want to take you by surprise. For a year or two longer, till Bell is
gone, I mean to be dutiful; but it would be very stupid for a girl to be dutiful all her life."

All of which Mrs Dale understood thoroughly. It amounted to an assertion on Lily's part that
she had loved once and could never love again; that she had played her game, hoping, as other
girls hope, that she might win the prize of a husband; but that, having lost, she could never
play the game again. It was that inward conviction on Lily's part which made her say such words
to her mother. But Mrs Dale would by no means allow herself to share this conviction. She declared
to herself that time would cure Lily's wound, and that her child might yet be crowned by the
bliss of a happy marriage. She would not in her heart consent to that plan in accordance with
which Lily's destiny in life was to be regarded as already fixed. She had never really liked
Crosbie as a suitor, and would herself have preferred John Eames, with all the faults of his
hobbledehoyhood on his head. It might yet come to pass that John Eames's love might be made happy.

But in the meantime Lily, as I have said, had become strong in her courage, and recommenced
the work of living with no lackadaisical self-assurance that because she had been made more
unhappy than others, therefore she should allow herself to be more idle. Morning and night
she prayed for him, and daily, almost hour by hour, she assured herself that it was still her
duty to love him. It was hard, this duty of loving, without any power of expressing such love.
But still she would do her duty.

"Tell me at once, mamma," she said one morning, "when you hear that the day is fixed for his
marriage. Pray don't keep me in the dark."

"It is to be in February," said Mrs Dale.

"But let me know the day. It must not be to me like ordinary days. But do not look unhappy,
mamma; I am not going to make a fool of myself. I shan't steal off and appear in the church
like a ghost." And then, having uttered her little joke, a sob came, and she hid her face on
her mother's bosom. In a moment she raised it again. "Believe me, mamma, that I am not unhappy,"
she said.

After the expiration of that second week Mrs Dale did write a letter to Crosbie:

   I suppose [she said] it is right that I should acknowledge
   the receipt of your letter. I do not know that I have aught
   else to say to you. It would not become me as a woman to
   say what I think of your conduct, but I believe that your
   conscience will tell you the same things. If it do not, you
   must, indeed, be hardened. I have promised my child that I
   will send to you a message from her. She bids me tell you
   that she has forgiven you, and that she does not hate you.
   May God also forgive you, and may you recover his love.

   MARY DALE.

   I beg that no rejoinder may be made to this letter, either
   to myself or to any of my family.

The squire wrote no answer to the letter which he had received, nor did he take any steps towards
the immediate punishment of Crosbie. Indeed he had declared that no such steps could be taken,
explaining to his nephew that such a man could be served only as one serves a rat.

"I shall never see him," he said once again; "if I did, I should not scruple to hit him on
the head with my stick; but I should think ill of myself to go after him with such an object."

And yet it was a terrible sorrow to the old man that the scoundrel who had so injured him and
his should escape scot-free. He had not forgiven Crosbie. No idea of forgiveness had ever crossed
his mind. He would have hated himself had he thought it possible that he could be induced to
forgive such an injury. "There is an amount of rascality in it,--of low meanness, which I do
not understand," he would say over and over again to his nephew. And then as he would walk
alone on the terrace he would speculate within his own mind whether Bernard would take any
steps towards avenging his cousin's injury. "He is right," he would say to himself; "Bernard
is quite right. But when I was young I could not have stood it. In those days a gentleman might
have a fellow out who had treated him as he has treated us. A man was satisfied in feeling
that he had done something. I suppose the world is different nowadays." The world is different;
but the squire by no means acknowledged in his heart that there had been any improvement.

Bernard also was greatly troubled in his mind. He would have had no objection to fight a duel
with Crosbie, had duels in these days been possible. But he believed them to be no longer possible,
at any rate without ridicule. And if he could not fight the man, in what other way was he to
punish him? Was it not the fact that for such a fault the world afforded no punishment? Was
it not in the power of a man like Crosbie to amuse himself for a week or two at the expense
of a girl's happiness for life, and then to escape absolutely without any ill effects to himself?
"I shall be barred out of my club lest I should meet him," Bernard said to himself, "but he
will not be barred out." Moreover, there was a feeling within him that the matter would be
one of triumph to Crosbie rather than otherwise. In having secured for himself the pleasure
of his courtship with such a girl as Lily Dale, without encountering the penalty usually consequent
upon such amusement, he would be held by many as having merited much admiration. He had sinned
against all the Dales, and yet the suffering arising from his sin was to fall upon the Dales
exclusively. Such was Bernard's reasoning, as he speculated on the whole affair, sadly enough,--wishing
to be avenged, but not knowing where to look for vengeance. For myself I believe him to have
been altogether wrong as to the light in which he supposed that Crosbie's falsehood would be
regarded by Crosbie's friends. Men will still talk of such things lightly, professing that
all is fair in love as it is in war, and speaking almost with envy of the good fortunes of
a practised deceiver. But I have never come across the man who thought in this way with reference
to an individual case. Crosbie's own judgment as to the consequences to himself of what he
had done was more correct than that formed by Bernard Dale. He had regarded the act as venial
as long as it was still to do,--while it was still within his power to leave it undone; but
from the moment of its accomplishment it had forced itself upon his own view in its proper
light. He knew that he had been a scoundrel, and he knew that other men would so think of him.
His friend Fowler Pratt, who had the reputation of looking at women simply as toys, had so
regarded him. Instead of boasting of what he had done, he was as afraid of alluding to any
matter connected with his marriage as a man is of talking of the articles which he has stolen.
He had already felt that men at his club looked askance at him; and, though he was no coward
as regarded his own skin and bones, he had an undefined fear lest some day he might encounter
Bernard Dale purposely armed with a stick. The squire and his nephew were wrong in supposing
that Crosbie was unpunished.

And as the winter came on he felt that he was closely watched by the noble family of de Courcy.
Some of that noble family he had already learned to hate cordially. The Honourable John came
up to town in November, and persecuted him vilely;--insisted on having dinners given to him
at Sebright's, of smoking throughout the whole afternoon in his future brother-in-law's rooms,
and on borrowing his future brother-in-law's possessions; till at last Crosbie determined that
it would be wise to quarrel with the Honourable John,--and he quarrelled with him accordingly,
turning him out of his rooms, and telling him in so many words that he would have no more to
do with him.

"You'll have to do it, as I did," Mortimer Gazebee had said to him; "I didn't like it because
of the family, but Lady Amelia told me that it must be so." Whereupon Crosbie took the advice
of Mortimer Gazebee.

But the hospitality of the Gazebees was perhaps more distressing to him than even the importunities
of the Honourable John. It seemed as though his future sister-in-law was determined not to
leave him alone. Mortimer was sent to fetch him up for the Sunday afternoons, and he found
that he was constrained to go to the villa in St. John's Wood, even in opposition to his own
most strenuous will. He could not quite analyse the circumstances of his own position, but
he felt as though he were a cock with his spurs cut off,--as a dog with his teeth drawn. He
found himself becoming humble and meek. He had to acknowledge to himself that he was afraid
of Lady Amelia, and almost even afraid of Mortimer Gazebee. He was aware that they watched
him, and knew all his goings out and comings in. They called him Adolphus, and made him tame.
That coming evil day in February was dinned into his ears. Lady Amelia would go and look at
furniture for him, and talked by the hour about bedding and sheets. "You had better get your
kitchen things at Tomkins'. They're all good, and he'll give you ten per cent. off if you pay
him ready money,--which, of course, you will, you know!" Was it for this that he had sacrificed
Lily Dale?--for this that he had allied himself with the noble house of de Courcy?

Mortimer had been at him about the settlements from the very first moment of his return to
London, and had already bound him up hand and foot. His life was insured, and the policy was
in Mortimer's hands. His own little bit of money had been already handed over to be tied up
with Lady Alexandrina's little bit. It seemed to him that in all the arrangements made the
intention was that he should die off speedily, and that Lady Alexandrina should be provided
with a decent little income, sufficient for St. John's Wood. Things were to be so settled that
he could not even spend the proceeds of his own money, or of hers. They were to go, under the
fostering hands of Mortimer Gazebee, in paying insurances. If he would only die the day after
his marriage, there would really be a very nice sum of money for Alexandrina, almost worthy
of the acceptance of an earl's daughter. Six months ago he would have considered himself able
to turn Mortimer Gazebee round his finger on any subject that could be introduced between them.
When they chanced to meet Gazebee had been quite humble to him, treating him almost as a superior
being. He had looked down on Gazebee from a very great height. But now it seemed as though
he were powerless in this man's hands.

But perhaps the countess had become his greatest aversion. She was perpetually writing to him
little notes in which she gave him multitudes of commissions, sending him about as though he
had been her servant. And she pestered him with advice which was even worse than her commissions,
telling him of the style of life in which Alexandrina would expect to live, and warning him
very frequently that such an one as he could not expect to be admitted within the bosom of
so noble a family without paying very dearly for that inestimable privilege. Her letters had
become odious to him, and he would chuck them on one side, leaving them for the whole day unopened.
He had already made up his mind that he would quarrel with the countess also, very shortly
after his marriage; indeed, that he would separate himself from the whole family if it were
possible. At another time, while still in Maryland, he was noticed by a man who had met him frequently
at the shipyards. In neither of these cases, however, was he interfered with or molested. When
he got into the free State of Pennsylvania, he felt more joy than he dared express. He had by
his cool temerity and address passed every sentinel undetected, and
no slave, to his knowledge, he afterward said, ever got away from
bondage on so narrow a margin of safety.

HENRY WARD BEECHER

(1813-1887)

THE BOY WHO HALF-HEARTEDLY JOINED THE CHURCH

There is
great encouragement for the seemingly backward, hesitant youth in
the story of Henry Ward Beecher's early life.

He tells us that he
used to be laughed at for talking as though he had pudding in his
mouth. As to those three days there was no escape for him; but he made Alexandrina
understand that the three Commissioners were men of iron as to any extension of those three
days. "I must be absent again in February, of course," he said, almost making his wail audible
in the words he used, "and therefore it is quite impossible that I should stay now beyond the
Monday." Had there been attractions for him at Courcy Castle I think he might have arranged
with Mr Optimist for a week or ten days. "We shall be all alone," the countess wrote to him,
"and I hope you will have an opportunity of learning more of our ways than you have ever really
been able to do as yet." This was bitter as gall to him. But in this world all valuable commodities
have their price; and when men such as Crosbie aspire to obtain for themselves an alliance
with noble families, they must pay the market price for the article which they purchase.

"You'll all come up and dine with us on Monday," the squire said to Mrs Dale, about the middle
of the previous week.

"Well, I think not," said Mrs Dale, "we are better, perhaps, as we are."

At this moment the squire and his sister-in-law were on much more friendly terms than had been
usual with them, and he took her reply in good part, understanding her feeling. Therefore,
he pressed his request, and succeeded.

"I think you're wrong," he said, "I don't suppose that we shall have a very merry Christmas.
You and the girls will hardly have that whether you eat your pudding here or at the Great House.
But it will be better for us all to make the attempt. It's the right thing to do. That's the
way I look at it."

"I'll ask Lily," said Mrs Dale.

"Do, do. Thus left entirely to herself, Juliet determines to die rather than prove false to her
husband. She hastens to the Friar who married them, and he gives her the philter, which she
accepts joyfully and carries home in her bosom.

 We always do. And we'll have blind-man's-buff with
all the Boyces, as we had last year, if uncle will ask them up." But the Boyces were not asked
up for that occasion.

But Lily, though she put on it all so brave a face, had much to suffer, and did in truth suffer
greatly. If you, my reader, ever chanced to slip into the gutter on a wet day, did you not
find that the sympathy of the bystanders was by far the severest part of your misfortune? Did
you not declare to yourself that all might yet be well, if the people would only walk on and
not look at you? And yet you cannot blame those who stood and pitied you; or, perhaps, essayed
to rub you down, and assist you in the recovery of your bedaubed hat. You, yourself, if you
see a man fall, cannot walk by as though nothing uncommon had happened to him. It was so with
Lily. The people of Allington could not regard her with their ordinary eyes. They would look
at her tenderly, knowing that she was a wounded fawn, and thus they aggravated the soreness
of her wound. Old Mrs Hearn condoled with her, telling her that very likely she would be better
off as she was. Lily would not lie about it in any way. "Mrs Hearn," she said, "the subject
is painful to me." Mrs Hearn said no more about it, but on every meeting between them she looked
the things she did not say. "Decidedly formal--in fact, I may say it is a rigidly military dinner."

"Military!
how military?"
"Well, you see General Lee sits at the head of the table, and Colonel
Chilton at the foot, and everything is done in red-tape style."

"Red
tape at table!
"If you speak to me again in such a way, I will tell my uncle." She turned away from him but
immediately turned back again, and put out her little hand to him. "I beg your pardon," she
said. "I know how kind you are, and I love you for it." And then she went away. "I'll go after
him yet, and break the dirty neck of him," said Hopkins to himself, as he walked down the path.

