The Glory of English Prose

Letters to my Grandson

The Glory of English Prose Letters to My Grandson

By The Hon. Stephen Coleridge

"The chief glory of every people arises from its authors" Dr. Johnson

G.P. Putnam's Sons New York and London The Knickerbocker Press 1922

1922 by Stephen Coleridge Made in the United States of America

PREFACE

If you have read, gentle reader, the earlier series of Letters to my Grandson on the World
about Him, you are to understand that in the interval between those letters and these, Antony
has grown to be a boy in the sixth form of his public school.

It has not been any longer necessary therefore to study an extreme simplicity of diction in
these letters.

My desire has been to lead him into the most glorious company in the world, in the hope that,
having early made friends with the noblest of human aristocracy, he will never afterwards admit
to his affection and intimacy anything mean or vulgar.

Many young people who, like Antony, are not at all averse from the study of English writers,
stand aghast at the vastness of the what seems so gigantic an enterprise.

In these letters I have acted as pilot for a first voyage through what is to a boy an uncharted
sea, after which I hope and believe he will have learned happily to steer for himself among
the islands of the blest.

S.C.

THE FORD, CHOBHAM.

CONTENTS

1. ON GOOD AND BAD STYLE IN PROSE 2. ON THE GLORY OF THE BIBLE 3. SIR WALTER RALEIGH 4. ACT
OF PARLIAMENT, 1532 5. THE JUDICIOUS HOOKER AND SHAKESPEARE 6. LORD CHIEF JUSTICE CREWE 7.
SIR THOMAS BROWNE AND MILTON 8. JEREMY TAYLOR 9. EVELYN'S DIARY 10. JOHN BUNYAN 11. DR. JOHNSON
12. EDMUND BURKE 13. GIBBON 14. HENRY GRATTAN AND MACAULAY 15. LORD ERSKINE 16. ROBERT HALL
17. LORD PLUNKET 18. ROBERT SOUTHEY 19. WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR 20. LORD BROUGHAM 21. SIR WILLIAM
NAPIER 22. RICHARD SHEIL 23. THOMAS CARLYLE 24. HENRY NELSON COLERIDGE 25. CARDINAL NEWMAN
26. LORD MACAULAY AGAIN 27. PRESIDENT LINCOLN 28. JOHN RUSKIN 29. JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE 30.
MATTHEW ARNOLD 31. SIR WILLIAM BUTLER 32. LORD MORLEY 33. HILAIRE BELLOC 34. KING GEORGE THE
FIFTH 35. CONCLUSION

LETTERS TO MY GRANDSON

1

MY DEAR ANTONY,

The letters which I wrote "On the world about you" having shown you that throughout all the
universe, from the blazing orbs in infinite space to the tiny muscles of an insect's wing,
perfect design is everywhere manifest, I hope and trust that you will never believe that so
magnificent a process and order can be without a Mind of which it is the visible expression.

The chief object of those letters was to endorse your natural feeling of reverence for the
Great First Cause of all things, with the testimony of your reason; and to save you from ever
allowing knowledge of how the sap rises in its stalk to lessen your wonder at and admiration
of the loveliness of a flower.

I am now going to write to you about the literature of England and show you, if I can, the
immense gulf that divides distinguished writing and speech from vulgar writing and speech.

There is nothing so vulgar as an ignorant use of your own language. Every Englishman should
show that he respects and honours the glorious language of his country, and will not willingly
degrade it with his own pen or tongue.

"We have long preserved our constitution," said Dr. Johnson; "let us make some struggles for
our language."

There is no need to be priggish or fantastic in our choice of words or phrases.

Simple old words are just as good as any that can be selected, if you use them in their proper
sense and place.

By reading good prose constantly your ear will come to know the harmony of language, and you
will find that your taste will unerringly tell you what is good and what is bad in style, without
your being able to explain even to yourself the precise quality that distinguishes the good
from the bad.

Any Englishman with a love of his country and a reverence for its language can say things in
a few words that will find their way straight into our hearts, Antony, and make us all better
men. I will tell you a few of such simple sayings that are better than any more laboured writings.

On the 30th of June, 1921, in the Times In Memoriam column there was an entry:--

"To the undying memory of officers, non-commissioned officers and men of the 9th and 10th battalions
of the K.O.Y.L.I.[1] who were killed in the attack on Fricourt in the first battle of the Somme";
and below it there were placed these splendid words:--

    "Gentlemen, when the barrage lifts."

In February of 1913 news reached England of the death, after reaching the South Pole, of four
explorers, Captain Scott, their leader, among them.

Shortly before the end, Captain Oates, a man of fortune who joined the expedition from pure
love of adventure, knowing that his helplessness with frozen feet was retarding the desperate
march of the others towards their ship, rose up and stumbled out of the tent into a raging
blizzard, saying, "I dare say I shall be away some time."

This was greatly said. His body was never found; but the rescue party who afterwards discovered
the tent with the others dead in it, put up a cairn in the desolate waste of snow with this
inscription:--

    "Hereabouts died a very gallant gentleman, Captain L.E.G. Gates,
    Inniskilling Dragoons, who, on their return from the Pole in
    March, 1912, willingly walked to his death in a blizzard to try
    and save his comrades beset with hardship."

All this was done, said, and written, very nobly by all concerned.

In St. Paul's Cathedral there lies a recumbent effigy of General Gordon, who gave his life
for the honour of England at Khartoum, and upon it are engraven these words:--

    "He gave his strength to the weak, his substance to the poor, his
    sympathy to the suffering, his heart to God."

Even the concentrated terseness of Latin cannot surpass these examples of the power of the
simplest and shortest English sentences to penetrate to the heart.

English can be used, by those who master it as an organ of expression, to convey deep emotion
under perfect control, than which nothing is more moving, nothing better calculated to refine
the mind, nothing more certain to elevate the character.

Whenever a man has something fine to communicate to his fellow-men he has but to use English
without affectation, honestly and simply, and he is in possession of the most splendid vehicle
of human thought in the world.

All the truly great writers of English speak with simplicity from their hearts, they all evince
a spirit of unaffected reverence, they all teach us to look up and not down, and by the nobility
of their works which have penetrated into every home where letters are cultivated, they have
done an incalculable service in forming and sustaining the high character of our race.

Clever flippant writers may do a trifling service here and there by ridiculing the pompous
and deflating the prigs, but there is no permanence in such work, unless--which is seldom the
case--it is totally devoid of personal vanity.

Very little such service is rendered when it emanates from a writer who announces himself as
equal if not superior to Shakespeare, and embellishes his lucubrations with parodies of the creeds.

"A Gentleman with a Duster," has in his "Glass of Fashion" shown us that the Society depicted
in the books of Colonel Repington and Mrs. Asquith is not the true and great Society that sustains
England in its noble station among civilised peoples, and we may be sure that neither do these
books in the faintest degree represent the true and living literature of the times. They will
pass away and be forgotten as utterly as are the fashion plates and missing-word competitions
of ten years ago.

Therefore, Antony, be sure that the famous and living literature of England, that has survived
all the shocks of time and changes of modern life, is the best and properest study for a man
to fit him for life, to refine his taste, to aggravate his wisdom, and consolidate his character.

Your loving old G.P.

[Footnote 1: King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry.]

2

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I alluded, in my first letter to you about English literature, to the necessity of your learning
from the beginning the wide distinction between what is good and what is bad style.

I do not know a better instance of a display of the difference between what is fine style and
what is not, than may be made by putting side by side almost any sentence from the old authorised
translation of the Bible and the same sentence from The Bible in Modern Speech.

    "Learn a lesson from the wild lilies. Watch their growth. They
    neither toil nor spin, and yet I tell you that not even Solomon
    in all his magnificence could array himself like one of these."

Here you can feel the perfect harmony and balance of the old version and the miserable commonplaceness
of the effort of these misguided modern men.

Again:--

    "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."

This is mauled into:--

    "Repent, he said, for the kingdom of the heavens is now close at
    hand."

These examples are perfectly suited to illustrate the immense difference that separates what
is noble and fine in style and what is poor and third rate.

If you recite the old version aloud you cannot escape the harmony and balance of the sentences,
and nothing dignified or distinguished can be made of the wretched paraphrases of the two desecrators
of the splendid old text.

And, Antony, I would have you know that I, who have spent a long life in precious libraries,
loving fine literature with all my heart, have long ago reverenced the old version of the Bible
as the granite corner-stone upon which has been built all the noblest English in the world.
No narrative in literature has yet surpassed in majesty, simplicity, and passion the story
of Joseph and his brethren, beginning at the thirty-seventh and ending with the forty-fifth
chapter of Genesis.

The whole of the forty-fifth chapter is touching and beautiful beyond all criticism, transcending
all art. To read it is to believe every word of it to be true, and to recognise the sublimity
of such a relation.

No narrative of the great Greek writers reaches the heart so directly and poignantly as does
this astonishing story.

    "And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not.

If you read the story of Joseph through from start to finish, you will see that it is a perfect
narrative of the life of a man without fault, who suffered much but without resentment, was
great of heart in evil days, and, when Fortune placed him in a position of glory and greatness,
showed a stainless magnanimity and a brotherly love that nothing could abate. (3) Character; "being
filled with the fruits of righteousness." This has to do with our permanent life both within and
without, though the emphasis is on being rather than on doing.

Character is the highest point and peak of the Christian life, for just as fruit is the outcome
of the life of a tree, so character is the fruit of Christian living, and is the best proof
of its existence.

The Apostle's word suggests that we are to be "permanently filled"

  (Greek) with the fruits of righteousness,
  those things that are right, straight,
  true, correct, upright, without
  any deflection on either side.

       The Lord Who is our Righteousness works in us the fruits of righteousness
by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit.

  
  

  4. THE ULTIMATE OBJECT.
  
  The Apostle looks forward "unto
  the day of Christ" (ver.

10, R.V.), and then speaks of the Christian life being lived "unto the glory and praise of God"
(ver. 11). Everything is to tend towards the manifestation of the splendour of God in human life
whereby others will be led to acknowledge and praise Him (Matt. v. 16). And this will reach its
culminating point in the "day of Christ," that time when Christian people will stand before their
Master and receive the reward of their life and service rendered to Him (ch. i. 6, ii. 16). This was
the Apostle's constant thought, and towards this he strained every nerve (ch. iii. 11-21). It
expresses the highest ideal of Christian living, for day by day we are to live with this wonderful thought
of "the glory and praise of God," and day by day we are to look forward
to the coming of Christ as that day in which our life will find its
fullest realisation, its complete satisfaction, and its unending joy.


"Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away."

Do not think it enough therefore, Antony, to hear it read badly and without intelligence or
emotion, in little detached snippets, in church once a week.

Read it for yourself, and learn to rejoice in the perfect balance, harmony, and strength of
its noble style.

Your loving old G.P.

3

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I could write you many letters like my last one about the Bible, and perhaps some day I will
go back to that wonderful Book and write you some more letters about it; but now I will go
on and tell you about some of the great writers of English prose that came after the translation
of the Bible.

Those translators were the great founders of the English language, which is probably on the
whole the most glorious organ of human expression that the world has yet known.

It blends the classic purity of Greek and the stately severity of Latin with the sanguine passions
and noble emotions of our race.

A whole life devoted to its study will not make you or me perfectly familiar with all the splendid
passages that have been spoken and written in it. But I shall show in my letters, at least
some of the glorious utterances scattered around me here in my library, so that you may recognise,
as you ought, the pomp and majesty of the speech of England.

One of the great qualities that was always present in the writings of Englishmen from the time
of Elizabeth down to the beginning of the nineteenth century was its restraint.

Those men never became hysterical or lost their perfect self-control.

The deeper the emotion of the writer the more manifest became the noble mastery of himself.

When Sir Walter Ralegh, that glorious son of Devon, from which county you and I, Antony, are
proud to have sprung, lay in the Tower of London awaiting his cowardly and shameful execution
the next day at the hands of that miserable James I., writing to his beloved wife, with a piece
of coal, because they even denied him pen and ink, face to face with death, he yet observed
a calm and noble language that is truly magnifical--to use the old Bible word.

    "For the rest," he wrote, "when you have travailed and wearied
    your thoughts on all sorts of worldly cogitations, you shall sit
    down by sorrow in the end. Teach your son also to serve and fear
    God while he is young, that the fear of God may grow up in him.
    Then will God be a Husband unto you and a Father unto him; a
    Husband and a Father which can never be taken from you.

    "I cannot write much. God knows how hardly I stole this time when
    all sleep; and it is time to separate my thoughts from the world.

    "Beg my dead body, which living was denied you; and either lay it
    at Sherburne, if the land continue, or in Exeter Church by my
    father and mother. I can write no more. Time and Death call me
    away.

    "The Everlasting, Infinite, Powerful and Inscrutable God, that
    Almighty God that is goodness itself, mercy itself, the true life
    and light, keep you and yours, and have mercy on me and teach me
    to forgive my persecutors and false accusers, and send us to meet
    in His Glorious Kingdom. My true wife, farewell. Bless my poor
    boy, pray for me. My true God hold you both in His Arms.

    "Written with the dying hand of, sometime thy husband, but now
    alas! overthrown, yours that was, but now not my own.

    "WALTER RALEGH."

Sir Walter Ralegh was born only a few miles down below Ottery St. Mary, in the same beautiful
valley from which you and I, Antony, and the poet have come. The peal of bells in the old church
tower at Otterton was given by him to the parish; and when "the lin lan lone of evening-bells"
floats across between the hills that guard the river Otter, it should fall upon our ears as
an echo of the melody that strikes upon our hearts in Ralegh's words.

Your loving old G.P.

4

MY DEAR ANTONY,

In looking through some very old Acts of Parliament not long ago I was rather surprised to
find that in those old times our forefathers drew up their statutes in very stately English.

In our own times Acts of Parliament frequently violate the simplest rules of grammar, and are
sometimes so unintelligible as to need the labours of learned judges to find out what they mean!

But it seems that in the great days of Henry VIII. and Elizabeth Acts of Parliament were often
written in resounding periods of solemn splendour of which the meaning is perfectly clear.

In the twenty-fourth year of the great Henry, the Act denying and forbidding any jurisdiction
of the Pope of Rome in England was passed.

This Act, depriving the Pope of all power in England, marked a turning-point in history.

It is headed with these words:--

    THE PRE-EMINENCE, POWER, AND AUTHORITY OF THE KING OF ENGLAND.
    1532.

The words "Empire" and "Imperial" are in the present day degraded from their ancient high estate
by an appropriation of them to advertise soap or cigarettes or what not; and we even are confronted
with the "Imperial" Cancer Research Fund, the money of which has been employed in artificially
inflicting cancer on hundreds of thousands of living animals--a performance utterly repugnant
to a great many of the inhabitants in the "Empire"!

But people indifferent to the dictates of mercy are not likely to have much reverence for words,
however august.

Henry VIII., we may be sure, would never have allowed these solemn words to be used by people
with something to sell, or by scientific disease-mongers.

They were great people who could draw up their statutes in splendid passages of sustained nobility.

Let us, Antony, salute them across the centuries.

Your loving old G.P.

5

MY DEAR ANTONY,

One of the great creators of English prose who lived at the same time as Ralegh and Shakespeare
was Richard Hooker, who is generally known as "the Judicious Hooker."

He was born in Devon, two years after Ralegh, in 1554.

He must very early in life have made his mark as a man of learning and piety, for when he was
only thirty-one he was made Master of the Temple. The controversies in which he there found
himself involved induced him to retire when he was only thirty-seven into the country, for
the purpose of writing his famous books, The Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity.

It is the first great book on the English Church, and it is full of magnificent prose. It was
divided into eight parts; and in the first one, before he had got far into it, he penned the
exclamatory description of law which will live as long as the language:--

    "Her seat is the bosom of God, her voice the harmony of the world;
    all things in heaven and earth do her homage, the very least as
    feeling her care, the greatest as not exempted from her power."

And in the same first part will be found a passage on the Deity which portrays faithfully for
us the humble wisdom of both the man and his age:--

    "Dangerous it were for the feeble brain of man to wade far into
    the doings of the Most High; whom although to know be life, and
    joy to make mention of His name; yet our soundest knowledge is to
    know that we know Him not as indeed He is, neither can know Him;
    and our safest eloquence concerning Him is our silence, when we
    confess without confession that His glory is inexplicable, His
    greatness above our capacity to reach. He is above and we upon
    earth; therefore it behoveth our words to be wary and few."

Shakespeare was born ten years later than Hooker, in 1564, and his share in founding English
prose as we know it is, of course, not comparable with that of Hooker, for of Shakespeare's
prose there remains for us but little. Whenever he rose to eloquence he clothed himself in
verse as with an inevitable attribute, but on the rare occasions when he condescended to step
down from the great line to "the other harmony of prose" he is as splendid as in all else.
In Hamlet we have this sudden passage:--

    "I have of late, (but wherefore I know not), lost all my mirth,
    foregone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily
    with my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to
    me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy the air, look
    you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof
    fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me,
    than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.

    "What a piece of work is man! And yet to me what is this
    quintessence of dust?"

And the most beautiful letter in the world is that written by Antonio to Bassanio in The Merchant
of Venice. When it is remembered that it was out of his friendship for Bassanio that Antonio
entered into his bond with Shylock, the supreme exquisiteness of the few words from friend
to friend render this letter unsurpassable:--

    "Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my creditors grow
    cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit, and
    since, in paying it, it is impossible I should live, all debts are
    cleared between you and me if I might see you at my death;
    notwithstanding, use your pleasure; if your love do not persuade
    you to come, let not my letter."

Well did Shakespeare know that such a letter must make an instant appeal to the sweet heart
of Portia: "O love!" she cries, "despatch all business, and be gone!"

All great poets are masters of a splendid prose, and had Shakespeare written some notable work
of prose we may be sure it would even have surpassed the noble utterances of all his wonderful
contemporaries.

It has been said that no language in the world has yet ever lasted in its integrity for over
a thousand years. Perhaps printing may confer a greater stability on present languages; but
whenever English is displaced, the sun of the most glorious of all days will have set.

Your loving old G.P.

6

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I do not think that men of letters often search through the old law reports for specimens of
fine prose, but I believe that here and there, in that generally barren field, a nugget of
pure gold may be discovered by an industrious student.

Much noble prose delivered from the bench down the centuries has been lost for ever, for the
judges of England have often been gentlemen of taste, scholarship, and eloquence. I have found
one very splendid passage that has somehow survived the wrecks of nearly four hundred years.

Lord Chief Justice Crewe, who became Chief Justice of England in 1624, delivered in the case
of the Earl of Oxford the following noble tribute to the great house of De Vere:--

    "I heard a great peer of this realm, and learned, say, when he
    lived, there was no king in Christendom had such a subject as
    Oxford. He came in with the Conqueror, Earl of Guienne; shortly
    after the Conquest made Great Chamberlain, above 400 years ago, by
    Henry I., the Conqueror's son; confirmed by Henry II. This great
    honour--this high and noble dignity--hath continued ever since, in
    the remarkable surname De Vere, by so many ages, descents, and
    generations, as no other kingdom can produce such a peer in one
    and the selfsame name and title. I find in all this time but two
    attainders of this noble family, and those in stormy and
    tempestuous time, when the government was unsettled, and the
    kingdom in competition. I have laboured to make a covenant with
    myself, that affection may not press upon judgment, for I suppose
    that there is no man that hath any apprehension of gentry or
    nobleness, but his affection stands to the continuance of so noble
    a name and fame, and would take hold of a twig or twine-thread to
    uphold it. And yet Time hath his revolutions: there must be an end
    to all temporal things, finis rerum,--and end of names and
    dignities, and whatsoever is terrene; and why not of De Vere?
    For where is De Bohun?--where is Mowbray?--where is Mortimer? Nay,
    what is more and most of all, where is Plantagenet? They are
    entombed in the urns and sepulchres of mortality. And yet, let
    the name and dignity of De Vere stand so long as it pleases God."

And alas! we can now ask, Where is De Vere? This great Earldom of Oxford was created in 1142,
and has disappeared long ago in the limbo of peerages said to be in abeyance.

In these days, Antony, when peerages are bought by men successful in trade and sold by men
successful in intrigue, such elevations in rank have ceased to be regarded as the necessary
concomitants of "great honour" and "high and noble dignity"; so that it has long been more
reputable in the House of Lords to be a descendant than an ancestor. But among the older great
families there still remains a pride that has descended unsullied through many generations,
which serves as a fine deterrent from evil deeds, and a constant incentive to honour--and in
England the history of great names can never be totally ignored, even though the country may
be ruled by persons who do not know who were their own grandfathers.

Nothing is more ridiculous and cheap than to sneer at honourable descent from famous ancestors;
it divertingly illustrates the fable of the sour grapes.

Your loving old G.P.

7

MY DEAR ANTONY,

You will have seen from the extracts I have already quoted to you of the writers of the Elizabethan
age that the style of all of them possesses something large and resonant, something that may
be said to constitute the "grand style" in prose; and this quite naturally without effort,
and without the slightest touch of affectation.

A great writer who came immediately after the Elizabethans--namely, Sir Thomas Browne, who
lived from 1605 to 1682--displays the development in his style of something less simple and
more precious than ruled in the former generation.

It is difficult to select any passage from his works where all is so good. He was curious and
exact in his choice of words and commanded a wide vocabulary. There is deliberate ingenuity
in the framing of his sentences, which arrests attention and markedly distinguishes his style.
His Urn Burial, in spite of its elaboration, reaches a grave and solemn splendour.

The fifth chapter, which begins by speaking of the dead who have "quietly rested under the
drums and tramplings of three conquests," rises to a very noble elevation as English prose.

Here I quote one paragraph of it, characteristic of the whole:--

    "Darkness and light divide the course of time, and oblivion shares
    with memory a great part even of our living beings; we slightly
    remember our felicities, and the smartest strokes of affliction
    leave but short smart upon us. Sense endureth no extremities, and
    sorrows destroy us or themselves. To weep into stones are fables.
    Afflictions induce callosities; miseries are slippery, or fall
    like snow upon us, which notwithstanding is no unhappy stupidity.
    To be ignorant of evils to come, and forgetful of evils past, is a
    merciful provision in nature, whereby we digest the mixture of our
    few and evil days, and, our delivered senses not relapsing into
    cutting remembrances, our sorrows are not kept raw by the edge of
    repetitions. A great part of antiquity contented their hopes of
    subsistency with a transmigration of their souls,--a good way to
    continue their memories, while having the advantage of plural
    successions they could not but act something remarkable in such
    variety of beings, and, enjoying the fame of their passed selves,
    make accumulation of glory unto their last durations. Others,
    rather than be lost in the uncomfortable night of nothing, were
    content to recede into the common being, and make one particle of
    the public soul of all things, which was no more than to return
    into their unknown and divine original again. Egyptian ingenuity
    was more unsatisfied, contriving their bodies in sweet
    consistencies, to attend the return of their souls. But all was
    vanity, feeding the wind, and folly.

Milton was a contemporary of Sir Thomas Browne, and, like all great poets, was a master of
resounding prose. All that he wrote, both in verse and prose, is severely classic in its form.
His Samson Agonistes is perhaps the finest example of a play written in English after the manner
of the Greek dramas.

Milton wrote The Areopagitica in defence of the liberty of publishers and printers of books.
And it stands for all time as the first and greatest argument against interference with the
freedom of the press.

The Areopagitæ were judges at Athens in its more flourishing time, who sat on Mars Hill and
made decrees and passed sentences which were delivered in public and commanded universal respect.

I will quote one of the finest passages in this great and splendid utterance:--

    "I deny not but that it is of greatest concernment in the Church
    and Commonwealth to have a vigilant eye how books demean
    themselves as well as men; and thereafter to confine, imprison,
    and do sharpest justice on them as malefactors: for books are not
    absolutely dead things, but do contain a potency of life in them
    to be as active as that soul was whose progeny they are; nay, they
    do preserve as in a vial the purest efficacy and extraction of
    that living intellect that bred them. I know they are as lively,
    and as vigorously productive, as those fabulous dragons' teeth;
    and being sown up and down, may chance to spring up armed men.

    "And yet on the other hand, unless wariness be used, as good
    almost kill a man as kill a good book; who kills a man kills a
    reasonable creature, God's image; but he who destroys a good book
    kills reason itself; kills the Image of God as it were in the eye.

    "'Tis true, no age can restore a life, whereof, perhaps, there is
    no great loss; and revolutions of ages do not oft recover the loss
    of a rejected truth, for the want of which whole nations fare the
    worse.

    "We should be wary, therefore, what persecutions we raise against
    the living labours of public men; how we spill that seasoned life
    of man preserved and stored up in books; since we see a kind of
    homicide may be thus committed, sometimes a martyrdom, and, if it
    extend to the whole impression, a kind of massacre, whereof the
    execution ends not in the slaying of an elemental life, but
    strikes at that ethereal and fifth essence, the breath of reason
    itself; slays an immortality rather than a life."

This is a fine defence of the inviolability of a good and proper book.

A bad book will generally die of itself, but there is something horribly malignant about a
wicked book, as it must always be worse than a wicked man, for a man can repent, but a book cannot.

It is the men of letters who keep alive the books of the great from generation to generation,
and they are never likely to preserve a wicked book from oblivion. Ultimately such go to light
fires and encompass groceries.

Your loving old G.P.

8

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Milton, of whom I wrote in my last letter, was five years older than Jeremy Taylor, of whom
I am going to write to-day. The latter's writings differ very much from Milton's, although
they were contemporaries for the whole of the former's life.

From the grave and august periods of Milton to the sweet beauty of Jeremy Taylor is as the
passing from out the austere halls of Justice to lovely fields full of flowers.

Your and my great kinsman, Coleridge, pronounced Jeremy Taylor to be the most eloquent of all
divines; and Coleridge was a great critic.

Indeed, there seems to dwell permanently in Jeremy Taylor's mind a compelling sweetness and
serenity.

His parables, though sometimes perhaps almost of set purpose fanciful, are always full of beauty.

Again:--

    "No man can tell but he that loves his children, how many
    delicious accents make a man's heart dance in the pretty
    conversation of those dear pledges; their childishness, their
    stammering, their little angers, their innocence, their
    imperfections, their necessities, are so many little emanations of
    joy and comfort to him that delights in their persons and society;
    but he that loves not his wife and children, feeds a lioness at
    home, and broods a nest of sorrows; and blessing itself cannot
    make him happy; so that all the commandments of God enjoining a
    man to 'love his wife' are nothing but so many necessities and
    capacities of joy. 'She that is loved, is safe; and he that loves,
    is joyful,' Love is a union of all things excellent; it contains
    in it proportion and satisfaction, and rest and confidence."

Again:--

    "So have I seen a lark rising from his bed of grass, and soaring
    upwards, singing as he rises, and hopes to get to heaven, and
    climb above the clouds; but the poor bird was beaten back with the
    loud sighings of an eastern wind, and his motion made irregular
    and inconstant, descending more at every breath of the tempest,
    than it could recover by the liberation and frequent weighing of
    his wings; till the little creature was forced to sit down and
    pant, and stay till the storm was over; and then it made a
    prosperous flight, and did rise and sing, as if it had learned
    music and motion from an angel, as he passed sometimes through the
    air, about his ministries here below; so is the prayer of a good
    man."

Again:--

    "I am fallen into the hands of publicans and sequestrators, and
    they have taken all from me; what now? Let me look about me.

Here, Antony, is true wisdom. True, indeed, is it that no one can take away from you your merry
countenance, your cheerful spirit, and your good conscience unless you choose; keep all three,
Antony, throughout your life, and you will be happy yourself and make everyone about you happy,
and that is to make a little heaven of your earthly home.

Your loving old G.P.

9

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Some day, no doubt, you will read some of the celebrated diaries that have come down to us.
The best known of such books is Pepys's Diary which was written in a kind of shorthand, and
so lay undeciphered from his death in 1703 for more than a century. One of its merits is its
absolute self-revelation; for Pepys exposes to us his character without a shadow of reserve
in all its vanity; and the other is the faithful picture it gives us of the time of the Restoration.

But, though less popular, Evelyn's Diary is, I think, in many ways superior to that of Pepys.[1]

There is a quiet, unostentatious dignity about Evelyn which is altogether absent in the garrulous
Pepys, and, indeed I find something very beautiful and touching in the grief Evelyn pours forth
upon the death of his little son of five years old:--

    "The day before he died," writes Evelyn, "he call'd to me and in a
    more serious manner than usual, told me that for all I loved him
    so dearly I should give my house, land, and all my fine things, to
    his Brother Jack, he should have none of them; and next morning
    when he found himself ill, and that I persuaded him to keepe his
    hands in bed, he demanded whether he might pray to God with his
    hands un-joyn'd; and a little after, whilst in great agonie,
    whether he should not offend God by using His holy name so often
    calling for ease. What shall I say of his frequent pathetical
    ejaculations utter'd of himselfe: Sweete Jesus save me, deliver
    me, pardon my sinns, let Thine angels receive me!

    "So early knowledge, so much piety and perfection! But thus God
    having dress'd up a Saint for himselfe, would not longer permit
    him with us, unworthy of ye future fruites of this incomparable
    hopefull blossome. Such a child I never saw: for such a child I
    blesse God in whose bosome he is! May I and mine become as this
    little child, who now follows the child Jesus that Lamb of God in
    a white robe whithersoever he goes; even so, Lord Jesus, fiat
    voluntas tua! Thou gavest him to us, Thou hast taken him from us,
    blessed be ye name of ye Lord! That I had anything acceptable to
    Thee was from Thy grace alone, since from me he had nothing but
    sin, but that Thou hast pardon'd! Blessed be my God for ever,
    Amen! I caused his body to be coffin'd in lead, and reposited on
    the 30th at 8 o'clock that night in the church at Deptford,
    accompanied with divers of my relations and neighbours among whom
    I distributed rings with this motto: Dominus abstulit;
    intending, God willing, to have him transported with my owne body
    to be interr'd in our dormitory in Wotton Church, in my dear
    native county of Surrey, and to lay my bones and mingle my dust
    with my fathers, if God be gracious to me and make me fit for Him
    as this blessed child was. The Lord Jesus sanctify this and all my
    other afflictions, Amen! Here ends the joy of my life, and for
    which I go even mourning to my grave."

This great love and reverence for little children is peculiarly in accord with Christianity,
for we should remember that it was the WISE men, who, when they had journeyed far across the
world to salute the King of kings, laid their offerings down at the feet of a little child.

Is there not something to reverence in faith and resignation such as are here expressed by
Evelyn? Were not these men of old with their unshakable faith and simple piety better and happier
than those who in these days know so much more and believe so much less?

We, no doubt, have the knowledge, but perhaps they had the wisdom.

I think, Antony, that in the history of England we shall have difficulty in finding any of
our greatest men whose hearts and minds were not filled with a reverence for God and a faith
in something beyond the blind forces which are all that Science has to offer mankind as a guide
of life.

All who have acted most nobly from the days of Ralegh and Sir Thomas More, down to the days
of Gordon of Khartoum, and down again to our own days when the youth of England upheld the
invincible valour, self-sacrifice, and glory of their race in the greatest of all wars,--all
have been filled with the love of God and have found therein a perfect serenity in the face
of death, and that peace which passeth all understanding.

The character of our race rests indubitably upon that faith, and he who lifts his voice, or
directs his pen, to tear it down, had better never have been born.

Your loving old G.P.

[Footnote 1: Another diary that you should read by and by is that of Henry Grabb Robinson.]

10

MY DEAR ANTONY,

In these letters I am never going to quote to you anything that does not seem to me to rise
to a level of merit well above ordinary proper prose. There are many writers whose general
correctness and excellence is not to be questioned or denied whom I shall not select in these
letters for your particular admiration.

By and by, when your own love of literature impels you to excursions in all directions, you
may perhaps come to differ from my judgment, for everyone's taste must vary a little from that
of others.

English prose in its excellence follows the proportions manifested by the contours of the elevation
of the world's land.

Vast tracts lie very near the sea-level, of such are the interminable outpourings of newspapers
and novels and school books. And, as each ascent from the sea-level is reached, less and less
land attains to it, and when the snow-line is approached only a very small proportion indeed
of the land aspires so high.

So among writers, those who climb to the snow-line are a slender band compared to all the inhabitants
of the lower slopes and plains.

In these letters I do not intend to mistake a pedlar for a mountaineer, nor a hearthstone for
a granite peak. Time slowly buries deep in oblivion the writings of the industrious and the dull.

Born fifteen years later than Jeremy Taylor, of whom I wrote in a former letter, John Bunyan
in 1660, being a Baptist, suffered the persecution then the lot of all dissenters, and was
cast into Bedford gaol, where he lay for conscience' sake for twelve years.

The force of simplicity finds here its most complete expression; the story wells from the man's
heart, whence come all great things:--

    "Then said the Interpreter to Christian, 'Hast thou considered
    all these things?'

    "Christian. 'Yes, and they put me in hope and fear.'

    "Interpreter.

Bunyan died in 1688, and Dr. Johnson was born in 1709. Many years, therefore, elapsed between
the time when they each displayed their greatest powers.

The interval was occupied by many reputable worldly-wise writers, but I do not myself find,
between these two masters of English prose, anyone who wrote passages of such great lustre
that I can quote them for your admiration.

You will have noticed, Antony, that all the writers whom I have quoted, and who reached the
true nobility of speech necessary to command our tribute of unstinted praise, have been men
of manifest piety and reverence.

And you will find it difficult to discover really great and eloquent prose from the pen of
any man whose heart is not filled with a simple faith in the goodness of God.

Your loving old G.P.

11

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I have come now to Dr. Johnson, and it is almost a test of a true man of letters that he should
love him.

He was rugged and prejudiced, but magnanimous; impatient with the presumptuous, tender to modest
ignorance, proudly independent of the patronage of the great, and was often doing deeds of
noble self-sacrifice by stealth.

Through long years of hard, unremitting toil for his daily bread he lived bravely and sturdily,
with no extraneous help but his stout oak stick--an unconquerable man.

His prose rises on occasion to a measured and stately grandeur above the reach of any of his
contemporaries.

It was not often that he unveiled to the public gaze the beatings of his own noble heart, or
invited the world to contemplate the depression and suffering amid which his unending labours
were accomplished.

The concluding page of the preface to the first edition of the great Dictionary is, therefore,
the more precious and moving.

This seems to me to be the noblest passage that Johnson ever wrote.

Almost all the most magnificent utterances of man are tinged with sadness. In this they possess
a quality that is almost inseparable from grandeur wherever displayed. No man of sensibility
and taste feels it possible to make jokes himself, or to tolerate them from others when in
the presence of the Falls of Niagara, or a tempest at sea, or when he views from a peak in
the Andes--as I have done--the sun descent into the Pacific. The greatest pictures painted
by man touch the heart rather than elate it; and genius finds its highest expression not in
comedy, but in tragedy.

And this need cause us no surprise when we consider how much of the great work in letters and
in art is directly due to the writer possessing in full measure the gift of sympathy.

People with this gift, even if they are without the faculty of expression, are beloved by those
about them, which must bring them happiness.

Till he was over fifty Dr. Johnson's life was a weary struggle with poverty. He wrote Rasselas
under the pressure of an urgent need of money to send to his dying mother. His wife died some
few years earlier.

    "I have outlived my friends and my rivals. Nothing is now of much
    importance; for I cannot extend my interest beyond myself. Youth
    is delighted with applause, because it is considered as the
    earnest of some future good, and because the prospect of life is
    far extended; but to me, who am now declining to decrepitude,
    there is little to be feared from the malevolence of men, and yet
    less to be hoped from their affection or esteem. Something they
    may take away, but they can give me nothing. Riches would now be
    useless, and high employment would be pain. My retrospect of life
    recalls to my view many opportunities of good neglected, much time
    squandered upon trifles, and more lost in idleness and vacancy. I
    leave many great designs unattempted, and many great attempts
    unfinished.

    "My mind is burdened with no heavy crime, and therefore I compose
    myself to tranquillity; endeavour to abstract my thoughts from
    hopes and cares, which, though reason knows them to be vain, still
    try to keep their old possession of the heart; expect, with serene
    humility, that hour which nature cannot long delay; and hope to
    possess, in a better state, that happiness which here I could not
    find, and that virtue which here I have not attained."

From the results of Rasselas he sent his mother money, but she had expired before it reached her.

Down to the time of Dr. Johnson it was the custom for writers of books and poems to seek and
enjoy the patronage of some great nobleman, to whom they generally dedicated their works.

And in pursuance of that custom Dr. Johnson, when he first issued the plan or prospectus of
his great Dictionary in 1747, addressed it to Lord Chesterfield, who was regarded as the most
brilliant and cultivated nobleman of his time. Lord Chesterfield, however, took no notice of
the matter till the Dictionary was on the point of coming out in 1755, and then wrote some
flippant remarks about it in a publication called The World.

At this Dr. Johnson wrote a letter to the condescending peer, which became celebrated throughout
England and practically put an end to writers seeking the patronage of the great.

Boswell's life of Dr. Johnson when you come to read it, as you will be sure to do by and by,
has left a living picture of this great and good man for all future generations to enjoy, extenuating
nothing to his quaintness, directness, and proneness to contradiction for its own sake, yet
unveiling everywhere the deep piety and fine magnanimity of his character. He suffered much,
but never complained, and certainly must be numbered among the great men of letters who have
found true consolation and support in every circumstance of life in an earnest and fervent faith.

Your loving old G.P.

12

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Edmund Burke was born in 1730, and therefore was twenty-one years younger than Dr. Johnson,
and he survived him thirteen years. He was a great prose writer, and although some of his speeches
in Parliament that have come down to us possess every quality of solid argument and lofty eloquence,
there must have been something lacking in his delivery and voice, for he so frequently failed
to rivet the attention of the House, and so often addressed a steadily dwindling audience,
that the wits christened him "the dinner bell."

All men of letters, however, acknowledge Burke as a true master of a very great style.

We see in him the first signs of a breaking away from the universal restraint of the older
writers, and of the surging up of expressed emotion.

His splendid tribute to Marie Antoinette and his panegyric of the lost age of chivalry are
familiar to all students of English prose.

This is a splendid and world-famous passage well worth committing to memory.

Your loving old G.P.

13

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Edward Gibbon, who wrote the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, belonged to the later half
of the eighteenth century, and was a contemporary of Dr. Johnson and Burke. He finished his
great history three years after Dr. Johnson's death. It is a monumental work, and will live
as long as the English language. It is one of the books which every cultivated gentleman should
read. The style is stately and sonorous, and the industry and erudition involved in its production
must have been immense.

Although it never sinks below a noble elevation of style, it nevertheless displays no uplifting
flights of eloquence or declamation, and to me, and probably to you, Antony, the most moving
passages in Gibbon's writings are those that describe with unaffected emotion the moment of
the first resolve to compose the great history and the night when he wrote the last line of it.

Thus did he resolve to devote himself to the tremendous task, and at Lausanne twenty-three
years later it was at last fulfilled. He recorded the event in a few pregnant sentences that
are strangely memorable:--

    "It was on the day, or rather night, of the 27th of June, 1787,
    between the hours of eleven and twelve, that I wrote the last
    lines of the last page, in a summer-house in my garden. After
    laying down my pen I took several turns in a berceau, or covered
    walk of acacias, which commands a prospect of the country, the
    lake, and the mountains. The air was temperate, the sky was
    serene, the silver orb of the moon was reflected from the waters,
    and all nature was silent. I will not dissemble the first
    emotions of joy on the recovery of my freedom, and perhaps, the
    establishment of my fame. But my pride was soon humbled, and a
    sober melancholy was spread over my mind, by the idea that I had
    taken an everlasting leave of an old and agreeable companion, and
    that, whatsoever might be the future fate of my History, the life
    of the historian must be short and precarious."

In June, 1888, just one hundred and one years after that pen had been finally laid aside, I
searched in Lausanne for the summer-house and covered walk, and could find no very authentic
record of its site. Printed and published by special command. London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to
the Army, dwelling in Aldersgate Street next door to the Peacock. 1659". Three days afterwards,
on October 27, John Evelyn had finished writing an answer, which
was published a week later, on November 4, under the title: "An Apologie
for the Royal Party ... With a Touch At the pretended Plea for the
Army.

Anno Dom. MDCLIX". No author's name, printer or place was given.

Evelyn afterwards made the note in his Diary under the date November
7, 1659, that is, three days after the actual publication: "Was publish'd
my bold Apologie for the King in His time of danger, when it was capital
to speak or write in favour of him.

It was twice printed, so universaly it took."[1] Evelyn was by conviction
an ardent royalist, but by temperament he was peaceable, and the publication
of this pamphlet was a courageous act on his part, involving considerable
risks.

The Apologie for the Royal Party contains an eloquent and outspoken
attack upon the parliamentary party, the depth of the author's feelings
making his style of writing more effective than it usually was.

Events were at this date nearing their climax, and Evelyn, soon after the publication of his
pamphlet, made persistent attempts to induce Colonel Henry Morley,
then Lieutenant of the Tower of London, to declare for the King.

In the edition of Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England, edited by Edward Phillips, 1665, is given
the following account of the negotiations (p. 736): "Mr. Evelyn gave him [Col. Morley] some
visits to attemper his affection by degrees to a confidence in him, & then by consequence to
ingage him in his designes; and to induce him the more powerfully thereunto, he put into his
hands an excellent and unanswerable hardy treatise by him written
and severall times reprinted, intituled An Apology for the Royall
Party, which he backed with so good Argument and dextrous Addresses
in the prosecution of them, that, after some private discourse, the
Colonel was so well inclin'd, as to recommend to him the procurement
of his Majestie's Grace for him, his Brother-in-law Mr. Fagg, and
one or two more of his Relations".

    Phillips added an account of a letter written by Evelyn to Colonel
    Morley, and gave him great credit for the influence which he exerted,
    though Evelyn endorsed a draft of the narrative with a statement
    saying there "was too much said concerning me". Nevertheless part
    of the narrative was confirmed by Evelyn when he wrote on the title-page
    of the copy of the pamphlet here reproduced: "Delivered to
    Coll. Morley a few daies after his contest w^th Lambert in the palace
    yard by J. Evelyn". The "contest" with General Lambert took place
    on October 12 or 13 when Morley, pistol in hand, refused to allow
    him at the head of his troops to pass through the Palace Yard.
    
    Evelyn also wrote on the title-page of this copy of his pamphlet
    "three tymes printed". In fact there were four printings, all
    described in the writer's John Evelyn, a Study in Bibliophily & a
    Bibliography of his Writings, New York, The Grolier Club,
    1937, the one here reproduced being the fourth and final form.

    Nevertheless all four issues are now extremely scarce, the first
    printing being known in three copies (one in the United States), the
    second in seven (two in the United States), the third in one, and
    the fourth in one. This apparently unique relic of Evelyn's bold
    gesture on behalf of his King is in the writer's possession
    and is still as issued, edges untrimmed and with its eight leaves
    stitched in a contemporary paper wrapper.
    

    "While a plank of the vessel sticks together, I will not leave
    her. Let the courtier present his flimsy sail, and carry the light
    bark of his faith, with every new breath of wind--I will remain
    anchored here--with fidelity to the fortunes of my country,
    faithful to her freedom, faithful to her fall."

Of another character, but not less admirable than his eloquence in the Senate, was Grattan's
achievement with the pen. His description of the great Lord Chatham lives as one of the most
noble panegyrics--it not the most noble--in the world. No writer, before or since, has offered
anyone such splendid homage as this--that he never sunk "to the vulgar level of the great."

    "Yet he was not always correct or polished; on the contrary, he
    was sometimes ungrammatical, negligent, and unenforcing, for he
    concealed his art, and was superior to the knack of oratory. Upon
    many occasions he abated the vigour of his eloquence, but even
    then, like the spinning of a cannon ball, he was still alive with
    fatal, unapproachable activity.

It is a great race, Antony, that can produce a man of such a character as Chatham, and also
writers who can dedicate to him such superb tributes as these.

Macaulay's prose has been much criticised as being too near to easy journalism to be classed
among the great classic passages of English; but this much must be recognised to his great
credit--he never wrote an obscure sentence or an ambiguous phrase, and his works may be searched
in vain for a foreign idiom or even a foreign word. He possessed an infallible memory, absolute
perspicuity, and a scholarly taste. He detested oppression wherever enforced, and never exercised
his great powers in the defence of mean politics or unworthy practices.

Such a writer to-day would blow a wholesome wind across the tainted pools of political intrigue.

We can salute him, Antony, as a fine, manly, clean writer, who was an honour to letters.

Your loving old G.P.

15

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Born in the same year as was Grattan, namely, in 1750, Lord Erskine adorned the profession
of the Bar with an eloquence that never exhibited the slight tendency to be ponderous which
sometimes was displayed by his contemporaries.

Grace and refinement shine out in every one of his great speeches.

He was a young scion of the great house of Buchan, being the third son of the tenth Earl. After
being in the Navy for four years he left it for the Army, and six years later he went to Trinity
College, Cambridge, and took his degree; thence he came to the Bar in 1778, and at once displayed
the most conspicuous ability as an advocate.

He appeared for Horne Tooke in a six-day trial for high treason, which ended in an acquittal.

In 1806 he became Lord Chancellor and a peer.

I quote an indignant warning to the aristocracy of England which flamed forth in one of his
great speeches:--

    "Let the aristocracy of England, which trembles so much for
    itself, take heed to its own security; let the nobles of England,
    if they mean to preserve that pre-eminence which, in some shape or
    other, must exist in every social community, take care to support
    it by aiming at that which is creative, and alone creative, of
    real superiority. Instead of matching themselves to supply wealth,
    to be again idly squandered in debauching excesses, or to round
    the quarters of a family shield; instead of continuing their names
    and honours in cold and alienated embraces, amidst the enervating
    rounds of shallow dissipation, let them live as their fathers of
    old lived before them; let them marry as affection and prudence
    lead the way, and, in the ardours of mutual love, and in the
    simplicities of rural life, let them lay the foundation of a
    vigorous race of men, firm in their bodies, and moral from early
    habits; and, instead of wasting their fortunes and their strength
    in the tasteless circles of debauchery, let them light up their
    magnificent and hospital halls to the gentry and peasantry of the
    country, extending the consolations of wealth and influence to the
    poor. Let them but do this,--and instead of those dangerous and
    distracted divisions between the different ranks of life, and
    those jealousies of the multitude so often blindly painted as big
    with destruction, we should see our country as one large and
    harmonious family, which can never be accomplished amidst vice and
    corruption, by wars and treaties, by informations, ex officio
    for libels, or by any of the tricks and artifices of the State."

Mr. Erskine was entitled, as the son of the tenth Earl of Buchan, to speak such words of warning
and exhortation to the aristocracy of England to which he belonged, and the lapse of a century
and a quarter has not rendered the exhortation vain, though it may be hoped that the condemnatory
clauses of the speech would not at the present time be so well justified as when they were
delivered.

Great names carry great obligations, and, for the most part, those who bear them to-day recognise
those great obligations and endeavour without ostentation to fulfil them.

The silly fribbles who posture before the photographic cameras for penny newspapers do not
represent the real aristocracy of England.

We must not, Antony, mistake a cockatoo for an eagle.

Your loving old G.P.

16

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I shall not expect you in your reading often to penetrate into the innumerable dusty octavos
that contain sermons. The stoutest heart may fail, without blame, before the flat-footed pedestrianism
of these platitudinous volumes. But there does occasionally arise above the dull horizon a
star whose brilliance is the more conspicuous for the surrounding gloom.

In 1796, Coleridge, in a letter[1] to a Mr. Flower, who was a publisher at Cambridge, wrote:--

    "I hope Robert Hall is well. Why is he idle? I mean towards the
    public. We want such men to rescue this enlightened age from
    general irreligion."

I suppose Robert Hall is a name known to but few in these days, but at the end of the eighteenth
and the beginning of the nineteenth centuries his fame was great and deserved.

As a divine, dowered with the gift of inspired eloquence, Coleridge estimated his powers as
second only to those of Jeremy Taylor. When Napoleon was at the supreme height of his conquests,
and England alone of European countries still stood erect, uninvaded and undismayed, a company
of soldiers attended Robert Hall's place of worship on the eve of their departure to Spain.
The occasion was memorable and moving, and the preacher's splendid periods deserve to be preserved
from oblivion:--

    "By a series of criminal enterprises, by the successes of guilty
    ambition, the liberties of Europe have been gradually
    extinguished; the subjugation of Holland, Switzerland, and the
    free towns of Germany, has completed that catastrophe; and we are
    the only people in the Eastern Hemisphere who are in possession of
    equal laws and a free constitution. Freedom, driven from every
    spot on the Continent, has sought an asylum in a country which she
    always chose for her favorite abode; but she is pursued even here,
    and threatened with destruction. The inundations of lawless power,
    after covering the whole earth, threaten to follow us here, and
    we are most exactly, most critically placed in the only aperture
    where it can be successfully repelled, in the Thermopylæ of the
    universe.

    "As far as the interests of freedom are concerned, the most
    important by far of sublunary interests, you, my countrymen, stand
    in the capacity of the federal representatives of the human race;
    for with you it is to determine (under God) in what condition the
    latest posterity shall be born; their fortunes are entrusted to
    your care, and on your conduct at this moment depends the colour
    and complexion of their destiny. If liberty, after being
    extinguished on the Continent, is suffered to expire here, whence
    is it ever to emerge in the midst of that thick night that will
    invest it?

    "It remains with you, then, to decide whether that freedom, at
    whose voice the kingdoms of Europe awoke from the sleep of ages to
    run a career of virtuous emulation in everything great and good;
    the freedom which dispelled the mists of superstition and invited
    the nations to behold their God; whose magic touch kindled the
    rays of genius, the enthusiasm of poetry, and the flame of
    eloquence; the freedom which poured into our lap opulence and
    arts, and embellished life with innumerable institutions and
    improvements till it became a theatre of wonders; it is for you to
    decide whether this freedom shall yet survive, or be covered with
    a funeral pall, and wrapt in eternal gloom.

    "It is not necessary to await your determination. In the
    solicitude you feel to approve yourselves worthy of such a trust,
    every thought of what is afflicting in warfare, every apprehension
    of danger, must vanish, and you are impatient to mingle in the
    battle of the civilised world.

    "And Thou, Sole Ruler among the children of men, to whom the
    shields of the earth belong, 'gird on Thy sword, Thou most
    Mighty'; go forth with our hosts in the day of battle! Impart, in
    addition to their hereditary valour, that confidence of success
    which springs from Thy Presence!

    "Pour into their hearts the spirit of departed heroes! Inspire
    them with Thine own, and, while led by Thine Hand and fighting
    under Thy banners, open Thou their eyes to behold in every valley
    and in every plain, what the prophet beheld by the same
    illuminations--chariots of fire, and horses of fire!

    "Then shall the strong man be as tow, and the maker of it as a
    spark; and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench
    them."

We, who have just emerged, shattered indeed and reeling, from another and yet more awful combat
for freedom, can the better extend our sympathy to those forefathers of ours situated in like
case, and can imagine with what beating hearts they must have listened to so magnificent a
call to arms as this; commingling prayer, exhortation, and benediction.

Napoleon, after all, waged his wars with us according to the laws of nations, the rules of
civilised peoples, and the dictates of decent humanity. But never since Christianity has been
established has one man committed so dread and awful an accumulation of public iniquities as
stand for ever against the base and cowardly name of William Hohenzollern, Emperor in Germany.
He spat upon the ancient chivalries of battle; he prostituted the decent amenities of diplomacy;
he polluted with infamy and murder the splendid comradeship of the sea.

When the captain of one of his submarines placed upon his deck the captured crew of an unarmed
merchant vessel which he had sunk, destroyed their boats, took from them their life-belts,
carried them miles away from any floating wreckage, and then projected them into the sea to
drown, this unspeakable monarch approved the awful deed and decorated the ruffian for his infamous
cruelty.

When gallant Fryatt, fulfilling every duty a captain owes to his unarmed crew and helpless
passengers, turned the bows of his peaceful packet-boat upon the submarine which was being
used to murder them all in cold blood, he fell into this Kaiser's hands, and the coward wreaked
his vengeance upon nobility that was beyond his comprehension and valour that rendered him
insignificant.

Of these horrible acts the proofs stand unchallenged, and for such deeds as these the world
has cast him out: thrown him down from one of the greatest thrones in history; and left him
in the place to which, white with terror, he ignominiously fled, stripped of all his power
and splendour, his crowns, his crosses, and his diadems.

Idle is it for this man and his apologists to plead any extenuation or excuse.

It was his custom in the plenitude of his power to declare himself answerable for his actions
only to God and himself. Then let the judgment of God be upon him. When we recall the awful
and unnumbered horrors with which he covered Europe, I doubt whether all history can furnish
a parallel to him.

By his authority helpless Belgium was invaded, treaties treacherously broken, and her people
slaughtered. By his authority her priests were murdered in cold blood and her nuns violated
by his vile soldiery. By his authority poison gases were first projected with low cunning upon
brave and honourable adversaries. By his authority hospital ships at sea were sent to the bottom.

But time and the might of free nations have, after fearful sufferings, dissipated his invincible
armies, and they have shrivelled before the wrath of mankind. The whole world rose up in its
offended majesty and tore from him that shining armour of which it was his custom to boast;
and, with the brand of Cain upon him, he now lies obscurely in Holland, bereft of all the trappings
of his sinister power.

There were times in the past when justice would have avenged such awful crimes as lie at this
man's door with the torture of his living body and the desecration of his lifeless remains,
but his conquerors disdained to debase themselves by imitating his own abominations; and they
left him to afford a spectacle to posterity as the supreme example of human ignominy!

When you are old, Antony, and this greatest of all wars has become part of England's history,
you will be proud and happy to remember that your own father, at the first call for volunteers,
laid down the pencil and scale of his peaceful profession, went out to fight for his country
in the trenches in France, was wounded almost to death, and was saved only by the skill and
devotion of one of the greatest surgeons of the day.[2] All the best blood of England, Scotland,
and Ireland went marching together to defend the freedom of the world, and upon their hearts
were engraven the glorious words:--

    "Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war
    and my fingers to fight."

May such a call never come to our beloved country again! But if it does, Antony, I know where
you will be found without need of exhortations from me.

Your loving old G.P.

[Footnote 1: Now in my library.--S.C.]

[Footnote 2: Sir Arbuthnot Lane.]

17

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Grattan, of whom I have already written, had in the first Lord Plunket a successor and a compatriot
very little his inferior in the gift of oratory.

He was born in 1764, and was therefore some fourteen years younger than Grattan, whom he survived
by thirty-four years.

Like Grattan, he displayed a burning patriotism and, like him, fiercely opposed the Act of Union.

Few orators have displayed greater powers of clear reason and convincing logic than Plunket.
It may be admitted that he seldom rose to great heights of eloquence, but tradition credits
his delivery with a quality of dignity amounting almost to majesty. The gift of oratory consists
in how things are said as much as in what things are said, and the voice, gesture, and manner
of Plunket were commanding and magnificent.

When Attorney-General in Ireland, in 1823, in a speech prosecuting the leaders of the riot
known as "the Bottle Riot," Plunket uttered the following fine tribute to the character of
William the Third:--

    "Perhaps, my lords, there is not to be found in the annals of
    history a character more truly great than that of William the
    Third. Perhaps no person has ever appeared on the theatre of the
    world who has conferred more essential or more lasting benefits on
    mankind; on these countries, certainly none. When I look at the
    abstract merits of his character, I contemplate him with
    admiration and reverence. Lord of a petty principality--destitute
    of all resources but those with which nature had endowed
    him--regarded with jealousy and envy by those whose battles he
    fought; thwarted in all his counsels; embarrassed in all his
    movements; deserted in his most critical enterprises--he continued
    to mould all those discordant materials, to govern all these
    warring interests, and merely by the force of his genius, the
    ascendancy of his integrity, and the immovable firmness and
    constancy of his nature, to combine them into an indissoluble
    alliance against the schemes of despotism and universal
    domination of the most powerful monarch in Europe, seconded by the
    ablest generals, at the head of the bravest and best disciplined
    armies in the world, and wielding, without check or control, the
    unlimited resources of his empire. He was not a consummate
    general; military men will point out his errors; in that respect
    Fortune did not favour him, save by throwing the lustre of
    adversity over all his virtues. He sustained defeat after defeat,
    but always rose adversa rerum immersabilis unda. Looking merely
    at his shining qualities and achievements, I admire him as I do a
    Scipio, a Regulus, a Fabius; a model of tranquil courage,
    undeviating probity, and armed with a resoluteness and constancy
    in the cause of truth and freedom, which rendered him superior to
    the accidents that control the fate of ordinary men.

    "But this is not all--I feel that to him, under God, I am, at this
    moment, indebted for the enjoyment of the rights which I possess
    as a subject of these free countries; to him I owe the blessings
    of civil and religious liberty, and I venerate his memory with a
    fervour of devotion suited to his illustrious qualities and to
    his godlike acts."

This is not so magnificent a panegyric as that of Grattan in his written tribute to Chatham,
but, enhanced by the gesture and voice of the great orator, it was reputed to have left a deep
impression upon all who heard it.

But few speeches, however eloquent, survive, while the printed work of the writer may long
endure; but to the orator is given what the writer never experiences--the fierce enjoyment,
amounting almost to rapture, of holding an audience entranced under the spell of the spoken
cadences; and English, Antony, has a splendour all its own when uttered by a master of its
august music.

Your loving old G.P.

18

MY DEAR ANTONY,

To-day I will write about Robert Southey, and, as he and Coleridge married sisters, you may
claim a distant relationship with him. His personal character was beautiful and unselfish,
and his dwelling at Keswick was the home that for years sheltered Coleridge's children.

With hardly an exception the poets of England have had an easy and royal mastery of prose;
and in the case of Robert Southey there are some, and they are not the worst critics, who anticipate
that his prose will long outlast his poetry in the Temple of Fame.

We may suppose that to a man whose whole private life was stainlessly dedicated to a noble
rectitude of conduct, and whose every act was sternly subjected to the judgment of an unbending
conscience, some circumstances of the private life of Nelson must have been distasteful and
open to censure; but no such reservations dimmed the splendour of Southey's tribute to the
public hero who gave his life in the act of establishing, beyond reach of dispute or cavil,
the throne of England as Queen of the Sea.

    "It was not, therefore, from any selfish reflection upon the
    magnitude of our loss that we mourned for him; the general sorrow
    was of a higher character. The people of England grieved that
    funeral ceremonies, public monuments and posthumous rewards, were
    all which they could now bestow upon him whom the king, the
    legislature, and the nation, would alike have delighted to honour;
    whom every tongue would have blessed; whose presence in every
    village through which he might have passed would have wakened the
    church bells, have given schoolboys a holiday, have drawn children
    from their sports to gaze upon him, and 'old men from the chimney
    corner' to look upon Nelson ere they died.

    "The victory of Trafalgar was celebrated, indeed, with the usual
    forms of rejoicing, but they were without joy; for such already
    was the glory of the British Navy through Nelson's surpassing
    genius, that it scarcely seemed to receive any addition from the
    most signal victory that ever was achieved upon the sea; and the
    destruction of this mighty fleet, by which all the maritime
    schemes of France were totally frustrated, hardly appeared to add
    to our security or strength, for while Nelson was living to watch
    the combined squadrons of the enemy, we felt ourselves as secure
    as now, when they were no longer in existence.

    "There was reason to suppose from the appearances upon opening the
    body, that in the course of nature he might have attained, like
    his father, to a good old age. Yet he cannot be said to have
    fallen prematurely whose work was done; nor ought he to be
    lamented, who died so full of honours, and at the height of human
    fame. The most triumphant death is that of a martyr; the most
    awful, that of the martyred patriot; the most splendid, that of
    the hero in the hour of victory; and if the chariot and the horses
    of fire had been vouchsafed for Nelson's translation, he could
    scarcely have departed in a brighter blaze of glory.

    "He has left us, not indeed his mantle of inspiration, but a name
    and an example which are at this hour inspiring hundreds of the
    youth of England; a name which is our pride, and an example which
    will continue to be our shield and our strength."

Nelson left England the Queen of the Sea, and the great war with Germany has failed to displace
her from that splendid throne. For the plain fact of history remains that, after the battle
of Jutland, the German High Seas Fleet never ventured out of port again till the end of the
war; and when it did emerge from its ignominious security, it sailed to captivity at Scapa
Flow, there ultimately to repose on the bottom of the sea.

Your loving old G.P.

19

MY DEAR ANTONY,

There are four very celebrated lines written by Walter Savage Landor which you may have heard
quoted; they were written towards the close of his life, and are certainly distinguished and
memorable:--

  "I strove with none, for none was worth my strife;
    Nature I loved, and next to Nature Art;
  I warmed both hands before the fire of life;
    It sinks, and I am ready to depart."

It does not detract from the merit of the lines that as a fact Landor was of a fiery disposition,
and strove a great deal with many adversaries, often of his own creation, throughout his long
life[1]; and although he was of a fierce and combative nature he displayed in his writings
a classical restraint and tender beauty hardly achieved by his contemporaries.

In the form of an imaginary conversation between Æsop and Rhodope, Landor makes the latter
describe how her father, in the famine, unbeknown to her, starved that she might have plenty,
and, when all was gone, took her to the market-place to sell her that she might live. There
is an exquisite delicacy in this dialogue that places it among the wonders of literature:--

    "Rhodope. Never shall I forget the morning when my father,
    sitting in the coolest part of the house, exchanged his last
    measure of grain for a chlamys of scarlet cloth, fringed with
    silver. He watched the merchant out of the door, and then looked
    wistfully into the cornchest. I, who thought there was something
    worth seeing, looked in also, and finding it empty, expressed my
    disappointment, not thinking, however, about the corn. A faint and
    transient smile came over his countenance at the sight of mine. He
    unfolded the chlamys, stretched it out with both hands before me,
    and then cast it over my shoulders. I looked down on the
    glittering fringe and screamed with joy. He then went out; and I
    know not what flowers he gathered, but he gathered many; and some
    he placed in my bosom, and some in my hair. Here's no goods publicated,
    none restrain'd or mulcted of their Libertie, none diminish'd of
    dignitie, none molested, or exil'd; all are again return'd into{9}
    their houses, Relations and Properties, and which is yet more
    then all, to their antient innocencie{10} and mutual charitie.

If
    the Philosopher in the Ethicks enquiring whether the felicity of
the sun, do any whit concern the happinesse of the defunct progenitor,
after much reasoning have determin'd that the honour only which his
son acquires by worthie and great actions, does certainly refresh
his Ghost: What a day of Jubilee, is this then to Your blessed Father!

    Not the odor of those flowers did so recreate the dead Archemorus
    which the Nymphs were yearly wont to strow upon his watry
    Sepulcher, as this daies Inauguration of Yours, does even seem
    to revive the Ashes of that sacred Martyr.
    
    Should some one from the clouds that had looked down on the sad face
of things, when our Temples lay in dust, our Palaces in desolation,
and the Altars demolished; when these Citie Gates were dashed to pieces,
Gibbets and Executions erected in every Street, and all things turned
into universal silence and solitude, behold now the change of this
daies glorious scean; that we see the Churches in repair, the sacred
Assemblies open'd, our Cities re-edified, the Markets full of People,
our Palaces richly furnished, and the Streets proud with the burden
of their Triumphal Arches, and the shouts of a rejoycing multitude:
How would he wonder and stand amaz'd, at the Prodigie, and leap down
from his lofty station, though already so near to heaven, to joyne
with us in earth, participate of our felicitie, and ravish'd with
the Ecstasie, cry out aloud now with Us.

    
    
    Set open the Temple-Gates, let the Prisoners go free, the Altars smoak
    perfumes, bring forth the Pretious things, strow the Waies with Flowers,
    let the Fountains run Wine, Crown the Gobblets, bring Chapplets of
    Palmes and Lawrells, the Bells ring, the Trumpets sound, the Cannon
roar, O happy Descent, and strange Reverse!

    I have seen{11} Englands Restorer, Great CHARLES the II. RETURN'D,
    REVENG'D, BELOV'D, CROWN'D, RE-ESTABLISH'D.

    
    Terrasque Astræa Revisit.
    
    And O that it were now in my power to speak some great thing,
    worthy this great day; I should put all the flowers of Orators
    and Raptures of Poets into one lofty & high Expression, and yet
    not Reach what I would say to Your Majestie: For never since there
    was a Citie, or Kingdom, did a Day appear more glorious to England,
    never since it was a Nation, and in which there either was, or
    ought to be so universal a Jubilation: Not that Your Triumphal Charriots
    do drag the miserable Captives, but are accompanied by freed Citizens;
    perfidie is now vanquished, popular fury chayn'd, crueltie tam'd,
    luxury restrained, these lie under the spondells of Your Wheeles,
    where Empire, Faith, Love, and Justice Ride Triumphant, and nothing
can be added to Your Majesties glory but its perpetuitie.

     He would not receive me from my father's
    neck, but he asked me with benignity and solicitude if I was
    hungry; at which I laughed again, and more than ever; for it was
    early in the morning, soon after the first meal, and my father had
    nourished me most carefully and plentifully in all the days of the
    famine. But Xanthus, waiting for no answer, took out of a sack,
    which one of his slaves carried at his side, a cake of wheaten
    bread and a piece of honeycomb, and gave them to me. I held the
    honeycomb to my father's mouth, thinking it the most of a dainty.
    He dashed it to the ground, but seizing the bread he began to
    devour it ferociously. This also I thought was in the play, and I
    clapped my hands at his distortions. But Xanthus looked at him
    like one afraid, and smote the cake from him, crying aloud, 'Name
    the price,' My father now placed me in his arms, naming a price
    much below what the other had offered, saying, 'The gods are ever
    with thee, O Xanthus! therefore to thee do I consign my child.'

    "But while Xanthus was counting out the silver my father seized
    the cake again, which the slave had taken up and was about to
    replace in the wallet. His hunger was exasperated by the taste,
    and the delay. Suddenly there arose much tumult. Turning round in
    the old woman's bosom who had received me from Xanthus, I saw my
    beloved father struggling on the ground, livid and speechless. The
    more violent my cries, the more rapidly they hurried me away; and
    many were soon between us.

    "Little was I suspicious that he had suffered the pangs of famine
    long before: alas! and he had suffered them for me. Do I weep
    while I am telling you they ended? I could not have closed his
    eyes; I was too young; but I might have received his last breath,
    the only comfort of an orphan's bosom. Do you now think him
    blameable, O Æsop?"

    "Æsop. It was sublime humanity; it was forbearance and
    self-denial which even the immortal gods have never shown us."

The Dream of Petrarca is, I think, more famous but not more beautiful than this narrative of
Rhodope; it lacks the deep human tragedy and infinite charity of the winsome child, and the
self-contained father silently perishing of hunger for her; but if the Æsop and Rhodope had
never been written, the Dream of Petrarca would secure its author a place among the immortals:--

    "... Wearied with the length of my walk over the mountains, and
    finding a soft molehill, covered with grey moss, by the wayside, I
    laid my head upon it and slept. I cannot tell how long it was
    before a species of dream or vision came over me.

    "Two beautiful youths appeared beside me; each was winged; but the
    wings were hanging down and seemed ill-adapted to flight. One of
    them, whose voice was the softest I ever heard, looking at me
    frequently, said to the other, 'He is under my guardianship for
    the present; do not awaken him with that feather.' Methought, on
    hearing the whisper, I saw something like the feather on an arrow;
    and then the arrow itself; the whole of it, even to the point,
    although he carried it in such a manner that it was difficult at
    first to discover more than a palm's length of it; the rest of the
    shaft (and the whole of the barb) was behind his ankles.

    "'This feather never awakens anyone,' replied he, rather
    petulantly, 'but it brings more of confident security, and more of
    cherished dreams, than you, without me, are capable of imparting.'

    "'Be it so!' answered the gentler; 'none is less inclined to
    quarrel or dispute than am I. Many whom you have wounded
    grievously call upon me for succour; but so little am I disposed
    to thwart you, it is seldom I venture to do more for them than to
    whisper a few words of comfort in passing. How many reproaches on
    these occasions have been cast upon me for indifference and
    infidelity! Nearly as many, and nearly in the same terms as upon
    you.'

    "'Odd enough that we, O Sleep! should be thought so alike!' said
    Love contemptuously. 'Yonder is he who bears a nearer resemblance
    to you; the dullest have observed it.' I fancied I turned my eyes
    to where he was pointing, and saw at a distance the figure he
    designated. Meanwhile the contention went on uninterruptedly.
    Sleep was slow in asserting his power or his benefits. Love
    recapitulated them; but only that he might assert his own above
    them.

    "Suddenly he called upon me to decide, and to choose my patron.
    Under the influence, first of the one, then of the other, I sprang
    from repose to rapture, I alighted from rapture on repose, and
    knew not which was sweetest. Love was very angry with me, and
    declared he would cross me through the whole of my existence.
    Whatever I might on other occasions have thought of his veracity,
    I now felt too surely that he would keep his word.

    "At last, before the close of the altercation, the third Genius
    had advanced, and stood near us. I cannot tell you how I knew him,
    but I knew him to be the Genius of Death. Breathless as I was at
    beholding him, I soon became familiar with his features. First
    they seemed only calm; presently they grew contemplative; and
    lastly beautiful; those of the Graces themselves are less regular,
    less harmonious, less composed.

    "Love glanced at him unsteadily, with a countenance in which there
    was somewhat of anxiety, somewhat of disdain; and cried, 'Go away!
    go away! nothing that thou touchest, lives!' 'Say rather, child!'
    replied the advancing form, and advancing grew loftier and
    statelier, 'say rather that nothing of beautiful or of glorious
    lives its own true life until my wing hath passed over it.'

    "Love pouted, and rumpled and bent down with his forefinger the
    stiff short feathers on his arrow-head, but replied not. Although
    he frowned worse than ever, and at me, I dreaded him less and
    less, and scarcely looked towards him. The milder and calmer
    Genius, the third, in proportion as I took courage to contemplate
    him, regarded me with more and more complacency. He held neither
    flower nor arrow as the others did, but throwing back the clusters
    of dark curls that overshadowed his countenance, he presented to
    me his hand, openly and benignly. I shrank on looking at him so
    near, and yet I sighed to love him. He smiled, not without an
    expression of pity, at perceiving my diffidence, my timidity; for
    I remembered how soft was the hand of Sleep, how warm and
    entrancing was Love's.

    "By degrees I became ashamed of my ingratitude, and turning my
    face away, I held out my arms, and I felt my neck within his; the
    coolness of freshest morning breathed around; the heavens seemed to
    open above me, while the beautiful cheek of my deliverer rested on
    my head. I would now have looked for those others, but knowing my
    intention by my gesture, he said consolatorily, 'Sleep is on his
    way to the Earth, where many are calling him; but it is not to
    these he hastens, for every call only makes him fly further off.
    Sedately and gravely as he looks, he is nearly as capricious and
    volatile as the more arrogant and ferocious one.'

    "'And Love!' said I, 'whither is he departed? If not too late, I
    would propitiate and appease him.'

    "'He who cannot follow me; he who cannot overtake and pass me,'
    said the Genius, 'is unworthy of the name, the most glorious in
    earth or heaven. Look up! Love is yonder, and ready to receive
    thee.'

    "I looked: the earth was under me: I saw only the clear blue sky,
    and something brighter above it."

There is something most rare and refined and precious in this vision, told as it is with a
sweet serenity. But it does not touch the heart like the Æsop and Rhodope.

Your loving old G.P.

[Footnote 1: Born 1775, died 1864.]

20

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I now come to speak of one whose fame was familiar to me as a boy--the great Lord Brougham.--for
he lived till 1868. I remember that he was vehemently praised and blamed as a politician, but
with such matters others have dealt; in this letter, Antony, we will concern ourselves with
the glory of English prose as it poured from Lord Brougham in two of his greatest speeches.

He was an orator whose voice was uplifted throughout a long and strenuous life in condemnation
of all the brutalities and oppression of his time, and to whose eloquence the triumphant cause
of freedom stands for ever in deep obligation.

His great speech on Law Reform in the House of Commons, in 1828, took six hours to deliver,
and the concluding passage, which mounted to a plane of lofty declamation, displayed no sign
of exhaustion, and was listened to with strained attention by an absorbed and crowded audience:--

    "The course is clear before us; the race is glorious to run. You
    have the power of sending your name down through all times,
    illustrated by deeds of higher fame, and more useful import, than
    ever were done within these walls.

    "You saw the greatest warrior of the age--conqueror of
    Italy--humbler of Germany--terror of the North--saw him account
    all his matchless victories poor, compared with the triumph you
    are now in a condition to win--saw him contemn the fickleness of
    fortune, while, in despite of her, he could pronounce his
    memorable boast, 'I shall go down to posterity with the Code in my
    hand!'

    "You have vanquished him in the field; strive now to rival him in
    the sacred arts of peace! Outstrip him as a lawgiver, whom in arms
    you overcame! The lustre of the Regency will be eclipsed by the
    more solid and enduring splendour of the Reign. The praise which
    false courtiers feigned for our Edwards and Harrys, the Justinians
    of their day, will be the just tribute of the wise and the good to
    that monarch under whose sway so mighty an undertaking shall be
    accomplished. Of a truth, the holders of sceptres are most chiefly
    to be envied for that they bestow the power of thus conquering,
    and ruling thus.

    "It was the boast of Augustus--it formed part of the glare in
    which the perfidies of his earlier years were lost,--that he found
    Rome of brick, and left it of marble; a praise not unworthy a
    great prince, and to which the present reign also has its claims.
    But how much nobler will be the sovereign's boast when he shall
    have it to say, that he found law dear, and left it cheap; found
    it a sealed book--left it a living letter; found it the patrimony
    of the rich--left it the inheritance of the poor; found it the
    two-edged sword of craft and oppression--left it the staff of
    honesty and the shield of innocence!

    "To me, much reflecting on these things, it has always seemed a
    worthier honour to be the instrument of making you bestir
    yourselves in this high matter, than to enjoy all that office can
    bestow--office, of which the patronage would be an irksome
    encumbrance, the emoluments superfluous to one content with the
    rest of his industrious fellow-citizens that his own hands
    minister to his wants; and as for the power supposed to follow
    it--I have lived near half a century, and I have learned that
    power and place may be severed.

    "But one power I do prize; that of being the advocate of my
    countrymen here, and their fellow-labourers elsewhere, in those
    things which concern the best interests of mankind. That power, I
    know full well, no government can give--no change take away!"

    "So now the fulness of time is come for at length discharging our
    duty to the African captive.

    "I demand his rights; I demand his liberty without stint.

This is nobly to use noble gifts; it is difficult to think ill of a man who can carry oratory
for a glorious object to such heights of splendour. It may seem a duty to some to darken his
character with detraction, but his inspiring words remain supreme and unsullied and will still
live when such faults as may be truly laid to his charge are long forgotten. To fight for a
great cause, Antony, is rightly to use great powers, and this is what Lord Brougham did with
all his might.

Your loving old G.P.

21

MY DEAR ANTONY,

In the great emprise of war it must often happen that the most awful scenes of manifested human
power, and the most godlike deeds of human glory, are lost to the contemporary world, and utterly
unknown to succeeding generations, because they were witnessed by no man with the gift of expression
who could record for after time, in adequate language, the majestic spectacle.

In the great war against Germany no great writer has yet appeared who was personally in touch
as a living witness of the countless deeds of glorious valour and acts of heroic endurance
that were everywhere displayed upon that immense far-stretched front.

But in the wars of former times, a whole battle could be witnessed from its beginning to its
end by a single commander, and no scenes in human life could be more terrible and soul-stirring
than the awful ebb and flow of a great combat in which the victory of armies and the fate of
nations hung in the balance.

The battle of Albuera in the Peninsular War might easily at this date have long been forgotten
had not the pen of Sir William Napier been as puissant as his sword. The battle had raged for
hours, and the British were well-nigh overwhelmed; the Colonel, twenty officers, and over four
hundred men out of five hundred and seventy had fallen in the 57th alone; not a third were
left standing in the other regiments that had been closely engaged throughout the day. Then
Cole was ordered up with his fourth division as a last hope, and this is how Sir William Napier
records their advance:--

    "Such a gallant line, issuing from the midst of the smoke and
    rapidly separating itself from the confused and broken multitude,
    startled the enemy's masses, then augmenting and pressing onwards
    as to an assured victory; they wavered, hesitated, and vomiting
    forth a storm of fire hastily endeavoured to enlarge their front,
    while a fearful discharge of grape from all their artillery
    whistled through the British ranks ... the English battalions,
    struck by the iron tempest, reeled and staggered like sinking
    ships; but suddenly and sternly recovering, they closed on their
    terrible enemies, and then was seen with what a strength and
    majesty the British soldier fights.

    "In vain did Soult with voice and gesture animate his Frenchmen;
    in vain did the hardiest veterans, breaking from the crowded
    columns, sacrifice their lives to gain time for the mass to open
    out on such a fair field; in vain did the mass itself bear up,
    and, fiercely striving, fire indiscriminately upon friends and
    foes, while the horsemen hovering on the flank threatened to
    charge the advancing line.

    "Nothing could stop that astonishing infantry.

    "No sudden burst of undisciplined valour, no nervous enthusiasm
    weakened the stability of their order; their flashing eyes were
    bent on the dark columns in their front; their measured tread
    shook the ground; their dreadful volleys swept away the head of
    every formation; their deafening shouts overpowered the dissonant
    cries that broke from all parts of the tumultuous crowd as slowly,
    and with a horrid carnage, it was pushed by the incessant vigour
    of the attack to the farthest edge of the height. There the French
    reserve, mixing with the struggling multitude, endeavoured to
    restore the fight, but only augmented the irremediable disorder,
    and the mighty mass, giving way like a loosened cliff, went
    headlong down the steep; the rain flowed after in streams
    discoloured with blood, and eighteen hundred unwounded men, the
    remnant of six thousand unconquerable British soldiers, stood
    triumphant on the fatal hill!

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The laurel is nobly won when the exhausted victor reels as he
    places it on his bleeding front.

    "All that night the rain poured down, and the river and the hills
    and the woods resounded with the dismal clamour and groans of
    dying men."

Sir William Napier seems intimately to have known the transience of the gratitude of nations
to those who fight their battles for them. At the end of his noble history of the Peninsular
War he lets the curtain fall upon the scene with solemn brevity in a single sentence, thus:--

    "The British infantry embarked at Bordeaux, some for America, some
    for England: the cavalry, marching through France, took shipping
    at Boulogne. Thus the war terminated, and with it all remembrance
    of the Veterans' services.

    "Yet those Veterans had won nineteen pitched battles, and
    innumerable combats; had made or sustained ten sieges and taken
    four great fortresses; had twice expelled the French from
    Portugal, once from Spain; had penetrated France, and killed,
    wounded, or captured two hundred thousand enemies--leaving of
    their own number, forty thousand dead, whose bones, whiten the
    plains and mountains of the Peninsula."

Science and the base malignity of our latest adversaries have debased modern warfare, as waged
by them, from its ancient dignity and honour; and they have conducted it so as to make it difficult
to believe that from the Kaiser down to the subaltern on land and the petty officer at sea
that nation can produce a single gentleman.

Your loving old G.P.

22

MY DEAR ANTONY,

This letter, like the last one, is concerned with war. War brings to every man not incapacitated
by age or physical defects the call of his country to fight, and if need be to die, for it.
It also exposes to view the few pusillanimous young men who are satisfied to enjoy protection
from the horrors of invasion and the priceless boon of personal freedom, secured to them by
the self-sacrifice and valour of others, while they themselves remain snugly at home and talk
of their consciences. Our own great war has not yet produced many fine utterances, and I go
back to-day to a contemporary of Sir William Napier for one of the noblest outbursts of eloquence
expressive of a burning patriotism that has ever been poured forth.

Someone in the days when Wellington was alive had alluded in the House of Lords to the Irish
as "aliens," and Richard Sheil, rising in the House of Commons, lifted up his voice for his
country in an impassioned flight of generous eloquence.

Sir Henry Hardinge, who had been at the battle of Waterloo, happened
to be seated opposite to Sheil in the House, and to him Sheil appealed
with the deepest emotion to support him in his vindication of his
country's valour. (and here Sheil
    pointed to Sir Henry Hardinge across the House). Tell me, for you
    were there.

    "Partners in every peril--in the glory shall we not be permitted
    to participate, and shall we be told as a requital that we are
    aliens, and estranged from the noble country for whose salvation
    our life-blood was poured out?"

A hundred years of strife, misunderstanding, anger, estrangement, outrages, bloodshed, and
murder separate us from this appealing cry wrung from the beating heart of this inspired Irishman.
Is the great tragedy of England and Ireland that has sullied their annals for seven hundred
years never to be brought to an end? Is there never to be for us a Lethe through which we may
pass to the farther shore of forgetfulness and forgiveness of the past and reconciliation in
the future?

That you may live to see it, Antony, is my hope and prayer.

Your loving old G.P.

23

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I gave you in a former letter Burke's famous passage on the fate of Marie Antoinette--in some
ways the most splendid of his utterances,--and I now am going to quote to you a very great
passage from Thomas Carlyle on the same tragic subject.

Courageous was it of Carlyle, who must certainly have been familiar with Burke's noble ejaculation,
to challenge it with emulation; but in the result we must admit that he amply justifies his
temerity.

The tragic figure of the queen drawn to execution through the roaring mob inspired Carlyle
with what is surely his most overwhelming product.

The august shadow of the Bible is dimly apprehended as the words ascend upwards and upwards
with simple sublimity to the awful close.

Nothing he wrote in all his multitudinous volumes surpasses this astonishing outburst:--

    "Beautiful Highborn that wert so foully hurled low!

    "For, if thy being came to thee out of old Hapsburg Dynasties,
    came it not also out of Heaven? Sunt lachrymæ rerum, et mentem
    mortalia tangunt. Oh! is there a man's heart that thinks without
    pity of those long months and years of slow-wasting ignominy;--of
    thy birth soft-cradled, the winds of Heaven not to visit thy face
    too roughly, thy foot to light on softness, thy eye on splendour;
    and then of thy death, or hundred deaths, to which the guillotine
    and Fouquier Tinville's judgment was but the merciful end?

    "Look there, O man born of woman! The bloom of that fair face is
    wasted, the hair is grey with care; the brightness of those eyes
    is quenched, their lids hang drooping, the face is stony pale as
    of one living in death.

    "Mean weeds which her own hand has mended attire the Queen of the
    World. The death-hurdle, where thou sittest pale, motionless,
    which only curses environ, has to stop--a people drunk with
    vengeance will drink it again in full draught, looking at thee
    there. Far as the eye reaches, a multitudinous sea of maniac
    heads, the air deaf with their triumph-yell!

    "The living-dead must shudder with yet one more pang; her startled
    blood yet again suffuses with the hue of agony that pale face,
    which she hides with her hands.

    "There is, then, no heart to say, 'God pity thee'?

    "O think not of these: think of Him Whom thou worshippest, the
    Crucified--Who also treading the winepress alone, fronted sorrow
    still deeper, and triumphed over it, and made it holy, and built
    of it a Sanctuary of Sorrow for thee and all the wretched!

    "Thy path of thorns is nigh ended. One long last look at the
    Tuileries, where thy step was once so light--where thy children
    shall not dwell.

    "Thy head is on the block; the axe rushes--dumb lies the world;
    that wild-yelling world, and all its madness, is behind thee."

There is a passage in Carlyle's tempestuous narrative of the taking of the Bastille which has
always seemed to me to give it the last consummate touch of greatness.

Suddenly he pauses in the turmoil and dust and wrath and madness of that tremendous conflict,
and his poetic vision gazes away over peaceful France, and he exclaims:--

    "O evening sun of July, how, at this hour thy beams fall slant on
    reapers amid peaceful woody fields; on old women spinning in
    cottages; on ships far out on the silent main; on balls at the
    Orangerie of Versailles, where high rouged Dames of the palace are
    even now dancing with double-jacketed Hussar-officers:--and also
    on this roaring Hell-porch of a Hôtel de Ville."

And a few sentences further on a heart of stone must be moved by what the archives of that
grim prison-house revealed:--

    "Old secrets come to view; and long-buried despair finds voice.
    Read this portion of an old letter.

    "'If for my consolation Monseigneur would grant me, for the sake
    of God and the Most Blessed Trinity, that I could have news of my
    dear wife; were it only her name on a card, to show that she is
    alive! It were the greatest consolation I could receive; and I
    should for ever bless the greatness of Monseigneur.'

    "Poor prisoner, who namest thyself Queret-Demery, and hast no
    other history,--she is dead, that dear wife of thine, and thou art
    dead! Tis fifty years since thy breaking heart put this question;
    to be heard now first, and long heard, in the hearts of men."

In the reign of Louis XV. alone, there were no less than fifteen thousand lettres de cachet
issued, by which anyone could be suddenly arrested, and, without trial, and, heedless of protest,
imprisoned perhaps for life in the Bastille.

In the excesses of the Reign of Terror three or four thousand persons perished. Their deaths
were spectacular, and have covered with execrations their dreadful executioners.

But it is right that we should remember, Antony, the life-long agony and the unutterable despair
of the victims of that remorselessly cruel system which the Revolution overthrew.

The chapter on the "Everlasting Yea," in Sartor Resartus, seems to me to come nearer to the
above excerpts than anything else in Carlyle, though at a perceptible distance:--

    "O thou that pinest in the imprisonment of the Actual, and criest
    bitterly to the gods for a kingdom wherein to rule and create,
    know this of a truth: the thing thou seekest is already with thee,
    'here or nowhere,' couldst thou only see!

    "But it is with man's Soul as it was with Nature: the beginning of
    Creation is--Light. Till the eye have vision the whole members are
    in bonds. Divine moment, when over the tempest-tossed Soul, as
    once over the wild-weltering Chaos, it is spoken: 'Let there be
    Light!' Even to the greatest that has felt such moment is it not
    miraculous and God-announcing; even as, under simpler figures, to
    the simplest and least. The mad primeval Discord is hushed; the
    rudely-jumbled conflicting elements bind themselves into separate
    Firmaments: deep, silent rock-foundations are built beneath, and
    the skyey vault, with its everlasting Luminaries, above; instead
    of a dark, wasteful Chaos, we have a blooming, fertile,
    heaven-encompassed World. 'Tis the utmost thou hast in thee; out with it then.
    Up, up! Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy whole
    might. Work while it is called to-day; for the night cometh
    wherein no man can work.'"

There is another passage in Sartor Resartus which I have always held in veneration, though
the field labourer is not now so "hardly-entreated" as when Carlyle wrote of him:--

    "Two men I honour, and no third. First the toilworn Craftsman that
    with earth-made implement laboriously conquers the earth, and
    makes her man's.

    "Venerable to me is the hard hand; crooked, coarse; wherein
    notwithstanding lies a cunning virtue indefeasibly royal, as of
    the sceptre of this planet. Venerable too is the rugged face, all
    weather-tanned, besoiled, with its rude intelligence; for it is
    the face of a man living manlike. Oh, but the more venerable for
    thy rudeness, and even because we must pity as well as love thee!
    Hardly-entreated brother! For us was thy back so bent, for us were
    thy straight limbs and fingers so deformed; thou wert our
    conscript, on whom the lot fell, and fighting our battles wert so
    marred. For in thee too lay a god-created form, but it was not to
    be unfolded; encrusted must it stand with the thick adhesions and
    defacements of labour; and thy body, like thy soul, was not to
    know freedom. Yet toil on, toil on; thou art in thy duty, be
    out of it who may: thou toilest for the altogether indispensable,
    for daily bread.

    "A second man I honour, and still more highly: him who is seen
    toiling for the spiritually indispensable; not daily bread, but
    the bread of life. Is not he too in his duty; endeavouring towards
    inward harmony; revealing this, by act or by word, through all his
    outward endeavours, be they high or low? Highest of all, when his
    outward and his inward endeavour are one: when we can name him
    artist; not earthly craftsman only, but inspired thinker, who with
    heaven-made implement conquers heaven for us! If the poor and
    humble toil that we have food, must not the high and glorious toil
    for him in return, that he have light, have guidance, freedom,
    immortality? These two, in all their degrees, I honour; all else
    is chaff and dust, which let the wind blow whither it listeth.

    "Unspeakably touching is it, however, when I find both dignities
    united; and he that must toil outwardly for the lowest of man's
    wants, is also toiling inwardly for the highest. Sublimer in this
    world know I nothing than a peasant saint, could such now anywhere
    be met with. Such a one will take thee back to Nazareth itself;
    thou wilt see the splendour of heaven spring forth from the
    humblest depths of earth, like a light shining in great darkness."

Sartor Resartus has long taken its place among the greatest prose works of the nineteenth century,
and it is a strange commentary on this mandate to us all to "produce, produce!" to find that
for eleven years Carlyle could find no publisher who would give it in book form to the world!

It is a solemn reflection to think that there may be many books of eloquence and splendour
that have never seen the light of publicity. Publishers concern themselves less with what is
finely written than with what will best sell; and in their defence it may be acceded that some
of the masterpieces of literature have at their first appearance before the world fallen dead
from the press.

The first edition of FitzGerald's Omar Khayyám, issued at one shilling, was totally unrecognised,
and copies of it might have been bought for twopence in the trays and boxes of trash on the
pavement outside old bookshops!

But if once a work is published, time will with almost irresistible force place it ultimately
in the station it deserves in the literature of the world.

Instant acceptance not seldom preludes final rejection. In the middle of the last century Martin
Tupper's Proverbial Philosophy garnished every drawing-room table; and now, where is it?

Your loving old G.P.

P.S.--Do not look for the passage on Marie Antoinette in the French Revolution, for you will
not find it there, but in the "Essay of the Diamond Necklace."

24

MY DEAR ANTONY,

You and I once had a cousin, Henry Nelson Coleridge, who, had he lived, would very certainly
have left a brilliant addition to the lustre of the name he bore. He was born in 1798, and
only lived forty-five years, dying when his powers were leading him to high fortune in that
legal profession which so many of the family have pursued.

He was a scholar of Eton; a Fellow of King's College, Cambridge; he won the Greek and Latin
Odes in 1820, and the Greek Ode again in 1821. To him, therefore, the classic spirit was inborn,
and a training that omitted the study of Latin and Greek the very negation of education. He
would have had something very trenchant to say of what is now known as "the modern side." He
wrote a very rich and splendid prose, and it is no fond family partiality that leads me to
quote to you his eloquent and precious defence of the classical languages:--

    "I am not one whose lot it has been to grow old in literary
    retirement, devoted to classical studies with an exclusiveness
    which might lead to an overweening estimate of these two noble
    languages. Few, I will not say evil, were the days allowed to me
    for such pursuits; and I was constrained, still young and an
    unripe scholar to forego them for the duties of an active and
    laborious profession. They are now amusements only, however
    delightful and improving. For I am far from assuming to understand
    all their riches, all their beauty, or all their power; yet I can
    profoundly feel their immeasurable superiority in many important
    respects to all we call modern; and I would fain think that there
    are many even among my younger readers who can now, or will
    hereafter, sympathise with the expression of my ardent admiration.

    "Greek--the shrine of the genius of the old world; as universal as
    our race, as individual as ourselves; of infinite flexibility, or
    indefatigable strength, with the complication and the distinctness
    of Nature herself; to which nothing was vulgar, from which nothing
    was excluded; speaking to the ear like Italian, speaking to the
    mind like English; with words like pictures, with words like the
    gossamer films of the summer; at once the variety and
    picturesqueness of Homer; the gloom and the intensity of Æschylus;
    not compressed to the closest by Thucydides, nor fathomed to the
    bottom by Plato; not sounding with all its thunders, nor lit up
    with all its ardours even under the Promethean touch of
    Demosthenes!

    "And Latin--the voice of empire and of war, of law and of the
    state, inferior to its half-parent and rival in the embodying of
    passion and in the distinguishing of thought, but equal to it in
    sustaining the measured march of history; and superior to it in
    the indignant declamation of moral satire; stamped with the mark
    of an imperial and despotising republic; rigid in its
    construction, parsimonious in its synonyms; reluctantly yielding
    to the flowery yoke of Horace, although opening glimpses of
    Greek-like splendour in the occasional inspirations of Lucretius;
    proved indeed, to the uttermost, by Cicero, and by him found
    wanting; yet majestic in its bareness, impressive in its
    conciseness; the true language of history, instinct with the
    spirit of nations and not with the passions of individuals;
    breathing the maxims of the world, and not the tenets of the
    schools; one and uniform in its air and spirit, whether touched by
    the stern and haughty Sallust, by the open and discursive Livy, by
    the reserved and thoughtful Tacitus.

    "These inestimable advantages, which no modern skill can wholly
    counterpoise, are known and felt by the scholar alone. He has not
    failed, in the sweet and silent studies of his youth, to drink
    deep at those sacred fountains of all that is just and beautiful
    in human language.

    "The thoughts and the words of the master-spirits of Greece and of
    Rome, are inseparably blended in his memory; a sense of their
    marvellous harmonies, their exquisite fitness, their consummate
    polish, has sunk for ever in his heart, and thence throws out
    light and fragrancy upon the gloom and the annoyance of his
    maturer years. No avocations of professional labour will make him
    abandon their wholesome study; in the midst of a thousand cares he
    will find an hour to recur to his boyish lessons--to reperuse
    them in the pleasurable consciousness of old associations, and in
    the clearness of manly judgment, and to apply them to himself and
    to the world with superior profit.

    "The more extended his sphere of learning in the literature of
    modern Europe, the more deeply, though the more wisely, will he
    reverence that of classical antiquity; and in declining age, when
    the appetite for magazines and reviews, and the ten-times repeated
    trash of the day, has failed, he will retire, as it were, within a
    circle of school-fellow friends, and end his secular studies as he
    began them, with his Homer, his Horace, and his Shakespeare."

Ah, what an echo, Antony, every word of this beautiful passage finds in my own heart, only
saddened with the poignant regret that the necessary business and occupation of the passing
years have dulled for me such unpolished facility, as I may once have possessed, for perusing
my Homer and my Horace!

It is, indeed, rare in these days to find gentlemen as familiar as were their forebears with
Latin and Greek. You, Antony, will probably find yourself as you grow up in like case with
myself, but there will remain for your unending instruction and delight all the glories of
English literature, to give you a taste for which these few letters of mine are written, plucking
only a single flower here and there from the most wonderful garden in the world.

Your loving old G.P.

25

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Cardinal Newman, of whom I shall write to-day, was the first of the great writers born in the
nineteenth century, and he lived from 1801 to 1890. Besides being a master of English prose
he was no mean poet; but above all else he was a man of immense personal power, which was strangely
associated with a manifest saintliness which compelled diffidence from those admitted to his
intimacy.

I have described him as I knew him in my Memories;[1] and now will quote to you his utterance
on music and its effect upon the heart of man, which has always seemed to me too precious to
leave buried in a sermon:--

    "Let us take an instance, of an outward and earthly form, or
    economy, under which great wonders unknown seem to be typified; I
    mean musical sounds as they are exhibited most perfectly in
    instrumental harmony.

    "There are seven notes in the scale; make them fourteen; yet what
    a slender outfit for so vast an enterprise! What Science brings so
    much out of so little? out of what poor elements does some great
    master in it create his new world!

    "Shall we say that all this exuberant inventiveness is a mere
    ingenuity or trick of art, like some game or fashion of the day,
    without reality, without meaning? We may do so; and then, perhaps,
    we shall also account theology to be a matter of words; yet, as
    there is a divinity in the theology of the Church, which those who
    feel cannot communicate, so is there also in the wonderful
    creation of sublimity and beauty of which I am speaking. To many
    men the very names which the Science employs are utterly
    incomprehensible. To speak of an idea or a subject seems to be
    fanciful or trifling, to speak of the views which it opens upon us
    to be childish extravagance; yet is it possible that that
    inexhaustible evolution and disposition of notes, so rich yet so
    simple, so intricate yet so regulated, so various yet so majestic,
    should be a mere sound, which is gone and perishes?

    "Can it be that those mysterious stirrings of heart, and keen
    emotions, and strange yearnings after we know not what, and awful
    impressions from we know not whence, should be wrought in us by
    what is unsubstantial, and comes and goes, and begins and ends in
    itself? It is not so; it cannot be. No; they have escaped from
    some higher sphere, they are the outpourings of eternal harmony in
    the medium of created sound; they are echoes from our home; they
    are the voice of angels or the magnificat of Saints, or the living
    laws of Divine Governance, or the Divinic attributes; something
    are they besides themselves, which we cannot compass, which we
    cannot utter,--though mortal man, and he perhaps not otherwise
    distinguished above his fellows, has the gift of eliciting them."

Of quite another order is the Cardinal's description of a gentleman.

    "Not that he may not hold a religion too, in his own way, even
    when he is not a Christian. In that case his religion is one of
    imagination and sentiment; it is the embodiment of those ideas of
    the sublime, majestic, and beautiful, without which there can be
    no large philosophy. Sometimes he acknowledges the Being of God,
    sometimes he invests an unknown principle or quality with the
    attributes of perfection. And this deduction of his reason, or
    creation of his fancy, he makes the occasion of such excellent
    thoughts, and the starting-point of so varied and systematic a
    teaching, that he even seems like a disciple of Christianity
    itself. From the very accuracy and steadiness of his logical
    powers, he is able to see what sentiments are consistent in those
    who hold any religious doctrine at all, and he appears to others
    to feel and to hold a whole circle of theological truths, which
    exist in his mind no otherwise than as a number of deductions.

    "Such are the lineaments of the ethical character which the
    cultivated intellect will form apart from religious principle."

Surely this is a wonderful utterance from a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, full of urbanity
and the wisdom of the world.

Your loving old G.P.

[Footnote 1: Pp. 52-57.]

26

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I have in a former letter quoted a short but noble passage from Lord Macaulay on the great
Lord Chatham.

But I feel that the writer who was perhaps the greatest essayist that England has ever produced
must not in these letters be fobbed off with so slight a notice and quotation.

What has always seemed to me the supremest passage that flowed from his wonderful pen is to
be found in his paper on Warren Hastings which appeared originally in the Edinburgh Review.

His description in that essay of the opening of the great impeachment, has given all succeeding
generations a vision of one of the most majestic scenes in the whole history of man.

Such a scene can only find its appropriate enactment at the centre of a great empire and amid
a people with an august history behind them, conscious of present magnificence and confident
of future glory.

We are now far into the second century since that memorable spectacle filled to the walls the
great Hall of Westminster.

What was an oligarchy permeated by a fine spirit of liberty and adorned by the sacred principle
of personal freedom, has been superseded by a socialistic democracy under which personal freedom
suffers frequent curtailments, and liberty is severely abridged by the mandates of trade unions,
the prohibitions of urban potentates, and the usurpations of medicine men.

Under these cramping and crippling deprivations we have lost the collective sense of greatness
as a race that infused every participator in the splendid pageant of such an event as the Impeachment
of Warren Hastings. One has but to imagine an impeachment to-day with the dominant personages
in it chosen from the strike leaders and labour delegates of the proletariat, assisted by promoted
railway porters and ennobled grocers, to perceive what a distance, and down what a declivity
we have travelled since those days when it was impossible for any great public function to
take place without its becoming naturally and without conscious effort the occasion for a manifestation
of the pomp, circumstance, and splendour inseparable from the solemn acts of a great people
performed by their greatest men.

But I am one, Antony, who look forward with steadfast hope and belief to a reaction from our
present vulgarity, and to a reascension of England to a greater dignity, honour, and nobleness
both in its public and private life than is observable to-day.

Your loving old G.P.

27

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I have not in my letters to you travelled beyond our own islands in search of great English
prose, but I propose now to make one divergence from this rule and quote a very great and deservedly
far-famed speech, uttered on a memorable occasion, of Abraham Lincoln, President of the United
States.

At the present time, I think, the name of Lincoln lies closer to the hearts of the American
people than that of any other, not even excepting Washington and Hamilton. The latter, though
they established American independence, remained in a personal sense English gentlemen till
their death. Lincoln was born in the backwoods in rude poverty, received no education but what
he acquired by his own unaided efforts, and lived and died a man of the people, the ideal type
of native-born American.

He rose from the lowest to the highest position in the State, borne upwards by the simple nobility
of his character, by the stainless purity of his actions, and the splendid motive of all his
endeavours. His speeches and writings derive their power and distinction from no tricks of
oratory, felicity of diction, or nimbleness of mind. They are the vocal results of the beatings
of his great heart.

He led his people to war in the manner of a prophet of Israel; with an awful austerity, majestic,
invincible, and with hand uplifted in sure appeal to the God of battles.

Few are the opportunities in the history of the world when the time, the place, the occasion,
and the words spoken, have combined so poignantly to move the hearts of men.

One can imagine the vast concourse standing awestruck and uncovered before the solemn splendour
of this noble dedication, every phrase of which will remain for generations a treasured and
sacred memory in countless thousands of homes of the great continent in the West.

Your loving old G.P.

28

MY DEAR ANTONY,

The nineteenth century witnessed the rise of an entirely new style of English prose. The ancient
and universal restraints were swept away, the decorous stateliness of all the buried centuries
was abandoned, and there arose a band of writers, to whom De Quincey and Ruskin were the leaders,
who withdrew all veils from their emotions, threw away all the shackles of reserve, and poured
their sobs and ecstasies upon us, in soaring periods of impassioned prose, glittering with
decorative alliterations, and adorned with euphonious harmonies of vowel sounds.

This flamboyant style seems to have synchronised with the general decline of reserve and ceremony
in English life, and with the rise of the modern familiar intimacy that leaves no privacy even
to our thoughts. Our grandfathers would have hesitated to have discussed at the dinner-table,
even after the ladies had withdrawn, what is now set down for free debate at ladies' clubs,
and canvassed in the correct columns of the Guardian.

This new habit of mind and speech has affected our literature deeply and diversely. In the
hands of the really great masters such as Carlyle, Froude, and Ruskin, the intimate revelations
of the throbbings of their hearts, and the direct and untrammelled appeal of their inmost souls
crying in the market-place, take forcible possession of our affections, and bring them into
closer touch with each one of us than was ever possible with the older restrained writers.

But with lesser men the modern decay of restraint and the licence of intimacy and of the emotions
have led to widespread vulgarity, and a contemptible deluge of hyperbole, and superlative,
and redundancy; and although the disappearance of reserve in modern writing may tend to reduce
all but the production of the great to a depressing state of vulgarity, it nevertheless, in
the master's hand, has unlocked for us the doors of an Aladdin's palace! But even if the restraint
of the ancient writers has disappeared from the prose of our own times, all great writing of
necessity must now and always possess the quality of simplicity; and even Ruskin, who saw the
world of nature about him with the eyes of a visionary, and wrote of what he saw as one so
inspired as to be already half in Paradise, yet clothed his glorious outpourings in a raiment
of perfect simplicity.

It is now many years since I first saw Venice rising from the sea on a September morning as
I sailed towards it across the Adriatic from Trieste; and as we glided closer and closer its
loveliness was slowly and exquisitely unveiled under the slanting beams of the early sun.

In all my wanderings over two hemispheres I remember no vision so enchanting and unsurpassable!
May you live to see it, Antony, before the vulgarities of modern life have totally defaced
its beauty.

Your loving old G.P.

29

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Born in Devon at the same time--within a year--as Ruskin, James Anthony Froude wrote prose
that displays the same sanguine and poetical characteristics. His historical writings have,
I believe, been somewhat discredited of late years owing to the permission he is alleged to
have given himself to warp his account of events in order to buttress some prejudice or contention
of his own.

Another passage of deep and melancholy beauty cannot be omitted from this volume. It records
in language of haunting loveliness the passing away of feudalism and chivalry and of a thousand
years of the pageantry of faith:--

    "The great trading companies were not instituted for selfish
    purposes, but to ensure the consumer of manufactured articles that
    what he purchased was properly made and of a reasonable price.
    They determined prices, fixed wages, and arranged the rules of
    apprenticeship. But in time the companies lost their healthy
    vitality, and, with other relics of feudalism, were in the reign
    of Elizabeth hastening away.

The sound of church bells, being entirely the creation of man, forms perhaps a more touching
link with the past for us than the eternal sounds of nature. Yet the everlasting wash of the
waves of the sea forms a bond between us and the unplumbed depths of time, as they

  "Begin and cease, and then again begin
  With tremulous cadence slow, and bring,
  The eternal note of sadness in.
  Sophocles long ago
  Heard it on the Ægean, and it brought
  Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow
  Of human misery."

So wrote Matthew Arnold. Then there is the sound of wind in the trees, and the voice of falling
waters and rippling streams which must have fallen upon the ears of our remotest fore-runners
as they do upon our own. These eternal sounds about us take no note of our brief coming and
going, and will be the same when you and I, Antony, and all the millions that come after us
in the world have returned to dust.

Your loving old G.P.

30

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Though I do not myself rank Matthew Arnold among the great prose writers of England, yet, like
all true poets--and he indeed was one of them,--he wrote excellent English prose.

It is true that he turned to poetry to express his finest emotions and thoughts, and he himself
alludes to his prose writings thus: "I am a mere solitary wanderer in search of the light,
and I talk an artless, unstudied, everyday familiar language. But, after all, this is the language
of the mass of the world."

The chief note of all his teaching was urbanity. "The pursuit of perfection," he said, "is
the pursuit of sweetness and light."

This teaching, no doubt, leads to fields of pleasantness and charm, and not at all to the high
places of self-sacrifice, or the austere peaks of martyrdom. Burning indignation against intolerable
things, fierce denunciation of the cruelties and abominations of the world find no encouragement
or sympathy from this serene, detached, and therefore somewhat ineffectual, teaching.

Sweetness and light would never have interfered with the slave trade, or fiercely fought beside
Plimsoll for the load-line on the sides of ships.

We did not fight the Germans under the doctrine of sweetness and light.

It was a beautiful and edifying adornment for the drawing-room in times of Victorian self-satisfied
peace, but was a tinsel armour for the battle of life, and entirely futile as a sword for combating
wrong.

I am not sure that Matthew Arnold would not have called those who wrathfully slash about them
at abominable evils, Philistines.

After all, the great men of action and the great writers of the world have been capable of
harbouring great enthusiasms and deep indignations in their hearts; and these emotions do not
emerge from a "passion for sweetness and light."

A better doctrine, Antony, is, I think, to try to push things along cheerfully but strenuously
in the right direction wherever and whenever you can.

As a writer I think Matthew Arnold's best passage is to be found in the Preface to his Essays
in Criticism:--

    "Oxford. Beautiful city! So venerable, so lovely, so unravaged by
    the fierce intellectual life of our century, so serene!

    "There are our young barbarians, all at play!

    "And yet steeped in sentiment as she lies, spreading her gardens
    to the moonlight, and whispering from her towers the last
    enchantments of the Middle Age, who will deny that Oxford, by her
    ineffable charm, keeps ever calling us to the true goal of all of
    us, to the ideal, to perfection,--to beauty, in a word, which is
    only truth seen from another side?--nearer perhaps than all the
    science of Tübingen. Adorable dreamer, whose heart has been so
    romantic! who hast given thyself so prodigally, given thyself to
    sides and heroes not mine, only never to the Philistines! home of
    lost causes, and forsaken beliefs, and unpopular names, and
    impossible loyalties!... Apparitions of a day, what is our puny
    warfare against the Philistines, compared with the warfare which
    this Queen of Romance has been waging against them for centuries,
    and will wage after we are gone?"

As a man and a companion,[1] if you expected nothing but delightful humour, brilliant discourse,
and urbane outlook upon everything, few could rival his personal charm; but he would never
really join you in a last ditch to defend the right, or actually charge with you against the
wrong, although in his poem "The Last Word," while not participating himself in such strenuous
doings, he seems to yield a reluctant admiration to him who does so charge, and who leaves
his "body by the wall."

Much has happened since Matthew Arnold poured his scorn upon the unregenerate Philistines;
but let us remember, Antony, that thousands and thousands of these contemned neglecters of
sweetness and light stood unflinchingly and died upon the plains of France that our country
and its freedom should survive.

Your loving old G.P.

[Footnote 1: See my Memories, pp. 46-52 and 55.]

31

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Like the author of the Peninsular War, Sir William Butler was great both as a soldier and as
a writer. His autobiography sparkles with humour, irony, and felicitous diction; but it was
in his Life of Gordon of Khartoum that he rose to his full stature as a contributor to the
glory of English prose.

The spell of Gordon seems to have, as it were, transfigured all who approached him, and raised
them out of themselves. One man alone, of all those whose lives touched his, has shown that
his own pinched and narrow mediocrity was proof against the radiance of Gordon's spirit, and
has feebly attempted to belittle the soldier saint for his own justification. But he has failed
even to project a spot upon the sun of Gordon's fame, and he is already forgotten, while the
great soldier's name will endure in the hearts of his countrymen till England and its people fail.

If Sir William Butler's final noble periods, which I here reproduce, do not deeply move him
who reads them, then must that reader have a heart of stone:--

    "Thus fell in dark hour of defeat a man as unselfish as Sidney, of
    courage dauntless as Wolfe, of honour stainless as Outram, of
    sympathy wide-reaching as Drummond, of honesty straightforward as
    Napier, of faith as steadfast as More. Doubtful indeed is it if
    anywhere in the past we shall find figure of knight or soldier to
    equal him, for sometimes it is the sword of death that gives to
    life its real knighthood, and too often the soldier's end is
    unworthy of his knightly life; but with Gordon the harmony of life
    and death was complete, and the closing scenes seem to move to
    their fulfilment in solemn hush, as though an unseen power watched
    over the sequence of their sorrow.

    "Not by the blind hazard of chance was this great tragedy
    consummated; not by the discord of men or from the vague
    opposition of physical obstacle, by fault of route or length of
    delay, was help denied to him. The picture of a wonderful life had
    to be made perfect by heroic death. The moral had to be cut deep,
    and written red, and hung high, so that its lesson could be seen
    by all men above strife and doubt and discord. Nay, the very
    setting of the final scenes has to be wrought out in such contrast
    of colour that the dullest eye shall be able to read the meaning
    of it all. For many a year back this soldier's life has been a
    protest against our most cherished teaching. Faith is weakness,
    we have said. He will show us it is strength. Reward is the right
    of service. Publicity is true fame. Let us go into action with a
    newspaper correspondent riding at our elbow, or sitting in the
    cabin of the ship, has been our practice. He has told us that the
    race should be for honour, not for 'honours,' that we should 'give
    away our medal,' and that courage and humility, mercy and
    strength, should march hand in hand together. For many a year we
    have had no room for him in our councils. Our armies knew him not;
    and it was only in semi-savage lands and in the service of remote
    empires he could find scope for his genius. Now our councils will
    be shamed in his service, and our armies will find no footing in
    our efforts to reach him. We have said that the Providence of God
    was only a calculation of chances; now for eleven months the
    amazing spectacle will be presented to the world of this solitary
    soldier standing at bay, within thirty days' travel of the centre
    of Empire, while the most powerful kingdom on the earth--the
    nation whose wealth is as the sands of the sea, whose boast is
    that the sun never sets upon its dominions--is unable to reach
    him--saving he does not want--but is unable to reach him even
    with one message of regret for past forgetfulness. 

    One expresses the principle, the other the application. Again
    we observe this word "knowledge" as a characteristic expression
    of the Apostle in these prison-epistles. "Full knowledge" (Greek)
    is one of the marks of a growing Christian life, and is proved by
    spiritual perception, spiritual feeling, spiritual discernment.
    There is a world of difference between intellectual ability and spiritual
    insight.

    Many people are clever, but not spiritual, while many people are often
    truly spiritual without being possessed of much intellectual capacity.
    Much is said in Scripture about sight in regard to things spiritual.
    "Except a man be born again, he cannot see" (John iii. 3).
    "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God" (Matt.
    v. 8). There are many people in our congregations of average
    intellect, and perhaps with mental powers decidedly below the average,
    who are nevertheless full of profound spiritual wisdom because love
    to Christ has given them keenness of vision and depth of insight.

2.
    THE IMMEDIATE PURPOSE.
    
    This constant progress and abundance of love was intended for a very
    practical purpose; "so that ye may approve the things that are excellent"
    (ver. 10, R.V.).

    The discernment already mentioned was intended for spiritual discrimination.
    They were to be enabled to distinguish, to prove, and thereby to
    approve. As Lightfoot points out, "love imparts a sensitiveness of
    touch, a keen edge to the discriminating faculty in things moral
    and spiritual." In things spiritual at least love is not blind, but
    keen-sighted. It is endowed with a spiritual discernment which
    is able to distinguish not only between good and bad, but between
    good and better, between better and best, and between best and excellent.
    The words, "approve the things that are excellent," occur also in
    Rom. ii. 18, and the meaning seems to be first that they
    were to "distinguish the things that differ," and then as a result
    they were to "approve the things that transcend."

This spiritual discernment is particularly needful to-day, as the Christian soul is surrounded
by so many views and voices.

Much that appears on the surface to be attractive and charming contains within it the elements
of spiritual danger and disaster, and it is only by spiritual discernment
which comes from abounding and increasing love to Christ that the
soul is safeguarded against evil and led to approve and follow the
things that are superior.

It is a vivid picture that the prophet gives of the Messiah when he describes Him as endowed by
the Spirit of God and made of "quick scent in the fear of the Lord"
(Isa. xi.

3, Hebrew).

It is this "quick scent" that by the same Spirit the Lord Jesus Christ
bestows upon those who love Him with all the heart.

3. THE PERMANENT RESULT.

Every Christian grace is intended for practical and permanent effect in character. Our lives
are not to be intermittent, but continuous in their expression of grace and blessing, and all
that the Apostle has been praying for and desiring on behalf of his Philippian Christians was
intended to develop and express in them the solid and permanent realities of Christian character.

(1)
Sincerity; "that ye may be sincere" (ver. 10).

    This has to do with motives. The word is thought to mean "tested
    in the sunlight." Our lives are to be manifestly true, genuine,
    sincere, "transparent." "Motive makes the man," and from time to
    time it is essential that we should allow ourselves to be tested
    and judged in the sunlight of our perfect fellowship with Christ,
    just as St. Peter, when asked by his Master, said, "Lord, Thou knowest
    all things." Sincerity is one of the essential features of the true
    Christian life. The believer, if he is to do the will of God and
    commend the Gospel to others, must have no doubtful arrière pensée
    but a life lived moment by moment in the perfect brightness of the
    presence of perfect holiness.
    

    (2) Consistency; "void of offence" (ver. 10, R.V.). This has to do
with conduct. Not only are we to be inwardly true, but outwardly sure.
Our lives must not hinder others, or put a stumbling-block in their
way. Just as the Master said, "Blessed is he whosoever is not put
to stumble by Me," so must it be with every follower of Christ. Many of its members had fought a hard
    battle for their seats, and trusted they were safe in the haven
    for half a dozen good years to come. Those who were moved by
    professional ambition, those whose object was social advancement,
    those who thought only of upright public service, the keen party
    of men, the men who aspire to office, the men with a past and the
    men who looked for a future, all alike found themselves adrift on
    dark and troubled waters. The secrets of the Bill had been well
    kept. To-day the disquieted host were first to learn what was the
    great project to which they would have to say that Aye or No on
    which for them and for the State so much would hang.

    "Of the chief comrades or rivals of the minister's own generation,
    the strong administrators, the eager and accomplished debaters,
    the sagacious leaders, the only survivor now comparable to him, in
    eloquence or in influence, was Mr. Bright. That illustrious man
    seldom came into the House in those distracted days; and on this
    memorable occasion his stern and noble head was to be seen in dim
    obscurity.

    "Various as were the emotions in other regions of the House, in
    one quarter rejoicing was unmixed. There, at least, was no doubt
    and no misgiving. There, pallid and tranquil, sat the Irish
    leader, whose hard insight, whose patience, energy, and spirit of
    command, had achieved this astounding result, and done that which
    he had vowed to his countrymen that he would assuredly be able to
    do. On the benches round him genial excitement rose almost to
    tumult. Well it might. For the first time since the Union the
    Irish case was at last to be pressed in all its force and
    strength, in every aspect of policy and of conscience by the most
    powerful Englishman then alive.

    "More striking than the audience was the man; more striking than
    the multitude of eager onlookers from the shore was the rescuer,
    with deliberate valour facing the floods ready to wash him down;
    the veteran Ulysses, who, after more than half a century of
    combat, service, toil, thought it not too late to try a further
    'work of noble note,' In the hands of such a master of the
    instrument the theme might easily have lent itself to one of those
    displays of exalted passion which the House had marvelled at in
    more than one of Mr. Gladstone's speeches on the Turkish question,
    or heard with religious reverence in his speech on the Affirmation
    Bill in 1883.

    "What the occasion now required was that passion should burn low,
    and reasoned persuasion hold up the guiding lamp. An elaborate
    scheme was to be unfolded, an unfamiliar policy to be explained
    and vindicated. Of that best kind of eloquence which dispenses
    with declamation this was a fine and sustained example. There was
    a deep, rapid, steady, onflowing volume of arguments, exposition,
    exhortation. Every hard or bitter stroke was avoided. Now and
    again a fervid note thrilled the ear and lifted all hearts. But
    political oratory is action, not words--action, character, will,
    conviction, purpose, personality. As this eager muster of men
    underwent the enchantment of periods exquisite in their balance
    and modulation, the compulsion of his flashing glance and animated
    gesture, what stirred and commanded them was the recollection of
    national service, the thought of the speaker's mastering purpose,
    his unflagging resolution and strenuous will, his strength of thew
    and sinew well tried in long years of resounding war, his
    unquenched conviction that the just cause can never fail. Few are
    the heroic moments in our parliamentary politics, but this was
    one."

I will not trench upon politics in these letters; but I may hazard the belief that could those
who rejected this noble effort, by the greatest statesman of the age, to assuage the everlasting
Irish conflict, have looked into the future, few of them but would have supported it with relief
and thanksgiving.

It is generally perhaps a blessing that the curtain that covers the future is impenetrable;
but in this case, had it been lifted for us to gaze upon the appalling future, Gladstone's
last effort for the peace of his country would surely not have been permitted to miscarry.

Your loving old G.P.

33

MY DEAR ANTONY,

Two other living writers I will now commend to you, and then I shall have done.

The parents of Mr. Belloc, with a happy prevision, anticipated by some decades the entente
cordiale, and their brilliant son felicitously manifests in his own person many of the admirable
qualities of both races. In England he is reported to be forcefully French, and it may be surmised
that when in France he is engagingly British. Fortunately for our literature, it is in the
language of his mother that he has found his expression. Many are the beautiful utterances
scattered through his charming works: two of the most picturesque deal with the greatness of
France; the subject of one is the Ancient Monarchy, and of the other the Great Napoleon:--

    "So perished the French Monarchy. Its dim origins stretched out
    and lost themselves in Rome; it had already learnt to speak and
    recognised its own nature when the vaults of the Thermæ echoed
    heavily to the slow footsteps of the Merovingian kings.

    "Look up the vast valley of dead men crowned, and you may see the
    gigantic figure of Charlemagne, his brows level and his long white
    beard tangled like an undergrowth, having in his left hand the
    globe, and in his right the hilt of an unconquerable sword. There
    also are the short strong horsemen of the Robertian House, half
    hidden by their leather shields, and their sons before them
    growing in vestment and majesty and taking on the pomp of the
    Middle Ages; Louis VII., all covered with iron; Philip, the
    Conqueror; Louis IX., who alone is surrounded with light: they
    stand in a widening, interminable procession, this great crowd of
    kings; they loose their armour, they take their ermine on, they
    are accompanied by their captains and their marshals; at last, in
    their attitude and in their magnificence they sum up in themselves
    the pride and the achievement of the French nation.

    "But Time has dissipated what it could not tarnish, and the
    process of a thousand years has turned these mighty figures into
    unsubstantial things. You may see them in the grey end of
    darkness, like a pageant, all standing still. You look again, but
    with the growing light, and with the wind that rises before
    morning, they have disappeared."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "There is a legend among the peasants in Russia of a certain
    sombre, mounted figure, unreal, only an outline and a cloud, that
    passed away to Asia, to the east and to the north. They saw him
    move along their snows, through the long mysterious twilights of
    the northern autumn, in silence, with the head bent and the reins
    in the left hand loose, following some enduring purpose, reaching
    towards an ancient solitude and repose. They say it was Napoleon.

    "After him there trailed for days the shadows of the soldiery,
    vague mists bearing faintly the forms of companies of men. It was
    as though the cannon smoke at Waterloo, borne on the light west
    wind of that June day, had received the spirits of twenty years
    of combat, and had drifted farther and farther during the fall of
    the year over the endless plains.

    "But there was no voice and no order. The terrible tramp of the
    Guard, and the sound that Heine loved, the dance of the French
    drums, was extinguished; there was no echo of their songs, for the
    army was of ghosts and was defeated. They passed in the silence
    which we can never pierce, and somewhere remote from men they
    sleep in bivouac round the most splendid of human swords."

Time and circumstances have changed our ancient enemies into our honoured friends, and the
race that fought against us at Waterloo has cemented its friendship towards us with its blood;
and as we look back over the century that divides us from Waterloo we can now with Mr. Belloc
salute the sombre figure of the defeated conqueror.

Your loving old G.P.

34

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I will now quote to you one other master of splendid English.

Not every temporal sovereign of these realms has deserved a throne among the kings of literature.
James the First was a poet of some merit; Charles the First wrote and spoke with a fine distinction;
Queen Victoria's letters to her subjects were models of dignified and kindly simplicity; but
to King George the Fifth by the grace of God it has been reserved to give utterance to what
I believe to be the most noble and uplifting address ever delivered by a king to his people.

From the day of his accession King George has been confronted with trials and troubles enough
to daunt the stoutest heart, and none of us can plumb the depth of anguish that must have been
his through the awful years of the Great War. He has been tried and proved in the fierce fires
of adversity, and has emerged ennobled by pain, and dowered by sorrow with a gift of expression
that has placed him among the masters of the glory of English prose. 

And a fuller treatment of 2 Thess. iii. 16 is given in his The Power of Peace.

For the thorough exegetical foundation of the passages included in
these prayers of the Apostle special attention should of course be
given to the various modern standard Commentaries.

The following have proved of particular value in the preparation of these pages. On Thessalonians:
Milligan, Frame, Eadie, and Ellicott. On Romans: Sanday and Headlam, Godet, and the Notes by
Lightfoot. On Ephesians: Armitage Robinson, Westcott, and Eadie. We are told that, "going up to the Cross of Sacrifice, the King looked out
over the closely marshalled graves to the sea, and back towards the woods and fields of the
Canche Valley where Montreuil stands, and seemed reluctant to leave."

At last he turned, and, standing before the great Cross of Sacrifice, he spoke from his heart
words that those of us, Antony, who love our country and the glory of its language will cherish
while we live:--

    "For the past few days I have been on a solemn pilgrimage in
    honour of a people who died for all free men.

    "At the close of that pilgrimage, on which I followed ways already
    marked by many footsteps of love and pride and grief, I should
    like to send a message to all who have lost those dear to them in
    the Great War, and in this the Queen joins me to-day, amidst these
    surroundings so wonderfully typical of that single-hearted
    assembly of nations and of races which form our Empire. For here,
    in their last quarters, lie sons of every portion of that Empire,
    across, as it were, the threshold of the Mother Island which they
    guarded, that Freedom might be saved in the uttermost ends of the
    earth.

    "For this, a generation of our manhood offered itself without
    question, and almost without the need of a summons. Those proofs
    of virtue, which we honour here to-day, are to be found throughout
    the world and its waters--since we can truly say that the whole
    circuit of the earth is girdled with the graves of our dead.
    Beyond the stately cemeteries of France, across Italy, through
    Eastern Europe in well-nigh unbroken chain they stretch, passing
    over the holy Mount of Olives itself to the furthest shores of the
    Indian and Pacific Oceans--from Zeebrugge to Coronel, from Dunkirk
    to the hidden wildernesses of East Africa.

    "But in this fair land of France, which sustained the utmost fury
    of the long strife, our brothers are numbered, alas! by hundreds
    of thousands.

    "They lie in the keeping of a tried and generous friend, a
    resolute and chivalrous comrade-in-arms, who with ready and quick
    sympathy has set aside for ever the soil in which they sleep, so
    that we ourselves and our descendants may for all time reverently
    tend and preserve their resting-places.

    "And here, at Terlinchthun, the shadow of his monument falling
    almost across their graves, the greatest of French soldiers--of
    all soldiers--stands guard over them. And this is just, for side
    by side with the descendants of his incomparable armies they
    defended his land in defending their own.

    "Never before in history have a people thus dedicated and
    maintained individual memorials to their fallen, and, in the
    course of my pilgrimage, I have many times asked myself whether
    there can be more potent advocates of peace upon earth through the
    years to come than this massed multitude of silent witnesses to
    the desolation of war. And this shall be enough to answer those devious
    Principles set down in the porch of that specious Edifice; which
    being erected upon the Sand, will (like the rest that has been daubed
    with untempered mortar) sink also at the next high wind that blowes
    upon it.
    

    "Standing beneath this Cross of Sacrifice, facing the great Stone
    of Remembrance, and compassed by these sternly simple headstones,
    we remember, and must charge our children to remember, that as our
    dead were equal in sacrifice, so are they equal in honour, for the
    greatest and the least of them have proved that sacrifice and
    honour are no vain things, but truths by which the world lives.

    "Many of the cemeteries I have visited in the remoter and still
    desolate districts of this sorely stricken land, where it has not
    yet been possible to replace the wooden crosses by headstones,
    have been made into beautiful gardens which are lovingly cared for
    by comrades of the war.

    "I rejoice I was fortunate enough to see these in the spring, when
    the returning pulse of the year tells of unbroken life that goes
    forward in the face of apparent loss and wreckage; and I
    fervently pray that, both as nations and individuals, we may so
    order our lives after the ideals for which our brethren died that
    we may be able to meet their gallant souls once more, humbly but
    unashamed."

Hard indeed must it be for any Englishman whose heart is quick within his bosom not to feel
it beat faster with thanksgiving and pride as he reads the flawless periods of this glorious
speech.

As the final word of consolation, sanctification, and benediction, closing the awful agony
of the greatest of all wars, preserve, Antony, this magnificent threnody in your memory imperishable.

Your loving old G.P.

35

MY DEAR ANTONY,

I have come now to the end of my citations for the present. My object, Antony, has been to
rouse in your heart, if I can, a love, admiration, and reverence for the wonders to be found
in the treasure-house of English prose literature.

I have only opened a little door here and there, so that you can peep in and see the visions
of splendour within.

Some day perhaps, when you have explored for yourself, you may feel surprised that in these
letters I have quoted nothing from Sir John Eliot, or Addison, or Scott, or Thackeray, or Charles
Lamb, or De Quincey, or Hazlitt, or other kings and princes of style innumerable. Many, many
writers whom I have not quoted in these letters have adorned everything they touched, but do
not seem to me to reach the snow-line or rise into great and moving eloquence. Preachers will
find it nothing short of an education in Greek to ponder the passages under the guidance of these
master-minds. The first step in all true expository preaching is the consideration of the words
and phrases in order to elicit their full exegetical value.

In selecting such passages as I have in these letters I have necessarily followed my own taste,
and taste--as I said when I first began writing to you--is illusive. I could do no more than
cite that which makes my own heart beat faster from a compelling sense of its nobility and beauty.

When I was young, Antony, I lived long in my father's house among his twelve thousand books,
with his scholarly mind as my companion, and his exact memory as my guide; for more than a
quarter of a century since those days I have lived in the more modest library of my own collecting,
and have long learnt how much fine literature there is that I have never read, and now can
never read. But, Antony, you may not find, in these crowded days, even so much time for reading,
or so much repose for study as I have found, and therefore it is that I have offered you in
these letters the preferences of my lifetime, even though it has been the lifetime of one who
makes no claim to be a literary authority.

As you look back at those from whom you have sprung, you will see that for five generations
they have been men of letters--many distinguished, and one world-famous; and though I myself
am but a puny link in the chain, yet I may perhaps afford you the opportunity of hitching your
wagon by and by to the star that has for so long ruled the destinies of our house.

Farewell, then, dear Antony; and if "the dear God who loveth us" listens to the benedictions
of the old upon their children's children, may He guide and bless you to your life's end.

Your loving old G.P.

