There are three forces which operate in society: that of blind faith, of reverent religious
freedom, and of irreverent scepticism. Now, since the human mind is so made that it must have
religion, when this middle element of reasonable religious freedom is withdrawn, society vibrates,
like a pendulum, between scepticism and superstition; the extreme of superstition reacting
to scepticism, and then the barrenness of scepticism reacting again into superstition. This must
now be filtered again, and carbonate of potassa added to the filtrate as long as a precipitate
is produced. This precipitate is brought upon a filter and washed thoroughly, and then dissolved
in diluted nitric acid. The suppression of all reasonable religious inquiry, and the consequent corruption
of the church, produced the school of Voltaire and his followers. The excesses of that school
have made devout Catholics afraid of the very beginning of religious rationalism; and these
causes act against each other to this day.

The revolution in England, under Cromwell, succeeded, because it had an open Bible and liberty
of conscience for its foundation, and united both the elements of faith and of reason. The
French revolution had, as Lamartine says, Plutarch's Lives for its Bible, and the great unchaining
of human passion had no element of religious control. Plad France, in the time of her revolution,
had leaders like Admiral Coligny, her revolution might have prospered as did England's under
Cromwell. But these revolutions, needlessly terrible as they have been, still have accomplished
something; without them France might have died away into what Spain is. As it is, progress
has been made, though at a fearful sacrifice. No country has been swept cleaner of aristocratic
institutions, and the old bastiles and prisons of a past tyranny. The aspiration for democratic
freedom has been so thoroughly sown in France, that it never will be rooted up again. How to
get it, and how to keep it when it is got, they do not yet clearly see; but they will never
rest till they learn. There is a liberty of thought and of speech in France which the tongue-tied
state of the press cannot indicate. Could France receive the Bible--could it be put into the
hands of all the common people--that might help her. And France is receiving the Bible. Spite
of all efforts to the contrary, the curiosity of the popular mind has been awakened; the yearnings
of the popular heart are turning towards it; and therein lie my best hopes for France.

One thing more I would say. Since I have been here, I have made the French and continental
mode of keeping Sunday a matter of calm, dispassionate inquiry and observation. I have tried
to divest myself of the prejudices--if you so please to call them--of my New England education--to
look at the matter sympathetically, in the French or continental point of view, and see whether
I have any occasion to revise the opinions in which I had been educated. I fully appreciate
all the agreeableness, the joyousness, and vivacity of a day of recreation and social freedom,
spent in visiting picture galleries and public grounds, in social reunions and rural excursions.
I am far from judging harshly of the piety of those who have been educated in these views and
practices. But, viewing the subject merely in relation to things of this life, I am met by
one very striking fact: there is not a single nation, possessed of a popular form of government,
which has not our Puritan theory of the Sabbath. Protestant Switzerland, England, Scotland,
and America cover the whole ground of popular freedom; and in all these this idea of the Sabbath
prevails with a distinctness about equal to the degree of liberty. Nor do I think this result
an accidental one. If we notice that the Lutheran branch of the reformation did not have this
element, and the Calvinistic branch, which spread over England and America, did have it, and
compare the influence of these two in sustaining popular rights, we shall be struck with the
obvious inference.

Now, there are things in our mode of keeping the Sabbath which have a direct tendency to sustain
popular government; for the very element of a popular government must be self-control in the
individual. There must be enough intensity of individual self-control to make up for the lack
of an extraneous pressure from government. The idea of the Sabbath, as observed by the Puritans,
is the voluntary dissevering of the thoughts and associations from the things of earth for
one day in seen, and the concentrating of the mind on purely spiritual subjects. In all this
there is a weekly recurring necessity for the greatest self-control. No way could be devised
to educate a community to be thoughtful and reflective better than the weekly recurrence of
a day when all stimulus, both of business and diversion, shall be withdrawn, and the mind turned
in upon itself. The weekly necessity of bringing all business to a close tends to give habits
of system and exactness. The assembling together for divine worship, and for instruction in
the duties of Christianity, is a training of the highest and noblest energies of the soul.
Even that style of abstract theologizing prevailing in New England and Scotland, which has
grown out of Sabbath sermonizing, has been an incalculable addition to the strength and self-controlling
power of the people.

Ride through France, you see the laborer in his wooden shoes, with scarce a thought beyond
his daily toil. His Sunday is a fete for dancing and recreation. Go through New England, and
you will find the laborer, as he lays his stone fence, discussing the consistency of foreordination
with free will, or perchance settling some more practical mooted point in politics. On Sunday
this laborer gets up his wagon, and takes his wife and family to church, to hear two or three
sermons, in each of which there are more elements of mental discipline than a French peasant
gets in a whole lifetime. It is a shallow view of theological training to ask of what practical
use are its metaphysical problems. Of what practical value to most students is geometry? On
the whole, I think it is the Puritan idea of the Sabbath, as it prevails in New England, that
is one great source of that individual strength and self-control which have supported so far
our democratic institutions.

In regard to the present state of affairs here, it has been my lot to converse unreservedly
with some of all parties sufficiently to find the key note of their thoughts. There are, first,
the Bourbonists--mediaeval people--believers in the divine right of kings in general, and of
the Bourbons in particular. There are many of them exceedingly interesting. There is something
rather poetic and graceful about the antique cast of their ideas; their chivalrous loyalty
to an exiled family, and their devout belief of the Catholic religion. These, for the most
part, keep out of Paris, entirely ignore the present court, and remain in their chateaus in
the country. A gentleman of this class, with whom I talked, thought the present emperor did
very well in keeping other parties out till the time should come to strike a blow for the true
king.

Then there are the partisans and friends of the Orleans family. I heard those who spoke, even
with tears, of Louis Philippe and his dynasty. They were patrons of letters and of arts, they
say, of virtue and of religion; and these good, faithful souls cling lovingly to their memory.

And then there are the republicans--men of the real olden time, capable of sacrificing every
thing that heart holds dear for a principle; such republicans as were our fathers in all, save
their religion, and because lacking that, losing the chief element of popular control. It presents, in
its metallic state, a dark grey powder, which by compression acquires the metallic lustre.
The oxide of lanthanium (LaO) is white, and its salts are colorless.
Heated upon charcoal, it does not change either in the oxidation flame
or that of reduction.

Besides all these there is another class, comparatively small, having neither the prestige
of fashion, rank, or wealth, but true, humble, evangelical Christians, in whom the simplicity
and spirituality of the old Huguenot church seems revived. These men are laboring at the very
foundation of things; laboring to bring back the forgotten Bible; beginning where Christ began,
with preaching the gospel to the poor. If any would wish to see Christianity in its loveliest
form, they would find it in some of these humble laborers. One, with whom I conversed, devotes
his time to the chiffoniers, (rag pickers.) He gave me an account of his labors, speaking with
such tenderness and compassion, that it was quite touching. "My poor people," he said, "they
are very ignorant, but they are not so very bad." And when I asked him, "Who supports you in
your labors?" he looked upward, with one of those quick, involuntary glances by which the French
express themselves without words. There was the same earnestness in him as in one of our city
missionaries, but a touching grace peculiarly national. It was the piety of Fenelon and St.
John. And I cannot believe that God, who loves all nations alike, and who knows how beautifully
the French mind is capable of reflecting the image of Jesus, will not yet shine forth upon
France, to give the light of the knowledge of his glory in the face of Christ.

It was the testimony of all with whom I conversed, that the national mind had become more and
more serious for many years past. Said a French gentleman to me one evening, "The old idea
of l'homme d'esprit of Louis XIV.'s time, the man of bon-mots, bows, and salons, is almost
passed away; there is only now and then a specimen of it left. The French are becoming more
earnest and more religious." In the Roman Catholic churches which I attended, I saw very full
audiences, and great earnestness and solemnity. I have talked intimately, also, with Roman
Catholics, in whom I felt that religion was a real and vital thing. One of them, a most lovely
lady, presented me with the Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, as a ground on which we
could both unite.

I have also been interested to see in these French Catholics, in its most fervent form, the
exhibition of that antislavery spirit which, in other ages, was the boast of that church. One
charming friend took me to the church of St. Germain l'Auxerrois, pointing out with great interest
the statues and pictures of saints who had been distinguished for their antislavery efforts
in France. In a note expressing her warm interest in the cause of the African slave, she says,
"It is a tradition of our church, that of the three kings which came to worship Jesus in Bethlehem,
one was black; and if Christians would kneel oftener before the manger of Bethlehem they would
think less of distinctions of caste and color."

Madame Belloc received, a day or two since, a letter from a lady in the old town of Orleans,
which gave name to Joan of Arc, expressing the most earnest enthusiasm in the antislavery cause.
Her prayers, she says, will ascend night and day for those brave souls in America who are conflicting
with this mighty injustice.

A lady a few days since called on me, all whose property was lost in the insurrection at Hayti,
but who is, nevertheless, a most earnest advocate of emancipation.

A Catholic lady, in a letter, inquired earnestly, why in my Key I had not included the Romish
clergy of the United States among the friends of emancipation, as that, she said, had been
always the boast of their church. I am sorry to be obliged to make the reply, that in America
the Catholic clergy have never identified themselves with the antislavery cause, but in their
influence have gone with the multitude.

I have received numerous calls from members of the Old French Abolition Society, which existed
here for many years. Among these I met, with great interest, M. Dutrone, its president; also
M. ----, who presented me with his very able ethnological work on the distinctive type of the
negro race. One gentleman, greatly distressed in view of the sufferings of the negro race in
America, said, naively enough, to Mrs. C., that he had heard that the negroes had great capability
for music, dancing, and the fine arts, and inquired whether something could not be done to
move sympathy in their behalf by training them to exhibit characteristic dances and pantomimes.
Mrs. C. quoted to him the action of one of the great ecclesiastical bodies in America, in the
same breath declining to condemn slavery, but denouncing dancing as so wholly of the world
lying in wickedness as to require condign ecclesiastical censure. The poor man was wholly lost
in amazement.

In this connection, I cannot but notice, to the credit of the French republican provisional
government, how much more consistent they were in their attachment to the principles of liberty
than ever our own has been. What do we see in our own history? Our northern free states denouncing
slavery as a crime, confessedly inconsistent with their civil and religious principles, yet,
for commercial and pecuniary considerations, deliberately entering into a compact with slaveholders
tolerating a twenty years' perpetuation of the African slave trade, the rendition of fugitives,
the suppression of servile insurrections, and allowing to the slaveholders a virtual property
basis of representation. It should qualify the contempt which some Americans express of the
French republic, that when the subject of the slave colonies was brought up, and it was seen
that consistency demanded immediate emancipation, they immediately emancipated; and not only
so, but conferred at once on the slaves the elective franchise.

This point strongly illustrates the difference, in one respect, between the French and the
Anglo-Saxons. As a race the French are less commercial, more ideal, more capable of devotion
to abstract principles, and of following them out consistently, irrespective of expediency.

