UP IN ARDMUIRLAND

by

REV. MICHAEL BARRETT, O.S.B.

New York Cincinnati Chicago Benziger Brothers Publishers of Benziger's Magazine 1912 Copyright,
1912, by Benziger Brothers

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I.  PERSONAL
   II.  MEMORIES
  III.  ARCHIE
   IV.  GOLDEN DREAMS
    V.  "DOMINIE DICK"
   VI.  BILDY
  VII.  SMUGGLERS
 VIII.  PHENOMENA
   IX.  SPRING'S RETURN
    X.  A RUSTIC PASTOR
   XI.  A SPRIG OF SHAMROCK
  XII.  PENNY

UP IN ARDMUIRLAND

I

PERSONAL

  Forest and meadow and hill, and the steel-blue rim of the ocean
  Lying silent and sad, in the afternoon shadows and sunshine.
          (Longfellow--"Miles Standish")

Val and I, being twins, have always been looked upon as inseparables. True, we have been often
forced apart during life's course; yet, somehow, we have always managed to drift back again
into the old companionship which Nature seems to have intended in bringing us into the world
together.

Boyhood and youth, as long as school life lasted, slipped by with never a parting.  The crux
came when we were old enough to choose our respective paths in life.  It appeared that Val,
although he had never before breathed a word to me--whatever he may have done to Dad--had thoroughly
determined to be a priest if he could.  I had never felt the ghost of a vocation in that direction,
so here came the parting of the ways.  Val went to college, and I was left inconsolable.

But I was not allowed to nurse my griefs; plans had been made in my regard also, it appeared.

"Ted," said Dad quite abruptly one day, "you'll have to go to Bonn. That'll be the best place
for you, since Oxford is out of the question. You've got to take my place some day, and you
mustn't grow up an absolute dunce.  Atfield" (an old school-chum of his) "is well pleased with
the place for his boy, Bill, so you may get ready to travel back with him next week, when the
vacation finishes."

In those days (how long ago I almost blush to record) Catholics were not allowed access to
our own universities as they now are, and we Flemings were Catholics to the core, and of old
staunch Jacobites, as befitted our Scottish race and name.

So Bill Atfield took me under his wing, and to Bonn I went the very next week.  There I remained
until the end of my course, returning home for vacations, as a rule, but ending up with a week
or two, in company with Dad, in Paris, whither Val had gone for his philosophy.  But such rare
meetings became rarer still when Val went off to Rome, and I had to take up a profession; and
our separation was apparently destined to last indefinitely when Val had been ordained, and
I went out to India after a civil service appointment.

And yet so kindly at times is Fate that, quite beyond my most ardent hopes, I have been thrown
together with Val, in daily companionship, as long as life permits.

For, as it fell out, I was invalided home at quite an early stage of my public career, and,
contrary to all family traditions, disgraced my kin by contracting lung disease--at least,
so the doctors have declared, though I have experienced very little inconvenience thereby,
except that of being condemned to act the invalid for the rest of my life. For years I was
forced by arbitrary decrees to winter in clement climes, as the only means of surviving till
the spring; but now that I am fifty I have emancipated myself from such slavery, and insist
on spending winter as well as summer in "bonnie Scotland."  So far I have found no difference
in health and strength.  Thus it came about that a long visit to Val lengthened out indefinitely,
and is not likely to terminate until one or other of us is removed hence.

The ego appears rather prominently in these introductory paragraphs, it is true, but it was
almost unavoidable; for my presence had to be accounted for in Ardmuirland before I could give
reminiscences of this delightful spot.  Now, however, I am free to speak of other folks; and
first of dear old Val.

It was a long and arduous apprenticeship (if it is not irreverent so to style it) which Val
had to pass in order to fit himself for priestly work; he was curate for I know not how many
years in a large and extremely poor mission in one of our big towns.  He worked well and thoroughly,
as any one who knows Val will be ready to affirm; but his health would not stand the hard work
and close confinement of a town, and he was forced against his will to relinquish his post.
His attraction had always been toward a studious life, so it came about that he was sent up
here, where he has time to study to his heart's content, since his flock will never be anything
but small.  Moreover, his share of poor old Dad's worldly substance enables him to live, for
the emoluments here would scarcely support a canary-bird.

Yet it must not be supposed that Val is rolling in riches.  In the first place, poor Dad had
to sell a good deal of property to make good his losses from unfortunate investments, and he
had not overmuch to leave us.  His worldly wisdom, too, taught him to be sparing with Val.

"He would spend his half in a month, Ted," said the old Pater shrewdly, when he came to settle
his worldly affairs.  "I shall therefore leave the bulk of everything to you, and trust to
you to provide liberally for the dear boy."

Dad's remark is the best possible clue to Val's character.  Had he nothing else to give, Val
would strip the very coat off his own back, when it was a question of relieving distress. 
So it is a part of my duty to see that he is clothed and fed as he ought to be, and a difficult
job it is at times.

I suppose I ought to give some idea of Val's appearance, if this is to be a proper literary
turn-out.  When we both were younger, it was commonly said by aunts, uncles, and such like,
that one was the image of the other.  That would be scarcely a fair description now.  I am
thin; Val is inclined to become chubby.  I have a beard and he is necessarily shaven; he needs
glasses always, and I only for reading. With these preliminary observations I may say that
Val is about five feet six in his shoes, of dark complexion, and with hair inclining to gray.
He is quiet in manner, yet withal a charming companion when called upon to talk.  The people
worship him; that is the best testimonial of a country priest, and all that I need say about
his interior man.

If I did not know for certain that Longfellow never set eyes on Ardmuirland, I should maintain
that the lines at the head of this chapter were meant for a description of it.  For "the steel-blue
rim of the ocean" is but three miles distant from this heather-clad, wind-swept height, which
rises some seven hundred feet above it. Moreover, as one gazes down, the eye meets many a miniature
forest of pine and birch, clothing portions of the lower hills, or nestling in the crevices
of the numerous watercourses which divide them.  Strewn irregularly over the landscape are
white-walled, low-roofed farms and crofters' dwellings--each in the embrace of sheltering barn
and byre, whose roofs of vivid scarlet often shine out in the sun from a setting of green meadow
or garden.

Our own habitation is simple enough, yet amply suffices for our needs. It is just a stone cottage
of two stories, and is connected by a small cloister-like passage, Gothic in character, with
the stone chapel which is the scene of Val's priestly ministrations.  This, too, is modest
enough.  The windows are triple lancets, filled with opaque glass, the altar of stone and marble,
but simple in decoration, the tabernacle of brass, and the eastern window--larger than the
others--is embellished with stained glass.  It is in memory of our dear Dad, and besides his
patron, St. Andrew, it has the figures of St. Valentine and St. Edmund on either side of the
Apostle.

Within the house is a dining-room, a better furnished room for the reception of important visitors,
and a small den known as the "priest's room," in which Val interviews members of his flock.
Upstairs are Val's study and my sitting-room, with our respective bed-chambers and a spare
one for a casual visitor.  Kitchen offices and servants' quarters are in a tiny special block.

Both chapel and house have been built by Val.  I can recall his pleading letters to Dad for
help to raise a more worthy temple.  The Pater, with his characteristic caution, made it a
condition of his help that a new house should form part of the plan.  If the old chapel was
as unworthy of its purpose as Val's descriptions painted it, the dwelling must have been indeed
poverty-stricken.  From what I have gleaned from the natives, both buildings must have surpassed
in meanness our wildest conceptions of them.  But more upon that subject later.

Any account of the chapel-house at Ardmuirland would be incomplete without some reference to
a personage who holds an important position in the household, second only to that of the master
of the house.  This is Penelope Spence, known to the world outside as "Mistress Spence," and
to Val and myself as "Penny."  She was our nurse long ago, and is now the ruler of the domestic
affairs of the chapel-house.  A little, round, white-haired, rosy-faced dumpling of a woman
is Penny; an Englishwoman, too, from the Midlands, where the letter H is reserved by many persons
of her social standing for the sake of special emphasis only.  I find by calculation that she
first saw the light at least seventy years ago, but she is reticent upon that subject.  All
the precise information I have ever extracted from her on the point is that she is not so young
as she once was--which is self-evident!  But young or old, she is brisk and active, both in
mind and body, still.  Such a devoted old soul, too!  She would go to the stake cheerfully
for either of us, but for Val she entertains an almost superstitious reverence, which would
be amusing were it not touching.  When speaking of him to the natives, she invariably styles
him "the Priest."  I imagine she looks for a higher place above, in recognition of her early
services to him.

Penny was already a young married woman when she came into the service of our family.  Her
history, as I have learned it from her own lips, will be worth narrating, if I can find room
for it in these pages.

Elsie is Penny's "lady in waiting"; she is too youthful as yet to have made history.  She hails
from a neighboring farm, and is a really satisfactory handmaid--ready, cheerful, and diligent;
she entertains a thoroughly genuine respect for her superior officer, "Mistress Spence," in
spite of the latter's somewhat severe notions as to the training of young servants.  In appearance
Elsie is much like any other Scottish lassie of her age--not strikingly beautiful, nor yet
ugly; just pleasant to look upon.  Her most conspicuous trait is a smile which appears to be
chronic.  One cannot help wondering what she looks like on occasions when a smile is out of
place--at her prayers, or at a funeral, for instance.  I am quite prepared to maintain that
she does not lose it during sleep; for though I have noticed it growing deeper and broader
when she has reason to feel more than usual satisfaction (e.g., when Penny unthinkingly utters
a word of praise), it never entirely disappears during the daytime.

There is another personage who deserves special mention; for not only is he an important item
in our establishment, but a very special crony of mine.  This is Willy Paterson (known locally,
by-the-bye, as "the Priest's Wully"), our gardener, groom, coachman (when required), and general
handy man.  Willy is a wiry, wrinkled, white-haired little man--little now, because stooping
a bit under the weight of well-nigh eighty years--who is greatly respected by his neighbors
far and near because he has "been sooth."  For he was long ago in the ranks of the police of
one of our biggest cities, and his former profession, not to speak of his knowledge of the
world gained thereby, entitles him to esteem.  It has raised him to the rank of a species of
oracle on any subject upon which he is pleased to discourse; the result is a not unpleasing,
because altogether unintentional, dogmatism which seasons Willy's opinions of men and things.

Our garden is the pride of Willy's heart.  It begins in front of the house, where flowers of
varied hue succeed one another as season follows season, and roses--red, white, and yellow--seem
almost perennial, since they bud forth in late May and scarcely disappear till December.  But
that is due to our wonderful climate as much as to Willy's attention.  As the garden disappears
round the corner of the house, its nature changes; vegetables in surprising and intricate variety
there flourish chiefly.  At the stable-yard it ceases; beyond that a dense pine wood holds
its own to the very top of a hill, which rises above our domain and protects us from eastern
blasts.  The wood is not the least of the attractions which Ardmuirland has for me; beyond
the more prosaic quality of its health-giving power, it possesses, as every bit of forest land
does for those who can read its message aright, a charm unspeakable.

And now I seem to hear some crusty reader exclaim quite impatiently, having skimmed through
my literary attempt thus far:

"No doubt the fellow thinks all this interesting enough!  But why expect me to wade through
pages of twaddle about Scottish peasants and their doings--for it is evident that is what it
will turn out?"

"Read it or not, just as you feel inclined, honored sir," I answer with all the courtesy I
can command.  "I respect your opinions, as your fellow-creature, and have no desire to thrust
my wares upon unwilling hands.  But opinions differ, luckily, or this world would be an undesirable
habitation for any one, so there may be some who do not disdain my humble efforts to entertain--and
perhaps even amuse.  To such I dedicate my pages."

Yet, between ourselves (dear, appreciative reader), it is but just that I should offer some
apology for thus rushing into print.  I trust to you to keep the matter a strict secret from
my doctor (McKillagen, M.D., M.R.C.S.), but winter weather at Ardmuirland is not altogether
of a balmy nature.  Consequently it is necessary that these precious lungs of mine should not
be exposed too rashly to

  "the cauld, cauld blast, on yonder lea."

This leads to much enclosure within doors during a good share of the worst of our months--say
from February to May, off and on; this again leads to a dearth of interesting occupation.

It is Val who is really to be blamed for this literary attempt.  When, in an unlucky moment,
I was one day expatiating on the material afforded to a book-maker (I do not use the word in
a sporting sense, of course) by the varied characters and histories of our people, and the
more than ordinary interest attaching to some, he beamed at me across the dinner-table, a twinkle
of humor disclosing itself from behind his glasses, and said:

"Why not write about them yourself, Ted?  You complain of having nothing to do in bad weather."

The idea took root; it was nourished by reflection.  Here is the fruit;
pluck it or not, gentle reader, as your inclination bids.
          (Goldsmith--"Deserted Village")

I have heard a complaint made of some reverend preachers (untruthfully, I well believe) that
they could never begin a sermon without harking back to the Creation.  Now it is not my intention
to travel quite so far back into the past, but I must confess to a desire to dig somewhat deeply
into the history of Ardmuirland in days gone by before touching upon more recent happenings.
Such a desire led me to investigate the recollections of some of our "oldest inhabitants."

Willy Paterson, I well knew, was to be trusted for accurate memories of a certain class of
happenings; but for more minute details of events the feminine mind is the more reliable. 
So I determined to start with Willy's wife, Bell.  Their dwelling is nearest to ours; it stands,
indeed, but a few yards down the road which leads past our gate.  It is a white-walled, thatched
house of one story only--like most of the habitations in Ardmuirland; it stands in a little
garden whose neatness and the prolific nature of its soil are standing proofs of Willy's industry
in hours of leisure.

Owing to the prevalence in our neighborhood of some particular patronymics--Macdonald, Mackintosh,
Mackenzie, and the rest--many individuals are distinguished by what is called in Ardmuirland
a "by-name."  Some of these are furnished by the title of the residence of the family in question,
others by the calling or trade of father, mother, or other relative; thus we have "Margot of
the Mill," "Sandy Craigdhu," as examples of the former, and "Nell Tailor," "Duncan the Post,"
of the latter.  Still more variety is obtained by the mention of some personal trait of the
individual, such as "Fair Archie," "Black Janet," and the like.  Willy Paterson's wife was
commonly known by such a by-name; every one spoke of her as "Bell o' the Burn," from the name
of her childhood's home.

Bell is a spare, hard-featured body--not attractive at first sight, though when one comes to
know her, and the somewhat stern expression relaxes, as the lines about the mouth soften, and
the brown eyes grow kindly, one begins to think that Bell must have been once quite handsome.
She is always scrupulously clean whenever I chance to visit her, and is usually arrayed in
a white "mutch" cap, spotless apron, and small tartan shawl over her shoulders.  Willy and
she have reared up a large family, all of them now settled in the world and most of them married.
They are most proud of their youngest, Margaret, who is a lay sister in a town convent.  Though
her husband is reckoned a traveler, Bell can lay no claim to the title; she probably never
moved farther than ten miles away from the family hearthstone until the day she left her father's
house by the Burn of Breakachy to marry Willy Paterson, and certainly has never traveled much
since that time.

Most of the houses of Ardmuirland are constructed on exactly the same plan.  There are two
principal rooms--"but" and "ben," as they are commonly designated.  (It is unnecessary here
to dive into etymology; but it may be noticed in passing that but signifies "without" and ben
"within.")  To "gae ben" is to pass into the inner room, which at one time opened out of the
ordinary living apartment or kitchen, but is now usually separated from it by a little entrance
lobby.  Besides these two chief rooms, the initiated will be able to point out sundry little
hidden closets and cupboards, fitted up as sleeping apartments, and reminding one of the contrivances
on board ship.  The two rooms each contain a more demonstrative bed, as a rule: but in some
cases the bed is shut up with panelled doors like a cupboard.

All that I learned from Bell about the Ardmuirland of bygone days was gathered from her lips
at intervals, and in the course of many repeated visits; for it would have been fatal to my
purpose had I allowed her to imagine that I intended to make public use of her communications.
Though I have retained the substance, I have often altered the form; for it would be useless
to expect the reader to translate (if it were even possible to do so without the help of a
glossary) Bell's broad Scots dialect.  Yet the temptation has been too great to be resisted
from time to time to quote her exact words--so quaint her diction and, to me at least, so attractive
withal.

A description of the original chapel of the district will serve as a fitting introduction to
these memoirs.  According to Bell, it must have been simple even to destitution.  No smoothly
hewn stones, no carved windows, no decoration of any kind distinguished it from the houses
of the people.  It was a small, low building of rough stone, unplastered, even inside, and
roofed by a heather thatch.  There was a single door in the side wall.  The roof within was
open to the rude, unvarnished beams which upheld the thatch.  The floor was of beaten clay,
and there were rough benches for the people to sit upon during the sermon, but no contrivance
for kneeling upon.

"Some o' the fowk had boards to kneel on, ye ken," Bell explained, "but the maist o' them prayed
kneelin' on the flure."

The altar was a plain, deal kitchen table, devoid of all ornament in the shape of draperies
except the necessary linen coverings. Underneath it was a box, within which the vestments were
stowed away; for there was no semblance of sacristy, and the priest's house was some yards
distant.  At the opposite end from the altar was a raised dais for the accommodation of the
singers, of whom Bell herself was one. She could not recall what they were accustomed to sing
as a rule.

"I mind we wad sing the Dies Irae, whiles," was all the information she could give on that
point.  One would think it scarcely possible that so penitential a chant could form the usual
musical accompaniment to Sunday Mass!  A teacher of music from a neighboring glen used to come
over from time to time to practise the singers.

"I mind weel," said Bell, "he had a wand and a tunin' fork."  Are these not the recognized
signs of ability, all the world over, to conduct a band of singers?  The practices were held
in the priest's house; sometimes the pastor would join in the singing, although Bell naïvely
remarked on that point:

"He hadna much ear for music, ye ken."

Of the priest of that day, "Mr." McGillivray, as the old style of address ran, more will be
said later.  The figure next in prominence to him in Bell's recollections was the old sacristan,
Robbie Benzie.  For many years he acted as "clerk" at the altar, continuing to carry out his
duties when well advanced in years.  During the week he carried on his trade of weaver; on
Sundays he was at his post betimes, carrying a lantern with him, from which he took the light
for the altar candles. Bell describes him as a stalwart man with fine features and dark eyes.
Clad in his green tartan plaid, he always accompanied the priest round the little chapel with
the holy water for the Asperges, and with his "lint-white locks" flowing onto his neck, he
used to appear in Bell's eyes "a deal mair imposin' lookin' ner the priest himsel'."  His modest
and respectful bearing gained him the esteem of all.  "I always think of him," said Bell, "as
one o' the saints of th' olden times, ye ken. He was the model of a guid Catholic--pious, hard-workin',
and aye happy and contented."

In those far-off days Ardmuirland was entirely Catholic.  The Faith, in consequence, was an
integral part of the life of the district, and the priest the recognized potentate, whom every
one was at all times ready to serve--working on his croft, plowing, harvesting, and such like--with
cheerful promptitude.  Any such labor, when required, was requested by the priest from the
altar on Sunday.

"I shall be glad to receive help this week on the glebe-land," he would announce.  "You will
kindly arrange the division of labor among yourselves."

The same would happen when the time came for cutting and storing up peats for the winter fuel.
The day and hour would be named, and all who could possibly help would be at the hill punctually
to take their respective shares in the labor.

It was on one such occasion that the incident occurred which struck me as the culminating point
of Bell's recollections.  I cannot give it as dramatically as she did, and if I attempted to
do so the pathos would be marred by the broad Doric--unintelligible to southrons--in which
her narrative was told; but I will reproduce it as faithfully as possible in my own words.

It was the "peat-casting" for the priest; every one had worked with a will--young and old.
Dinner had been sent up to the moss at noon by the various housewives of the district.  It
was a sumptuous repast, as usual on so great an occasion; chickens, oatcake, scones, cheese,
and abundance of milk had been thoroughly enjoyed by the workers.  The children--bearers of
the dainties from their respective mothers--though bashful in responding to the fatherly greetings
of the old priest, were yet secretly proud of the honor of his special notice.  Shyly they
stood about in groups, watching for a time the resumed labors of fathers and brothers, until
afternoon was wearing away, and it was time to betake themselves home to make ready for the
still more important event of the day.  Gaily they rushed down the hill, their joyous laughter
and merry shouts--relieved as they were from the restraint which good manners had imposed in
the priest's presence--awaking the echoes of the glen.  For many of them would be allowed to
take part in the evening's festivity, and all might share in the preparations for it.  This
event was the public supper in the priest's barn, when women were welcomed with their husbands
and brothers, and even the bigger children were admitted.  For the evening repast, as for that
of noonday, each family contributed its share of provisions, which were always ample in quantity
as well as excellent in quality.

Supper, on this particular occasion--as was usual--took some time, and it was a serious business,
when little conversation was encouraged. But after supper the real fun began.  None love dancing
more than Scots; so dancing must needs form the climax of every gathering for social enjoyment.
The bashful roughness which characterized the commencement had worn off; lads and lasses were
thoroughly enjoying the somewhat rare opportunity of taking part in so large an assembly; Archie
Cattanach, the piper, was throwing his whole soul into the skirls and flourishes of his choice
tunes; all was gaiety and innocent enjoyment.  The good priest sat looking on pleased because
his people were happy; now and again he would move his position to another group of the older
guests, so that he might chat with all in turn; his flock, though they held their Pastor in
that reverence which none but a priest can inspire, were under no false restraint in his presence,
but joined in laugh and jest with ease and simplicity.

Loudly rang out Archie's pipes, merrily tripped the dancers, and joy reigned supreme, when
suddenly there came an unexpected check.  The outer door flew open, and a girlie of about ten,
wild-eyed, bare-headed, panting for breath, rushed into the midst of the gathering.  She was
evidently laboring under the stress of some unwonted excitement.  There was no shyness now,
in spite of the priest's presence--in spite of the eager faces that sought hers in anxious
questioning.

"Mither, Mither!" she screamed shrilly, as she caught sight of the familiar face she sought,
and rushed toward her mother's open arms.  It was little Peggy, Bell's younger sister.

"Oh, Mither," she wailed through her sobs, "oor Jessie's nae to be foond!  She's nae at hame.
I dinna ken wha she's gane!"

With her mother's arms around her, the child was able to give a more coherent account of the
circumstances which had led to this abrupt cessation of the dance; for Archie's melody had
trailed off into an unmusical drone and speedily ceased, and the dancers had spontaneously
crowded round the child and her mother.

Peggy had been left in charge at home, for Bell was allowed to take part in the "ball."  Jessie,
the youngest but one of the family, was a little maid of four years.  She had accompanied Peggy
and her brothers, with a crowd of other small folk, when the children went to the moss with
provisions for the workers.  All had gone and returned in a body, and no one noticed that Jessie
was not with them.  It was only when Peggy began to assemble her own little charges, to conduct
them to their own house, that she missed the wee lassie.  Peggy knew that her father and mother,
together with all her elders in the family, had already started for the barn--some to help
in the preparations, others to chat with those who were assembling outside.  It was growing
dark, for the children had delayed their homeward journey (as they often will when a number
are together) to play and sport.

There was no one to advise or help the child.  Sending on three-year-old Elsie and the other
little ones in charge of Johnnie, she ran back, half distracted, toward the hill they had left
earlier in the afternoon.  Shouting out for Jessie by name, she wandered hither and thither--terrified,
self-accusing, disconsolate.  But it was all to no purpose.  Darkness fell, and fearful and
contrite, Peggy had no resource but to seek her mother.

There was no more merriment that night.  A search party was at once organized by the younger
men, who started with lanterns and some of their collies to the peat-moss.  All that night
the anxious mother kept weary vigil, while the men-folk searched the hill.  Day broke, and
no trace had been found of the lost child.  Weary and sad, the men returned for some needful
rest and others took their places.  But though they traversed the moors all day, and searched
crevices and water-courses with diligence, they met with no better success. Sometimes a sound
would break through the stillness which would stir their hearts with renewed hope.  The cry
of a child!  Weak and faint, indeed, but telling of the continuance of life!  But again and
again, after scaling heights or creeping down comes, they were doomed to disappointment.  It
was but the bleat of a strayed lamb!  That night a larger party set out with lanterns and torches,
and once more ranged the hills shouting for the child; but once again morning dawned upon disappointed
hopes.

Then every one who could be of any possible use was pressed into the service.  The people flocked
out of their homes from all that district, and hand in hand they started in a long line stretching
across a wide tract of country, and moving slowly on until every inch of ground in their way
had been thoroughly explored.

It was after three nights and three days had passed that they came upon the weak little body,
lying stark and still under an overhanging rock, and half buried in the heather.  Moss was
clutched in her clenched hand, and shreds of moss were on her cold lips; the poor little bairn
had hungered for food, and had seized that which first came to hand to satisfy her craving.
She was quite dead.

The bereaved mother mourned her darling with a grief that none but a mother can know.  But
the child had been her father's special pet of all his little flock.

"His heart," said Bell, the rising tears witnessing to the sadness of the memories called back
by her story, "was well-nigh broke.  He burst into tears at the sight of her wee white face,
and sobbed like a bairn wi' the rest of us."

And poor little Peggy!  How touching the story!  She never ceased to reproach herself for what
she considered her carelessness in losing sight of Jessie on that fatal day.  No single creature
attached a shadow of blame to her; on the contrary, it was the dearest wish of all to try to
console her and assure her of her innocence in that respect. But it was of no avail.  Her unceasing
grief fretted away her strength, and six months later she was borne to St. Mungo's ancient
burying ground to share Jessie's grave.

"It's nigh on sixty years sin'," said Bell apologetically, as she wiped
her streaming eyes with her apron; "but the thocht o' that time brings
the tears up yet."
          (Pope--"Ode to Solitude")

He was an unusually wretched semblance of a man.  A tattered coat--some one's cast-off overcoat--green,
greasy, mud-stained, clung round his shaking knees; trousers which might have been of any hue
originally, but were now "sad-colored," flapped about his thin legs and fringed his ankles;
shoes, slashed across the front for ease, revealed bare feet beneath; an antique and dirty
red woolen muffler swathed his neck almost to the ears.  Surmounting these woeful garments
appeared a yellow, wrinkled face surrounded by a straggling fringe of gray whisker; gray locks
strayed from an old red handkerchief tied round the brows under a dilapidated wide-awake hat.
To add to his woe-begone aspect, the poor wretch was streaming with wet, for a Scottish mist
had been steadily falling all the morning.

Leaning on his stick, the man slowly shuffled up the central path toward the porch in which
I was sitting, striving to get the nearest possible approach to an open-air pipe.  Touching
his sorry headgear, he looked at me with mild eyes of faded blue, and smiled benignly as he asked:

"Could I see himsel'?"

I had not long come to that part of the country, and I was not thoroughly conversant with the
terminology of the people, but it flashed upon me what he meant.

"Did you wish to see the priest?" I rejoined.

"Aye," replied the old vagrant--for so I deemed him.  The smile seemed stereotyped, for it
never faded.  His face, when one regarded it attentively, had a quite attractive pleasantness.

"I'm sorry to say he's out just now," I said.  "But you may go round to the back and get something
to eat, if you wish."

It struck me as strange that he did not ask for money, but thanked me profusely and politely,
as he touched his wretched hat once more and shuffled off toward the kitchen quarters.

He did not reappear for so long a time that I began to think it would be prudent to investigate.
Traveling gentry of such a class are not always desirable visitors when the kitchen happens
to be unoccupied for the nonce.  As I made my way in that direction through the little hall
I heard voices through the half-open door beyond.

"It'll be all right, Archie," Penny was saying.  "The priest shall have the money as soon as
he comes in, and if he can't say the Mass to-morrow, I'll take care to send you word by Willy.
Now, mind you get a bit of fire lighted when you get back home.  You must be wet through!"

"Thank ye kindly, Mistress Spence," came the slow response in the quavering voice of the old
man.  "It's yersel' that's aye kind and thochtful!"

I waited till I heard the door close upon the supposed "tramp" before venturing to make the
inquiries that rushed to my lips.  And even then I paused a while.  When needing information
from Penny, one has to be circumspect; she has a way of shutting off the supply with ruthless
decision, yet with a seeming absence of deliberate purpose, whenever she suspects a "pumping"
operation.

"I'm one that won't be drove," I've often heard her say.  So we old fellows are often obliged
to have recourse to diplomacy in dealing with our old nurse.

Consequently I lounged casually, as it were, into Penny's domain with the remark, "That poor
old chap looked awfully wet, Penny."

"Wet enough he was, Mr. Edmund," replied the unsuspecting Penny, "and I have just been giving
him a good hot cup of tea; for he never touches wine or spirits."

She was evidently betrayed by my apparent lack of inquisitiveness into a relation of the details
I was longing to hear.

"To think," she continued, "of the creature walking down in such weather, and he such a frail
old mortal, too, just to make sure of Mass to-morrow for his wife's anniversary.  I can't help
thinking, Mr. Edmund, that some of us might take an example in many things from poor old Archie
McLean!"

"Does he live far away?" I asked--just to encourage the flow of the narrative.

"A good three miles--and his rheumatism something hawful," exclaimed Penny, now thoroughly
started on her recital.  I had but to lend an ear, and my curiosity would be satisfied.

Archie, it appeared, had been a soldier in his young days, but when he came to settle in Ardmuirland
his time of service had expired; that was long ago, for he was now quite an elderly man.  He
took up his residence in a deserted mill, by the Ardmuir Burn.  As he proved to be thoroughly
quiet and inoffensive, the neighbors--true to their national character, not speedily attracted
by strangers--began in course of time to make his acquaintance, and he eventually became a
great favorite with all.  When younger, Penny had been told, he had been "a wonderful good
gardener," and for trifling payment, or in return for a meal, would always "redd-up" the gardens
of the district.  Thus he acquired the designation of "Airchie Gairdener," and by that was
usually known.

What his neighbors could not comprehend was how Archie spent these small earnings, but more
especially to what use he had put his army pension, which every one knew he once received regularly.
He had no occasion to buy food, for kindly neighbors would always exchange for meal or eggs
the varied produce of his well-cultivated garden.  His clothes cost him nothing; for he had
worn the same old garments for years past, and though no self-respecting tramp would have accepted
them, he never seemed anxious to replace them.  If any others were given him, he would use
them for a time, out of compliment to the donor, but the ancient attire would always reappear
after a short interval.

"As to where his money goes," summed up Penny, "I've a notion that his Reverence knows more
than any one else except Archie himself.  Poor Archie often asks for the priest, and I've heard
his Reverence speaking to him in quite an angry way--for him," she added quickly; "but there's
never any change in Archie's way of living.  Some of the people here think he's a perfect saint,
and I'm not so sure that they're far wrong! However, I think he ought to take ordinary care
of his 'ealth; that seems to me a duty even for saints!"

I tried to glean more details from Val, but found him strangely reticent.

"Poor old fellow!  A good soul, if ever there was one!" was the only remark I could elicit.

This air of mystery made me more than ever desirous of learning something about Archie's antecedents.
It was this curiosity which led me, in the first instance, to visit his tumbledown dwelling.
It was a quaint establishment.  A moderately large garden surrounded it on three sides, roughly
fenced in from the woodland, its fence interwoven with gorse branches to keep out rabbits.
The varied supplies of vegetables were evidence of Archie's industry, in spite of his rheumatism.
It was by the produce of this garden that the old man obtained in return the oatmeal and milk
which formed his staple food; for he could no longer work for others.

The house itself was a picture!  Its aged roof seemed to have bent beneath the weight of years;
for the ridge had sunk in the middle of its mossy, grass-grown expanse, and threatened to fall
upon its occupant to the peril of his life.  A small barrel served for a chimney.  One window
possessed still two small panes of glass; the other openings were filled in with bits of boarding,
as was the whole of the other window.

There was something quite uncanny about the silence of the place.  The monotonous ripple of
the burn below seemed to intensify it.  I stood in hesitation for a moment or two before venturing
to knock at the door. When at last I had done so, shuffling footsteps sounded within, and Archie
opened the door; the same bland smile which I had noticed when I first saw him appeared on
his wrinkled face, and the faded blue eyes lighted up.

"Come ben, sir; come ben!" he said hospitably.  "Ye're kindly welcome, tho' 'tis but a puir
hoosachie for ane o' the gentry."

It was indeed a sorry place to live in.  The roof was so unsound that, as I learned later from
Bell, it was difficult to find a dry spot for his wretched bed in wet weather.  Added to this,
as the same informant assured me, the place was a happy hunting-ground for rats.

"The rats is that bould, sir," she said, "that he's fairly to tak' a stick to bed wi' him o'
nichts, to keep the beasts off.  It's a wonder they rats hasna' yokit on him afore this!"

But on this, my first visit, no rat put in an appearance.

I gave no motive for looking in, nor did Archie seem to be surprised at my call.  He was evidently
much pleased to see me; but I could not help thinking at the time that his cordial welcome
was due in great measure to my relationship to Val.

That first visit was short, but it was succeeded by others.  It soon became quite customary
to wind up my daily walk with a chat with the "hermit"--as I got into the way of calling him.
For beyond the mystery attaching to the man--or perhaps I ought to say intensifying it--was
the fact that he was a really attractive personality.  He could talk about the various countries
he had seen with a degree of intelligence unlooked for in one of his condition; moreover, he
could season his remarks with much spice of sound, earnest wisdom, which amused while it edified
me.  It did not take long to discover that Archie "Gairdener" was a man out of the common.

That Archie was a good Christian was self-evident.  No weather, however tempestuous, could
keep him from Sunday Mass, and I noticed with some surprise that he received Holy Communion
at least once and sometimes more frequently every week, but always on a week-day, when our
congregation consisted chiefly of our household and Bell.

"I suppose Archie 'Gairdener' finds it more convenient to come to the Sacraments on a week-day,"
I remarked one day to Val, "because of the late hour of Mass on Sunday."

"Scarcely that," was his quiet answer.  "I happen to know from other sources that he still
keeps up the old practice he found in use when he first came here.  In those days no one dreamed
of breaking fast on a Sunday until the priest himself did.  Every one came to Mass fasting,
as Archie still does--though I believe he is the only one nowadays."

During the two or three years that followed I saw a good deal of Archie.  We became such cronies,
indeed, that Val was considerably amused that I should take so much pleasure in the company
of one with whom I could have few ideas in common.  But there was something that attracted
me to the old fellow from the first, which I can not define in words.

A severe winter made it almost impossible for the old man to get to Sunday Mass at all; he
would do his best, but it was evident, as I could see more plainly in my visits, that he was
growing very feeble. I happened to be seedy myself at that time, and did not manage to get
out so frequently as before, owing to the trying weather.

It came with no surprise when Val told me in early spring that Archie was growing worse, and
that the doctor gave little hope of his regaining strength; in the circumstances, Val thought
it well not to delay the Last Sacraments any longer.  I tried to accompany him when he went
to the old mill for that purpose, but I had to give it up.  It was about a week later that
I was able to visit the old man.

Winter seemed to have departed for good on that day in mid-April.  A bright sun was shining;
deluded little birds were flitting about as though summer had come; even on the hill the air
was mild and balmy.

The brooding silence seemed accentuated in the neighborhood of Archie's hermitage.  An unusual
sign of life was to be seen at the mill-house itself; smoke was rising from the extemporized
chimney; for Bell, as I knew, had installed herself as nurse and was doing her best to render
the last days of the old recluse more restful than they could have been during his more active
period.

It was Bell who answered to my knock.  With a gesture imploring silence she led me in.  I was
startled at the sight which met my eyes.  The old man lay stretched on the bare earthen floor,
his head pillowed upon a large stone.  His body was covered by blankets, but his arms were
crossed on his breast outside of them and embraced his crucifix.  His eyes were closed, but
he was still breathing fitfully.  Bell whispered, in response to my amazed look of inquiry:

"He wouldna' rest till Wully and I lifted him oot o' bed before Wully went for the priest.
He'd been keepin' yon big stane for years to serve him at the last."

Val appeared very soon.  Archie showed no sign of recognition, even when the well-known voice
began the prayers he seemed to have been waiting for before departing.

Bell lighted the blessed candle, which was in readiness, and knelt with Willy on one side of
the quiet form, while I knelt on the other near to the priest.

I could not shake off a sense of loss as keen as though some dearly loved friend had been taken
from me.  Val and I walked home in unbroken silence through the shadow of the wood, newly decked
in tender green buds, up to the rising ground beyond.  My brother seemed as much touched as I.

It was not until our meal was over, and we sat on either side of the still necessary fire,
though we had dined without a lamp, and still preferred the dusk for a quiet talk, that Val
spoke of Archie.

"Now that the poor old fellow is at rest," he said, "I will tell you, by his express desire,
something about his history.   He wanted me to promise to make it public, but that I resolutely
refused to do, for many reasons.  'Let Mr. Edmund know, at least,' he said.  'I do not want
him to have too good an opinion of me, or he will not pray as much as I should wish for my
poor soul.'  So you have a right to know, Ted."

And with that he unfolded the story of Archie McLean's early years.

Archie had been a wild boy in his youth, with a strong propensity for drink--hereditary, unfortunately--which
he was not so well able to satisfy on his father's croft, in Banffshire; so, to gain more liberty,
he ran off and enlisted.  When scarcely more than twenty he took up with a girl he met in one
of the provincial towns in which he happened to be stationed, and eventually married her. 
He had asked no leave--indeed, at his age it would not have been granted; his wife, therefore,
was not "on the strength of the regiment"--in other words, depended entirely upon his pay,
and what little she might earn, for the necessaries of life, and even for traveling expenses,
in case of removal elsewhere.  The girl was a negligent Protestant, and he a non-practising
Catholic.  They had been married before a Registrar, and neither of them entered a church as
long as the woman lived.  The one child born to them died a week later, unbaptized.

Such a marriage could not possibly prove happy, but it was more unfortunate in its results
than could have been imagined.  The man's craving for drink grew with its indulgence.  His
wife, neglected by him, followed his example and took to that sorry comforter; before long
she had acquired habits of drunkenness that disgusted even him.  Soon she had fallen so low
that her life was a crying scandal for its unrestrained vices.

The man's companions took a savage pleasure in taunting him about his wife's depravity, until
the very mention of her name was hateful to him.  He acknowledged that he himself was bad enough,
but her conduct had reached the extreme of vileness.  The result was what might have been foreseen.
Quarrels and recriminations were perpetual.  The man hated the woman because of her vicious
life; he hated himself because, as his conscience reminded him in lucid intervals, he was responsible
for her downfall.

The regiment was on the eve of removing to other quarters, and much as he would have liked
to leave his wife behind to shift for herself, he dare not face the consequences.  Coming to
her lodgings, therefore, to arrange about her journey, he found the woman hopelessly incapable.
His mad rage against her was inflamed by the drink he had just taken; in his anger he was strongly
tempted to rid himself of the burden she had become.  Nothing could be easier!  No one had
seen him enter the house, and there was every chance of his being able to steal away unperceived,
in the dusk of the evening.  An uncontrollable loathing for the woman urged him on; conscience
was disregarded.  He seized one of the pillows of the bed.  It was merely necessary to press
it over her face, hold it there till life was extinct, and creep away, a free man!

It must have been the ever-watching Angel Guardian of that wretched man who touched his heart
at that moment of danger, by a sudden grace.  He faltered; threw down the pillow, and swiftly
ran from the room and from the house--pursued by remorse.

An hour later, when he ventured to return, he was met on the threshold with the tidings that
his wife had been found dead of heart failure.

For many a year after that horrible day Archie McLean was tormented by his reproachful conscience.
He regarded himself as a murderer in desire, though actually guiltless of his wife's blood.
The terrible shock was his salvation.  From that day he never more touched strong drink.  The
formerly inveterate drunkard, a great portion of whose time was spent in the cells, rose by
degrees to the position of the smartest soldier in his company.  When his long service had
to come to an end, he took a situation as gardener for a time; but a desire which had come
upon him when his army service had been completed became still more urgent.  He longed to be
able to devote himself to a penitential life, as a means of making such atonement as was in
his power for his past transgressions.  Even while in the army his life had been one of rigorous
mortification, dating from the day when he once more began to practise his religion; he shunned
no duty, however distasteful, and shrank from no danger.

In response to the keen desire which dominated him, Archie threw up his situation, and searching
for some part of the country in which he would not be known, yet where he should find life
and surroundings not entirely foreign to his experience, settled at length at Ardmuirland.
For about forty years his life was characterized by a rigorous austerity.  His pension was
at once carried to the priest, as soon as he received it, to be devoted to the offering of
Masses for the soul of his unhappy wife, and the relief of the poor--scarcely poorer than himself.
He never spent a penny upon his own needs; even the scanty earnings of his labor, unless made
in kind, went the same way as his pension.  The clothing, even, which charitable persons bestowed
upon him in pity soon passed into coin for the same end; no scolding of his spiritual Father
could prevail upon him to look better after his own well-being.

"I've been a great sinner, Father," he would say.  "I owe a big debt to the justice of the
Almighty!"

As he had lived, so he died, I had noticed that my brother had shown no surprise, as I did,
at the sight of the dying figure of the old man stretched on the bare earth with a stone for
his pillow; Val had become familiar with the idea.

"My Saviour died on a Cross for me, and shall I, a vile sinner, be content to die in my bed?"
Thus he would always answer the remonstrances of the priest.

Whenever I read the Gospel narrative of Lazarus--the wretchedly clothed, ill-fed, diseased
mendicant--who inspired loathing in the eyes and nostrils of the delicately nurtured, sensual
men who flocked past his unlovely form to the banquets of the rich glutton at whose palace
gate he lay, my thoughts fly at once to my old friend, Archie the penitent, and my prayers
rise to Heaven on his behalf in the Church's touching petition for the departed:

  "Cum Lazaro, quondam paupere, eternam habeas requiem!"

  "With Lazarus, once poor, now blest
  May'st thou enjoy eternal rest!"

IV

GOLDEN DREAMS

  "All the world is turning golden, turning golden
      In the spring."
          (Nora Hopper--"April.")

On a day when May was growing old, everything up at Ardmuirland was green and gold except the
sky, and that was mostly blue and gold. Gorse and broom were in full blossom, so that on all
sides the outlook was glorious!

Looking through my field-glasses to discover the meaning of a column of dense smoke, which
seemed to be rising from a hill in the distance, I found myself gazing at a forest in flames!
Fire--a very wall of fire--seemed to extend for miles along a dense tract of woodland!  So
seemingly fierce the blaze that it lighted up with golden gleams the tower of a distant church
beyond the wood!  Yet, as I looked steadily, it became evident that the flames neither diminished
nor increased; presently I discovered that the column of smoke rose from a spot entirely different--more
to the foreground.  In the end I had to confess with reluctance that my eyes had been deceived;
there was no sensational forest fire at all!  What I had seen was but the sunshine on an expanse
of yellow bloom on some rising ground beyond the belt of woodland, and on the old church tower,
while a rare cloud shaded the nearer prospect.

What a silly goat I called myself!  Looking nearer home I saw the same red-gold glow, which
needed but the sunshine to wake it into flame. The disused quarry, not half a mile away, where
the sun was bright, might have been an open gold mine--so brilliant the shining of its wealth
of broom bushes!  The hedge of gorse which bordered the road on both sides had no speck of
green to mar its splendor.

  "All the world is turning golden, turning golden.
    Gold butterflies are light upon the wing;
  Gold is shining through the eyelids that were holden
        Till the spring."

The graceful verse haunted me all that day, repeating spontaneously, again and again, its tuneful
refrain.  For up at Ardmuirland we have to wait till May for settled springtide.

Later on I strolled across to her cottage to have a chat with "Bell o' the Burn."  I found
her busy at her washtub on the threshold of the door, but none the less ready to enter into
conversation, as I leaned on the garden fence watching her tireless pink hands, as they worked
up the snowy soapsuds.

"You've maybe haird the news, sir?" she began, a note of inquiry in her tone.

I had seen yesterday's Scotsman, but not in those pages did any of our folk look for news.
They read--those, at least, who possess that accomplishment--the stories in the People's Friend
and the like, if they were young; those who were older scanned the columns of the local newspaper,
published in the county town, and believed firmly in the absolute truth of everything that
was asserted there.  But "news" meant something more intimate--something which affected our
own immediate circle by its relation to the daily life and interests of those around us.

So, knowing this, I did not dream about any startling political crisis, recent mining disaster,
or railway collision; Bell knew nothing about such events.  Experience had taught me to allow
her to enlighten me in her own way.  So I put a question to that end.

"Have you heard some news?" I said.

Bell's delight at being first in the field was evident.

"Christian Logan's come intil a fortune!" she replied, with no little delight.

"That is good news, indeed!" I cried impulsively.  For Christian was, beyond doubt, one of
the poorest of our neighbors, and the most deserving.

"But where did the fortune come from, Bell?" I asked.

"Her mon," explained Bell, "had a cousin oot in Ameriky as fowks allays said wes gey rich.
But he niver so much as sent a word to Donal' for years, till juist aboot a week afore the
puir mon met wi' his accident, ye ken.  An' he says in the letter," continued the old woman,
warming up with the interest attaching to her subject, "as Donal' wes the only kin left him,
an' he'd find himsel' nane the worse o' that.  Alexander Gowan, they callit him."

"And so this cousin is dead, I suppose?"

"Na, na, sir," replied Bell.  "Gowan's on his wye back frae Ameriky, ye ken, an' Christian's
had word to expect him.  Maybe he'll be up here in twa, three days after he lands, like."

This was news with a vengeance!  An American who was "gey rich" might be a millionaire!  All
kinds of rosy visions began to float through my brain.  Thoughts of the manifold additions
and improvements which Val was dying to make in the church; of the shinty club we were so anxious
to start, but could not for want of means; of the hall we planned to build some day for concerts
and social gatherings in the long winter evenings--all started into new life at the prospect
of a wealthy Catholic returning to his native land with gold in his pocket and a ready hand
to scatter it liberally for the benefit of his kinsfolk!

"I suppose he's a Catholic," was the remark to which my mental plans gave birth.

"Aye," said Bell, in a reproachful tone, "the Gowans wes all strict Catholics.  The mon would
nae turn agen his chapel oot there, I'm thinkin'."

(In Ardmuirland, be it known, "chapel" means the Catholic Church, and "church"--or more frequently
"kirk"--denotes exclusively a Protestant place of worship; thus do penal laws leave their trail
behind them!)

"Not likely!" I exclaimed boldly.  For Bell began to look anxiously at me, as though the staunch
Catholicism of this particular Gowan might be open to question.  "Our religion is as free out
there as any other; that's one good quality in republican America which our government lacks
at present."

Still, my own mind misgave me a little.  I knew of more than one of my countrymen who had been
"strict Catholics" once, but who had lamentably fallen off through knocking about the world.
However, we were not justified in classing Gowan with such.

"And will this good man put up at Christian's cottage?" I asked.

"Na, na, Mr. Edmund," said Bell, astonished, "Christian's nae ower weel provided wi' sheets
and siclike, ye ken.  Na! he's to stay wi' Mistress Dobie at Larrigie Inn.  They've redded
up the best rooms, and kindled fires and a', to be ready gin he comes soon.  The fowks say
as Gowan 'll likely have ane o' they motors, like the Squire's at the toon, so as he can drive
aboot the countryside and see a' the changes that's come sin' he left."

The world was "turning golden," indeed!  My cogitations as I made my way home were touched
by the sheen.

Val took it all very calmly (as he is wont, dear boy! whenever I rhapsodize).

"If he happens to be a millionaire, Ted," he remarked--and a twinkle shone through his glasses--"you
may give up all hope of getting anything out of him.  It is proverbial that such gentry haggle
over a six-pence when it comes to gratuities!"

During the week that followed the whole countryside had no more interesting subject of conversation
than the coming of the rich cousin to "make a lady" of Christian Logan.

Christian certainly deserved any good fortune that might fall to her. She was the young widow
of an under-gamekeeper at Taskerton, an estate in our neighborhood.  Donald Logan had met with
an accident, by the discharge of a gun, and had died of lock-jaw, consequent on the wound.
He had not been very thrifty, poor fellow, for he was too fond of whiskey; the result was that
very little means remained for the support of the family when the bread-winner had been taken.
The proprietor of Taskerton was generally an absentee, and the casual tenants of the place
had little interest in those employed on the estate. Consequently, Christian had to do her
best to support herself and her three young children by her own efforts.  Tam and Kirsty, aged
respectively twelve and eleven, had to continue at school for a year or two at least; the youngest,
Jeemsie, who was only eight, had been deaf and dumb from his birth.

Luckily, the agent of the estate, being a man of kindly feelings, was willing to allow the
poor woman to remain for a time in the cottage they had occupied, and Val had approached the
proprietor on the subject of a pension.  At present, however, beyond a liberal donation for
Christian's benefit, nothing definite had been settled.  We had all subscribed to buy her a
sewing-machine, and as she was a clever seamstress she was able to make ends meet by dressmaking.
She had her cow, and her few hens, so altogether, with the sale of eggs and occasionally of
milk, she was able to provide for her little ones for the present.  She was such a cheery,
kindly little body that every one at Ardmuirland was her friend; this accounted in great measure
for the unusual interest in her prospects.

I felt that it would be but neighborly to offer Christian my congratulations upon her approaching
good fortune.  Her little house stood near a belt of trees on a rising ground, a few feet from
the road that led higher up the hill.  No other habitation was within a mile of it, and its
solitary position was quite enough by itself to suggest to any one that a man who had made
money across the "drink"--as I heard an American once irreverently style the Atlantic--would
scarcely be likely to stay for any considerable time in such an out-of-the-world spot.  To
my mind it seemed incredible that he could be content for long with the comparative luxury
of Mrs. Dobie's inn.

Christian sat at her machine in her clean little kitchen when I arrived there, and she called
to me cheerily through the open doorway to enter, and rose to receive me.  She was a plain
little woman, about forty years old, probably; she bore the marks of her many anxieties on
her brow--too early scored with wrinkles.  I could not help thinking, as I saw her, that no
fine clothes that her rich relative might buy for her would ever make her anything else than
a plain country body; in silks and satins, even, she would still be the same homely Christian.

"I came over to say how glad I am to hear of your good fortune," I said when the usual greetings
had passed, and I was seated in the chair of state by the fire--for the hillside was chilly,
and fires were seldom wanting up there even in the summer weather.

"Thank you kindly, sir," was her answer.  "Father Fleming was in himself yesterday, for the
same reason.  It is very good of the priest and yourself, sir, as well as our neighbors aboot,
to take sic an interest in us.  Indeed, I'm very thankful that God has been sae guid to us.
It looks as though our troubles are coming to an end, with this guid news!"

"When do you expect your cousin?" I asked.

Christian took a letter from the mantelpiece, where a china dog had been guarding it.

"This is his last letter, sir," she said, with a touch of honest pride, as she handed it to
me to read. Let us pretend that we can do it. Suppose we have built a machine that can fly far
out from the earth through space (of course no one has really ever invented such a machine).
And since the place is far beyond the air that surrounds the earth,
let us imagine that we have fitted out the air-tight cabin of our
machine with plenty of air to breathe, and with food and everything
we need for living.

We shall picture it something like the cabin of an ocean steamer. And let us pretend that we have
just arrived at the place where things weigh nothing:

When you try
to walk, you glide toward the ceiling of the cabin and do not stop
before your head bumps against it.

If you push on the ceiling, you float back toward the floor. But you cannot tell whether the floor
is above or below, because you have no idea as to which way is up
and which way is down.

As a matter of fact there is no up or down. You discover this quickly enough when you try to pour
a glass of water.

You do not know where to hold the glass or where to hold the pitcher. No matter how you hold
them, the water will not pour--point the top of the pitcher toward the ceiling, or the floor,
or the wall, it makes no difference. Finally you have to put your hand into the pitcher and pull
the water out. It comes. Not a drop runs between your fingers--which way can it run, since there
is no down? The big lump of water stays right on your hand. This surprises you so much that
you let go of the pitcher. Never mind; the pitcher stays poised in mid-air. But how are you
going to get a drink?

It does not seem reasonable to try to drink a large lump of water. Yet when you hold the lump to
your lips and suck it you can draw the water into your mouth, and it is as wet as ever; then
you can force it on down to (or rather toward) your throat with your tongue. Still you have
left in your hand a big piece of water that will not flow off.

You throw it away, and it sails through the air of the cabin in a straight line until it splashes
against the wall. It wets the wall as much as water on the earth would, but it does not run
off.

It sticks there, like a splash-shaped piece of clear, colorless gelatin.

Suppose that for the sake of experimenting you have brought an elephant along on this trip. You
can move under him (or over him--anyway between him and the floor), brace your feet on the floor,
and give him a push.

(If he happens to step on your toes while you are doing this, you do not mind in the least, because
he does not weigh anything, you know.) If you push hard enough to get the elephant started,
he rises slowly toward the ceiling.

When he objects on the way, and struggles and kicks and tries to get back to the floor, it does
not help him at all.

His bulky, kicking body floats steadily on till it crashes into the ceiling.

No chairs or beds are needed in this place. You can lie or sit in mid-air, or cling to a fixture
on a wall, resting as gently there as a feather might. There is no need to set the table for
meals--just lay the dishes with the food on them in space and they
stay there.

If the top of your cup of chocolate is toward the ceiling, and your plate of food is turned
the other way, no harm is done. Your feet may happen to point toward the ceiling, while some
one else's point toward the floor, as you sit in mid-air, eating. There is some difficulty
in getting the food on the dishes, so probably you do not wish to
bother with dishes, after all.

Do you want some mashed potatoes? All right, here it is--and the cook jerks the spoon away from
the potatoes, leaving them floating before you, ready to eat.

It is literally a topsy-turvy place.

Do you want to know why all this would happen? Here is the reason: There is a great force known
as gravitation. It is the pull that everything in the universe has on everything else. The more
massive a thing is, the more gravitational pull it has on other objects; but the farther apart
things are, the less pull they have on each other.

The earth is very massive, and we live right on its surface; so it
pulls us strongly toward it.

Therefore we say that we weigh something. And since every time we roll off a bed, for instance,
or jump off a chair, the earth pulls us swiftly toward it, we say that the earth is down. "Down"
simply means toward the thing that is pulling us. If we were on the surface of the moon, the
moon would pull us. "Down" would then be under our feet or toward the center of the moon, and the
earth would be seen floating up in the sky. For "up" means away from the thing which is pulling
us.

WHY WATER DOES NOT FLOW OFF THE EARTH. It was because people did not know about gravitation
that they laughed at Columbus when he said the earth was round.

"Why, if the earth were round," they argued, "the water would all
flow off on the other side."

They did not know that water flows downhill because the earth is pulling it toward its center
by gravitation, and that it does not make the slightest difference on which side of the earth
water is, since it is still pulled toward the center.

WHY THE WORLD DOES NOT FALL DOWN. And people used to wonder "what held the earth up." The answer,
as you can see, is easy. There simply is no up or down in space. The earth cannot fall down,
because there is no down to fall to. "Down" merely means toward the earth, and the earth cannot
very well fall toward itself, can it? The sun is pulling on it, though; so the earth could fall
into the sun, and it would do so, if it were not swinging around
the sun so fast.

You will see how this keeps it from falling into the sun when you come to the section on centrifugal
force.

WHY THERE IS A PLACE WHERE THINGS WEIGH NOTHING.

Now about the place where gravitation has no effect. Since an object near the sun is pulled
more by the sun than it is by the earth, and since down here near the earth an object is pulled
harder by the earth than by the sun, it is clear that there must
be a place between the sun and the earth where their pulls just balance;
and where the sun pulls just as hard one way as the earth pulls the
other way, things will not fall either way, but will float.

The place where the pulls of the sun and the earth are equal is not halfway between the earth
and the sun, because the sun is so much larger and pulls so much more powerfully than the earth,
that the place where their pulls balance is much nearer the earth than it is to the sun. As
a matter of fact, it can be easily calculated that this spot is somewhere near 160,000 miles
from the earth.

There are other spots like it between every two stars, and in the
center of the earth, and in the center of every other body.

You see, in the center of the earth there is just as much of the earth pulling one way as there
is pulling the other, so again there is no up or down.

APPLICATION 1. Explain why the people on the other side of the earth do not fall off; why you
have weight; why rivers run downhill; why the world does not fall down.

SECTION 2. "Water seeks its own level."

Why does a spring bubble up from the ground? What makes the water
come up through the pipe into your house?

Why is a fire engine needed to pump water up high?

You remember that up where the pull of the earth and the sun balance each other, water could
not flow or flatten out. Let us try to imagine that water, here on the earth, has lost its habit
of flattening out whenever possible--that, like clay, it keeps whatever shape it is given.

First you notice that the water fails to run out of the faucets. (For in most places in the world
as it really is, the water that comes through faucets is simply flowing down from some high reservoir.)
People all begin to search for water to drink. They rush to the rivers and begin to dig the water
out of them. It looks queer to see a hole left in the water wherever a person has scooped
up a pailful. If some one slips into the river while getting water, he does not drown, because
the water cannot close in over his head; there is just a deep hole
where he has fallen through, and he breathes the air that comes down
to him at the bottom of the hole.

If you try to row on the water, each stroke of the oars piles up the water, and the boat makes
a deep furrow wherever it goes so that the whole river begins to look like a rough, plowed
field.

When the rivers are used up, people search in vain for springs. (No springs could flow in our
everyday world if water did not seek its own level; for the waters
of the springs come from hills or mountains, and the higher water,
in trying to flatten out, forces the lower water up through the ground
on the hillsides or in the valleys.) So people have to get their water
from underground or go to lakes for it.

And these lakes are strange sights. Storms toss up huge waves, which remain as ridges and furrows
until another storm tears them down and throws up new ones.

But with no rivers flowing into them, the lakes also are used up in time. The only fresh water
to be had is what is caught from the rain. Even wells soon become useless; because as soon as you
pump up the water surrounding the pump, no more water flows in around it; and if you use a bucket
to raise the water, the well goes dry as soon as the supply of water
standing in it has been drawn.

You will understand more about water seeking its own level if you do this experiment:

EXPERIMENT 1. Put one end of a rubber tube over the narrow neck of a funnel (a glass funnel is
best), and put the other end of the tube over a piece of glass tubing not less than 5 or 6 inches
long. Hold up the glass tube and the funnel, letting the rubber tube sag down between them
as in Figure 1. Now fill the funnel three fourths full of water.

Raise the glass tube higher if the water starts to flow out of it. If no water shows in the
glass tube, lower it until it does.

Gradually raise and lower the tube, and notice how high the water goes in it whenever it is
held still.

This same thing would happen with any shape of tube or funnel. You have another example of it
when you fill a teakettle: the water rises in the spout just as high
as it does in the kettle.

WHY WATER FLOWS UP INTO YOUR HOUSE. It is because water seeks its own level that it comes up through
the pipes in your house. Usually the water for a city is pumped into a reservoir that is as high
as the highest house in the city. When it flows down from the reservoir, it tends to rise in any
pipe through which it flows, to the height at which the water in the reservoir stands. If
a house is higher than the surface of the water in the reservoir, of course that house will get
no running water.

WHY FIRE ENGINES ARE NEEDED TO FORCE WATER HIGH. In putting out a fire, the firemen often want
to throw the water with a good deal of force.

The tendency of the water to seek its own level does not always give
a high enough or powerful enough stream from the fire hose; so a fire
engine is used to pump the water through the hose, and the stream
flows with much more force than if it were not pumped.

  
  APPLICATION 2. A. C. Wheeler of Chicago
          bought a little farm in Indiana, and had a windmill put up to supply
the place with water.

But at first he was not sure where he should put the tank into which the windmill was to pump the water
and from which the water should flow into the kitchen, bathroom,
and barn.

The barn was on a knoll, so that its floor was almost as high as the roof of the house. Which
would have been the best place for the tank: high up on the windmill (which stood on the knoll by
the barn), or the basement of the house, or the attic of the house?

APPLICATION 3. A man was about to open a garage in San Francisco. He had a large oil tank and
wanted a simple way of telling at a glance how full it was. One of his workmen suggested that
he attach a long piece of glass tubing to the side of the tank, connecting it with an extra
faucet near the bottom of the tank. A second workman said, "No, that
won't do.

Your tank holds ever so much more than the tube would hold, so the oil in the tank would force the
oil up over the top of the tube, even when the tank was not full." Who was right?

SECTION 3. The sea of compressed air in which we live: Air pressure.

Does a balloon explode if it goes high in the air?

What is suction?

Why does soda water run up a straw when you draw on the straw?

Why will evaporated milk not flow freely out of a can in which there is only one hole?

Why does water gurgle when you pour it out of a bottle?

We are living in a sea of compressed air. Every square inch of our bodies has about 15 pounds of
pressure against it. The only reason we are not crushed is that there is as strong pressure
inside of our bodies pushing out as there is outside pushing in. There is compressed air in the
blood and all through the body. If you were to lie down on the ground and have all the air pumped
out from under you, the air above would crush you as flat as a pancake. You might as well let
a dozen big farm horses trample on you, or let a huge elephant roll over you, as let the air
press down on you if there were no air underneath and inside your
body to resist the pressure from above.

It is hard to believe that the air and liquids in our bodies are pressing out with a force great
enough to resist this crushing weight of air. But if you were suddenly to go up above the earth's
atmosphere, or if you were to stay down here and go into a room from which the air were to be pumped
all at once, your body would explode like a torpedo.

When you suck the air out of a bottle, the surrounding air pressure forces the bottle against
your tongue; if the bottle is a small one, it will stick there.

And the pressure of the air and blood in your tongue will force your tongue down into the neck
of the bottle from which part of the air has been taken.

In the same way, when you force the air out of a rubber suction cap, such as is used to fasten reading
lamps to the head of a bed, the air pressure outside holds the suction cap tightly to the object
against which you first pressed it, making it stick there.

We can easily experiment with air pressure because we can get almost
entirely rid of it in places and can then watch what happens.

A place from which the air is practically all pumped out is called a vacuum. Here are some interesting
experiments that will show what air pressure does:

EXPERIMENT 2. Hold a burned-out electric lamp in a basin of water, break its point off, and
see what happens.

All the common electric lamps (less than 70 watts) are made with vacuums inside. The reason for
this is that the fine wire would burn up if there were any air in the lamps. When you knock
the point off the globe, it leaves a space into which the water can be pushed. Since the air
is pressing hard on the surface of the water except in the one place
where the vacuum in the lamp globe is, the water is forced violently
into this empty space.

It really is a good deal like the way mud comes up between your toes when you are barefoot. Your
foot is pressing on the mud all around except in the spaces between
your toes, and so the mud is forced up into these spaces.

The air pressure on the water is like your foot on the mud, and the
space in the lamp globe is like the space between your toes.

Since wherever there is air it is pressing hard, the only space into which it can force water or
anything else is into a place from which all the air has been removed, like the inside of the
lamp globe.

The reason that the water does not run out of the globe is this: the hole is too small to let the
air squeeze up past the water, and therefore no air can take the place of the water that might
otherwise run out. In order to flow out, then, the water would have to leave an empty space or
vacuum behind it, and the air pressure would not allow this.

WHY WATER GURGLES WHEN IT POURS OUT OF A BOTTLE. You have often noticed that when you pour water
out of a bottle it gurgles and gulps instead of flowing out evenly.

The reason for this is that when a little water gets out and leaves an empty space behind,
the air pushing against the water starts to force it back up; but since the mouth of the bottle
is fairly wide, the air itself squeezes past the water and bubbles up to the top.

EXPERIMENT 3. Put a straw or a piece of glass tube down into a glass of water. Hold your finger tightly
over the upper end, and lift the tube out of the water.

Notice how the water stays in the tube. Now remove your finger from the upper end.

The air holds the water up in the tube because there is no room for it to bubble up into the tube
to take the place of the water; and the water, to flow out of the tube, would have to leave
a vacuum, which the air outside does not allow.

But when you take your finger off the top of the straw or tube, the air from above takes the place
of the water as rapidly as it flows out; so there is no tendency
to form a vacuum, and the water leaves the tube.

Now do you see why you make two holes in the top of a can of evaporated
milk when you wish to pour the milk out evenly?

EXPERIMENT 4. Push a rubber suction cap firmly against the inside
of the bell jar of an air pump.

Try to pull the suction cap off. If it comes off, press it on again; place the bell jar on
the plate of the air pump, and pump the air out of the jar. What must have been holding the suction
cap against the inside of the jar? Does air press up and sidewise as well as down? Test this
further in the following experiment:

EXPERIMENT 5. Put a cork into an empty bottle. Do not use a new cork, but one that has been
fitted into the bottle many times and has become shaped to the neck. Press the cork in rather
firmly, so that it is air-tight, but do not jam it in.

Set the bottle on the plate of the air pump, put the bell jar over it, and pump the air out
of the jar. What makes the cork fly out of the bottle? What was really in the "empty" bottle?
Why could it not push the cork out until you had pumped the air out of the jar?

EXPERIMENT 6. Wax the rims of the two Magdeburg hemispheres (see Fig. 7). Screw the lower section
into the hole in the plate of the air pump. Be sure that the stop valve in the neck of the hemisphere
is open. (The little handle should be vertical.) Fit the other section on to the first, and
pump out as much air as you can. Close the stop valve. Unscrew the hemispheres from the air
pump.

Try to pull them apart--pull straight out, taking care not to slide the parts. If you wish, let some
one else take one handle, and see if the two of you can pull it apart.

Before you pumped the air out of the hemisphere, the compressed air inside of them (you remember all
the air down here is compressed) was pushing them apart just as hard as the air outside of them was
pushing them together. When you pumped the air out, however, there was hardly any air left
inside of them to push outward.

So the strong pressure of the outside air against the hemispheres had nothing to oppose it.
It therefore pressed them very tightly together and held them that way.

This experiment was first tried by a man living in Magdeburg, Germany. The first set of hemispheres
he used proved too weak, and when the air in them was partly pumped out, the pressure of the outside
air crushed them like an egg shell. The second set was over a foot in diameter and much stronger.
After he had pumped the air out, it took sixteen horses, eight pulling one way and eight the
opposite way, to pull the hemispheres apart.

EXPERIMENT 7. Fill a bottle (or flask) half full of water. Through a one-hole stopper that will fit
the bottle, put a bent piece of glass tubing that will reach down
to the bottom of the bottle. Set the bottle, thus stoppered, on the
plate of the air pump, with a beaker or tumbler under the outer end
of the glass tube. Put the bell jar over the bottle and glass, and
pump the air out of the jar. What is it that forces the water up and
out of the bottle? Why could it do this when the air was pumped out
of the bell jar and not before?

HOW A SELTZER SIPHON WORKS. A seltzer
siphon works on the same principle. But instead of the ordinary compressed
air that is all around us, there is in the seltzer siphon a gas (carbon
dioxid) which has been much more compressed than ordinary air. This
strongly compressed gas forces the seltzer water out into the less
compressed air, exactly as the compressed air in the upper part of
the bottle forced the water out into the comparative vacuum of the
bell jar in Experiment 7.

EXPERIMENT 8. Fill a toy balloon partly
full of air by blowing into it, and close the neck with a rubber band
so that no air can escape. Lay a saucer over the hole in the plate
of the air pump, so that the rubber of the balloon cannot be sucked
down the hole. Lay the balloon on top of this saucer, put the bell
jar over it, and pump the air out of the jar. What makes the balloon
expand? What is in it? Why could it not expand before you pumped the
air out from around it?

A toy balloon expands for the same reason
when it goes high in the air. Up there the air pressure is not so
strong outside the balloon, and so the gas inside makes the balloon
expand until it bursts.

EXPERIMENT 9. Lay a rubber tube flat in the
bottom of a pan of water, so that the tube will be filled with water.
Let one end stay under water, but pinch the other end tightly shut
with your thumb and finger and lift it out of the pan. Lower this
closed end into a sink or empty pan that is lower than the pan of
water. Now stop pinching the tube shut. This device is called a siphon
(Fig. 8).

EXPERIMENT 10. Put the mouth of a small syringe, or better,
of a glass model lift pump, under water. Draw the handle up. Does
the water follow the plunger up, stand still, or go down in the pump?
He arranged for him to travel with the old fellow, under the pretence of visiting a large school
on the invitation of a master there whom he knew; this supposititious friend had included McConnachie
in the letter (really written by the Inspector) which Farquharson had received on the subject.

The old schoolmaster was easily duped by this trick, and on an appointed day the two set off.
The first obstacle arose at the station, when Farquharson had taken the tickets, for which
the "friend" had provided the necessary money.

"I should like to have my own ticket," the older man remarked with an air of dignity.  "I'm
not a bairn to be likely to lose it."

Here was a slight difficulty!  Farquharson had taken a single ticket for the other and a return
for himself.  It would never do to allow this to be known.  On the other hand, McConnachie
must be kept in good humor or he would give trouble to his guardian, who began now to see the
weak points in the plot.  So trusting to the certainty of being able to get back the remaining
half-ticket when the old man was safely lodged in the Asylum, he retained the single ticket
and gave McConnachie the other.

They reached the end of their railway journey successfully, and Farquharson managed to explain
their destination to a porter privately, and asked him to get a cab for them.  The man was
either stupid or was disappointed at receiving an insignificant tip, since Farquharson was
not one to waste money unnecessarily; for he gave the direction "Asylum" to the driver in a
voice that McConnachie must have been deaf not to have heard distinctly.  Farquharson glanced
at once at his companion, but the old man's face was expressionless, and he persuaded himself,
almost against his will, that McConnachie was too much taken up with the novelty of the situation
to catch the words spoken.  The eagerness with which the old man took notice of every feature
of their progress tended to confirm the idea, and by the time the Asylum was reached Farquharson
felt more at ease.

"The grounds are well kept," remarked McConnachie as they proceeded up the short avenue.

"Aye, aye, they are that!" was the other's ready answer.

"It seems a big building!" said the old man, as they drove up to the entrance.

"Far bigger than I expected," said Farquharson.

The cabby rang the bell, and the door was opened by a man-servant, who came down the steps
and opened the carriage door.  Farquharson got out first and incautiously walked up the steps
toward the door of the building.  With a madman's cunning, McConnachie whispered to the servant:

"That's the gentleman I was to bring.  He's gone in, so I need not wait.  Tell the man to drive
back."

And the agonized Farquharson beheld his charge rapidly driving away and leaving him behind alone.

"Stop!  Stop!" he cried in an angry voice.  "That's the man I was bringing here!  He's not
fit to be left alone.  I tell you he's the daft man!  I'm only a friend!"

"Quite so, sir," said the servant quietly.  "It will be all right if you will step in for a
few minutes.  We can easily explain to the Governor."

Two other attendants had appeared on the scene by this time, and the gentle pressure of the
servant's hand on his arm induced the hapless Farquharson to ascend the steps once more and
enter the hall.

He repeated his explanation to the other men, who treated it in the same quiet way as the first
had done.  Then it began to dawn upon him that they really took him for the madman and McConnachie
for his sane companion.

It was a natural mistake as far as they were concerned; for it was quite a common thing for
patients to suppose every one else to be mentally afflicted except themselves.  Moreover, McConnachie
had a more cultured manner than Farquharson at any time, and when the latter showed so much
excitement on account of the trick which had been played upon him, he did not appear to advantage.
He was so intensely angry and so apprehensive of the consequences of the disaster that he was
scarcely coherent, and this justified the attendants in their view of the situation.

The Governor had already been prejudiced against him, when Farquharson at last obtained an
interview with him, and took the same view as the others.  The fact of his having given the
return ticket to McConnachie made it difficult to explain that the other had no right to it;
the faint glimmer of a smile on the face of the attendant while he was attempting to clear
up that point filled poor Farquharson with dismay and rendered him still more nervous and excited.

So the poor schoolmaster was detained in the Asylum and old McConnachie returned home in state.
All was put right in a day or two, for the Inspector was informed of the turn affairs had taken,
and lost no time in releasing Farquharson.  The unfortunate man did not dare to return to the
district for some time.  When he at last ventured to appear, McConnachie had long left the
place and was dead and almost forgotten, and neighbors were too glad to welcome Farquharson
back among them to remind him of his humiliation.

"Things is gey different now, sir," was Willy's summing-up on the subject of education.  "The
bairns get mair teechin' noo, and less o' the beltin', an' I'm no sure but they learn a' the
better for it!"

VI

BILDY

  "'Tis not the whole of life to live;
  Nor all of death to die."
          (Montgomery--"Issues of Life and Death")

Old Widow Lamont and her spinster daughter, Robina, lived in a bit of a house on the edge of
the pine wood that sheltered our presbytery from the east winds; they were consequently our
nearest neighbors with the exception of Willy and Bell.  They possessed a cow and a few hens,
and Robina, who was a sturdy woman of forty, did the work of their small croft with occasional
help from one of the males of the community.  For in Ardmuirland, be it known, one neighbor
helps another in return for the like service when required; thus Robina would lend a hand at
hay-time, harvest, potato planting, and the rest, and would be entitled to a few days' plowing
and harrowing on her own land in compensation.

The Lamonts, though not exceedingly poor, could not be called well-to-do.  The absence of a
resident man in a small croft must be of necessity a difficulty; but they were upright, hard-working
women, and managed to maintain themselves in a simple, frugal way.  Oatmeal and potatoes were
grown on the croft; bread could be obtained from the passing baker's cart in exchange for eggs;
butter, and sometimes milk, could be sold to neighbors; the widow's knitted stockings fetched
a fair price with the hosier in the county town; in these various ways they made ends meet.

Old-age pensions were then unheard of, and the Lamonts would have thought themselves insulted
had any one suggested parish relief for the old woman; although her helpless condition would
have justified it, for she never moved from her corner by the fire, to which she was carried
from her bed in the morning to be borne back to bed at night.  An accident which had befallen
her when in the prime of life had rendered her a cripple without power to move her lower limbs.

Like many of their class, the Lamonts were full of an honest pride, and although they may have
possibly felt the pinch of poverty now and again, they would have scorned to acknowledge it.
By the exercise of diplomacy Penny has often managed to help them in little ways from time
to time; she will visit the old woman to inquire after her health, and take with her in a neighborly
way some little delicacy in the shape of soup or pudding.  At one time she tried to furnish
her with some orders for stockings, but it turned out that the Lamonts considered it next door
to heresy to take payment from the priest's house, and Penny's charitable attempts were frustrated.
She found it better to "borrow" a few eggs occasionally (even though she was not in great need
of them), and to more than pay their value in little presents--an acknowledgment of the kindness
of the lenders.

"The very thing for the Lamonts!" exclaimed Val at breakfast one morning.  He had been reading
his letters, just delivered, and I was glancing through that day's paper.  I looked up in token
of interest.

"I have an application from the Inspector of the Poor," he continued, "for a quiet, reliable
family, who would be willing to take charge, for payment, of a poor daft fellow.  He is about
thirty, and has been in this state since he was eighteen, when he had a bad fever.  He is perfectly
tractable, quite inoffensive, and thoroughly good-tempered. The only reason for moving him
from his present home is that it is in a village, and the children tease and annoy him.  I
fancy the Lamonts would jump at the opportunity."

I quite agreed with him.  To my mind, Robina Lamont was a match for a far more dangerous character.
She would be equal in strength to many an able-bodied man.  But I felt doubtful whether the
arrangement would be satisfactory as regarded the old widow.  She was so helpless that unless
the man was actually as harmless as was supposed it might he risky to place him in such a house.
I voiced my objection, but Val was not impressed by it.  He had great confidence in the judgment
of the Inspector--a thoroughly able man, and shrewd withal.

When the question was proposed to the Lamonts they at once warmed to the idea.  It appeared
that one of the lads of their own family--now long dead--had been in much the same state, though
he was inclined to be unruly at times; consequently neither the widow nor her daughter felt
the least apprehension of difficulties in managing their patient. Thus it came about that Bildy
Gow became a member of our community.

In Scotland we have many more diminutive forms of ordinary Christian names than is the case
in England.  William, for example, figures as Willy, Wildy, Will, Bill, Billy, and Bildy. 
The variety is useful in cases, which are of frequent occurrence, where the same name belongs
to grandfather, father, and son; William, Wildy, and Bill are perfectly distinct.  It was as
Bildy that William Gow became known among us; before long every one dropped the unnecessary
surname and he was spoken of habitually as Bildy simply.

Robina brought her lodger to Mass with her in state on the very first Sunday.  He was rather
a good-looking fellow, tall and straight, with fresh complexion, regular features and light-brown
hair and moustache. He was neatly dressed, too, for he had evidently been fitted out for his
new home by the liberality of the Inspector.  Beyond a shy, vacant expression, Bildy gave no
evidence of mental incapacity in his appearance.  He kept close to Robina when they emerged
from church, and seemed to rely upon her protection with the air of a shy lad, which was rather
pathetic to witness.  He was not a Catholic, but he had shown such distress when Robina had
told him to sit at home with her mother that they were forced to let him go to church to keep
him quiet.

On further acquaintance, Bildy did not belie the good character given him by the Inspector.
He was merely a grown-up child.  In his youth he must have been of a thoroughly quiet, innocent
nature, for he showed it in his aspect still; his character had never developed beyond that
innocent adolescence, while his mind had retrograded to a state resembling early childhood.
If one spoke to him on the road he at once assumed the air of an exceedingly shy bairn--frightened
and embarrassed.  It would have been amusing were it not so sad.  I could never extract a word
from him on such occasions, so overawed was he!

From the first, while looking upon Robina as the supreme authority to which he owed implicit
obedience, Bildy seemed to give all his affection to the old widow.  He liked nothing better
than to sit opposite her by the fireside, watching the tireless swiftness of her knitting needles
as they flashed in the firelight.  When summoned by Robina for any duty, he would promptly
comply, returning as soon as free to his favorite attraction.

I was passing by the Lamonts' house one afternoon, and as Robina was working in her garden
I stopped for a chat.  After asking after her mother and things in general, the conversation
turned on Bildy.  Robina praised him highly.

"He's as biddable as a bairn," she declared.  "He carries a' the water for us frae the spring,
an' takes oot the coo, an' fetches her hame as weel as I could masel'.  He's nae tribble to
us whateever!"

She then launched into details concerning Bildy which were very entertaining, and gave much
amusement to Val over our dinner.  It appeared that the poor fellow had formed a most reverential
opinion of the priest on his first visit to our church for Mass.  On his return home he sat
by the fire smiling delightedly and murmuring to himself. They did not catch what he said,
but after repeated questioning Robina found that he was quite pleased with the "chapel."

"An' yon mon!" he exclaimed.  "Isna' he dressed fine?  Wha's yon mon wi' the fine dress?"

"Yen's the priest," explained Robina.  "Father Fleming, he's callit."

"Father Fleming!  Father Fleming!" repeated Bildy over and over again, as though to familiarize
himself with the sound of it.

"Aye, aye!  He's the boy!  He can gab, canna' he?  He's the boy to tell us what to dee!" he
continued in his broad Scots.

"It's extraordinary how well he behaves at Mass--or at any rate during the sermon," said Val
when he heard the story.  "I wish some others were as good!"

That reminded me of another anecdote.  After one or two Sundays, Bildy had got familiar with
the church, and was inclined to gaze about more than Robina approved of.  She therefore took
it upon herself to instruct him upon the sacred character of the place, and to threaten to
keep him at home if he did not behave better.

"Remember, Bildy," she said as they started next Sunday, "it's the hoose o' God ye're goin'
tee.  Ye musna' glower aboot!  Juist sit ye still an' look straicht at Father Fleming a' the time."

After that his manner was irreproachable.  But one Sunday, as Penny was leaving the church
after Mass, she caught sight of Bildy furiously shaking his fist--at her, she thought!  So
she mentioned the fact quietly to Robina, who promised to investigate the matter.  It turned
out that poor Bildy had so thoroughly assimilated her instructions as to the requisite behavior
in church that he had been silently reproving what he thought irreverence.  He had seen a crofter
whom he knew very well dozing during the sermon, and had "wagged his fist" at him--righteously
indignant.

"Sleepin' i' the hoose o' God!" cried Bildy.  "Yon's nae the place to sleep in!  I waggit my
fist, an' I sair fleggit him!"

Bildy evidently congratulated himself on having so successfully "sore frighted" the delinquent
that he would never dare to behave so badly again.

Bildy's respect for Val never waned.  He never caught sight of the priest, even at some little
distance, but his hand flew up to his cap in salutation, and remained there until Val had seen
him and had returned his salute.  This would happen if he saw Val at a window of our house
just the same as when outside.

Penny took quite a motherly interest in the poor afflicted fellow. Whenever he came on any
errand from the Lamonts he was always given a piece of cake or fruit--anything sweet, for he
had a child's taste. But although Bildy was supremely delighted, he seldom said more than "thank
you, Ma'am!"  I once suggested that she should refer to Val, and the experiment was successful
in opening Bildy's mouth.  After that the conversation would almost invariably run thus:

"Did you see Father Fleming on Sunday, Bildy?"

"Aye, aye!  He's the boy!  Father Fleming's the boy!"

Next to the old widow, Bildy loved the cow.  She was his particular charge, and he was soon
on intimate terms with her.  Not only did he carry on familiar conversations with her, on his
part, but it appeared that the cow made him her confidant in return.  If he began to murmur
something to himself as he sat by the chimney corner, they would inquire what he was talking
about.  It was generally arrant nonsense that he told them.  Once Robina asked:

"Wha tellit ye that rubbish, Bildy?"

"The coo," he gravely answered.

On a damp, misty morning he had gone out as usual to drive the cow out to the meadow to graze.
Widow Lamont, from her place opposite the window, noticed that they did not pass out in the
customary way, and notified the fact to Robina.  The latter accordingly ran out at once to
inquire the reason of the delay.  She found Bildy quietly fastening the door of the byre before
returning to the house.

"Ye havna' fetched oot the coo!" she exclaimed.  "Gae in an' drive her oot, Bildy!"

"Na, na," replied he, solemnly shaking his head.  "She says it's ower cauld the day.  She'll
bide inside."

Bildy's hero-worship of my brother increased as time went by.  He regularly came to Mass, and
obedient to Robina's instructions sat still and looked "straicht at Father Fleming."  On one
particular Sunday, when we had a priest staying with us (an old friend of Val's), the latter
invited him to preach.  This did not suit Bildy at all.  After Mass he walked home alone, not
waiting for Robina, who was chatting with her neighbors outside the church, and showed by his
manner that something was amiss.  Widow Lamont put down her book, in which she had been piously
reading her "Prayers for Mass," and accosted him with the usual formula:

"Weel, Bildy, what kind o' preachin' had ye the day?"

But the answer was not that which they took a simple pleasure in drawing from him usually.
Bildy began to bite his hand--a trick he had when annoyed.

"That's nae preachin'," he cried indignantly.  "Yon monnie canna' preach!  Wha's the reason
Father Fleming canna' preach the day?  Eh!" (with withering contempt.)  "Sic a monnie preach!"

The diminutive, in Bildy's phraseology, implied depreciation; that was why he stigmatized a
regular six-footer as a "monnie."

When Doddy came to Ardmuirland, Bildy discovered his real vocation! Doddy--or, in English,
Georgie--was the orphan child of Robina's sister.  His father had married a second wife and
had gone out to Canada, and Widow Lamont had insisted upon having the little chap with her;
for his father and step-mother were both Protestants, and Doddy stood little chance of being
reared in the faith of his baptism.  So the man agreed, and undertook to pay a trifle weekly
for the child's keep, until he could earn something for himself.

Doddy was almost a baby--not more than four, and quite small of his age; but he soon discovered
that he had a slave at his beck and call in the spellbound Bildy.  The man seemed to worship
the little fellow. Whenever Bildy was free from his ordinary occupations he was playing with
Doddy, as though they were both children--with this difference: Doddy was always the tyrant,
and Bildy the submissive subject.

It was a proof of the man's absolute harmlessness that he never so much as touched any one
who angered him.  Sometimes other children, attracted by Doddy, would come to join in the games,
and often drove poor Bildy away.  He would slink off, the picture of misery, and make his way
home, biting his hand--his only sign of displeasure.

When Doddy was five, and had to attend school, Bildy would watch with the utmost patience the
road by which the child had to return, until he caught sight of the tiny figure in the distance;
then he would run to meet Doddy with every demonstration of joy, pick him up, set him on his
shoulder, and amble off up the hill to the cottage.

Bildy had been about six years in Ardmuirland, and had become a favorite with every one.  The
poor fellow was so unfeignedly pleased to receive any little notice from any one that all accosted
him kindly, and no one in the district would have dreamed of causing him unhappiness.  Doddy
had grown into a sharp little lad of seven, and was no longer so dependent upon Bildy for companionship.
Yet Bildy did not relinquish altogether his post of guardian, but kept a wary eye upon the
movements of his little master, ready at all times to do his bidding.

Winter set in that year unusually early.  At the beginning of December earth and water were
bound in the chains of a very hard frost.  Nothing could more delight the heart of a schoolboy,
and those of Ardmuirland were in their element.  There was a small, shallow pond close by the
schoolhouse, and there they were able to slide and sport about to their hearts' content.  But
children are changeful.  When the frost had lasted more than two whole weeks, the little pond
was not exciting enough.  There was a mountain lake about a mile farther on, a much larger
piece of water.  Thither the more adventurous spirits determined to go one holiday afternoon.
Doddy, who was precocious for his years, made up his mind to go too, proud in being the companion
of much bigger boys.  Unluckily, none of the parents of the boys had any idea of the proposed
adventure; had they known, the project would have been sternly prohibited.  It is possible
that the young adventurers knew this and kept the matter quiet.

But Doddy's faithful guardian had watched the boy steal off, to be met by five or six others,
and followed them at a distance.  He did not venture to join the party openly, fearing to be
driven off ignominiously, as he often had been before on other occasions.  By the time he reached
them they had been some half-hour at the lake, and had most of them ventured cautiously to
try the bearing power of the ice. The long frost had made this quite safe in most parts; but,
unluckily, the lads were not aware that there were other portions where rising springs prevented
the water from freezing much, if at all.  As long as they kept near to the place upon which
they had first set foot all was well; but security made them venturesome.  They started a game
of shinty, and threw themselves into the sport with fervor.

Bildy, partly hidden behind the bushes which skirted the water, watched the game with interest,
his eyes on his beloved Doddy.  Suddenly, while he looked on, Doddy disappeared, and a shout
of terror arose from the other boys, who were too full of fear to do much toward helping the
unfortunate child, though one or two slid down prostrate and tried to crawl to the hole into
which Doddy had fallen, in order to help him out with their sticks.

It remained for Bildy to come to their assistance.  With a frightened cry the man rushed over
the ice to the spot, and regardless of the cautions which the others shrilled at him, plunged
into the water. Doddy had fallen in where there was only very thin ice around the edge of an
open sheet of water.  Luckily, it was shallow for a man, though it covered the child.  Bildy
managed to seize the boy and rose up gasping from the pool, holding Doddy aloft.  He seated
the frightened child on his shoulder, and was able to keep half his own body out of the water.
Thus they remained till help came in the shape of one or two farm-servants, who had been summoned
by the screams of the boys.

It was not a difficult matter to get the two out of the water safely; indeed, any one more
sensible than poor Bildy could have lifted the child onto thicker ice, after wading some paces
in the water.  Both were shivering with cold and drenched with water, which froze on their
clothes during their hurried progress home to bed.

The after-effects were not serious, as far as Doddy was concerned.  He got a severe cold, but
nothing worse--not taking into account the castigation administered with a good-will by his
"auntie."  With poor Bildy it was different.  He had been in the ice-cold water far longer
than the boy, and a serious attack of pneumonia was the result.  The poor fellow had probably
little stamina.  He did not rally, even when the climax seemed to have been successfully passed,
but grew weaker every day.

"Robina Lamont wants me to go to that poor fellow," Val said one day. "She wants me to do what
I can for him, as the doctor gives no hope of recovery.  I can baptize him conditionally, of
course, and I am starting now.  Would you like to come, Ted?"

I was most anxious to accompany him, and we set out at once for the Lamonts' cottage.

Bildy looked frightfully wasted; his face was the color of parchment, and his brown eyes looked
enormously large and startlingly bright.  But what touched me more than his emaciated appearance
was the wonderful expression of emotion which shone from those large eyes as we appeared at
the bedside; they looked at Val with the yearning affection that one sees sometimes in a faithful
dog.  The poor fellow put out his white, wasted hand to Val with evident delight.

"Bildy's been wearyin' for ye, Father," said Robina.  "He's often cried out for Father Fleming."

The dying man's eyes were proof that she spoke truly.

The short ceremony was soon over, and after some prayers for the sick man we took our leave.
For the few days that he lingered after that, the visit of the priest--twice every day and
sometimes oftener--was the culminating point of satisfaction for poor Bildy.

I was there with Val when the end came.  Bildy passed away quite peacefully while we joined
in the prayers for the dying; a calm smile was on his face, and some vision of delight before
his wide-open eyes, which it is not for mortals to attempt to fathom.

"Poor fellow!" exclaimed Val, as we took our way home; "life has held little of happiness for
him.  Indeed, one can hardly call it life in the full sense of the word; it was mere existence,
as far as we can see."

"Let's hope that life has begun for him at last," I said reverently.

"I have little doubt of that," replied the priest.

VII

SMUGGLERS

      "My enemy's dog,
  Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
      Against my fire."
          ("King Lear"--Act IV, Sc. 7.)

"Aebody kent Davie Forbes wes tarrible at the smugglin'," said Willy.

We had been discussing the pros and cons of illicit distilling--known inland as "smuggling"--and
I found that Willy agreed with the general opinion of the district that the only harm in it
was the penalty due "'gin ye get foond oot by the gauger."  He assured me that in his young
days the practice was widespread.  This had brought us to Davie Forbes and his persistence
in escaping government dues, and led on to the narrative which I here set down in intelligible
English.

Davie was a fine, hearty specimen of a Scottish crofter, whose appearance did not tally with
his acknowledged seventy-nine years; for his handsome, ruddy face, framed by white whiskers,
and crowned with abundant, curly white locks, showed scarcely a wrinkle.  He was stalwart and
straight, too, as many a man twenty years his junior would dearly love to be.

Davie's wife had been dead many years at the date of this story; his only daughter, Maggie
Jean, was housekeeper for him and her two unmarried brothers, Jock and Peter.  Like many of
his fellows who might have to support a widowed mother or other helpless relatives, he had
not married until rather late in life.  Consequently, Maggie Jean, the youngest of the family,
was a strapping lass of thirty, and Jock, the eldest, a "lad" of thirty-six; for an unmarried
man in our neighborhood, be it known, is a lad till he becomes decrepit!

The family residence of the Forbes stood about half-way up Ben Sgurrach, the highest hill in
the district, and the house was at least 1,000 feet above the sea.  It was sheltered from the
east wind by a clump of scarecrow-looking pine trees, and a spur of barren rock rose behind
it on the north.  I could imagine those trees, though I have never seen them; we have some
such in our little wood behind the presbytery.  Gaunt-looking figures they are indeed!  Some
have been twisted into uncouth shapes by adverse winds; others stand draped in veritable garments
of gray lichen--weird and shaggy.  The latter, seen in the dusk, are calculated to terrify
a chance comer who might find himself in their neighborhood; for he would probably mistake
them for goblins.

A copious spring of excellent water and several convenient crevices in the surrounding rocks
made Davie's place an excellent site for a still. His son Jock was occupied with odd jobs provided
for him as handy man at a shooting lodge not far from the foot of the hill, where he tended
the garden and looked after the pony at ordinary times, and acted as gillie when the shooting
season came round.  Peter did most of the work on the croft, lower down the hill; for David
himself was getting past arduous labors, though he directed the distilling, in which Peter,
and occasionally Jock, did the greater part of the work.  Much of the barley for the still
grew on their own land, where also they raised corn for their own oatmeal and for Maggie Jean's
chickens, as well as turnips for her "coo."  The customers for whiskey were many; for owing
to its innocence of government duty it was cheaper than could be got from a merchant, while
for quality it was renowned.  Davie was a past master in the art of distilling, and the secluded
nature of his storehouses enabled him to keep it until its rawness had worn off with age.

Many a tale was told of Davie's adventures in his contraband trade.  In days when he was young
and strong revenue officers would scour the hills with a small band of soldiers in their company,
the better to over-awe the country folk.  On one such occasion Davie had the misfortune to
be apprehended in his house, when off his guard; for he was well known to the preventive men
of the district, who had long been seeking to trap him.  They had tracked him from his still,
which they then took charge of, and surrounded his house to prevent escape.  But Davie was
too wary for them in the end.  He feigned submission, and got his old mother to bring out refreshments
for the party within the house, and went himself to the door with glasses and whiskey for the
two soldiers on guard there.  But they never tasted their dram; Davie was the renowned wrestler
of the neighborhood, and in a second or two he had tripped up both men and had made off for
some secret hiding-place in the hills before the party inside, aroused by the cries of the
sentinels, were able to understand what had happened.  Both the unfortunate soldiers had been
so badly bruised by their fall on the flagstones near the doorway that they were unable to
rise without help.

At another time he was still more successful.  The revenue officers and their escort surprised
his house at midnight, and demanded admission in the King's name.  Old Jeandy, his mother,
who was then alive, made as much difficulty as possible in getting the door open in order to
give Davie time to conceal himself.  But he did better than hide in the house.  Springing out
of bed, he actually broke a hole through the "divets" or turfs of the thatch, and creeping
through it, climbed down outside, just as his adversaries, certain of capturing their prize,
were mounting the ladder which led to his bed-chamber.  When the exciseman saw the empty bed
he cried with an angry oath:

"Here's the nest--still warm; but the bird's awa'!"  The "bird" had flown to a more hidden
place of retirement under cover of the darkness!

In later years Davie was not much molested by the representatives of the excise.  A gauger
was indeed stationed in a town ten miles distant, but he was elderly, and not over energetic.
He would make a formal visit now and again to suspected districts, and content himself with
a few casual inquiries.  As a matter of fact, he was personally quite inadequate to the task
of searching for illicit stills in a district of such abundant hidden recesses.

But there was a change of front when the old officer retired and a young and energetic man
succeeded him.  A "new broom" is eulogized in proverb; and Mr. Michael Bonar, being new to
his district, and a man of youth and determination, boasted that he meant to sweep away the
taint of smuggling from the neighborhood of Ardmuirland, which bore a bad name in that respect.

The boast of the incautious gauger was repeated far and wide, and a strong spirit of opposition
was aroused.  Many a wary practitioner began to devise cunning means of concealment, and to
invent traps to catch their adversary and turn him into ridicule.  Davie Forbes was not behindhand
in making remote preparations for the ganger's certain visit to him.  But it was then mid-winter,
and if Bonar was the canny man that he was said to be, there would be little fear of any attempted
search for Davie's implements and stores before spring had set in.  So the Forbes family congratulated
themselves upon the security of their airy nest, and would smile grimly when the name of Bonar
was mentioned.

The gauger was, it is true, canny, but his youth made him perhaps a trifle too venturesome.
He was not unused to climbing, and had scaled many a mountain more imposing than Ben Sguarrach;
but it was not in winter; forgetfulness of that trifling circumstance led to his discomfiture.
Ben Sguarrach was indeed no pleasant place in wintry weather.  Its open spaces were swept by
icy blasts; snow often drifted to unparalleled depths, and made the ascent dangerous to those
who were not familiar with the mountain in its more peaceful aspects.

To Bonar's ardent mind the season of the year seemed likely to assist rather than hinder him.
Days were short; nights were dark (if the moon should happen to be unpropitious), but they
were long.  No work was possible at such a time in a mountain distillery, and stores could
not be shifted so readily as in summer time.  So he determined to bide his opportunity and
make a secret visit to Davie Forbes' dwelling, just to reconnoiter.  He would thus be enabled
to form his plan of campaign for a more bold attack.

Unfortunately, the gauger did not thoroughly know the people he had to deal with or he would
have made allowance for their clannish devotion to each other's interests.  Every one recognized
him as a public enemy, and however politely he might be treated public sympathy was on the
side of his opponents.  He might flatter himself that he was keeping his intentions and movements
absolutely secret, yet it was impossible not to take some one or other into his confidence;
thus it came about that tidings of his intended visit flew to Davie at least a week before
his attempt.

In consequence of this fact, all incriminating evidence was carefully concealed by the old
man and his sons, and it would have taken a sharper man than Bonar--intelligent as he was--to
discover any traces of illicit distilling in the neighborhood of their house.  There was one
suspicious feature only; a large eighteen-gallon barrel, full of something--whatever the liquid
might be--was barely covered by peat-turfs heaped over it under the shelter of the end wall
of the byre.  But it had not been overlooked; arrangements had been made in its regard, should
circumstances demand its more thorough concealment, otherwise it must not be disturbed.  For--if
the truth must be told--that particular cask contained the store of whiskey which Davie had
been carefully preserving for his last act of hospitality; it was for the entertainment of
those who would attend his funeral.  Who, indeed, was able to provide refreshment for the crowd
of mourners who would surely assemble on such an occasion, if not Davie, whose "whuskey" was
renowned in the whole countryside?

Bonar had the good sense to keep from every one the actual date of his intended visit, lest
tidings should reach the Forbes.  He fixed upon a night when there would be an early rising
moon to light him.  On the morning of the day he made all his preparations very carefully.
In view of an absence of some hours, he provided himself with a good packet of sandwiches and
a flask of spirits.  He then set out for Fouranbuie Inn, a dreary hostel about four miles distant
from the foot of the mountain.  There he made a substantial meal, and about four in the afternoon
started on his quest.  He had resolved to ride off from the inn on his bicycle, ostensibly
toward a village farther on; then to dismount at the foot of Ben Sgurrach, and, hiding his
machine in some bushes, to start the climb as dusk fell.  Jock, as he had found out, was accustomed
to approach from another direction when returning from work.

The January day was already closing when Bonar began the ascent.  The climb was decidedly pleasant;
the wintry air, the excitement coming from the spirit of adventure, the vigorous exercise--all
tended to raise the young man's ardor, and he trod the upward path with the steady, swinging
pace of a Highlander.

The moon had scarcely risen when clouds began to drift across the sky, and the wind became
more boisterous.  The darkness increased, and soon it became almost impossible to discern the
path.  Then cold, soft particles brushed his cheek, and he realized that snow was beginning
to fall.  In a snowstorm he had no better prospect of finding his way to his bicycle down below
than up to Davie Forbes' house.  So he kept mechanically groping his way upward, although the
storm had commenced in earnest now.

There was less difficulty in progressing while the pretty well-defined pathway could be kept
to; but the falling snow began to obliterate its traces.  His entire surroundings soon became
shut out from the man's vision.  He moved on resolutely, although his face smarted and his
eyes were blinded by the steadily descending snow, which surrounded him on all sides like a
moving curtain of grayish white.  He owned to himself that it was impossible to proceed, but
what was he to do?  To return was just as impossible!

Fortune at last favored him.  Staggering through the wind and snow of the ever-increasing storm,
he ran unexpectedly upon a lofty wall of rock looking to him like a high cliff.  He had evidently
lost the path, for here was an insurmountable obstacle.  Clinging to the rough surface, he
cautiously felt his way along the rock for some yards.  He was still ascending, but the ground
was rough and piled with small stones, which had crumbled off from the main wall and lay in
heaps beneath it.  He knew enough about Scottish mountains to expect to find an opening in
the wall large enough to enable him to creep into some kind of shelter; he was not disappointed,
for soon he came upon a crevice--not deep enough to be called a cave, but affording some temporary
relief from the storm, which had by this time assumed a furious aspect.

The retreat happened to be under the lee of the rock, so that although it had little depth,
he was protected from the violence of the storm; the relief was great after the fatiguing struggle
he had been undergoing.  He managed to strike a match and look at his watch; it was only six
o'clock.  Had he to pass the night in that chill and dreary region?

Gruesome anecdotes rushed tormentingly to memory.  It was but last winter that he had read
of the finding of a man's body, stark and cold, not fifty yards from his own threshold; he
had fallen helpless, faint from incessant struggling through the snow-drifts and too weak to
make his cries for help heard above the rushing of the wind and the swish of the snow on the
window behind which his terrified wife was anxiously awaiting his coming.

And what of Bonar himself?  He might at that instant be miles away from any human habitation;
it might be days before a human being chanced to pass that way!  Would his body confront some
wandering shepherd or some sportsman months hence, when the snows had gone, and, perhaps--horrible
thought, yet possible to be realized!--after carrion birds had made their onslaught on the
foul thing it had become?

Be sure he called himself every kind of idiot for venturing on such a fool's errand at such
a time.  But that did not warm his shivering limbs or infuse patience into his almost despairing
heart.  The cold was intense.  He was obliged at last to move away from his shelter--such as
it was--and in spite of the thick snow beneath his feet, and the hurrying flakes still noiselessly
but relentlessly falling, to trample some kind of pathway in which he might pace backwards
and forwards to keep the blood circulating in his veins.

It was not quite dark, but the gray curtain of falling snow shut out everything from his vision;
no sound could be heard but the rush of the wind over the slopes, and an occasional wail nearer
at hand, as it swished round a corner of the rocks behind him.  He dare not attempt to climb
higher, nor dare he descend.  What unexplored expanses of moorland might lie beyond, to lure
him farther away from the chance of shelter or rescue?  What hidden pitfalls might not lurk
below, to trap his inexperienced feet and hurl him to his death?

Warmed by his exercise, he crept back into his recess to await the possibility of some cessation
of the storm.  Busied with anxious thoughts, he failed to notice the gradual lessening of the
snow-flakes and the lull in the wind beyond the rocks.  It was only when the moon shone out
clearly once more that he perceived that the storm was over.

Courage returned at once.  He left his shelter and tried to find the direction of the upward
path.  Light had dispelled his fears.  It was better to trust himself to the dangers of the
higher level than to risk a fall into some crevice on the downward way.  Before his eyes lay
stretched out a vast snowfield!  More dazzlingly white in the moonlight than before, a thick
carpet of snow lessened every inequality of surface; it softened every hard outline, while
it filled up depressions.  Sounding every step as he advanced, he trod slowly upwards; plowing
now and again into drifts waist-deep, staggering over submerged bowlders and stony heaps whose
unexpected existence would often imperil his balance, he managed to climb considerably higher.
But his progress was necessarily slow.  He kept as near as possible to the rocky ridge which
had sheltered him; for on his other hand the ground sloped downwards in a steep gradient, and
the treacherous snow might well conceal many a deadly peril.

His strength was becoming exhausted by the severe strain of wading through the deep drifts
when, turning round a corner of the wall of rock beside him, his eyes were gladdened by a welcome
sight.  Across the expanse of snow he could see shining a tiny bright light.  It was no reflection
from the moonbeams, for it burned with a reddish glow amid the dazzling whiteness all around.
His courage revived; he was certainly not far from some habitation--perhaps the very one he
sought! The thought filled him with fresh vigor; his wearied limbs gained new strength, and
he climbed forward with energy and decision.  But, alas! in spite of his efforts, the light
seemed to recede; it grew gradually smaller and less bright until he lost sight of it altogether.

The man's powers of endurance were well-nigh spent.  His food had been eaten long before while
he lay in shelter; his flask--more carefully husbanded--was now empty.  He almost gave up striving.
Why not give way to the almost uncontrollable desire to lie down and rest in the snow?  He
could hold out no longer!

It was at that critical moment that through the intense stillness of the mountain solitudes
he heard the bark of a dog!  Once more he picked up courage.  Staggering on a few steps further,
he saw from behind an intervening rock, which had concealed it till then, the light from a
window not far ahead!

All interest in his errand had departed long before.  What did he care if the mountain were
full of illicit stills?  The only desire that possessed him now was that roused by the human
instinct in every man in peril of his life--the desire to escape from danger.  Oh, for sufficient
strength to creep onwards!  If he could but hold out a little, shelter and warmth, and--above
all--safety would be his!  So once again, wearily, painfully, and slowly, he plowed his way
through the drifts toward the beacon that shone ahead.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Within the modest dwelling to which Davie Forbes was wont to refer as his "hoosachie" (little
house), on snow-clad Ben Sguarrach, the living-room looked cosy enough on that wild evening.
By the two windows--one at the gable-end of the house, the other near the door--no icy draught
could enter, for both apertures were hermetically sealed! All the ventilation deemed necessary
during the daytime came through the usually open door, by which Maggie Jean was continually
passing in and out, bent on domestic duties.  (Like other Scottish housewives, she carried
out much of her rougher and dirtier housework in the open.) At night, when work was over, the
bright lamp and fire of glowing peat and blazing logs kept the house warm and snug; the pungent
"reek" from the peat, too, acted as a healthy disinfectant.

Everything was scrupulously clean.  The flagged floor, the deal table, the dresser, with its
shelves filled with crockery--all spoke of frequent and thorough scrubbing.  The high mantel-shelf
bore brass candlesticks--more for ornament than use--which had been polished till they shone
like gold.  The very walls had been so often subjected to Maggie Jean's whitewashing brush
that they were spotless.

Under the overhanging ingle-nook, in which a ham or two were hanging overhead, sat Davie in
his own special corner and his own special chair, calmly smoking; opposite sat Jock, a black-bearded
man of sturdy build, who was also smoking.  Both were listening to Maggie Jean, who, seated
near her father, was reading in a monotonous voice the choice extracts from a three-days-old
local paper.  Now and again, as the snow beat more forcibly upon the window, or the wind moaned
round the corner of the house, or drove the peat reek in gusts into the room, she would pause
and glance anxiously through the uncurtained window near the door.  For Peter had gone down
to the croft to bring back a bag of turnips for her "coo" during this unforeseen spell of fierce
weather. The storm had come on suddenly, and provender was low; so Peter had volunteered his
services in his characteristically shy way (which a southron, perhaps, would have taken for
an indication of surliness), and his sister, in equally characteristic Scottish fashion, had
accepted the offer with the air of one who had a right to it.  Yet all the while (I am sure,
for I know the type well!) Peter was full of tender compassion for the poor beast, and Maggie
Jean's heart overflowed with solicitude for her brother's safe return.

"Eh!  But it's a fearfu' nicht, and nae mistak'!" old Davie would exclaim, as the storm made
itself felt more than usual.

"Aye, aye, it is thot," was Jock's imperturbable reply.

And Maggie Jean, with an anxious sigh, would resume her slow chant, punctuated by occasional
glances outside.

But a dash at the door from without, and Don's joyful barking, told of the return of the dog
and his master.  Snow-clad Peter, with his lantern, looking like some rustic Santa Claus--all
white from head to foot--made his appearance, and with much stamping and shaking off of the
snow from his garments, divested himself of his wraps, and joined the family circle, pushing
his way past Jock to the corner nearest the fire, his dog following at his heels.

"Eh!  But it's bin gey stormy!" he said as he filled his pipe.

"Nae doot o' thot!" hazarded Jock, solemnly sucking away at his.

"The sna's gey deep, I doot," remarked Davie interrogatively.

"Some o' the reefs is fower foot an' mair," answered Peter nonchalantly, between puffs of smoke.

The announcement caused no visible surprise.  Maggie Jean made a diversion.

"It's fair noo," she said, glancing through the window, "and there's a bonny moon!"

"Aye," responded Peter.  "There's bin nae sna' this guid while."

The party had settled down to silent contemplation of the cheery fire, the men enjoying their
pipes, Maggie Jean busy with her knitting.  No sound disturbed the peaceful calm except the
regular faint click of the rapidly moving knitting-pins.

Suddenly there was a loud noise at the door.  It was not so much a knock as the fall of some
heavy body against it.  Don's startled bark roused all from their seats, and Peter made for
the door at once, having first quieted the dog by the forcible argument of a well-directed
kick.  "It's a mon," he cried in surprise as he opened the door, "faint wi' the cauld!"  And
at once strong arms lifted the prostrate form out of the snow and bore it to the warm hearthside.

It was a man--young and handsome.  He was well dressed, and his thick gloves, gaiters and strong
boots, together with his warm clothing, showed him to be not altogether unprovided against
the cold whose unusual potency had overcome him.  He had evidently tramped for some distance
in deep snow, and gave proofs of more than one fall into the drifts.

The men busied themselves in efforts for his restoration.  Maggie Jean produced whiskey, which
they administered in small doses; Jock and Peter drew off the man's sodden boots and socks,
and chafed his hands and feet in the warmth of the fire.  Old Davie stood regarding the stranger
attentively during these proceedings.

"It's himsel', I doot," he remarked to Jock at last.  "D'ye ken him?"

"Aye, aye," said Jock dispassionately.  "I ken him fine.  I see him in the toon last market-day.
It's himsel', sure enough!"

"Eh!  Puir body!" exclaimed old Davie.  "And mayhe the creetur wes on his wye t' oor still."

"Nae doot o' thot," remarked Peter, while Jock wisely nodded assent.

"No' but what he'd find it gey hard to come up wi't in the sna' and a'!" added the latter,
in a tone of unrestrained congratulation.

They spoke in half-whispers, and never ceased their charitable ministrations the while.  Not
a word passed on the subject again, for in a few minutes the stranger had gained consciousness.
He looked in a puzzled way from one face to another, not realizing for the moment where he
was.  Davie was the first to speak.

"The storm's bin ower muckle for ye, sir, I'm thinkin'," he said kindly.  "It's weel ye chanced
to find y'r wye t' oor wee hoosachie. It's nae muckle to be prood on; but it's better ner bein'
ootside in siclike weather, I doot!"

Bonar suddenly became aware of the identity of his hosts.  He had no doubt that this was Davie
Forbes, whom he had come to spy upon and denounce!  But he was no coward, and quickly reassured
himself that duty alone had led him.  Still, he was indebted to his enemies!

"I'm greatly obliged to you, indeed," he said with genuine gratitude. "I probably owe my life
to the good luck that led me to your door."

"Na, na, mon," replied Davie.  "Ye've naething to thank us for.  But ye'll need a bit supper!"
he added, as Bonar rose to his feet and seemed about to prepare for departure.  (He felt rather
unsteady on his legs, but go he must, as he assured himself resolutely.)

"Aye, sure!" cried Maggie Jean, seconding her father's hospitable invitation.  And without
another word she produced from various hidden receptacles tablecloth, knives and forks, bread,
oatcake, butter, cheese, and jam, with the rapidity of a conjurer--as the dazed Bonar thought.
Then down came a frying-pan, and she began to cook eggs and ham over the bright fire.

It was impossible to resist, and Bonar had no wish to refuse the food he needed so badly.

"You're very good, I'm sure!" he faltered out.  "I really think it was hunger alone that made
me faint.  I've never done such a thing in my life before!"

"Ye'd be nane the worse for a wee drappie sperrits afore y'r supper," said Davie.  "Peter,
lad, fetch oot a drap frae yon jar beyont!"

Peter dutifully obeyed, retiring into some back recess and returning with a small jug of whiskey,
from which his father poured out drams for the guest and himself.

"Y'r guid health, sir!" he said hospitably, lifting his glass.  "May ye be nane the worse for
y'r wettin', the nicht!"

Bonar would have been less than human to have refused.  He quietly sipped his whiskey, which
was excellent.  The spirit gave him renewed strength; the savor of Maggie Jean's cooking whetted
his appetite.  He owed it to himself to take ordinary care of his health, he reasoned interiorly.
He would tell them who he was, though, before he left.

He had indeed been saved from serious disaster, if not from death, by means of this family.
Peter's lantern--which he had not troubled to extinguish when the moon rendered it no longer
necessary--had been Bonar's first guiding-star.  Don's bark had renewed his energy, and the
result was shelter and hospitality.  Like a sensible man he accepted the good fortune which
had fallen to him, and ate a hearty meal.

When it came to the question of starting out again, he found it less easy than he had anticipated.

"Ye'll nae think o' leavin' this hoose the nicht!" the old man declared, when, after his supper
and a pipe, Bonar touched on the subject.

"It's an impossibeelity for ony mon as disna' ken the hill yon to find his wye up or doon in
siclike weather," Jock added grimly.

Bonar knew how true was Jock's remark.  Nevertheless, he felt very uncomfortable at the prospect
of remaining there for the night, as Davie had proposed.  Did they know who he was?  It seemed
most unlikely, with the kindness they had shown him!  Yet he could not stay, he told himself,
under false pretences.

"It's more than kind of you to treat me like this," he said.  "I could never have expected
such a friendly welcome to one who is a perfect stranger to you all."

"Nae altogither a stranger, whateever," returned Davie--and for a moment there was ever so
slight a suspicion of a twinkle in his kindly old eyes.  "Ye're the new gauger we've haird
sae muckle aboot, I'm thinkin'."

"Quite so," stammered Bonar, rather shamefacedly, "and--it's really very good of you to show
me so much kindness."

"Na, na, sir," said the old man warmly.  "I should be wantin' in human feelin' if I wes to
turn a dog oot sic a nicht--still mair a fellow-creetur.  Na, na, sir!  Juist ye sit still,
and Maggie Jean'll redd up the bed for ye beyont for y'r nicht's rest!"

So in the smuggler's very house the smuggler's natural enemy was bound to rest for the night,
having been warmed at the smuggler's hearth and cheered and invigorated by whiskey that had
paid no duty!

It was with changed mien that Bonar trod his downward path next morning under Peter's guidance.

Be sure he lost no time in applying for removal to a new sphere of labor!  Let others tackle
Davie Forbes and his sons if they wished; as for himself, he could never so repay the fearless
generosity to which he owed--as he firmly believed--the saving of his life!

VIII

PHENOMENA

  "This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him."
          ("Hamlet" Act I, Sc. 1.)

Strolling across the little stableyard one day to have a look at Tim, our pony, I heard from
the open door of the kitchen Penny's voice, raised in expostulation.

"Ghost, indeed!"  And withering scorn was expressed in the very tone of her ejaculation.  "When
you're my hage you'll have learned to take no 'eed of such nonsense!  There's no such a thing;
and I'm surprised as a Catholic girl, born and bred, should be that superstitious!  You mustn't
believe such rubbish!"

I scented entertainment, for Penny dogmatizing on spiritualism was likely to prove interesting.

"What's up, Penny?" I inquired with an air of innocence, as she suddenly emerged from the kitchen,
wrathfully brandishing a huge knife--as who should say, in Hamlet's words:

"I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!"

had she not been bent upon the more peaceful, if prosaic, slaughter of a lettuce for the luncheon
salad.

Penny was just in the mood to give vent to her theological opinions concerning the possibility
of visits from another world, and at once seized the opportunity of imparting a little wholesome
instruction to any audience obtainable.

"The nonsense that folks get into their 'eads nowadays, Mr. Edmund--what with these trashy
novels and 'apenny papers--is something past belief! Not but what Elsie is a good, quiet girl
enough, and reg'lar at her duties every first Sunday in the month; but she's young, and I suppose
we 'ave to make allowance for young folk."

I murmured in token of acquiescence.

"I let her off for the afternoon yesterday, to take tea with her haunt from America, and back
she comes with a cock-and-bull story of a happarition her youngest brother Aleck imagined he
saw the night before last."

"An apparition!" I cried.  "That's strange!  Where did the boy see it?"

"He couldn't have seen it, Mr. Edmund, as you must know very well, with your heducation and
experience.  He was running home in the moonlight and thought he saw some figure in the old
mill, which, of course, he says must have been a ghost."

"A ghost at the old mill!"  I laughed heartily myself at the notion.  "It couldn't have been
poor old Archie.  It's not like him to terrify his neighbors in that way."

"I gave the girl a good talking to," continued Penny.  (I did not doubt it!)  "'Read your Penny
Catechism,' I said, 'and see how strong it is against dealing with the Devil by consulting
spiritualists, and don't let me hear another word about it.'"

It seemed rather hard on poor Elsie, who was, beyond doubt, innocent of any such forbidden
practices.  But I refrained from comment, for I wanted to hear more about the happarition.

But Penny could not be drawn out.  She professed herself so disgusted at Elsie's "superstition"
that I could get no coherent account of what Aleck was supposed to have seen.  So I left her
to vent her wrath on the defenceless vegetables, and determined to seek a more copious source
of information.

Willy and Bell would be capable of second-hand descriptions only, so I resolved to approach
the fountain-head and interrogate Aleck in person. I found the youth in the garden of Fanellan
farm, evidently just passing the time by a cursory pruning of berry bushes.  He had on his
Sunday suit, and was unusually smartened up for a weekday; for it was but natural that neighbors
might be expected to drop in for information as to the supernatural manifestations he had experienced,
and it was well to be prepared.  He was a fresh-looking, fair-haired lad of eighteen or thereabouts.
I had often noticed him on Sundays among the gathering under the pine-trees near the church
door, but had never spoken to him.

Aleck had not expected so illustrious a visitor as "the priest's brother," and, though evidently
gratified by my interest, was so painfully shy that it would have needed an expert barrister
to draw out any satisfactory information from so bashful a witness.  Luckily his mother had
espied me from the window, and promptly appeared on the scene, and by means of her judicious
prompting the youth was induced to tell his tale.

It appeared that Aleck was out on the night in question at the unusual hour of twelve.  He
had been "bidden," as his mother explained, to a marriage in the neighborhood, and his father
had allowed him to accept the invitation on the condition of his return home by midnight. 
As is not unusual in such cases, the attractions of the dance had led the youth to postpone
his departure, minute by minute, until it was questionable whether he could possibly reach
home by the appointed time, even if he ran his best.  Consequently he took all the short cuts
he knew, and one of them led him by the old mill.

I was well aware, from an anecdote related to me by Penny, that John Farquhar, the lad's father,
was a stern disciplinarian.  Elsie's elder sister, Jean, a lass of nineteen, had once happened
to return home from confession rather later than usual one Saturday evening, owing to the exceptionally
large number awaiting their turn in the church.  On reaching home about half-past eight on
a spring evening, she became aware of her father standing in the dusk at the garden gate, holding
an ominously slender walking-stick in his hand.  With this he proceeded to deal several far
from gentle strokes upon the girl's shoulders, regardless of her frightened remonstrances and
explanations.

"I dinna' care wha ye come frae, chaipel or nae chaipel; ye'll nae be alloowed oot at sic an hoor!"

In the light of this circumstance it was not difficult to understand Aleck's desire to reach
Fanellan punctually.  But to return to his adventure.

As he approached the old mill he became aware of a light shining from one of the windows. 
Thinking that some traveling tinkers had taken up free lodgings there, he was preparing to
pass as quickly and quietly as possible, to avoid drawing attention upon himself and delaying
his progress.  But, to his astonishment, the light suddenly went out, and by the time he reached
the house it was wrapped in darkness.  There was little moonlight (spite of Penny's indignant
insinuations), for it was a cloudy night, and the lad would have had difficulty in finding
his way had it not been so familiar.  Curiosity urged Aleck to investigate the mystery of the
light, and, forgetful for the moment of his father's injunction, he crept quietly to the unglazed
window and looked through the opening.  Not a sound revealed the presence of any human being
within.  A silence, accentuated no doubt by his startled imagination, seemed to hang over the
place.  He was starting on again when a strange sight met his eyes.  Suddenly out of the darkness
of the cottage shone out the figure of a human hand!  It seemed to glow with a faint greenish
light, and it held a long pointed knife, which burned with the same pale hue.  Nothing else
could be seen except a kind of gauzy floating sleeve, from which the mysterious hand emerged.
Aleck had no wish to investigate further, but promptly took to his heels, and made for home
with all speed, frightened out of his wits.

As luck would have it, the clock by which he had started was fast, and he was home in good
time.  The circumstance tended to render his story more worthy of credence than it might otherwise
have proved.  But his evident terror, and the very incoherence of his narrative, told in his favor.

"He's been a truthful lad all his days," his mother proudly testified; "while as to drink--not
a drop of spirits has passed his lips sin' I gev' him a wee drop for the spasms when he wes
a wean!"

And Aleck's blushing approval of the maternal statement bore witness to its truth.

I confess that the story did not in the least rouse any superstitious credence in my mind.
Luminous paint was not such an unknown quantity to me as it would be to this country-bred lad
and his family.  I took care, however, to breathe no word of my suspicions; for I meant to
make a few investigations on my own account.  So with the looked-for expressions of astonishment,
I took my leave.

I had been asked to dine at Ardmuir House that evening, and as it was a matter of eight miles
distant, I was to stay the night.  Accordingly, I started in good time in the pony cart, old
Willy by my side to bring back the trap.  Colonel Ashol was by way of being civil to Val and
myself, and frequently invited us; my brother, however, seldom accepted, and was always glad
when I undertook to represent the Flemings there.  The Ashols, though a family of a feeble
type of Protestants, showed no decided bigotry.  They had a few Catholics in their employ on
the estate, and were cordial enough with us.

Ardmuir House and some of its land had been Church property before the Reformation.  Val looked
the matter up once, and discovered that it had been a dependency upon one of the larger abbeys,
and was itself a place of no little importance.

The mansion itself was rather picturesque; it had been rebuilt in a later century on the site
and from the materials of the former church and monastery.  You drove for some distance up
a stately avenue of beeches before sighting the house.  It was a big, roomy place, with fine
large windows and handsome moldings round them--probably portions of the spoils of the ancient
erection.  A wide portico, supported on stone pillars, stood in front of the chief entrance,
and carriages might drive under its shelter to set down the occupants at the doorstep.  An
air of gloom seemed to hang about it, owing to the huge trees which grew pretty close to it
in places.

The one striking feature about the house was the parapet, which ran round the entire roof.
This was pierced in such a way as to form the letters composing a text of Scripture.  The inscription,
in huge characters, ran thus:

  EXCEPT THE LORD BUILD THE HOUSE THEY
  LABOR IN VAIN THAT BUILD IT

The idea of such a decoration doubtless originated with the desire of some pious Presbyterian
ancestor of the present owners to emphasize the fact that the ancient builders had not made
pure Gospel teaching their sure foundation.  But, by the irony of fate, the text had become
a striking commentary upon the fortunes of later possessors of sacrilegious spoils; for it
was a tradition--upon which the family kept a discreet silence--that three male heirs in direct
succession had never lived to inherit the property.  At the very time of which I am writing,
Colonel Ashol's only son was suffering from what doctors had pronounced to be incipient spinal
disease, which, should it develop, would render him a helpless cripple for life--should life
be granted to him.

I was rather more keen than usual about that particular visit, as I expected to meet a young
Catholic priest, who was to stay with the Ashols for a day or two in company with his mother,
an old friend of the hostess.  For that reason Val would have accompanied me that evening,
in spite of his aversion to such "inanities," as he chose to call dinner parties, had he not
been otherwise engaged.  He had already made an appointment to interview for the first time
a girl who lived some distance away and could not be easily postponed; moreover, the occasion
was important, being the commencement of a series of instructions preparatory to her reception
into the Church.  For the lassie in question--to use the terminology of Ardmuirland--"had gotten
a Catholic man"; in other words, was engaged to be married to a Catholic, who had inspired
her with the desire of sharing his faith as well as his worldly goods.

It was early when I arrived.  The Colonel and some of the men were still out on the moors,
but a few guests were sitting about in the big, cool entrance hall, waiting for tea.  Among
them were Mrs. Vansome and her son, to both of whom I was at once presented.  They happened
to be the only Catholics of the house party.  We chatted amicably for some time, until the
dressing-bell broke up the gathering for the nonce.

I happened to remain for a few minutes in the hall after the rest had left; I wanted to look
into a paper which was there, and I knew my room from previous visits.  The staircase ran along
two sides of the hall and led to a broad corridor, upon which the rooms opened.  Another passage
at right angles joined this corridor, and to reach my room I had to pass by the end of it.

It was just between daylight and dusk, on a September evening, and no lamps were yet needed.
As I passed the passage on my way I saw an elderly lady coming toward the main corridor.  I
am no great observer of feminine costume--perhaps because I am not much in ladies' company,
or, it may be, because I never had a sister to instruct me; I can only say of this lady's dress,
therefore, that it struck me as differing from those I had lately seen in the hall, both in
fashion and material.  I remember hearing a rustling as of silk, and I think there was some
white lace about the neck and hair.

But what struck me most was the woman's face.  I had looked in her direction, lest I might
seem discourteous to some acquaintance; but this was a stranger.  The face was that of a woman
in an agony of suffering! The wide-open eyes were full of trouble; the whole countenance expressed
pain and something like terror.  (I am describing the impression made upon me at the moment,
for the incident passed more quickly than it takes to tell, however brief the narration.)

As my eyes met hers, the woman stretched out her hands with an appealing gesture, and seemed
to be hastening swiftly toward me.  But just as she was almost near enough to touch me, she
suddenly disappeared--having turned, as it seemed to me, into a door close by.

For a moment I stood bewildered.  Then that look of appeal for help came back to mind; it was
evident something was wrong.  I at once entered the open door into which the figure had passed,
determined to do what I could to assist one in such unmistakable need of help.  To my astonishment
I found that the place was a mere housemaid's closet, for the keeping of brooms, dusting appliances,
and the like.  It was but a tiny room, too; a glance from the threshold was enough to convince
me that no human being was there!

It was not so much surprise as terror that seized me at such a discovery. I found myself wiping
from my brow the cold sweat that stood there in great drops.  I felt certain that I had been
face to face with something unexplainable by the ordinary laws of nature.  I was as well as
usual.  I had read nothing of late that could have conjured up such a figure.  As to preternatural
manifestations of such a kind--I had but that very day, and but an hour or two ago, passed
supercilious judgment on what I thought the credulity of ignorant rustics.  And yet here I
was, the victim to some such hallucination--unless it was possible that I had really seen the
figure with my bodily eyes!  My knees were shaking under me as I managed to reach my room,
my whole being agitated by an unaccountable sense of fear.

Luckily we were allowed an unusually long time for dressing, and I was able to get a smoke
and take a bath; by dinner-time I was more like myself.

I tried hard at first to persuade myself that the entire scene had been imaginary; but I could
not succeed.  I was too firmly convinced that I had actually seen such a figure to entertain
the idea.

Dinner passed without particular incident.  I had an interesting chat after with young Father
Vansome.  I discovered that he was a Benedictine attached to one of the English monasteries,
and had been permitted, as a relief from a long spell of heavy teaching work, to spend a few
days at Ardmuir House, where his mother was then staying.  He was dressed like an ordinary
priest; this, as he explained, was out of consideration for the Ashols, who were entertaining
among their guests that day some of ultra-Protestant views, who might have resented the intrusion
into their midst of a real live monk, "in habit as he lived."

More than once during our conversation the extraordinary occurrence which had disturbed my
peace of mind kept intruding itself upon my mental vision, and again and again it was almost
divulged to my companion; but I shrank from being laughed at as a victim to superstitious imaginings.
I had a priest for a brother, and no one knew better than I how sceptical were our own clergy
with regard to any supernatural happenings that had not been corroborated by the testimony
of reliable authority.

There was the usual smoke, with the usual billiards, and bedtime arrived without any disclosure
on my part of the mysterious incident.  I did not fear further revelations, for my bedroom
was nowhere near the scene of the apparition.  I must confess to a momentary creepy sensation
as I passed, in company with other men, the corridor of the adventure; but nothing happened
to disturb my rest materially.

I like to be stirring at a pretty early hour, to get a morning pipe of peace.  But in a strange
house it is not always convenient to prowl about too soon; however, I could not interfere with
any one in the garden, so to the garden I promptly betook myself.  It wanted an hour until
breakfast, and I was rather surprised to find the Benedictine already pacing the broad walk
under the terrace, which was out of view of the windows.  He was not smoking, though, and when
I accosted him it seemed to me that he looked somewhat disturbed and embarrassed.  We passed
a few desultory remarks, and then he asked whether I intended to leave early after breakfast
or stay for lunch.  As it happened, I had arranged for Willy to bring the cart in time to start
soon after ten; for Val had to drive somewhere in the afternoon, and it was as well to give
Tim a rest before starting out again.  This I explained to Father Vansome.

"I wonder whether you could give me a lift," was his remark.  "I should very much like to consult
Father Fleming upon a certain matter, and if you could take me, it would avoid a fuss here.
I shall enjoy the tramp back again."

Of course I was delighted to give him a lift.  So we set off in due time with Willy on the
back seat.  I had been rejoicing in the prospect of an agreeable drive with a pleasant companion,
for I had been greatly attracted by the young monk; but I was doomed to disappointment.  My
constant efforts at conversation fell flat; for the priest seemed preoccupied, and his responses
were evidently merely mechanical.

Father Vansome was closeted with Val up to lunch time.  He sat down to table with us, and after
the meal he and Val drove off together in the trap; they had arranged that Father Vansome should
get down at a point where their roads diverged.  I was rather astonished to learn, when I took
leave of him, that he hoped to return that same evening, as he had a particular reason for
wishing to say Mass next day.

Left to myself, I turned my steps in the direction of Archie's former dwelling at the old mill;
for I hoped to light upon some evidence which would clear up to my own satisfaction at least
the apparent mystery of Aleck Farquhar's ghost story.  Although I could not account by any
natural means for the event which had startled me at Ardmuir House, I was nevertheless still
sceptical with regard to the supposed apparition at the mill-house.  Indeed, I felt more certain
than ever that a living person had been playing pranks in the latter case, to serve some purpose
of his own; the impossibility of fraud in my regard contrasted strongly with its probability
at the old mill.

I was not deceived in my expectation.  I found that the boards that usually covered the window
opening had been carefully removed, and were standing in a corner awaiting replacement, probably.
Here was a sign that the midnight visitor had been surprised, and had not dared to wait to
cover up the window again--unless, indeed, it meant that another "apparition" was intended.
But a more close investigation convinced me of trickery.  Flung away into a corner was a small
brush bearing traces of luminous paint, and in a heap of rubbish I discerned the very lid of
a small tin of that effective spiritualistic medium.  No further proof was needed.  By lucky
chance I discovered what appeared to be a clue to the reason of all this mystification.  Loosened
stones in the chimney and by the hearth suggested that a search had been made for something
supposed to be hidden in the hut.  The spiritual visitor had evidently been bent upon seizing
the material riches which rumor had doubtless located in the dwelling of one whom those not
in his confidence would have reason to regard as a miser.  Here then was one illusion dissipated
by my discoveries.

Father Vansome was driven over again in time for dinner.  During the progress of the meal I
was inclined to make merry over my find; but I had little success in gaining the interest either
of Val or our guest, who both seemed to shun the topic.

When dinner was over, it occurred to me to introduce the subject of my own ghostly experience,
for I was curious to hear what the priests would think of it.  As I led up to it by degrees
I saw the dark eyes of Father Vansome light up with expectation.  Both he and Val listened
with keen interest, neither attempting to interrupt the narration.  Then they looked spontaneously
at each other.

"I am quite as convinced as yourself," said the Benedictine to me as I finished my relation,
"that what you saw was neither an hallucination nor a human figure.  I have seen it also, and
that is why I am here now."

He then gave, in turn, his experience.  During the early part of the night he had been unusually
restless.  When he did at last fall asleep he had a strange dream.  He saw the figure of an
elderly woman, clad in antique garb, holding by the hand a young man, who wore the habit of
his own Order.  The woman fixed upon him eyes full of entreaty, and implored him in piteous
accents to offer Mass for her soul, for it was in his power to release her from grievous torments.
Father Vansome then awoke, the impression made by his dream still vivid.  He struck a light
and looked at his watch.  It was two o'clock only; but his nerves were too highly strung to
suffer him to sleep again, and he lay wondering what the dream could signify.

Suddenly, while still wide awake, he was aware of the figure of the woman of his dream standing
by his bed.  Her eyes were full of intense supplication, and her hands stretched out to him
in eager entreaty. Yielding to a sudden, irresistible impulse, he exclaimed:

"Tell me, in God's name, who you are and what you want of me?"

The answer came in a clear, distinct voice:

"I am Elizabeth Ashol.  I am suffering for a wrong done to my stepson, Gilbert, a monk of your
Order.  Say Mass for my soul and I shall have rest."

Then the figure vanished.

Father Vansome naturally had no more sleep that morning.  Very early, indeed, he was summoned
to his mother's bedside by her maid, and found her as agitated as himself.  From her lips he
learned that she too had been visited by the figure he had himself seen.  The woman, answering
to the description of his ghostly visitor, had approached Mrs. Vansome's bed, when she was
still wide awake, with outstretched hands and entreating eyes, but no voice had been heard.

The apparition to his mother had convinced Father Vansome that what he had experienced was
no trick of the imagination.  He had, however, taken counsel with Val, who, like himself, was
of opinion that the Mass ought to be said.  He had found on returning to Ardmuir House that
morning that his mother had confided the matter to Mrs. Ashol, and had heard from her that
previous visitors had experienced similar apparitions; on further consideration it was discovered--though
Mrs. Ashol had not realized it before--that such persons had been invariably Catholics.  There
was, however, no record of the figure having spoken; this had happened for the first time to
the only Benedictine monk who had ever entered the house since Elizabeth Ashol's death, two
centuries before.

It appeared that a certain Dame Elizabeth Ashol, second wife of Gilbert Ashol, lived in the
latter part of the seventeenth century.  She had one son, Laurence, to whom his father left
the estate, to the exclusion of his eldest son, Gilbert, the offspring of the first marriage.
This youth, to his father's intense indignation, had reverted to the faith of his ancestors;
soon after his conversion he had entered a monastery on the continent, with a view to returning,
as so many of his religious brethren were then doing, to work for the restoration of his fellow-countrymen
to the Church.  It was generally thought that Dame Elizabeth, in her ambition for the welfare
of her own son, had encouraged her husband in his religious bias, and secured the succession
for Laurence.  It was held in the family that the disasters which had always befallen the first-born
of the house dated from the unjust acquisition of the estate by this Laurence, and the entire
disinheriting of Gilbert; it was from a kind of superstitious dread attaching to the name that
no Ashol for a long term of years had ever been baptized Laurence.

Father Vansome said the required Mass next morning, and his mother drove over to assist at
it.  Her prayers and mine were thus united with the supreme Sacrifice on behalf of the soul
so greatly in need.

The apparition has never been seen again, though many a Catholic guest has visited Ardmuir
House.  More wonderful still--the curse seems to have been averted by the laying of the ghost;
for young Gilbert Ashol has so greatly improved in health and strength that his doctors predict
for him a probably long and useful life.

The family has indeed been thoroughly impressed by the strange circumstances just related.
In the light of their increasing interest in all things Catholic, Val is beginning to entertain
hopes of the ultimate return of the Ashols to the Faith their fathers abandoned more than three
hundred years ago.

IX

SPRING'S RETURN

  "Now Ariel goes a-singing, by the olden
    Dark yews, where flitter-mice were wont to cling.

I shook my head.

"I'm no hand at riddles."

"Well, there's a marriage to come off in our parish before long, if matters can be satisfactorily
arranged."

"A marriage!"  That roused me; it would be the first function of the kind I had seen in Ardmuirland.
For our lads usually fetched partners from elsewhere, and maidens being accustomed to migrate
to service in the south, found mates there--even as the swallows.

"I thought that would fetch you!" cried Val triumphant.  "And now give a guess."

But I racked my brains to no purpose.

"It's not Widow Lamont, and it's not Robina----"

"Why not?" he asked.  But I saw he was quizzing.

"It's a widow," he said.  "I'll tell you that much."

Even then I was nonplussed.

"Ted, you've no imagination!  Is Christian Logan too old?"

"Christian Logan!  Of course not!  Who's the happy man?"

"He's not altogether happy yet," returned Val.  "There are obstacles in the way at present.
Do you know the Camerons of Redbank Farm at all?"

"Camerons of Redbank!  Why, they're Protestants!"

"Tell me something I don't know already," he retorted.

"I can say very little about them.  There are two brothers, I believe--one very middle-aged
and the other less so.  I may have passed the time of day with one or the other."

"Well, it's the less middle-aged one--Lachlan by name--who wants to marry Christian.  It's
all right about religion.  He's ready to make all the necessary promises, and moreover, remarked
quite spontaneously that he intended coming to church with his wife after they were married--a
most unusual undertaking in these cases.  He's evidently merely ignorant of everything Catholic;
not bigoted, really.  With a wife like Christian, he is most likely to enter the Church himself
eventually."

"But what are these almost insurmountable obstacles?"

"Chiefly financial.  It seems that the elder brother is the actual tenant of Redbank, and Lachlan
is little better than a farm-servant at present.  It would be scarcely possible for the poor
chap to support a wife and three of a ready-made family on the wages of a mere plowman--except,
of course, in the style of a common laborer, and he is far above that.  The best way out of
the difficulty would be for Christian to manage the house at Redbank, instead of a paid housekeeper;
but the old brother is bitter against Catholics, and more opposed to young children in the
house.  Hence these tears!  Don't you think there are rather respectable obstacles to be overcome?"

"Quite.  So what did you suggest?"

"Cameron himself suggested what I think a reasonable solution: to try for some situation as
farm bailiff or manager.  He is thoroughly up to it all, for he has been practically managing
things at Redbank for the last year or two, and has plenty of experience in farm work."

"He ought to be able to find something of the sort.  Could the factor at Taskerton do anything
for him, do you think?  Christian has already lost a husband in the service of the estate,
and it would be but restitution to provide her with another."

"The idea struck me, too, though not in precisely the same terms," said Val with an amused
laugh.  "I am thinking of writing to him about the matter."

"You are really satisfied with the man, then?"

"Decidedly so!  He struck me as being a very decent sort of fellow.  He has a straight-forward,
pleasant manner with him, and is altogether superior to an ordinary crofter.  It would be a
good match for Christian.  Poor soul!  She deserves a better lot than she enjoys at present."

"What's his age, do you suppose?"

"Forty-six.  Quite a lad, for these parts!"

"Things look all right, certainly," was my summing up.

Val wrote to the factor, but the result was not over-promising.  He knew of nothing suitable
at present.  But he would keep the case in mind, and write at once should he hear of anything
available.

Both Val and I were keen on getting the matter settled, and often talked it over together,
discussing ways and means.  But the weeks slipped by, and we found ourselves no nearer to a
solution of the difficulty.  We little dreamed of the quarter from which it was eventually to come!

One day as we sat at breakfast Elsie brought in a telegram for Val.  It was a somewhat unusual
occurrence; for we were a good way from the office, and, porterage being expensive, we had
carefully instructed our ordinary correspondents that we preferred the humbler post-card, as
a rule.  When a telegram did arrive, therefore, it generally presaged something of unusual
importance.  I saw Val's face change as he read it.  He passed it over to me as he rose to
write a reply.  This is what I saw:

  "Gowan dying wants to see you come immediately."

It was signed by a Glasgow doctor, and sent from one of the chief hotels of the city.

I followed Val to his den, where he was writing the answer.

"Would you mind my coming with you?" I asked.

"I should like it of all things," was his reply.

In less than half an hour we had started, and before night had arrived at our destination.

It always seems to me that one feels one's personal insignificance more keenly in a big city
than anywhere else.  The hurry and bustle on all sides witness to the self-interest which rules
every individual of the crowd, to the exclusion of any sincere concern for others.  The feeling
was accentuated when we reached the hotel.  There all was brightness and movement; in the brilliantly
lighted dining-room guests were eating, drinking, chatting, and enjoying life; in the hall
and on the staircases attendants were moving swiftly about, visitors were coming and going.
Each one's pleasures, comforts, and advantages were the business of the hour.  Yet in some
chamber overhead a momentous crisis was at hand for one poor, lonely man, who had to leave
behind him this scene of busy life, to enter upon an eternity of weal or woe.  Upon the passing
moments everything depended for him; he had to prepare to meet his God.  Around him things
were taking their usual course; it mattered little to the majority of the people under that
roof whether he lived or died, and less still how his soul would fare in that passage.  Yet
the things which made up the present happiness of the crowd were those which he had labored
so strenuously to procure--ease, enjoyment, freedom from care--the companions of wealth.  For
these he had bartered not only the toil and stress of his best years, but something infinitely
more precious; part of the price had been the favour of his God!  Now he had to part with all
these gains, willing or unwilling; would he have the grace to sue for the mercy which might
still be his for the asking?

We had ascertained that Gowan still lived, though there was no hope for his recovery, and were
ascending the staircase to our rooms when we encountered a priest coming down.  He regarded
Val with evident interest, then stopped and accosted him.  He proved to be one of the neighboring
parochial clergy, who had just been visiting the dying man. Val invited him to our room, and
there we learned the circumstances of the case.

Gowan had been in Glasgow about a fortnight, having come thither immediately after landing
in Liverpool.  He was seriously ill when he arrived at the hotel, and was compelled to take
to his bed at once.  A doctor was sent for, and found him suffering from heart disease, which
had already reached an advanced stage.  In spite of every attention the patient became rapidly
worse.  He would not infrequently fall into fits of unconsciousness, which were the prelude
to a state of coma in which he would eventually pass away from life.

To the man's credit, be it said, he at once asked for a priest when he became aware of his
danger, and had afterward desired to see Val.  All the Sacraments had been administered, and
Gowan lay in a weak state, hovering between life and death.  I could not but think of the lasting
gratitude of Christian Logan and her children, which had led them to remember this man daily
in their prayers; who could tell how great a part those prayers had had in securing for him
the grace to make his peace with God at the eleventh hour?

Val went in alone to Gowan's room; it was not for me to take any part in such an interview.
It was not long before he was back again in our own apartment.  Gowan's reception of him had
been all that could have been desired.  The man expressed sincere sorrow for his ill behavior,
and begged Val's forgiveness.  But what was still more satisfactory was his message to Christian
and her children.  He asked pardon for his unkindness in deserting them; they would soon see,
he said, how dear they were to him.

"He has made his will in their favor," was Val's summing up of the matter.  "He was just explaining
that fact when he had another bad attack quite suddenly, and I came away, after summoning the
nurse."

That conversation, short as it was, proved to be the last in which the dying man was to take
part with my brother.  He passed away a short time after, having never recovered consciousness.
The Catholic nurse had sent for Val a few minutes after he had rejoined me.  We both went to
the sick-room, and my brother had said the prayers for the dying, followed by those for the
repose of his soul when Gowan ceased to breathe.

The funeral was over and we had been back in Ardmuirland for some weeks before any tidings
arrived about the dead man's affairs.  All arrangements as to payment of expenses and the like
were carried out by a Glasgow lawyer, who had been empowered to act for Gowan's agent in America.
The most thorough search had failed to discover anything in the shape of a will among the dead
man's effects in Glasgow, and it was supposed to be in the keeping of the American lawyer.
When tidings did arrive, they were such as to fill us with consternation.  The will in the
lawyer's possession was dated more than two years before, after Gowan's return to America from
Ardmuirland.  Its terms, moreover, by no means tallied with the information given by the dying
man to Val; for in it there was no mention of the Logans at all, everything being bequeathed
to the Freemason's lodge of which Gowan had been a member.

Val was puzzled, but not convinced.

"It's a mystery, certainly," he said; "but I feel absolutely satisfied that there is another
will somewhere.  Poor Gowan said so, unmistakably."

"Can you recall his exact words?" I asked.

Val had an idea that Gowan had said: "I have settled everything on Cousin Christian."  He fancied
that just before the attack occurred he had added: "You will have to see about it," or words
to that effect.

We both felt convinced that Gowan had been too good a man of business to make such a remark
unless he had made his bequest legally secure.

The obvious thing to do was to cable at once to the lawyer to delay action until the new will
should turn up.  This we did; a letter followed, detailing circumstances.

Our next communication was from the Glasgow lawyer, who requested Val's presence there to consult
about matters, as my brother was the only person to whom Gowan had spoken on the subject of
a second will.  I was too much interested in the mystery to let Val go alone, and he was delighted
to have my company, so once more we set off for the distant city.

Dalziel, the lawyer in question, received us in his private office on the morning after our
arrival.  He was a small gray man, with keen black eyes that twinkled behind his gold-rimmed
spectacles now and again when an ordinary man would have smiled.  His statement of affairs
was indeed not reassuring.  Every scrap of paper left behind by Gowan had been carefully examined
by one of his responsible clerks, but nothing in the shape of a will had been discovered. 
Had there been no previous will, Christian Logan's boy might have claimed the estate as next
of kin; but that was now not possible.  To bring the matter before the law courts was equally
futile; the law took cognizance of a man's wishes expressed in writing, and no evidence of
a verbal declaration on his part would suffice to set aside a written document.

"I am afraid, Father Fleming," said the lawyer, summing up his report, "that there is no case
to go upon for the Logan family."

"But I am convinced," replied Val, "that Gowan has made another will. He sent for me to tell
me so, and to ask me to help the Logans in the matter.  The will must be somewhere.  The question
is: Where?"

"I am inclined to think that he never made a second will," the lawyer went on to say.  "Not
that I think he meant to deceive you," he added hastily, as he noticed Val's air of protest.
"But it has often come within my experience that a man in such a weak state may persuade himself
that he has already accomplished something which he has fixed his mind upon doing, while all
the time nothing has been actually done."

Val, however, could not be convinced that such was the case in the present instance, and I
could not help agreeing with him.

"It would be as well if you would call at Gowan's hotel before you leave Glasgow," said Dalziel,
as our interview came to an end.  "There are some clothes, traveling-cases, rugs, and such
like, which it would be absurd to send to America, and equally absurd to sell.  They will be
something for the Logons if you think well to take them.  I can easily arrange with the legatees
on the other side, who will certainly make no difficulty."

It was a good idea, and we resolved to act upon it.  The lawyer drove with us to the hotel,
to introduce us to the manager, and left us when we ascended to the room occupied by the dead
man, which was still being retained by the executor until the property should be removed.

The manager himself very civilly accompanied us, directing us to summon a servant, when we
had examined things to our satisfaction, and to give orders about packing and removal.

I must confess that I had not altogether given up hope of discovering the lost document among
the clothes and packing-cases.  But my anticipations were dispelled when we entered.  Everything
had been neatly folded and placed on the bed and the two tables; it was evident that no document
could have been passed unnoticed.  The room, too, was quite clean and in order.  Val, like
myself, seemed rather depressed at the state of things.  There was no receptacle where any
paper could have been stowed away that had not been thoroughly ransacked by the lawyer's men,
whose interest it was to discover the will.  A wardrobe for hanging clothes, a chest of drawers,
dressing-table, and washstand were the only articles of furniture besides bed, tables, and
chairs; none of them looked like possible receptacles of a hidden paper.

Scarcely realizing what I did, I began opening one after another the drawers in the chest.
Each was neatly lined with paper, but otherwise empty.  As though possessed by a mania for
searching, I took out each paper and carefully assured myself that nothing had slipped underneath.
Val, roused by my action, began to poke into the drawers of the dressing-table; but his search
was just as fruitless.  There was nothing to be done but to settle as to the packing of the
clothes and take our departure.

Suddenly an idea struck me.  How often does a small article get lost in a chest of drawers
by slipping behind the drawers themselves.  At once I acted on the suggestion.  I did not watt
to consider that others had probably searched as thoroughly as I could do.  Out came the drawers,
one after the other, and were deposited on the floor.  The bottom drawer was rather tight,
and would not come out easily; but I got it out with an extra expenditure of muscle. Almost every hour
the sound of fife and drum was heard, as shattered regiments and decimated battalions marched
through the streets. Although all expression of feeling, among the
citizens, was sternly repressed, the mask of sullen indifference was
known to be but a mask.

Hearts beneath were bounding with pride and joy and hope.

Almost without exception, houses were closed and devoid of all appearance
of life.

Yet behind those closely-shut blinds women embraced each other with
tempestuous joy, or paced the floor in uncontrollable agitation, or
knelt in earnest prayer, mingling thanksgivings with agonized petitions
for those whose fate was yet unknown.

Mothers, sisters, wives, strove, with trembling lips, to comfort each other, bidding the voice
of patriotism be heard above the "tempest of the heart."

In the midst of all this excitement my interests were never lost sight of. Secret meetings were
held, and various plans discussed. At last, one day a note was received inviting me to spend
a social evening at the house of "one of the faithful." A casual observer would have discovered
nothing more than a few lines of invitation, still the paper bore
a private mark which made my heart beat with hope.

Arrived at the house indicated, where seemed to be only an ordinary gathering of friends, I found
it difficult to appear at ease, and watched eagerly for developments. Not a sign or a word was
given, however, until after supper, when the ladies repaired (as
usual) to the dressing-room up-stairs to rearrange their toilets.

Instead of entering with the rest, the hostess, by a slight pressure of the hand, indicated
to me that I was desired to pass on and up a second flight of stairs.

We did so unnoticed, and soon entered a small room in the third story, where were found waiting
a few friends, among them a captain and clerk of a steamboat which
was expected to leave in three days for Newport News with United States
troops to reinforce Colonel Phelps at that point.

      Here appeared to be a chance, but a hazardous one, since the officers
of the boat must not evince any interest in their passenger, and could
afford no assistance or protection among the rough soldiers who would
crowd every available foot of room.

They must appear as good Union men, engaged in transporting troops to assist in quelling "the rebellion."
In case of any rough treatment of the "rebel woman," they could only appeal to the officers
in charge of the troops, and the result of such an appeal, in the present state of feeling, would
be doubtful.

The boat was not a passenger steamer, and had only two or three small staterooms, occupied by
its officers. These might be required by the military commanders. Instantly, and unhesitatingly,
I decided to make the trial.

We ladies then descended to the parlor, while one by one our friends were conveyed out of
the house.

A new difficulty at once arose; a friend had applied to General Scott for a pass--unsuccessfully.
The precious hours were passing, and failure seemed imminent.

This difficulty was increased by the fact that I had undertaken the
charge of Jemmy Little, a boy of ten, who, having lingered too long
at school in Baltimore, had been cut off from his family in Norfolk,
and being desperately unhappy, had implored to be included in the
plans formed for me.

He was to pass as my brother, and, having once promised, I could
not disappoint him, especially as his waking hours were spent by my
side, his hand often nestling into my own, his large wistful eyes
questioning my face, as if dreading to find there some evidence of
hesitation or change of purpose.

      
  One day passed. At evening, as I was anxiously
  pacing my room, my hostess hurriedly entered,
  exclaiming, in agitation,
          "Your brother awaits you in the drawing-room.

I could not welcome him. I will not see him. Only for your sake would I allow a Federal soldier
to cross my threshold; but he is your brother; go to him."


That life, as her reminiscences witness, was one of extreme homeliness--not to say austerity.
The food of the priest was that of the ordinary peasant class among which he lived.  "His denner,"
said Bell, "wes juist tatties, taken in their skins; his supper wes brochan an' sometimes tatties
as weel.  Some o' the neebors would come an' join him, whiles, an' share the supper wi' him,
as they sat roond the hearth."  (In answer to my query Bell explained that "brochan" was a
kind of soup or gruel, made from oatmeal.)

"My faither an' mither," Bell remarked with some pride, "usit often to tak' denner wi' the
priest o' Sundays.  They wes bidin' a good bit awa' frae the chapel, ye ken, sir, an' they
aye likit a talk wi' me aifter Mass.  So Mr. McGillivray wouldna' aloo them to fast till they
got hame, but aye pressit them to stay.  For they wouldna' break their fast till the priest
did, ye ken; it had aye been the custom in their young days, and they keepit it till they wes
too weak to fast sae lang."

Besides the Ardmuirland district, the priest had charge of two others at some little distance
over the hills in different directions.  It was his duty to say Mass at one or other of these
stations occasionally, and the Ardmuirland folk who could conveniently manage the journey would
generally accompany him on a Sunday.  They would walk over the hill in a kind of unorganized
procession, reciting the Rosary and litany as they went.

During the week the priest kept daily moving about among his people, and little of interest
could happen which did not soon come to his knowledge.  "The fowk aye enjoyit a chat wi' the
priest," said Bell, "for Mr. McGillivray wes the best oot at tellin' auld-fashioned stories."
His figure was a familiar one in all the countryside, as he walked slowly along, leaning on
his silver-mounted walking-stick, and wrapped in the ample folds of a well-worn Spanish cloak,
buckled at the neck by a silver clasp.  Under that same cloak he would often carry tit-bits
of oatcake for the horses he might come across in the farms he visited--for he was a lover
of all dumb creatures.

Mr. McGillivray's only outdoor recreation was fishing.  Children knew his ways, and would shyly
steal after him down to the side of the burn and watch him from a distance.  When his rod happened
to get caught in the branches of the stunted birches which bordered the stream--which was not
of infrequent occurrence--they would run to his assistance and help to untangle the hook; they
would often search for and carry to him worms to serve as bait.  Both kinds of service were
sure to be rewarded by a piece of "black sugar," as Bell styled licorice, which he always carried
with him for use in such emergencies.

"We bairns," she explained, "were niver feared o' the priest.  I weel remember hoo my mither
chided me for usin' sic freedom wi' him--I had lived sae lang in the hoose wi' him, ye ken,
that I wes whiles gey familiar in my speech.  Well, when he askit me one day--juist as a joke,
ye ken--to tak' a snuff oot o' the wee boxie he aye carrit, I tossit my head and said (ill
bred as I wes!), 'Fuich!'  Mr. McGillivray wesna' angered; he juist laughed oot an' says he:
'Weel, lassie, ye couldna' ha' said worse to a dog!'  But I got mair words frae my mither aifter,
an' a strappin' as weel, an' to bed wi'oot supper.  It learned me to be mair respectful-like
to the priest!"

This anecdote recalled another.  "I mind weel hoo I got my first bonnet through Mr. McGillivray.
In they times, ye ken, sir, it wes aye the fashion to wear large bonnets o' Tuscan straw, an'
a lassie o' foorteen wes surely auld enough for siclike--I said to mysel'.  So when the priest
cam' to oor hoose aince, I made sae bold as to get him to ask my faither to buy me a bonnet
for Sundays, next time he went to the toon o' Aberdeen.  My faither wouldna' ha' done it for
me, but he did when the priest askit him, and I got my bonnet!  But I doot I wes a bit o' a
favorite with the priest, sin' I herdit his coos sae lang."

However free the children may have been in their intercourse with the old priest, I gathered
from Bell's narrative that the grown-ups rather feared him.  His methods were certainly such
as would be considered unnecessarily severe in these days; still, there is no doubt he managed
by them to keep his people well in hand.

"I canna' mind muckle aboot Mr. McGillivray's discoorses," she answered, when I questioned
her on that subject.  "I wes but a bit lassie, an' I couldna' onderstand weel.  He seemed to
me to stan' an' drone awa' mostly.  Whiles, he wud gi' great scoldin's, an' then I usit to
think it wes splendid!  He could be eloquent then, I assure ye, sir! I mind weel when there
wes a marriage in Advent in a Protestant family, an' Mr. McGillivray warned the fowk that they
mightna' attend it; some o' them, in spite o' that, went to the marriage, an' I could niver
forget the awfu' way he chided them in the chapel on the Sunday aifter! It wes tarrible!

"If ony o' the fowk cam' to the chapel in their working clothes he would be greatly pit aboot.
He would ca' them up to the rail at catechism time an' reprove them before a' the congregation."

"So you said your catechism in public!" I asked.

"There wes aye catechism, atween the Mass an' the preachin'.  Aebody had to be prepared to
be callit up till they wes marrit, at least! Even aifter that, a body couldna' be sure o' bein'
left alane!  I mind him callin' a mon o' saxty years o' age ane Sunday!  He wes a mon greatly
thought of by the congregation, an' maybe the priest wes afeared he wes gettin' prood.  Onyways,
Mr. McGillivray had him at the rails wi' the bairns.  'Are you ashamed,' he says, 'to learn
your Christian Doctrine?'  'Na, na, sir,' says he.  'Then gae back an' sit ye doon,' says the
priest."

Such treatment would scarcely be appreciated in these days, but perhaps the reason is that
we are less endowed with humility than our fathers in the Faith.

Bell had other anecdotes of a like kind.

"If ony o' the bairns wes restless or trifling-kind, during the preachin', Mr. McGillivray
would stop his discoorse an' ca' them up to the rail an' reprove them severely.  I mind him
summoning a grown man from the choir aince, and mak' him own his fault.  Hey!  He wer a graund
priest, an' nae mistak'--wer Mr. McGillivray!"

On stormy days, when it was difficult for the aged pastor to wade through the deep snow down
to the chapel, Mass was said in his own house.  The people crowded in at the door of his little
living-room, and would fill the kitchen.  When he grew old and infirm it was impossible for
the greater number to hear anything of the sermon; yet he never omitted to preach.

"An' I mind," naïvely added Bell, "that there wes aye a collection made."

People went to Confession in the house at such times; otherwise the priest heard them in the
chapel on Saturdays or Sundays, and on the eves of feasts.

It can not be denied that Mr. McGillivray was a militant churchman, whenever the interests
of his flock or of the Catholic Church were at stake.  Bell had more than one anecdote to prove it.

A poor woman who was at the point of death had been induced by two good old Catholic spinsters
who lived near her to send for the priest to reconcile her to the Church.  She was the offspring
of a mixed marriage; her mother--the Catholic party--had died when the child was quite young,
and the father had at once taken the girl to kirk with him.  She had once been to Confession,
but had received no other Sacrament except Baptism.  When she had grown to womanhood, she married
a Presbyterian, and all her family had been brought up in that religion.  Yet the grace of
her Baptism seemed to cling to her.  After her husband's death she would now and again attend
at Mass, driven the six miles by her Protestant son; but she was not known to the priest, and
so she remained outside the pale.  Her intimacy with Jeannie and Katie Ann McGruer was the
means of keeping her in touch with Catholic matters, and eventually resulted in her reconciliation.

This was not accomplished, however, without a stiff skirmish between the old priest and the
members of her family--not to mention the minister of their particular kirk.

In compliance with the summons conveyed by one of the McGruers (Bell spoke of them as "guid
Catholic lassies," but in answer to my query explained that Katie Ann, the younger sister,
would be "risin' sixty"!), Mr. McGillivray betook himself to the house of the invalid. The
door was opened by her eldest son, Adam Fordyce--a burly, black-browed, bearded man of forty.
He had charge of the roads in the district, so that he and the priest were on speaking terms,
at least.

Adam held the door in one hand and the door-post in the other, and his portly figure filled
up the opening fairly well.

"I am sorry to hear that your mother is unwell," said the priest sympathetically.

"Aye, aye, sir, she's nae weel at all," was the answer.

"I would like to see her, if she's well enough," said Mr. McGillivray.

"Weel, sir, I wouldna' like to say she's nae fit to see a veesitor--but--ye ken, sir----"

"You mean she's not well enough to see me."

"Weel, it's this wye, Mr. McGillivray," answered Adam, lowering his voice; "I'm nae ohjectin'
mysel', sin she askit me to let ye come; but the ithers is awfu' set again' it.  That's the
wye it is, sir."

The fact was, the "Cerberus" was not at all fierce--quite the contrary! He had been deputed
by the others to confront the unwelcome visitor, as being the eldest, and therefore responsible
for all unpleasant duties; but as far as he was concerned, he had no feeling in the matter.
Like any Scotsman who had lived with his mother from childhood to mature manhood, he was deeply
attached to her, and willing to agree to anything that might give her satisfaction in her present
weak state; that the visit of the priest would be a comfort to her he strongly suspected, and
hence the conflict between duty--as he regarded it--and affection.

It took very little persuasion from the priest to overcome Adam's scruples and gain admittance
to the sick-room; this accomplished, it might seem that the battle had been won for religion,
but the victory was not yet complete!

Adam had relented so far as to admit the priest, but no argument could persuade him to leave
him alone with the invalid.  He was the agent of the family, and it was his duty to see everything
that went on.  He would have nothing underhand in the matter!

Mr. McGillivray easily interpreted his action.  He was afraid of what the others might say
should he desert his post--that was all. Diplomacy was necessary and the priest rose to the
occasion.

"Look here, Adam," he said; "I know you are merely carrying out what you feel to be a duty
to your family in staying here.  We can arrange matters without any difficulty.  I must have
a few minutes' private talk with your mother on religious matters which concern herself and
no one else.  Just leave me with her for a bit and you can come back and stay here as long
as I do."

But Adam was obstinate.  He acknowledged that the others "wouldna' be pleased" should he relinquish
his post of watch-dog.  He must "bide" in the room as long as the priest remained.

As in many houses of that class, there was what is called a "bed-closet" opening out of the
room in which the sick woman lay.  It was literally a closet, containing nothing except the
bed, and lighted by a tiny window.  Without more ado, Mr. McGillivray seized the man by the
arm and led him to the closet.

"Just jump onto the bed," he whispered.  "No one will know that you have not remained in the
room.  You shall come out in a few minutes."

So the burly Adam climbed onto the bed, and the priest shut the door upon his prisoner and
fastened the "sneck."  After hearing the mother's Confession, he released his captive, and
Adam stood by while the saving unction was administered to prepare the poor woman for her last
journey.  It was soon over and the priest took his leave.

Adam was quite relieved to find that his mother had been gladdened by the priest's ministrations--for
she had poured forth grateful thanks for his kindness--while he had not been compromised in
the eyes of his brothers and sisters.  He willingly consented for Mr. McGillivray to return
next day to administer Holy Communion for the first--and probably the last--time in the life
of the dying woman.

"I've only one more office to do for your mother, Adam," the priest had explained, "and then
she will be quite at rest.  So I will call to-morrow about this time."  And Adam had cordially
agreed.

But there were others to be reckoned with.  The news of the priest's visit was soon carried
to the Free Church minister, and down he swooped upon the luckless Fordyces that very afternoon.
Poor Adam was the scapegoat.  He it was who had to bear the whole of the blame.  The minister
congratulated himself, when he took his leave (without venturing into the sick-room, for the
present), that he had successfully prevented any further "popish antics" in that house!

Consequently, when Mr. McGillivray returned next day, according to promise, he was met, not
by Adam, but by the younger son--a dour Presbyterian, of pronounced type.  He absolutely refused
to allow the priest to cross the threshold again.  His brother was "oot"; but he had left word
that he must not be allowed to enter the house.  The minister, as the brother explained, "had
been sair angered" on account of the proceedings of the previous day.  He had threatened to
remove Adam from his post of "precentor" should he allow any more intercourse between his mother
and any "popish minister."

Remonstrances, persuasions, entreaties were all unavailing.  The man declared that his mother
"didna' wish to see" Mr. McGillivray.  The latter had therefore reluctantly to submit to circumstances
and return home with the Blessed Sacrament, leaving the poor woman "unhouselled"--although
not "unanointed."  He feared that she had given in to the persuasions of the minister to refuse
further help.  But after her death, which occurred a few days later, the good priest ascertained
that she had died in most edifying dispositions.  The minister had not visited her, and she
had thought it best to wait a little before seeing the priest again, merely on account of her
family. The McGruers, who were present at the last, assured him that she had died a good Catholic---her
only regret the deprivation of Holy Communion.

Some remarks dropped by the Free Church minister as to the priest's "interference" with a member
of his congregation drew forth so vehement a denial from Mr. McGillivray, and a demand for
a public contradiction of the statement from the pulpit on the following Sunday, that the crestfallen
minister had to eat his words.

The priest was indeed a match for any of his opponents in whatever way they chose to attack
him.  Once at a dinner, when three ministers were present as well as Mr. McGillivray, one of
them thought to make a butt of the priest, and during the after-dinner toasts proposed suddenly:
"The Auld Kirk!"  But the priest was too quick for him.  Raising his glass, he responded promptly:
"The Auld Kirk--the True Kirk!"

"No!  No!" cried the entrapped Presbyterian.

"Then I'm sorry for you!" was the quiet retort.

One feature in Bell's recollections must not be passed over.  The priest was renowned as a
peacemaker.  Anything like family strife was speedily put an end to by his tactful intervention.
Even by Protestants his services were not infrequently asked for in this respect, and the result
was a great popularity with all classes in the district of Ardmuirland.  There was much pathos
about the old man's last days; for he hastened his end by his self-denying charity in the cause
of peace.

A violent quarrel had taken place some years before between two Protestant farmers, both living
some distance away from the priest's house.  They had married two sisters, and a dispute had
arisen on the subject of a legacy left to one of these nieces by their father's brother, while
the other was passed over entirely.  Suspicions and insinuations of underhand dealing on the
part of the successful legatee had aroused strong feelings, with the result that all communication
between the two families had ceased.

At length the wife of one of the belligerents lay upon her deathbed, and under the softening
influence of that solemn hour she begged that her sister should be asked to visit her, that
they might part as sisters should.  The other woman was just as anxious for a reconciliation,
but their respective husbands could not be brought to terms.

In her distress the dying woman sent a message to the priest, begging for his intervention.
It was the dead of winter, and a severe frost had set in.  The old priest had to drive in a
friendly farmer's open vehicle for ten miles in a keen wind.  He succeeded in persuading one
of the men to seek for peace and friendship, then drove on five miles farther to interview
the other.  Through his earnest remonstrances the strife was entirely brought to an end.  But
it was at the cost of the life of the aged peacemaker.  He caught a severe chill, which he
was never able to throw off, and after two or three months he bade farewell to earth.

Mr. McGillivray had desired, when old age should have rendered him incapable of his priestly
charge, to be allowed to retire from active work, and end his days in the quiet seclusion of
his native district--a strath shut in by hills, many miles to the north of Ardmuirland.  But
the family from which the priest had sprung were no great favorites there, and his wish, when
made known, had not been cordially received by the people.  This had been sufficient to excite
the wrath of the Ardmuirland folk; they had risen up as one man against any such arrangement.
An appeal was made to the Bishop to prevent their beloved pastor from leaving his flock to
die among comparative strangers.  So it had been settled by authority that Mr. McGillivray
should continue his ministrations among them as long as he was able, and should then receive
a helper; thus he was never to take leave of Ardmuirland except to receive his heavenly reward.
As we have seen, he died in harness, before there could be any question of retirement.

And now another difficulty arose.  His own native district naturally laid claim to his mortal
remains, and his relatives had speedily made arrangements for his burial in the family grave.
Then, indeed, Ardmuirland was stirred.

"They wouldna' tak' him leevin'; they'll nae get him deid!" was the universal cry.

So in the bright springtime, after a late fall of snow had clothed the countryside in dazzling
whiteness, his people bore him to the grave. An immense gathering--of both Catholics and Protestants--had
assembled; in Bell's expressive phrase--"the country wes full o' men!"  Every man took his
turn in helping to bear the coffin shoulder-high all the five miles which lay between the priest's
house and the ancient burial-ground of St. Michael below the hill.  There, surrounded by the
flock he had tended so long and so faithfully, the body of the pastor awaits with them the
general awakening to life eternal.

XI

A SPRIG OF SHAMROCK

  "Amid the roses fierce Repentance rears
  Her snaky crest."
          (Thomson's Seasons---"Spring")

"Shamrock in Scotland!" I seem to hear some captious critic exclaim.  I do not attribute Scottish
birth to the particular sprig of shamrock which is to figure in these pages, dear reader. 
Like all true shamrock, it was grown in the Emerald Isle.  Nevertheless, it was by its means
that the subject of this story migrated to Ardmuirland; hence it is responsible for my narrative.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

It was no fault on Bernard Murray's part that all his acquaintances should without exception
imagine that he was of Scottish race.  For every one who knew him well--and they numbered not
a few--dubbed him "a canny Scot."  He had not started the fiction, even if he had done nothing
toward contradicting it.  For what did it matter to any one else that his nationality should
be so widely misinterpreted?  He did not care a straw.  Indeed, it is possible that in his
secret heart he was rather pleased that the illusion had grown up.  For it might prove awkward
to be known as Irish; Ireland, among the set in which he moved, was looked upon as so impossibly
retrograde!  So when he was hailed as "a canny Scot" Bernard merely smiled pleasantly and held
his peace.

No doubt Violet Rossall thought that smile well worth awakening.  It was so sunny--lighting
up to classical beauty Bernard's usually grave yet always handsome features.  The rarity of
his smile, too, rendered it all the more precious.  His habitual quiet thoughtfulness of expression
helped to settle so definitely his supposed origin; yet had his admirers been better learned
in physiognomy they could never have guessed so wide of the mark.  The clear, pale skin, the
black hair and dark blue eyes so palpably proclaimed him Irish!  Moreover, it was to his native
traits that he really owed his wide popularity.  The quiet reserve which usually characterized
him hid a fund of brilliant humor, which would occasionally, and often unexpectedly, flash
out in some quick retort or witty jest; nor was there ever wanting that indefinable attraction
which is the special charm of Erin's sons and daughters all the world over.

Even Cuthbert Aston was not proof against that charm, although in a sense he and Bernard were
rivals.  For it must have been as evident to Violet Rossall as it was to all onlookers that
both Murray and Aston sought her company in preference to that of any other maiden of their
acquaintance; which of the two was preferred by her was not so evident, since she seemed to
favor both alike.

Violet was, indeed, the center of attraction for all the unattached males of her particular
set.  For one reason, she was undeniably beautiful.  An oval face, creamy complexion, large,
changeful gray eyes, abundant hair of bright chestnut hue, a slim and graceful figure--these
were but the half of her charms; there was beauty in her ever-changing expression, and beauty,
above all, in that radiant, winning smile, apart from all loveliness of form or feature.  She
was so undeniably clever, too. What is gravity? What is "down," and what is "up"?

There is a place where nothing has weight; where there is no "up" or "down"; where nothing ever
falls; and where, if people were there, they would float about with
their heads pointing in all directions.  Violet, therefore, was well pleased with her lot,
and felt, it may be taken for granted, little anxiety about her future.

As regards a life-partner, were she disposed to relinquish the chance of future honors for
present ease and happiness, there were many aspirants to the distinction; she might choose
freely among the eligible bachelors of her acquaintance.  Two only of these, however, seemed
to appeal to her sense of fitness--Murray and Aston.

The former, a year or two older than herself, was a master at the same school; clever and capable,
he was evidently destined to rise rapidly in his profession, and his future promise, together
with his attractive personality, might well render him the more favored suitor.

Cuthbert Aston could not be compared with Murray as regarded intellect, attainments, or personal
charm; but he had other attractions of no less weight in the eyes of a girl who had social
ambitions.  His father had made money in business, and bore the reputation of possessing great
wealth.  Cuthbert, was the only child of infatuated parents, who had spared no expense in his
upbringing, and were ready to gratify his every whim. You do not even know the name of the place
which you wish to visit; you have been informed that on the summit of yonder mountain is a lake,
said to be picturesque; but of its cognomen, and of the proper means to reach it, you are utterly
ignorant.  If the dear boy should get tired of the routine, he could easily
take up something else more to his taste."

Apart from his worldly prospects, there was little to attract a girl of Violet's character
toward Cuthbert Aston.  He was what men technically style "a bounder!"  Yet, empty-headed,
arrogant, self-centered though he might be, he was a rich man's only son.  In Violet's eyes
that in itself condoned many flagrant defects.  The Astons moved in the highest circles of
the city--spite of Mrs. Aston's "flamboyant" style and her husband's demonstrative vulgarity;
as a member of their family, therefore, her social status would be secure.

If the girl had any heart it must have pleaded on behalf of Bernard Murray--young, handsome,
lovable, as he was.  Nothing else except ambition could have allowed her to compare Aston with
him.  There might, it is true, have been a spice of adventure connected with her encouragement
of the latter; it was well known that his parents looked with dismay upon the prospect of their
idolized boy "throwing himself away on that little school-teacher," as his mother phrased it.

To do the Astons credit, their objection to Violet did not rest wholly upon an imagined social
disparity; there was a much graver reason.  The girl lost no opportunity in proclaiming herself
a pronounced Free-thinker.  Her mother had died while she was quite a child, and for her upbringing
Violet had depended wholly upon her father--an ardent Socialist as well as Atheist.  Thus she
had grown up in an atmosphere thoroughly anti-religious, until death had claimed her father
also. Socialism had never strongly appealed to her, and was not likely to do so, under present
circumstances; for religion she entertained a supercilious disdain, as "out-of-date nonsense."

Here, then, were three young people kept in contact by the evident attraction of both men for
the same girl, and by the diplomatic encouragement which the latter seemed to give to each
in equal proportion.  Had Violet not been in question, Murray would have given the cold shoulder
to Aston; but as Violet tolerated Aston, he perforce must put up with him.  Aston, on his part,
admired and feared Murray, whom he regarded as a formidable rival.

"What puzzles me about Murray," he exclaimed once to a boon companion, "is his jolly good English!
Why, the chap has positively no kind of provincial accent!"  (Cuthbert's English, by the way,
was not regarded by his intimates as the perfect thing!)  "He doesn't speak like a Scotch Johnny
at all!  You never hear an 'Aye, aye' or 'd'ye ken?'--not a broad vowel even!  Why, he might
have lived all his life this side the border, to judge by his tongue, confound him!"

There could be no doubt of Cuthbert's attachment to Violet.  No remonstrances of his mother--and
they were but mild, in spite of her objection to Violet, since she recognized the futility
of opposing her son's determined will--had the slightest effect with him.  He felt confident
in the final acquiescence of both parents in whatever he might choose to do with regard to
marriage.  Everything, as he saw, rested with Violet, and he was shrewd enough to appreciate
the advantages--not so much personal as social--involved in her ultimate decision.

An amateur operatic company had been started in the town, and all the musical talent among
the younger generation had been stirred up to take part in what was regarded as a pleasant
occupation for winter evenings with the pleasurable anticipation of the excitement of a public
performance as the outcome of practices.  Our human triangle formed part of the company.  All
three were musical, and two of them more than usually talented both in singing and acting--Violet
and Bernard.  The former especially--endowed with a beautiful soprano voice, which had been
well cultivated, added to what is styled by the initiated "a good stage presence"--was much
in request on all such occasions.  She had filled more than one title-role in popular operas
presented by their little company, and no one would dream of casting her for any other than
the leading part.  Bernard had a good tenor voice, and Cuthbert a very fair bass.

It happened that the particular opera chosen for presentation during the Easter holidays was
to be performed by a capable traveling company in a neighboring town a month or so before.
Consequently our amateurs felt it their duty to witness the performance, and thus pick up some
valuable hints for future use by such a mild form of "under-study." Not only our three friends,
but two others of the company--the second soprano and the contralto--started on their short
railway journey on a certain evening in March, intending to return by the last train.

It was scarcely possible, without giving offense to some one or other of the party, to arrange
beforehand who was to escort whom.  One of the men must inevitably take charge of two of the
ladies; fate must determine which!  Cuthbert Aston--a youth unaccustomed to deny himself any
gratification upon which he had set his mind--had probably resolved that it would not be he!
But fortune is proverbially fickle.  The train was crowded and seats were at a discount.  It
was impossible for all five to travel together.  Violet--with a woman's perversity, perhaps,
because of Cuthbert's evident intention, or, it may be, to show a deliberate preference for
Murray--contrived that the latter should accompany herself.  The other cavalier was therefore
compelled, with as good grace as he could manage, to find places in another compartment for
himself and the two very uninteresting maidens thus thrust upon him.  No wonder he was nettled!
Like a spoiled boy he determined to leave Violet to herself--or rather to her chosen escort--for
the rest of the evening.  Glum as an owl, he took his place in the theater between the two
girls, keeping himself severely aloof from the fickle lady of his dreams.  She, on the contrary,
stirred by the pleasurable excitement of her surroundings, and possibly not displeased by so
evident a proof of Cuthhert's appreciation of her, gave herself wholly to the enjoyment of
the hour.

Bernard, on his part, could not fail to be struck by the preference manifested in his regard;
he, too, was consequently in high spirits. No better companion--apart from his personal attraction
for her--could have been allotted to him for such an occasion.  Violet's sunny presence, her
clever criticisms of the acting and singing--which he had learned of old to expect--promised
for him a thoroughly enjoyable evening.  His heart took courage; was it possible that this
charming girl really preferred him--a man who had to make his way in the world, and work hard
to provide a home for her such as befitted her hopes and ambitions--to this rich man's only
son, who had it in his power to give her at once wealth, position, and admiration?

The first act was over.  They both had been charmed with what they had seen and heard, and
it was pleasurable to compare impressions and to anticipate further gratifying experiences.
The theater was warm, and Violet unwound from her neck a lace scarf which she had been wearing.
Pinned to the bosom of her pretty mauve dress was a tiny spray of dull green leaves.

"What have you there?" he asked all unthinkingly.

But before she could answer he knew, and a wave of mingled remorse, shame, and self-condemnation
swept over his soul.

"What is it?  Why, shamrock, of course!"

"Shamrock!" was all he could falter lamely in reply.

"Yes, shamrock.  Queen Alexandra set the fashion, you know.  Every one who wants to do the
correct thing wears shamrock today.  But of course you are a Scotchman; you probably have no
idea what day it is!  So I don't mind instructing you.  It's St. Patrick's Day."

He dare not speak.  She took his silence and his rapt gaze on the little spray of green as
token of his admiration of her.

"Perhaps," she rattled on lightly, "you never heard of Patrick, or if you did, you are inclined
to share the modern opinion that 'there never was no sich a person'--to quote an immortal!
If you were an Irishman I should not dare to whisper such a thing; but a canny Scot could have
no regard for Patrick, even should he believe in him ever so much!"

Bernard kept his self-control, though he was deadly pale as he spoke.

"If it is so correct to wear it, you might give me a bit of it."

Smilingly she complied.  He placed it in his buttonhole with what must have seemed to her elaborate
care.  Luckily the curtain rose, and he was free to indulge his thoughts.

Oh, it was almost sacramental--that tiny sprig!  How it called up dead memories--memories of
the old land, of his dear ones now gone, of his boyhood's simple faith!

"If you were an Irishman! . . .  Perhaps you never heard of Patrick!" The frivolous words burned
his brain.

O God!  Believe in Patrick!  His breath came and went.  He could hardly refrain from pressing
his lips to the tiny leaves he was wearing on his breast.

An Irishman, indeed, he was; but how unworthy of the name!  He, a child of that dear land which
Patrick's blessed feet had trodden--he, a son of that race to whom the saint's words of grace
had made known the Truth--what was he now?  A renegade!  A false deserter from the ranks of
his faithful countrymen!  He had been ashamed of his nationality! He had ceased to practise
or to cherish the faith which Patrick had brought to the Isle of Saints!

The curtain fell upon the second act, and he had to be ready to listen to frivolities and to
respond.  He did it with a bad grace, as he well knew.  Indeed, he would gladly have been far
away--hidden in the dark corner of some deserted church, where freely and unrestrainedly he
might pour forth penitential tears, and beg forgiveness of the Father he had so wantonly offended.

"How deadly dull you are to-night!" cried his companion.  "I believe Cuthbert Aston, glum as
he looks, would have been more entertaining! What can be the matter with you?"

Her banter failed to provoke the always ready apology--usually so charmingly proffered.

He could only mutter something about an awful headache; luckily Violet's attention was drawn
for the moment to an acquaintance who caught her eye, and there was a speedy change of subject.
Did he ever see such execrable taste as that girl's dress?  It was positively hideous!  The
colors did not suit either the wearer or each other, etc., etc.

It was a relief when the curtain rose once more.  The music and the action of the piece engrossed
the attention of Violet; to Bernard they were God-sent helps.  His mind could range back over
the past without restraint, while outwardly he appeared absorbed in the play.

What torrents of self-reproach swept over him as he retraced the wanderings of his misspent
years--misspent as regarded the service of his Creator, however prosperous in the eyes of the
world!  The past came back like a dream.  His innocent childhood, spent under the vigilant
care of a saintly mother; his boyhood, with its keener joys--all tempered by religion; his
school-days, his college career--both dominated by faith; in minute detail the pictures passed
before his mental vision as he sat there, silent and solitary--heedless of the throng of pleasure-seekers
all around him.  The sorrow with which such recollections filled his heart was caused by the
contrast which after years presented.  He could recall his first falling-away from grace, when
the successful attainment of a coveted appointment had brought with it the necessity of concealing
his Catholic upbringing and convictions.  How rapidly had he descended after that turning point
had been passed!  Conscience had been stifled until its voice no longer troubled him.  Ambition
became his goal, worldly success his God.  Far away in Ireland his mother had died blessing
him for his generous provision for her, ignorant of her darling's downfall.  None were now
left for whose opinion he had cared one straw, even should they learn of his apostasy.

Shrouded as they were in the gloom of the auditorium, his face, kept resolutely toward the
stage, could not be seen by his companion, much less his eyes, which were wells of misery.
In his overwhelming grief he almost forgot the girl beside him until a whispered remark upon
some beautiful passage in the music recalled her presence.  It did but add fresh stings to
his remorse.  Could it be possible that he--a son of a sainted mother, child of a faithful
Catholic race--could have contemplated marriage with a professed atheist?  Had he indeed been
planning to take to wife, to make the mother of his possible children, one who openly flouted
the idea of a personal God--he, who had drunk in at his mother's breast the burning love of
the Faith which is the birthright of every true son of Ireland?

The pain and the shame which filled his heart were well-nigh unendurable!  Oh, if he could
but manage to keep his self-control for an hour or two!  If he could but hold out until he
was alone; for at times it seemed as though he must betray himself--there, in that public assembly--by
crying aloud in his anguish, or even by breaking out into unmanly weeping.

How he got through that miserable evening he never could recall.  He realized by her coldness
on the return journey, and by the demonstrative encouragement shown to Aston, that he had woefully
offended Violet.

Bernard never played his allotted part in the opera; for to every one's astonishment he threw
up his appointment and left the town, bound no one knew whither.  So the course was clear for
Cuthbert Aston, and he lost no time in making good his opportunity.  His engagement to Violet
took no one by surprise, when his only possible rival was out of the way.

It does not need a very vivid imagination to voice the sentiments of Aston and his fiancée
on the subject of Bernard's extraordinary conduct--as it would appear to them.

"I was always afraid," the successful suitor would doubtless exclaim, "that Murray would be
the fortunate chap; he was so jolly clever--and good looking, too!"

"Of course," we may imagine the lady responding, "he was all right in that way--handsome, and
well-bred, and all that sort of thing.  But surely affection is the only thing one really values,
dear, and you were always so faithful," etc., etc., etc.

Meanwhile, in the great Trappist monastery beyond the Irish Sea a Brother Patrick labored and
prayed--if so be he might make some reparation, at least for past unfaithfulness to so bountiful
a Lord.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

"You must have been working hard at your prayers, Ted," was Val's morning salutation to me
when I went in to breakfast one day.

"What, am I late?" I asked, glancing at my watch.

"Oh, that's nothing unusual," was the unkind response, "But I was not thinking of this morning
in particular.  Don't you remember what I asked you to pray for?"

"To be sure I do.  For a particularly good mistress for the school." (For we had just had the
misfortune to lose one who was next door to perfection, and wanted to increase in perfection
by entering a convent, and Val had been worrying himself to replace her before the holidays
were over.)

"So you've heard of one?  That's good!" I continued.

"Well, not exactly," said Val.  "I've heard of a person who is on the lookout for a place of
this kind, and reference seem quite correct, but----"

"But what?  If she is all right, why hesitate?  Write at once, my dear fellow, and snap her
up before some one else does!"

Val's eyes twinkled.

"It's not a she at all.  That's the difficulty.  It's a master who is applying."

I whistled my astonishment, then shook my head in distrust.

"If he's not a fraud he must be fooling you!" I rejoined irreverently. "No capable master would
come up here."

"Read that before you make a pronouncement," said Val, as he threw a letter across the table to me.

It proved to be from an old college friend of Val's, and backed up very warmly the application
for our vacant post of a young man who was an excellent trained teacher, who had tried his
vocation as a monk, and had failed through a breakdown in health.  He was in want of an easy
berth in good country air, where he could pick up his strength and fit himself for entering
college to train for the secular priesthood in a couple of years.  No man with sense in his
head would think twice about closing with such a promising candidate; Val wrote back gladly
accepting the young man.

So Bernard Murray came to Ardmuirland, and won all our hearts in no time.

"That gentleman's got the face of a priest, Mr. Edmund," was Penny's remark at first sight of him.

"Murray's a treasure!" cried Val in delight.  "He'll do wonders with our bairns, Ted!"

It was a true forecast.  The children all took to him at once; the little lassies loved him;
for he had a gentle way with them--like that of a kindly, grown-up brother; the boys regarded
him with more awe, but were ready to stand up for him against any adversary, as the best shinty
player in the district.  He thoroughly transformed our little choir of children--leading them
and accompanying them with taste and skill.

To Val as well as to myself he grew inexpressibly dear.  It became the regular custom for one
or other of us to look in at the schoolhouse of an evening, to smoke a pipe with the master,
or to lure him for a walk--should the weather be favorable; while on Sunday evenings after
service Murray dined with us as a matter of course.  It was in the intimate fellowship thus
engendered that he confided to me his life story as detailed above.

It was a wrench to all three of us when the parting came, and the dear boy left us to begin
his training for the Foreign Missions--his elected field of labor; but we could not grudge
our sacrifice when we compared it with the immensity of his.

Bernard is devoting rare talents, ceaseless energy, abundant tenderness to the winning of souls
to God.  Difficult and hopeless as his efforts appear, yet his rare letters breathe patience
and cheerful content. Like every true missionary, he is prodigal of labor, in spite of the
apparent scarcity of the harvest gathered; for like his fellows, he relies upon those inspired
words which promise a plentiful reaping before the great Harvest-home.

  "They went forth on their way and wept: scattering
      their seed.
  But returning, they shall come with joy: carrying
      their sheaves."
          (Campbell--"Pleasures of Hope")

Although Penny's early history is not concerned with Ardmuirland or its neighborhood, yet her
long residence in the district will serve as an excuse for its introduction here, apart from
the fact of its undoubted interest. In North Carolina and South Carolina we have a hold, from
which it will be hard to drive us. On the Atlantic and Gulf coast nearly every fortress is
in our possession; there is not a port which is not possessed by us, or else so blockaded
that (except in the peculiar case of Wilmington) it is a hazardous affair for any vessel to
attempt going in or coming out; and the rebels are utterly unable to raise the blockade of a single
port.

In fine, they have lost more than one third of their territory forever, and of the remaining
portion there is not one considerable subdivision over which in some part the flag of the Union
does not securely wave. What title to recognition as an independent power can the Confederate
rebels present to the neutral powers of the world?

SKETCHES OF AMERICAN LIFE AND SCENERY.

While American tourists are delightedly visiting and minutely describing the most hidden recesses of beauty
among the mountains, plains, seas, lakes, and rivers of Europe, there are, close within their
reach, innumerable spots well worthy of consideration, and hitherto entirely unknown to the great
mass of pleasure and scenery seeking travellers.

These fair but hidden gems have become of the more importance that the grand struggle convulsing
our country has rendered foreign travel difficult, even when advisable, and has roused within our
people a love for their own land, a pride in its loveliness, much more rarely felt before the attempt
to dismember and ruin it had awakened dormant patriotism and completed the severance between the
recent province and the historically renowned mother country. American painters are worthily
illustrating American life and landscape; American poets, and no less poetical prose writers,
are singing the forests, skies, flowers, and birds of their native land; and the inquisitive
traveller should surely not fail to add his humbler mite in the way
of discovery and description.

The following sketches are founded upon actual observation, and the delineations of scenery
and manners therein contained are strictly in accordance with the personal experience of the
author.

I.--A SUMMER EXCURSION.

'All very well,' said Aunt Sarah; 'I have no doubt the excursion would be charming; but who will accompany
you?'

'We do not require an escort; we can take care of each other,'

'Can it be that you, Lucy, a staid married woman of thirty-six, and you, Elsie, a demure young
girl of twenty, are suddenly about to enter the ranks of the strong minded?'

'Why, dear aunt,' said Lucy D----, 'you would not have us weak minded, would you? I think I
heard you say no longer ago than yesterday that half the domestic
miseries in this world were due to the weak nerves and feeble intellects
of poorly educated women.'

'True; but the technical expression, 'strong
minded,' does not mean strong in mind--rather the contrary.'

'In
other words, strong minded means weak minded, is that it, auntie?'
laughed Elsie.

'I see, Aunt Sarah,' said Lucy, 'we shall be forced
to call upon you for that most difficult of tasks, a definition. What
is meant by the term, 'strong-minded woman'?'

'A monster,' replied
Mrs. Sarah Grundy, 'who lectures, speaks in public, wants women to
vote, to wear men's garments; in a word, one who would like to upset
religion, social life, and the world in general.'

'Well,' dear auntie,
'we surely do not purpose committing any of these enormities; our
intentions simply embrace a short excursion of some forty miles in
search of fine scenery, health, and a little amusement.  Its wide chimney had settled on either side, where one could sit warm and comfortable--heedless
of winter winds--in the glow of the log-fire burning on the iron "dogs" of the low hearth.
In summer its sanded pavement made it a gratefully cool retreat from the sunshine outside.
Moreover, Stephen Dale's renowned home-brewed ale added to the attractions of the house.

Neither Stephen nor any of his household ever set foot in the church for the purposes of worship;
for, strange as it may seem, the Dales, surrounded by English country yokels, whose sole notion
of religion lay in a perfunctory attendance at church once on a Sunday--afternoon for preference--to
listen uncomprehending to the service, and slumber through the sermon, came of a Catholic stock.
Both Stephen and his wife hailed from Lancashire; they had spent many years in service together
in a Catholic household about fifty miles distant from Lanedon before they had married and
set up housekeeping at the "British Lion."  Nor were they so utterly deprived of the consolations
of religion as at first sight might appear; four miles away were the military barracks of Melliford,
and a Catholic chapel which had been built there--principally on account of the soldiers--was
served every Sunday and holiday from a larger center, and thither the Dales regularly drove
to worship.

Seven children had been born to the worthy couple, but death had snatched all in turn except
the last; this was Penelope (our Penny), who, needless to say, was the idol of both parents.
The result of their devotion was a rather strict surveillance, to which she was subjected,
not only during childhood's years, but with even greater insistence when she had reached maidenhood.
For it became necessary then to guard their treasure from any adventurer who might seek to
win her in marriage for the sake of the goodly dowry which every one knew must fall to her
lot.  Her father would often remark with no little show of determination: "Penny shall never
throw herself away on any whipper-snapper of a fellow!  She'll not be a pauper, and she can
afford to wait a bit till she meets her match!"

It is not to be surprised, therefore, that Penny should hold her pretty head rather high. 
No mere plowman would dare to aspire to the hand of a landlord's only daughter, and no marriageable
farmer to whom Penny might aspire was to be found in the neighborhood.  As to the military--Penny
would have scouted the idea of wedding a common soldier, and was sensible enough to turn a
cold shoulder upon the undisguised glances of admiration of youthful and impressionable officers.
Thus it came about that she had blossomed into a graceful girl of twenty--small in stature,
yet not without good looks--and yet remained heart-whole.

Among their few intimate acquaintances the Dales had a particular attraction for one of the
married sergeants of the barracks and his wife--both Catholics.  Sergeant Pike and his better-half
would not infrequently, especially during the summer months, stroll over to the inn of an evening--sure
of a hearty welcome to a cup of tea and a chat.  Pike had seen service in India, and his adventures
would thrill his rustic audience in the inn, as they listened over pipe and mug to his stirring
narratives.  His wife was equally entertaining toward Sarah Dale and her daughter, in the little
glass-partitioned bar in the corner of the "house-place"; she had been maid to many an officer's
lady, and had traveled as far abroad as her husband.  Thus while "the tented field" and its
dangers held enthralled the larger company of men, present fashions and past adventures--though
less exciting than those of the sergeant--were entertaining enough to the smaller audience
in the bar. Even 'Melia, the maid-servant of tender years, would share in the social enjoyment,
as knitting in hand she stole furtively in from the kitchen and listened unreproved to the
interesting discourse.  Sometimes it might happen that the Pikes had been able to drive over
in a borrowed conveyance on a winter afternoon; in such case a cosy supper in the snug little
bar, after the ordinary company had departed, would take the place of tea.  The Pikes, in their
turn, were always hospitably inclined whenever Stephen Dale, his wife, or daughter, or all
of them together, might look in upon them of a Sunday after Mass.

The acquaintance, thus ripened, was destined to influence Penny's future beyond any anticipation
on the part of either family.  It fell out on one occasion that Mrs. Pike was unable to accompany
the sergeant on a visit to the Dales, and to serve as a companion on the walk he brought with
him a fellow-sergeant, much younger, whom he introduced to the Dales as "my particular chum--Sergeant
Spence."  The newcomer was a decidedly handsome, strapping young soldier, with a merry dark
eye, rendered still more striking by his fair hair and tawny moustache.  His skin would have
been fair, too, had it not undergone a process of bronzing under tropical suns.  He could not
have been thirty, and looked even younger.  He proved also to be unmarried; a fact playfully
made known by his companion. "Arthur's never met with a missus to suit him since he got his
stripes," he said laughing, as they sat at supper; "he's like me--a bit particular in that
respect."  Spence merely greeted the remark with a quiet smile. He seemed a silent young fellow,
with a manner superior to his companion's.

Perhaps it was a want of circumspection on the part of Stephen Dale that he should welcome
a stranger, and a soldier, too, as a guest at his family meal.  But it was his favorite axiom
that a sergeant might not be looked down upon "like as if he was a common Tom, Dick, or Harry
in the ranks"; so that his hospitality was to be expected in the present instance.  Had either
anxious parent had the slightest fear of the attractive sergeant's pleasing qualities proving
too strong for Penny's "proper pride," their welcome would have been less genuine; but they
were altogether without suspicion.  Yet, as to Penny herself, it must have been evident from
the first that the dark eyes often strayed in her direction, and that with unmistakable interest,
even on so short an acquaintance.

After that first visit the handsome young sergeant became a frequent partaker of the hospitality
of the "British Lion."  He never omitted to accompany the Pikes, and not seldom walked over
on a summer's evening to smoke a pipe with Stephen and feast his eyes surreptitiously upon
Stephen's attractive daughter.  He proved, on acquaintance, to be an intelligent, well-spoken
young fellow, evidently superior to most of his class; this was owing to the fact that he was
a farmer's son, left, through a combination of circumstances, orphaned and almost destitute,
who had found in the army a welcome means of livelihood.

It was not long before Spence was on as familiar a footing at the "British Lion" as his fellow-sergeant.
It was strange that both Stephen Dale and his wife were altogether blind to the real reason
for his frequent visits.  Penny, on the other hand, had early discerned the state of the young
man's feelings toward her; but instinctively she guarded her secret from all.  Even when Spence
had spoken, and had learned her strong affection for him, she insisted that all knowledge of
their mutual understanding should be kept from her parents until she could gauge their feelings
in the matter.  She was not without uneasiness; for it seemed extremely doubtful whether her
father--much as he liked her lover--would consider him suitable as a son-in-law.  For her mother's
opinion she felt no anxiety; since Sarah Dale was thoroughly under her husband's thumb. Penny's
own strong will had come to her from her father alone.

The course of events was much like that of other instances of the kind. Clandestine letters,
less frequent meetings--as opportunity offered--ran the usual risk; in due time, as might have
been expected by any but ardent lovers, the secret oozed out.  Some busybody or other lost
no time in conveying the startling news to Stephen Dale, who had hitherto had no suspicion
of the state of things.

To say that Penny's father was disappointed would be an altogether inadequate description of
his state of mind; he was thoroughly enraged. Never in her life had his daughter seen him give
way to such unrestrained passion; for never before had his hopes and aspirations been so entirely
thrown over.  He had set his heart upon establishing his darling in a position in life as far
above his own as might be possible; now, by her own initiative, she had paved the way to an
evident descent in the social scale.  Not content with choosing one far beneath her, she had
even chosen a Protestant!  Yet Stephen had too strong a will to be easily contravened.  He
was determined to prevent, at all costs, such a disaster.  His first impulse was to relieve
his mind by telling Spence in no measured language what he thought of his conduct; the latter
had perforce to keep silent, however exaggerated the abuse heaped upon him, for his conscience
told him that he was in fault.  Penny was the next to listen to some very candid truths as
to the uprightness of her part in the proceedings.  Then when he had given full play to his
indignation, Stephen began to make plans for the future which might effectually defeat any
attempts on the part of the young people to renew their intimacy. Spence, of course, was absolutely
forbidden to set foot again over the threshold of the inn.  Penny was kept under strict surveillance
until her father was able to carry her off to a sister of his own in distant Lancashire, who
could be depended upon to prevent any communication between the lovers.  The Pikes--poor people--though
absolutely innocent of any complicity, since they knew no more of what was going on than Stephen
himself, were made to share in Spence's interdict.  No assurances of their total ignorance
of the affair would avail; the fact that Pike had been the unfortunate instrument in introducing
his comrade to the Dale family was in itself sufficient to kindle Stephen's wrath against him.
To add to the sergeant's discomfiture, he could not forget that in his admiration for his "chum"
he had been unstinting in his praises; for he had a genuine affectionate regard for Spence,
as a thoroughly upright young fellow, and a striking contrast to the majority of the Protestants
with whom he was daily brought into contact.

The unhappy Penny, placed under her aunt's vigilant guardianship, was inconsolable.  She languished
and drooped, during the first week or two of her exile, as though her usually firm will had
died within her.  So utterly broken did she seem that her aunt began to lose all hope of rousing
her to any interest in life; apparently she was submitting in a spirit of blank despair to
a fate which she regarded as inevitable.  But soon a change came over her.  Though still quiet
and seemingly docile, she gained by degrees some vestiges of her old cheerfulness and gaiety.
Her guardian's watchfulness inadvertently relaxed, for it appeared no longer necessary.

But the unfortunate woman had a sad awakening.  One morning the girl went out alone--ostensibly
to Mass; the day wore on, and to her aunt's consternation no Penny put in an appearance.  An
explanation arrived next morning by letter.  Penny's lover had contrived to communicate with
her and to arrange a meeting in Liverpool, where they had been married; by the time the letter
arrived at its destination the couple were on the way to Ireland, whither Spence's regiment
had been just transferred.

The two years that followed were, for the most part, years of happiness for the sergeant and
his bride.  Penny's conscience had been at first greatly troubled by her sacrilegious marriage
before a registrar, on account of the inevitable haste with which it had to be carried through.
She bitterly deplored her weakness for many a long day, even after she had done all that was
possible to atone for her sin by a sincere Confession.  Her husband could not be expected to
realize as she did the gravity of her offense against religion; but he sympathized with her
distress, and did all that lay in his power, by unceasing care and devotion, to comfort her.
By degrees his lavish affection tended to deaden for the time the keenness of her remorse.

Their happiness was increased by the birth of a little daughter.  The child was the idol of
her father, and Penny's life was brightened by the joys of motherhood, in spite of the persistent
refusal of Stephen Dale to hold any communication with her or allow his wife to do so.

But all too soon that happiness was to be rudely shattered, and that in a way entirely unforeseen.

Like many another family on the strength of the regiment, the Spences, for lack of accommodation
in barracks, were lodged in apartments in the city.  One dreary winter evening, when little
Annie was about a year old, Penny sat at her knitting by the fireside, the baby in her cot
close by, fast asleep.  Spence had been taking part in a concert, and was later than usual
in coming in, for it was past ten o'clock.  In the silence Penny heard the sound of footsteps
ascending the stairs outside; they halted at her door, and there was a gentle rapping.  She
rose and opened the door in response.

On the landing without stood a woman, whom she had never before seen--a shabby-looking woman,
dressed in soiled and worn garments, which had once been bright and stylish.  Her appearance,
apart from her dress, was far from attractive; her lean face had dull red blotches upon it,
her eyes looked wild and shining, and her gray hair straggled out from her tawdry bonnet. 
It scarcely needed the evidence of a strong smell of spirits to prove that she had been taking
drink.

Penny instinctively shrank back from the threshold, but still held the door in her hand.  The
woman made no attempt to enter.  Fixing her too bright eyes upon Penny's face with a scrutinizing
glance, she said in a raucous whisper:

"I was told that Sergeant Spence was likely to be here; but it seems I've come to the wrong rooms."

Penny was silent for a moment, dreading she knew not what.

"Sergeant Spence may be here any moment," she answered, rousing herself. She was praying that
he might come quickly.

"Oh, indeed!  So he may be here any moment," said the woman in louder tones.  "I suppose my
fine fellow is courting you now," she went on, staring boldly into Penny's frightened face.
"Well, I've no fault to find with his taste.  He used to have an eye for a pretty face, and
you're a good-looking girl, though you're but a little one."

"What do you want with Sergeant Spence?" asked Penny, as her courage began to return.  Why
should she fear this coarse, black-eyed woman.  She could have nothing in common with Arthur.
But why should she seek him thus openly in his own dwelling?  Her fears began to return.

The strange visitor advanced across the threshold; Penny retreated before her.  The color deepened
in her already florid face as the woman cried fiercely:

"What do I want with him?  I mean to force him to take me back to my rightful place, that's
what I want with him!"

Her voice, raised angrily, awoke the child, who gave a shrill cry of fright.  The woman stared
at the cot in astonishment.  Penny stooped and lifted the little one, and faced the stranger
once more as she pressed the child to her bosom.

"Is that your baby?" the woman almost whispered, as she caught the gleam of Penny's wedding
ring.  Then she cried wrathfully:

"What!  Has he dared to marry you?  Oh, the treacherous villain!  Surely you're not Arthur
Spence's wife!"

In spite of the fear that fell upon her, Penny grew at once strangely calm.  This must be some
disreputable relative of her husband's--though she had thought him alone in the world.  He
was an orphan.  This could not be Arthur's mother!  He could have nothing in common with a
woman so low as this!  It was some bold, bad creature trying to frighten her. Thus spoke her
trembling heart, but her voice was quiet and restrained as she said in reply:

"I do not see how it affects you that Arthur Spence is my husband, and this is our child."

The simple dignity with which she spoke and her apparent calmness seemed to soften the woman
and still her anger somewhat. His perfect manners and courtly observance of the smallest requirements
of good breeding and etiquette made us feel quite as if we were lord
and ladies.

Dr. Conway had a way of conveying subtle indefinable flattery which was very elevating to one's
self-esteem. Others enjoyed it in full, but often, just as our Chesterfield had interviewed me, infusing
even into the homely subject of diet-lists much that was calculated
to puff up my vanity, in would stalk Diogenes, who never failed to
bring me to a realizing sense of the hollowness of it all.

Dr. Hughes was a venerable and excellent gentleman, who constituted himself my mentor. He never
failed to drop in every day, being always ready to smooth tangled threads for me. He was forever
protesting against the habit I had contracted in Richmond, and never
afterwards relinquished, of remaining late by the bedside of dying
patients, or going to the wards whenever summoned at night.

He would say, "Daughter, it is not right, it is not safe; not only do you risk contagion by breathing
the foul air of the wards at night, but some of these soldiers are
mighty rough and might not always justify your confidence in them."

But I would not listen.

My firm belief in the honor of "my boys" and in their true and chivalrous devotion towards myself
caused me to trust them utterly at all times and places. I can truly say that never during
the whole four years of the war was that trust disturbed by even the roughest man of them all,
although I was often placed in very trying circumstances, many times being entirely dependent
upon their protection and care, which never failed me.

So I used to set at naught the well-meant counsels of my kindly old friend, to laugh at his lugubrious
countenance and the portentous shaking of his silvery head.



With shaking hands the poor little wife took it.  It was a letter--the handwriting familiar
to her.  She turned to the signature; it was her husband's own.

"Read it through," persisted the woman.  "See whether I am telling the truth or lies."

Penny's knees were shaking under her.  She sank into a chair, and clasping her baby more closely
to her breast she read the letter.  It was dated a few days before she and Arthur were married.

"Dear Clara," it ran.  "This is the last time I shall write to you. Unless you stick to the
agreement we made, I shall stop sending you money.  Do not try to meet me, and do not mention
again our unhappy marriage--even to me--or I shall shake you off entirely. We have New Orleans, and the
uncontrolled possession of the Mississippi river--cutting the territory of the rebels in two,
destroying their communications, and giving us a considerable portion
of the States bordering that river.

  There could no longer he room for doubt.
She had indeed been fooled and deceived!  Her innate courage rose and sustained her under the
weight of the trial.  She would leave that house--now, once and for all--before her betrayer
could return!  Never, never would she look upon his smiling, treacherous face again!

Animated with fresh strength, she rose and hastily began her preparations.  She fetched the
baby's warm wraps from the inner room and began to dress the child.  The other woman looked
on in silence--dazed for the moment by Penny's brisk movements.  At last she found a voice.

"What are you doing?" she cried.  "Surely you will not take the child out to-night!"

Penny made no answer, but fetched her own outdoor clothes and dressed hastily.

"Where are you going, on such a night?" cried the other excitedly.

"Anywhere," answered Penny, her lips white and her eyes flashing. "Anywhere out of reach of
that man."

"No, no!" the woman expostulated.  "Wait till morning!  I'll see him then and settle everything."

"What can you settle that can make me stay?" asked Penny, in bitter wrath.  "Do you think that
I would spend another night under this roof? Wait here and see him, if you wish--you have the
right to be here, not I! He will never see me again."

She ran back into her bedroom for the little purse.  In it were a few pounds she had saved
up to buy the man an easy chair for his coming birthday.  How often she had pictured his pleasure
when he would be able to lean back comfortably in it on the opposite side of the fireplace
and smoke his evening pipe, his handsome face beaming love and admiration. The vision filled
her with fresh loathing.  She scarcely bade the other woman good-night, but clasping her babe
hurried from the room.  Swiftly down the stairs she ran, heedless of the cries of the woman
she had left behind, and out into the wind and rain of the dreary street--fit emblem, in its
forlorn wretchedness, of the future which loomed hopeless before her.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Two things added to the poignancy of Penny's unavailing grief in after years: the innocence
of Arthur Spence of any deception (except silence regarding his past), and the fact that she
never knew this until he had given his life in his country's service.  It was then too late
to reap comfort in her supreme sorrow from the knowledge of his uprightness both to herself
and to the wretched woman who had caused her unreflecting flight on that fatal night. 

The money is all spent at home. It stimulates the productive industry of the country, and the nation
is all the time growing rich. The rebels have been disastrously repulsed in two attempts at invasion,
and do not hold one inch of Northern soil.  Grief at the loss of her little one, added to her already heavy
burden of trouble, had told upon her own health, and for weeks she had needed to be nursed
herself.  After her recovery, as she shrank from returning home, the good Sisters obtained
for her the post of nurse with our family.

Two years later Stephen Dale died suddenly.  Penny had written to him and to her mother more
than once, but got no answer; the intimation of her father's death was the first communication
she had received since leaving home.  Later on a letter was forwarded to her, which had been
found among her father's papers.  It was from Spence, and was dated the day following her flight.
In an agony of mind the man had searched for her everywhere, and failing to discover any trace
of her whereabouts, had written to her under cover to her father.  He, poor man, could not
send it--even had he been willing--having no idea of her address.

The letter was a pitiful appeal to Penny to return, and contained a full explanation of his
conduct.  The marriage with the woman Millar--never a happy one--had proved invalid, owing
to the survival of her former husband to a later date.  This, however, only became known to
Spence after the woman's intemperate habits had told upon her brain, and landed her in an asylum.
She had really believed that her husband--a worthless fellow--had died on the day stated. 
It was characteristic of the chivalrous nature of the man that Spence shrank from telling her,
after her recovery, of the error; content to send her an annual allowance on condition that
they should remain apart--as they had agreed to do long before.  Although the woman had no
legal claim upon him, he had continued this allowance even after his marriage with Penny, hoping
to secure by this means freedom from molestation. 

In that fearful moment strength and courage seemed to come as from above. The servants, sleeping
upon the floor, began to scream, but were instantly silenced. The ladies, slipping on dressing-gowns,
but never stopping to put on shoes or stockings, quietly opened the
doors.  The
answer told of his death in action three months earlier.

Penny--poor soul!--when giving me these details many years later, utterly broke down, as she
accused herself of having wronged--however unwittingly--by her suspicions the brave and upright
man whose loss she still keenly deplored, and whose soul (I make no doubt) she will never omit
to recommend to God in her daily prayers as long as life is granted to her.

