That afternoon Mehitabel Heasty had come to visit May, so she went along, and I followed. 
They poked around the driftwood at the floodgate behind the barn, and were giving up the place.
Candace had crossed the creek and was coming back, and May had started, when she saw a tiny
little one and chased it.  We didn't know then that it was a good thing to have snakes to eat
moles, field mice, and other pests that bother your crops; the Bible had no mercy on them at
all, so we were not saving our snakes; and anyway we had more than we needed, while some of
them were too big to be safe to keep, and a few poison as could be.  May began to bruise the
serpent, when out of the driftwood where they hadn't found anything came its mammy, a great
big blacksnake, maddest you ever saw, with its pappy right after her, mad as ever too.  Candace
screamed at May to look behind her, but May was busy with the snake and didn't look quick enough,
so the old mammy struck right in her back.  She just caught in the hem of May's skirt, and
her teeth stuck in the goods--you know how a snake's teeth turn back--so she couldn't let go.
May took one look and raced down the bank to the crossing, through the water, and toward us,
with the snake dragging and twisting, and trying her best to get away.  May was screaming at
every jump for Candace, and Mehitabel was flying up and down crying:  "Oh there's snakes in
my shoes!  There's snakes in my shoes!"

That was a fair sample of how much sense a Heasty ever had.  It took all Mehitabel's shoes
could do to hold her feet, for after one went barefoot all week, and never put on shoes except
on Sunday or for a visit, the feet became so spread out, shoes had all they could do to manage
them, and then mostly they pinched until they made one squirm. But she jumped and said that,
while May ran and screamed, and Candace gripped her big hickory stick and told May to stand
still.  Then she bruised that serpent with her whole foot, for she stood on it, and swatted
it until she broke its neck.  Then she turned ready for the other one, but when it saw what
happened to its mate, it decided to go back.  Even snakes, it doesn't seem right to break up
families like that; so by the time Candace got the mammy killed, loose from May's hem, and
stretched out with the back up, so she wouldn't make it rain, when Candace wasn't sure that
father wanted rain, I had enough.  I went down the creek until I was below the orchard, then
I crossed, passed the cowslip bed, climbed the hill and fence, and stopped to think what I
would do first; and there only a few feet away was Shelley.  She was sitting in the shade,
her knees drawn up, her hands clasped around them, staring straight before her across the meadow
at nothing in particular, that I could see.  She jumped as if I had been a snake when she saw
me, then she said, "Oh, is it you?" like she was half glad of it.  My chance had come.

I went to her, sat close beside her and tried snuggling up a little. It worked.  She put her
arm around me, drew me tight, rubbed her cheek against my head and we sat there.  I was wondering
how in the world I could ask her, and not get slapped.  I was growing most too big for that
slapping business, anyway.  We sat there; I was looking across the meadow as she did, only
I was watching everything that went on, so when I saw a grosbeak fly from the wild grape where
Shelley had put the crock for sap, it made me think of her hair.  She used to like to have
me play with it so well, she'd give me pennies if I did.  I got up, and began pulling out her
pins carefully.  I knew I was getting a start because right away she put up her hand to help me.

"I can get them," I said just as flannel-mouthed as ever I could, like all of us talked to
her now, so I got every one and never pulled a mite.  When I reached over her shoulder to drop
them in her lap, being so close I kissed her cheek.  Then I shook down her hair, spread it
out, lifted it, parted it, and held up strands to let the air on her scalp.  She shivered and
said: "Mercy child, how good that does feel! My head has ached lately until it's a wonder there's
a hair left on it."

So I was pleasing her.  I never did handle hair so carefully.  I tried every single thing it
feels good to you to have done with your hair, rubbed her head gently, and to cheer her up
I told her about May and the snake, and what fool Mehitabel had said, and she couldn't help
laughing; so I had her feeling about as good as she could, for the way she actually felt, but
still I didn't really get ahead.  Come right to the place to do it, that was no very easy question
to ask a person, when you wouldn't hurt their feelings for anything; I was beginning to wonder
if I would lose my chance, when all at once a way I could manage popped into my mind.

"Shelley," I said, "they told you about Laddie and the Princess, didn't they?"

I knew they had, but I had to make a beginning some way.

"Yes," she said.  "I'm glad of it!  I think she's pretty as a picture, and nice as she looks.
Laddie may have to hump himself to support her, but if he can't get her as fine clothes as
she has, her folks can help him.  They seem to have plenty, and she's their only child."

"They're going to.  I heard Mr. Pryor ask Laddie if he'd be so unkind as to object to them
having the pleasure of giving her things."

"Well, the greenhorn didn't say he would!"

"No.  He didn't want to put his nose to the grindstone quite that close.  He said it was between
them."

"I should think so!"

"Shelley, there's a question I've been wanting to ask some one for quite a while."

"What?"

"Why, this!  You know, Laddie was in love with the Princess, like you are when you want to
marry folks, for a long, long time, before he could be sure whether she loved him back."

"Yes."

"Well, now, 'spose she never had loved him, would he have had anything to be ashamed of?"

"I can't see that he would.  Some one must start a courtship, or there would be no marrying,
and it's conceded to be the place of the man. No.  He might be disappointed, or dreadfully
hurt, but there would be no shame about it."

"Well, then, suppose she loved him, and wanted to marry him, and he hadn't loved her, or wanted
her, would SHE have had anything to be ashamed of?"

"I don't think so!  If she was attracted by him, and thought she would like him, she would
have a right to go to a certain extent, to find out if he cared for her, and if he didn't,
why, she'd just have to give him up.  But any sensible girl waits for a man to make the advances,
and plenty of them, before she allows herself even to dream of loving him, or at least, I would."

Now I was getting somewhere!

"Of course you would!" I said.  "That would be the WAY mother would, wouldn't it?"

"Surely!"

"If that Paget man you used to write about had seemed to be just what you liked, you'd have
waited to know if he wanted you, before you loved him, wouldn't you?"

"I certainly would!" answered Shelley.  "Or at least, I'd have waited until I THOUGHT sure
as death, I knew.  It seems that sometimes you can be fooled about those things."

"But if you thought sure you knew, and then found out you had been mistaken, you wouldn't have
anything to be ASHAMED of, would you?"

"Not-on-your-life-I-wouldn't!" cried Shelley, hammering each word into her right knee with
her doubled fist.  "What are you driving at, Blatherskite?  What have you got into your head?"

"Oh just studying about things," I said, which was exactly the truth. "Sally getting married
last fall, and Laddie going to this, just started me to wondering."

Fooled her, too!

"Oh well, there's no harm done," she said.  "The sooner you get these matters straightened
out, the better able you will be to take care of yourself.  If you ever go to a city, you'll
find out that a girl needs considerable care taken of her."

"You could look out for yourself, Shelley?"

"Well, I don't know as I made such a glorious fist of it," she said, "but at least, as you
say, I've nothing to be ashamed of!"

I almost hugged her head off.

"Of course you haven't!" I cried.  "Of course you wouldn't have!"

I just kissed her over and over for joy; I was so glad my heart hurt for father and mother.
Shame had not come to them!

"Now, I guess I'll run to the house and get a comb," I told her.

"Go on," said Shelley.  "I know you are tired."

"I'm not in the least," I said.  "Don't you remember I always use a comb when I fuss with your
hair?"

"It is better," said Shelley.  "Go get one."

As I got up to start I took a last look at her, and there was something in her face that I
couldn't bear.  I knelt beside her, and put both arms around her neck.

"Shelley, it's a secret," I said in a breathless half whisper.  "It's a great, big secret,
but I'm going to tell you.  Twice now I've had a powerful prayer all ready to try.  It's the
kind where you go to the barn, all alone, stand on that top beam below the highest window and
look toward the east.  You keep perfectly still, and just think with all your might, and you
look away over where Jesus used to be, and when the right feeling comes, you pray that prayer
as if He stood before you, and it will come true.  I KNOW it will come true.  The reason I
know is because twice now I've been almost ready to try it, and what I intended to ask for
happened before I had time; so I've saved that prayer; but Shelley, shall I pray it about the
Paget man, for you?"

She gripped me, and she shook until she was all twisted up; you could hear her teeth click,
she chilled so.  The tears just gushed, and she pulled me up close and whispered right in my ear:

"Yes!"

It was only pretend about the comb; what I really wanted was to get to father and mother quick.
I knew he was at the barn and he was going to be too happy for words in a minute.  But as I
went up the lane, I wasn't sure whether I'd rather pray about that Paget man or bruise him
with my heel like a serpent.  The only way I could fix it was to remember if Shelley loved
him so, he must be mighty nice.  Father was in the wagon shovelling corn from it to a platform
where it would be handy to feed the pigs, so I ran and called him, and put one foot on a hub
and raised my hands.  He pulled me up and when he saw how important it was, he sat on the edge
of the bed, so I told him:  "Father, you haven't got a thing in the world to be ashamed of
about Shelley."

"Praise the Lord!" said father like I knew he would, but you should have seen his face.  "Tell
me about it!"

I told him and he said:  "Well, I don't know but this is the gladdest hour of my life.  Go
straight and repeat to your mother exactly what you've said to me.  Take her away all alone,
and then forget about it, you little blessing."

"Father, have you got too many children?"

"No!" he said.  "I wish I had a dozen more, if they'd be like you."

When I went up the lane I was so puffed up with importance I felt too dignified to run.  I
strutted like our biggest turkey gobbler.  The only reason you couldn't hear my wings scrape,
was because through mistake they grew on the turkey.  If I'd had them, I would have dragged
them sure, and cried "Ge-hobble-hobble!" at every step.

I took mother away alone and told her, and she asked many more questions than father, but she
was even gladder than he.  She almost hugged the breath out of me.  Sometimes I get things
RIGHT, anyway! Then I took the comb and ran back to Shelley.

"I thought you'd forgotten me," she said.

She had wiped up and was looking better.  If ever I combed carefully I did then.  Just when
I had all the tangles out, there came mother.  She had not walked that far in a long time.
I thought maybe she could comfort Shelley, so I laid the comb in her lap and went to see how
the snake hunters were coming on.  It must be all right, when the Bible says so, but the African
Jungle will do for me, and a popgun is not going to scatter families.  I never felt so strongly
about breaking home ties in my life as I did then.  There was nothing worse.  It was not where
I wanted to be, so I thought I'd go back to the barn, and hang around father, hoping maybe
he'd brag on me some more.  Going up the lane I saw a wagon passing with the biggest box I
ever had seen, and I ran to the gate to watch where it went.  It stopped at our house and Frank
came toward me as I hurried up the road.

"Where are the folks?" he asked, without paying the least attention to my asking him over and
over what was in the box.

"May and Candace are killing every snake in the driftwood behind the barn, Shelley and mother
are down in the orchard, and father and the boys are hauling corn."

"Go tell the boys to come quickly and keep quiet," he said.  "But don't let any one else know
I'm here."

That was so exciting I almost fell over my feet running, and all three of them came quite as
fast.  I stood back and watched, and I just danced a steady hop from one foot to the other
while those men got the big box off the wagon and opened it.  On the side I spelled Piano,
so of course it was for Shelley.  It was so heavy it took all six of them, father and the three
boys, the driver and another very stylish looking man to carry it.  They put it in the parlour,
screwed a leg on each corner, and a queer harp in the middle, then they lifted it up and set
it on its feet, under the whatnot, and it seemed as if it filled half the room.  Then Frank
spread a beauteous wine coloured cover all embroidered in pink roses with green leaves over
it, and the stylish man opened a lid, sat down and spread out his hands.  Frank said: "Soft
pedal!  Mighty soft!"  So he smothered it down, and tried only enough to find that it had not
been hurt coming, and then he went away on the wagon.  Father and the boys gathered up every
scrap, swept the walk, and put all the things they had used back where they got them, like
we always did.

Then Frank took a card from his pocket and tied it to the music rack, and it read:  "For Shelley,
from her brothers in fact, and in law."  To a corner of the cover he pinned another card that
read:  "From Peter."

"What is that?" asked father.

"That's from Peter," said Frank.  "Peter is great on finishing touches. He had to outdo the
rest of us that much or bust.  Fact is, none of us thought of a cover except him."

"How about this?" asked father, staring at it as if it were an animal that would bite.

"Well," said Frank, "it was apparent that practising her fingers to the bone wouldn't do Shelley
much good unless she could keep it up in summer, and you and mother always have done so much
for the rest of us, and now mother isn't so strong and the expenses go on the same with these
youngsters; we know you were figuring on it, but we beat you. Put yours in the bank, and try
the feel of a surplus once more. Haven't had much lately, have you, father?"

"Well, not to speak of," said father.

"Now let's shut everything up, ring the bell to call them, and get Shelley in here and surprise
her."

"She's not very well," said father.  "Mother thinks she worked too hard."

"She's all right now, father," I said.  "She is getting pink again and rounder, and this will
fix her grand."

Wouldn't it though!  There wasn't one anywhere, short of the city. Even the Princess had none.
Father hunted up a song book, opened it and set it on the rack.  Then all of us went out.

"We'll write to the boys, mother and I, and Shelley also," said father. "I can't express myself
just now.  This is a fine thing for all of you to do."

Frank seemed to think so too, and looked rather puffed up, until Leon began telling about his
horse.  When Frank found out that Laddie, who had not yet branched out for himself, had given
Leon much more than any one of them had Shelley, he looked a little disappointed.  He explained
how the piano cost eight hundred dollars, but by paying cash all at once, the man took seven
hundred and fifty, so it only cost them one hundred and fifty a piece, and none of them felt
it at all.

"Sometimes the clouds loom up pretty black, and mother and I scarcely know how to go on, save
for the help of the Lord, but we certainly are blest with good children, children we can be
proud of.  Your mother will like that instrument as well as Shelley, son," said father.

Frank went out and rang the bell, tolled it, and made a big noise like he always did when he
came unexpectedly, and then sat on the back fence until he saw them coming, and went to meet
them.  He walked between mother and Shelley, with an arm around each one.  If he thought Shelley
looked badly, he didn't mention it.  What he did say was that he was starved, and to fly around
and get supper.  I thought I'd burst.  They began to cook, and the boys went to feed and see
Leon's horse, and then we had supper.  I just sat and stared at Frank and grinned.  I couldn't eat.

"Do finish your supper," said mother.  "I never saw anything take your appetite like seeing
your brother.  You'll be wanting a piece before bedtime."

I didn't say a word, because I was afraid to, but I kept looking at Leon and he smiled back,
and we had great fun.  Secrets are lovely. Mother couldn't have eaten a bite if she'd known
about that great shining thing, all full of wonderful sound, standing in our parlour. When
the last slow person had finished, father said:  "Shelley, won't you step into the front room
and bring me that book I borrowed from Frank on 'Taxation.' I want to talk over a few points."

All of us heard her little breathless cry, and mother said, "There!" as if she'd been listening
for something, and she beat all of us to the door.  Then she cried out too, and such a time
as we did have.  At last after all of us had grown sensible enough to behave, Shelley sat on
the stool, spread her fingers over the keys and played at the place father had selected, and
all of us sang as hard as we could:  "Be it ever so humble, There's no place like home;" and
there WAS no place like ours, of THAT I'm quite sure.

CHAPTER XVII

In Faith Believing

  "Nor could the bright green world around
     A joy to her impart,
  For still she missed the eyes that made
     The summer of her heart."

Soon as she had the piano, Shelley needed only the Paget man to make her happy as a girl could
be; and having faith in that prayer, I decided to try it right away.  So I got Laddie to promise
surely that he'd wake me when he got up the next morning.

I laid my clothes out all ready; he merely touched my foot, and I came to, slipped out with
him, and he helped me dress.  We went to the barn when the morning was all gray.

"What the dickens have you got in your head now, Chicken?" he asked. "Is it business with the
Fairies?"

"No, this is with the Most High," I said solemnly, like father.  "Go away and leave me alone."

"Well of all the queer chickens!" he said, but he kissed me and went.

I climbed the stairs to the threshing floor, then the ladder to the mow, walked a beam to the
wall, there followed one to the east end, and another to the little, high-up ventilator window.
There I stood looking at the top of the world.  A gray mist was rising like steam from the
earth, there was a curious colour in the east, stripes of orange and flames of red, where the
sun was coming.  I folded my hands on the sill, faced the sky, and stood staring.  Just stood,
and stood, never moving a muscle.  By and by I began to think how much we loved Shelley, how
happy she had been at Christmas the way she was now, and how much all of us would give in money,
or time, or love, to make her sparkling, bubbling, happy again; so I thought and thought, gazing
at the sky, which every second became a grander sight.  Little cold chills began going up my
back, and soon I was talking to the Lord exactly as if He stood before me on the reddest ray
that topped our apple trees.

I don't know all I said.  That's funny, for I usually remember to the last word; but this time
it was so important, I wanted it so badly, and I was so in earnest that words poured in a stream.
I began by reminding Him that He knew everything, and so He'd understand if what I asked was
for the best.  Then I told Him how it looked to us, who knew only a part; and then I went at
Him and implored and beseeched, if it would be best for Shelley, and would make her happy,
to send her the Paget man, and to be quick about it.  When I had said the last word that came
to me, and begged all I thought becoming--I don't think with His face, that Jesus wants us
to grovel to Him, at least He looks too dignified to do it Himself--I just stood there, still
staring.

I didn't expect to see a burning bush, or a pillar of fire, or a cloud of flame, or even to
hear a small, still voice; but I watched, so I wouldn't miss it if there should be anything
different in that sunrise from any other I ever had seen, and there was not.  Not one thing!
It was so beautiful, and I was so in earnest my heart hurt; but that was like any other sunrise
on a fine July morning.  There wasn't the least sign that Jesus had heard me, and would send
the man; yet before I knew it, I was amazed to find the feeling creeping over me that he was
coming.  If I had held the letter in my hand saying he would arrive on the noon train, I couldn't
have grown surer.  Why, I even looked down the first time I moved, to see if I had it; but
I was certain anyway. So I looked steadily toward the east once more and said, "Thank you,
with all my heart, Lord Jesus," then I slowly made my way down and back to the house.

Shelley was at the orchard gate, waiting; so I knew they had missed me, and Laddie had told
them where I was and not to call.  She had the strangest look on her face, as she asked:  "Where
have you been?"

I looked straight and hard at her and said, "It's all right, Shelley. He's going to come soon";
but I didn't think it was a thing to mouth over, so I twisted away from her, and ran to the
kitchen to see if breakfast had all been eaten.  I left Shelley standing there with her eyes
wide, also her mouth.  She looked about as intelligent as Mehitabel Heasty, and it wouldn't
have surprised me if she had begun to jump up and down and say there were snakes in HER shoes.
No doubt you have heard of people having been knocked silly; I knew she was, and so she had
a perfect right to look that way, until she could remember what she was doing, and come back
to herself.  Maybe it took her longer, because mother wasn't there, to remind her about her
mouth, and I didn't propose to mention it.

At breakfast, mother said father was going to drive Frank home in the carriage, and if I would
like, I might go along.  I would have to sit on the back seat alone, going; but coming home
I could ride beside and visit with father.  I loved that, for you could see more from the front
seat, and father would stop to explain every single thing.  He always gave me the money and
let me pay the toll.  He would get me a drink at the spring, let me wade a few minutes at Enyard's
riffles, where their creek, with the loveliest gravel bed, ran beside the road; and he always
raced like wildfire at the narrows, where for a mile the railroad ran along the turnpike.

We took Frank to his office, stopped a little while to visit Lucy, and give her the butter
and cream mother sent, went to the store to see Peter, and then to the post-office.  From there
we could see that the veranda of the hotel across the street was filled with gayly dressed
people, and father said that the summer boarders from big cities around must be pouring in
fast.  When he came out with the mail he said he better ask if the landlord did not want some
of mother's corn and milk fed spring chickens, because last year he had paid her more than
the grocer.  So he drove across the street, stopped at the curb, and left me to hold the team.

Maybe you think I wasn't proud!  I've told you about Ned and Jo, with their sharp ears, dappled
sides, and silky tails, and the carriage almost new, with leather seats, patent leather trimmings,
and side lamps, so shiny you could see yourself in the brass.  We never drove into the barn
with one speck of mud or dust on it.  That was how particular mother was.

I watched the team carefully; I had to if I didn't want my neck broken; but I also kept an
eye on that veranda.  You could see at a glance that those were stylish women.  Now my mother
liked to be in fashion as well as any one could; so I knew she'd be mightily pleased if I could
tell her a new place to set her comb, a different way to fasten her collar, or about an unusual
pattern for a frock.

I got my drink at the spring, father offered to stop at the riffle, but I was enjoying the
ride so much, and I could always wade at home, although our creek was not so beautiful as Enyard's,
but for common wading it would do; we went through the narrows, like two shakes of a sheep's
tail, then we settled down to a slow trot, and were having the loveliest visit possible, when
in the bundle on my lap, I saw the end of something that interested me.  Mr. Agnew always made
our mail into a roll with the Advocate and the Agriculturist on the outside, and because every
one was so anxious about their letters, and some of them meant so much, I felt grown and important
while holding the package.

I was gripping it tight when I noticed the end of one letter much wider and fatter than any
I ever had seen, so when father was not looking I began pushing it a little at one end, and
pulling it at the other, to work it up, until I could read the address.  I got it out so far
I thought every minute he'd notice, and tell me not to do that, but I could only see Stanton.
All of us were Stanton, so it might be for me, for that matter.  Jerry might be sending me
pictures, or a book, he did sometimes, but there was an exciting thing about it.  Besides being
fatter than it looked right at the end, it was plastered with stamps--lots of them, enough
to have brought it clear around the world. I pushed that end back, pulled out the other, and
took one good look. I almost fell from the carriage.  I grabbed father's arm and cried: "Stop!
Stop this team quick.  Stop them and see if I can read."

"Are you crazy, child?" asked father, but he checked the horses.

"No, but you are going to be in a minute," I said.  "Look at that!"

I yanked the letter from the bundle, and held it over.  I THOUGHT I could read, but I was too
scared to be sure.  I thought it said in big, strong, upstanding letters, Miss Shelley Stanton,
Groveville, Indiana. And in the upper corner, Blackburn, Yeats and PAGET, Counsellors of Law,
37 to 39 State St., Chicago.  I put my finger on the Paget, and looked into father's face.
I was no fool after all.  He was not a bit surer that HE could read than I was, from the dazed
way he stared.

"You see!" I said.

"It says Paget!" he said, like he would come nearer believing; it if he heard himself pronounce
the word.

"I THOUGHT it said 'Paget,'" I gasped, "but I wanted to know if you thought so too."

"Yes, it's Paget plain enough," said father, but he acted like there was every possibility
that it might change to Jones any minute.  "It says 'Paget,' plain as print."

"Father!" I cried, clutching his arm, "father, see how fat it is! There must be pages and pages!
Father, it wouldn't take all that to tell her he didn't like her, and he never wanted to see
her again. Would it, father?"

"It doesn't seem probable," said father.

"Father don't you think it means there's been some big mistake, and it takes so much to tell
how it can be fixed?"

"It seems reasonable."

I gripped him tighter, and maybe shook him a little.

"Father!" I cried.  "Father, doesn't it just look HURRY, all over? Can't you speed up a little?
They have all day to cool off.  Oh father, won't you speed a little?"

"That I will!" said father.  "Get a tight hold, and pray God it is good word we carry."

"But I prayed the one big prayer to get this," I said.  "It wouldn't be sent if it wasn't good.
The thing to do now is to thank the Lord for 'all his loving kindnesses,' like mother said."

"Drive father!  Make them go!"

At first he only touched them up; I couldn't see that we were getting home so fast; but in
a minute a cornfield passed like a streak, a piece of woods flew by a dark blur, a bridge never
had time to rattle, and we began to rock from side to side a little.  Then I gripped the top
supports with one hand, the mail with the other, and hung on for dear life.  I took one good
look at father.

His feet were on the brace, his face was clear, even white, his eyes steely, and he never moved
a muscle.  When Jo thought it was funny, that he was loose in the pasture, and kicked up a
little behind, father gave him a sharp cut with the whip and said: "Steady boy!  Get along there!"

Sometimes he said, "Aye, aye!  Easy!" but he never stopped a mite.  We whizzed past the church
and cemetery, and scarcely touched the Big Hill.  People ran to their doors, even to the yards,
and I was sure they thought we were having a runaway, but we were not.  Father began to stop
at the lane gate, he pulled all the way past the garden, and it was as much as he could do
to get them slowed down so that I could jump out by the time we reached the hitching rack.
He tied them, and followed me into the house instead of going to the barn.  I ran ahead calling:
"Shelley!  Where is Shelley?"

"What in this world has happened, child?" asked mother, catching my arm.

"Her letter has come!  Her Paget letter!  The one you looked for until you gave up.  It's come
at last!  Oh, where is she?"

"Be calmer, child, you'll frighten her," said mother.

May snatched the letter from my fingers and began to read all that was on it aloud.  I burst
out crying.

"Make her give that back!" I sobbed to father.  "It's mine!  I found it.  Father, make her
let me take it!"

"Give it to her!" said father.  "I rather feel that it is her right to deliver it."

May passed it back, but she looked so disappointed, that by how she felt I knew how much I
wanted to take it myself; so I reached my hand to her and said:  "You can come along!  We'll
both take it!  Oh where is she?"

"She went down in the orchard," said mother.  "I think probably she's gone back where she was
the other day."

Gee, but we ran!  And there she was!  As we came up, she heard us and turned.

"Shelley!" I cried.  "Here's your letter!  Everything is all right! He's coming, Shelley! 
Look quick, and see when!  Mother will want to begin baking right away!"

Shelley looked at me, and said coolly:  "Paddy Ryan!  What's the matter?"

"Your letter!" I cried, shoving it right against her hands.  "Your letter from Robert!  From
the Paget man, you know!  I told you he was coming!  Hurry, and see when!"

She took it, and sat there staring at it, so much like father, that it made me think of him,
so I saw that she was going to have to come around to it as we did, and that one couldn't hurry
her.  She just had to take her time to sense it.

"Shall I open it for you?" I asked, merely to make her see that it was time she was doing it
herself.

Blest if she didn't reach it toward me!--sort of woodenlike.  I stuck my finger under the flap,
gave it a rip across and emptied what was inside into her lap.  Bet there were six or seven
letters in queer yellow envelopes I never before had seen any like, and on them was the name,
Robert Paget, while in one corner it said, "Returned Dead Letter"; also there was a loose folded
white sheet.  She sat staring at the heap, touching one, another, and repeating "Robert Paget?"
as she picked each up in turn.

"What do you suppose it means?" she asked May.  May examined them.

"You must read the loose sheet," she advised.  "No doubt that will explain."

But Shelley never touched it.  She handled those letters and stared at them.  Father and mother
came through the orchard and stood together behind us, so father knelt down at last, reached
across Shelley's shoulder, picked one up and looked at it.

"Have you good word, dear?" asked mother of Shelley.

"Why, I don't understand at all," said Shelley.  "Just look at all these queer letters, addressed
to Mr. Paget.  Why should they be sent to me?  I mustn't open them.  They're not mine.  There
must be some mistake."

"These are DEAD LETTERS," said father.  "They've been written to you, couldn't be delivered,
and so were sent to the Dead Letter Office at Washington, which returned them to the writer,
and unopened he has forwarded them once more to you.  You've heard of dead letters, haven't you?"

"I suppose so," said Shelley.  "I don't remember just now; but there couldn't be a better name.
They've come mighty near killing me."

"If you'd only read that note!" urged May, putting it right into her fingers.

Shelley still sat there.

"I'm afraid of it," she said exactly like I'd have spoken if there had been a big rattlesnake
coming right at me, when I'd nothing at hand to bruise it.

Laddie and Leon came from the barn.  They had heard me calling, seen May and me run, and then
father and mother coming down, so they walked over.

"What's up?" asked Leon.  "Has Uncle Levi's will been discovered, and does mother get his Mexican
mines?"

"What have you got, Shelley?" asked Laddie, kneeling beside her, and picking up one of the
yellow letters.

"I hardly know," said Shelley.

"I brought her a big letter with all those little ones and a note in it, and they are from
the Paget man," I explained to him.  "But she won't even read the note, and see what he writes.
She says she's afraid."

"Poor child!  No wonder!" said Laddie, sitting beside her and putting his arm around her. 
"Suppose I read it for you.  May I?"

"Yes," said Shelley.  "You read it.  Read it out loud.  I don't care."

She leaned against him, while he unfolded the white sheet.

"Umph!" he said.  "This DOES look bad for you.  It begins:  'My own darling Girl.'"

"Let me see!" cried Shelley, suddenly straightening, and reaching her hand.

Laddie held the page toward her, but she only looked, she didn't offer to touch it.

"'My own darling Girl:'" repeated Laddie tenderly, making it mean just all he possibly could,
because he felt so dreadfully sorry for her--"'On my return to Chicago, from the trip to England
I have so often told you I intended to make some time soon----'"

"Did he?" asked mother.

"Yes," answered Shelley.  "He couldn't talk about much else.  It was his first case.  It was
for a friend of his who had been robbed of everything in the world; honour, relatives, home,
and money.  If Robert won it, he got all that back for his friend and enough for himself--that
he could--a home of his own, you know!  Read on, Laddie!"

"'I was horrified to find on my desk every letter I had written you during my absence returned
to me from the Dead Letter Office, as you see.'"

"Good gracious!" cried mother, picking up one and clutching it tight as if she meant to see
that it didn't get away again.

"Go on!" cried Shelley.

"'I am enclosing some of them as they came back to me, in proof of my statement.  I drove at
once to your boarding place and found you had not been there for weeks, and your landlady was
distinctly crabbed. Then I went to the college, only to find that you had fallen ill and gone
to your home.  That threw me into torments, and all that keeps me from taking the first train
is the thought that perhaps you refused to accept these letters, for some reason.  Shelley,
you did not, did you? There is some mistake somewhere, is there not----'"

"One would be led to think so," said father sternly.  "Seems as if he might have managed some
way----"

"Don't you blame him!" cried Shelley.  "Can't you see it's all my fault?  He'd been coming
regularly, and the other girls envied me; then he just disappeared, and there was no word or
anything, and they laughed and whispered until I couldn't endure it; so I moved in with Peter's
cousin, as I wrote you; but that left Mrs. Fleet with an empty room in the middle of the term,
and it made her hopping mad.  I bet anything she wouldn't give the postman my new address,
to pay me back. I left it, of course.  But if I'd been half a woman, and had the confidence
I should have had in myself and in him----  Oh how I've suffered, and punished all of you----!"

"Never you mind about that," said mother, stroking Shelley's hair. "Likely there isn't much
in Chicago to give a girl who never had been away from her family before, 'confidence' in herself
or any one else. As for him--just disappearing like that, without a word or even a line----
Go on Laddie!"

"'Surely, you knew that I was only waiting the outcome of this trip to tell you how dearly
I love you.  Surely, you encouraged me in thinking you cared for me a little, Shelley.  Only
a little will do to begin with----'"

"You see, I DID have something to go on!" cried Shelley, wiping her eyes and straightening up.

"'No doubt you misunderstood and resented my going without coming to explain, and bid you good-bye
in person, but Shelley, I SIMPLY DARED NOT.  You see, it was this way:  I got a cable about
the case I was always talking of, and the only man who could give the testimony I MUST HAVE
was dying!'"

"For land's sake!  The poor boy!" cried mother, patting Shelley's shoulder.

"'An hour's delay might mean the loss of everything in the world to me, even you.  For if I
lost any time, and the man escaped me, there was no hope of winning my case, and everything,
even you, as I said before, depended on him----'"

"Good Lord!  I mean land!" cried Leon.

"'If I could catch the train in an hour, I could take a boat at New York, and go straight through
with no loss of time.  So I wrote you a note that probably said more than I would have ventured
in person, and paid a boy to deliver it.'"

"Kept the money and tore up the note, I bet!" said May.

"'I wrote on the train, but found after sailing that I had rushed so I had failed to post it
in New York.  I kept on writing every day on the boat, and mailed you six at Liverpool.  All
the time I have written frequently; there are many more here that this envelope will not hold,
that I shall save until I hear from you.'"

"Well, well!" said father.

"'Shelley, I beat death, reached my man, got the testimony I had to have, and won my case.'"

"Glory!" cried mother.  "Praise the Lord!"

"'Then I scoured England, and part of the continent, hunting some interested parties; and when
I was so long finding them, and still no word came from you, I decided to come back and get
you, if you would come with me, and go on with the work together.'"

"Listen to that!  More weddings!" cried Leon.  He dropped on his knees before Shelley.  "Will
you marry me, my pretty maid?" he begged.

"Young man, if you cut any capers right now, I'll cuff your ears!" cried father.  "This is
no proper time for your foolishness!"

"'Shelley, I beg that you will believe me, and if you care for me in the very least, telegraph
if I may come.  Quick!  I'm half insane to see you.  I have many things to tell you, first
of all how dear you are to me.  Please telegraph.  Robert.'"

"Saddle a horse, Leon!" father cried as he unstrapped his wallet.

"Laddie, take down her message."

"Can you put it into ten words?" asked Laddie.

"Mother, what would you say?" questioned Shelley.

Leon held up his fingers and curled down one with each word.  "Say, 'Dear Robert.  Well and
happy.  Come when you get ready.'"

"But then I won't know when he's coming," objected Shelley.  "You don't need to," said Leon.
"You can take it for granted from that epistolary effusion that he won't let the grass grow
under his feet while coming here.  That's a bully message!  It sounds as if you weren't crazy
over him, and it's a big compliment to mother.  Looks as if she didn't have to know when people
are coming--like she's ready all the time."

"Write it out and let me see," said Shelley.

So Laddie wrote it, and she looked at it a long time, it seemed to me, at last she said:  "I
don't like that 'get.'  It doesn't sound right. Wouldn't 'are' be better?"

"Come when you are ready," repeated Laddie.  "Yes, that's better. 'Get' sounds rather saucy."

"Why not put it, 'Come when you choose?'" suggested mother.  "That will leave a word to spare,
so it won't look as if you had counted them and used exactly ten on purpose, and it doesn't
sound as if you expected him to make long preparations, like the other.  That will leave it
with him to start whenever he likes."

"Yes! yes!" cried Shelley.  "That's much better!  Say, 'Come when you choose!'"

"Right!" said Laddie as he wrote it.  "Now I'll take this!"

"Oh no you won't!" cried Leon.  "Father told me to saddle my horse. She's got enough speed
in her to beat yours a mile.  I take that! Didn't you say for me to saddle, father?"

"Such important business, I think I better," said Laddie, and Leon began to cry.

"I think you should both go," said Shelley.  "It is so important, and if one goes to make a
mistake, maybe the other will notice it."

"Yes, that's the best way," said mother.

"Yes, both go," said father.

It was like one streak when they went up the Big Hill.  Father shook his head.  "Poor judgment--that,"
he said.  "Never run a horse up hill!"

"But they're in such a hurry," Shelley reminded him.

"So they are," said father.  "In this case I might have broken the rule myself.  Now come all
of you, and let the child get at her mail."

"But I want you to stay," said Shelley.  "I'm so addle-pated this morning.  I need my family
to help me."

"Of course you do, child," said mother.  "Families were made to cling together, and stand by
each other in every circumstance of life--joy or sorrow.  Of course you need your family."

May began sorting the letters by dates so Shelley could start on the one that had been written
first.  Father ran his knife across the top of each, and cut all the envelopes, and Shelley
took out the first and read it; that was the train one.  In it he told her about sending the
boy with the note again, and explained more about how it was so very important for him to hurry,
because the only man who could help him was so sick.  We talked it over, and all of us thought
the boy had kept the money and torn up the note.  Father said the way would have been to send
the note and pay the boy when he came back; but Shelley said Mr. Paget would have been gone
before the boy got back, so father saw that wouldn't have been the way, in such a case.

Next she read one written on the boat.  He told more about sending the boy; how he loved her,
what it would mean to both of them if he got the evidence he wanted and won his first case;
and how much it would bring his friend.  The next one told it all over again, and more.  In
that he wrote a little about the ocean, the people on board the ship, and he gave Shelley the
name of the place where he was going and begged her to write to him.  He told her if the ship
he was on passed another, they were going to stop and send back the mail.  He begged her to
write often, and to say she forgave him for starting away without seeing her, as he had been
forced to.

The next one was the same thing over, only a little more yet.  In the last he had reached England,
the important man was still living, but he was almost gone, and Mr. Paget took two good witnesses,
all the evidence he had, and went to see him; and the man saw it was no use, so he made a statement,
and Robert had it all written out, signed and witnessed.  For the real straight sense there
was in that letter, I could have done as well myself.

It was a wild jumble, because Robert was so crazy over having the evidence that would win his
case; and he told Shelley that now he was perfectly free to love her all she would allow him.
He said he had to stay a while longer to find his friend's people so they would get back their
share of the money, but it was not going to be easy to locate them.  You wouldn't think the
world so big, but maybe it seemed smaller to me because as far as I could see from the top
of our house, was all I knew about it.  After Shelley had read the letters, and the note again,
father heaved a big sigh that seemed to come clear from his boot soles and he said:  "Well
Shelley, it looks to me as if you had found a MAN.  Seems to me that's a mighty important case
for a young lawyer to be trusted with, in a first effort."

"Yes, but it was for Robert's best friend, and only think, he has won!"

"I don't see how he could have done better if he'd been old as Methuselah, and wise as Solomon,"
boasted mother.

"But he hasn't found the people who must have back their money," said May.  "He will have to
go to England again.  And he wants to take you, Shelley.  My!  You'll get to sail on a big
steamer, cross the Atlantic Ocean, and see London.  Maybe you'll even get a peep at the Queen!"

Shelley was busy making a little heap of her letters; when the top one slid off I reached over
and put it back for her.  She looked straight at me, and smiled the most wonderful and the
most beautiful smile I ever saw on any one's face, so I said to her: "You see! I TOLD you he
was coming!"

"I can't understand it!" said Shelley.

"YOU KNOW I told you."

"Of course I do!  But what made you think so?"

"That was the answer.  Just that he was coming."

"What are you two talking about?" asked mother.

Shelley looked at me, and waited for me to tell mother as much as I wanted to, of what had
happened.  But I didn't think things like that were to be talked about before every one, so
I just said:

"Oh nothing!  Only, I told Shelley this very morning that the Paget man was coming soon, and
that everything was going to be all right."

"You did?  Well of all the world!  I can't see why."

"Oh something told me! I just FELT that way."

"More of that Fairy nonsense?" asked father sharply.

"No.  I didn't get that from the Fairies."

"Well, never mind!" said Shelley, rising, because she saw that I had told all I wanted to.
"Little Sister DID tell me this morning that he was coming, that everything would be made right,
and it's the queerest thing, but instantly I believed her.  Didn't I sing all morning, mother?
The first note since Robert didn't come when I expected him in Chicago, weeks ago."

"Yes," said mother.  "That's a wonderfully strange thing.  I can't see what made you think so."

"Anyway, I did!" I said.  "Now let's go have dinner.  I'm starving."

I caught May's hand, and ran to get away from them.  Father and mother walked one on each side
of Shelley, while with both hands she held her letters before her.  When we reached the house
we just talked about them all the time.  Pretty soon the boys were back, and then they told
about sending the telegram.  Leon vowed he gave the operator a dime extra to start that message
with a shove, so it would go faster.

"It will go all right," said Laddie, "and how it will go won't be a circumstance to the way
he'll come.  If there's anything we ought to do, before he gets here, we should hustle.  Chicago
isn't a thousand miles away.  That message can reach him by two o'clock, it's probable he has
got ready while he was waiting, so he will start on the first train our way.  He could reach
Groveville on the ten, to-morrow.  We better meet it."

"Yes, we'll meet it," said mother.  "Is the carriage perfectly clean?"

Father said:  "It must be gone over.  Our general manager here ordered me to speed up, and
we drove a little coming from town."

Mother went to planning what else should be done.

"Don't do anything!" cried Shelley.  "The house is all right.  There's no need to work and
worry into a sweat.  He won't notice or care how things look."

"I miss my guess if he doesn't notice and care very much indeed," said mother emphatically.
"Men are not blind.  No one need think they don't see when things are not as they should be,
just because they're not cattish enough to let you know it, like a woman always does.  Shelley,
wouldn't you like to ride over and spend the afternoon with the Princess?"

"Nope!" said Shelley.  "It's her turn to come to see me.  Besides, you don't get me out of
the way like that.  I know what you'll do here, and I intend to help."

"Do you need one of the boys at the house?" asked father, and if you'll believe it, both of
them wanted to stay.

Father said he must have one to help wash the carriage and do a little fixing around the barn;
so he took Leon, but he didn't like to go.  He said:  "I don't see what all this fuss is about,
anyway.  Probably he'll be another Peter."

Shelley looked at him:  "Oh Mr. Paget isn't nearly so large as Peter," she said, "and his hair
is whiter than yours, while his eyes are not so blue."

"Saints preserve us!" cried Leon. Will not harm come if, being wholly in the power of a master,
I carry out, in the workshop erected and directed by him, the orders
he gives me, strange though they may seem to me who do not know the
Master's final aims?

But it is not even this question "What will happen?" that agitates men when they hesitate to fulfill
the Master's will. They are troubled by the question how to live without those habitual conditions
of life which we call civilization, culture, art, and science. We feel ourselves all the burdensomeness
of life as it is; we see also that this organization of life must inevitably be our ruin, if
it continues. At the same time we want the conditions of our life which arise out of this organization--our
civilization, culture, art, and science--to remain intact.

It is as though a man, living in an old house and suffering from cold and all sorts of inconvenience
in it, knowing, too, that it is on the point of falling to pieces, should consent to its being
rebuilt, but only on the condition that he should not be required to leave it: a condition which
is equivalent to refusing to have it rebuilt at all.

  
  "But what if I leave the house and give up every
  convenience for a time, and the new house is not
  built, or is built on a different plan so that
  I do not find in it the comforts to which I am
  accustomed?"

But seeing that the materials and the builders are here, there is every likelihood that the
new house will on the contrary be better built than the old one. And at the same time, there
is not only the likelihood but the certainty that the old house will
fall down and crush those who remain within it.

Whether the old habitual conditions of life are supported, or whether
they are abolished and altogether new and better conditions arise;
in any case, there is no doubt we shall be forced to leave the old
forms of life which have become impossible and fatal, and must go
forward to meet the future.

"Civilization, art, science, culture, will disappear!"

Yes, but all these we know are only various manifestations of truth,
and the change that is before us is only to be made for the sake of
a closer attainment and realization of truth.

How then can the manifestations of truth disappear through our realizing
it?

These manifestations will be different, higher, better, but they
will not cease to be.

Only what is false in them will be destroyed; all the truth there
was in them will only be stronger and more flourishing.

Take thought, oh, men, and have faith in the Gospel, in whose teaching is your happiness. If
you do not take thought, you will perish just as the men perished, slain by Pilate, or crushed
by the tower of Siloam; as millions of men have perished, slayers and slain, executing and executed,
torturers and tortured alike, and as the man foolishly perished, who filled his granaries full
and made ready for a long life and died the very night that he planned to begin his life. Take
thought and have faith in the Gospel, Christ said eighteen hundred years ago, and he says it
with even greater force now that the calamities foretold by him have come to pass, and the
senselessness of our life has reached the furthest point of suffering and madness.

Nowadays, after so many centuries of fruitless efforts to make our life secure by the pagan
organization of life, it must be evident to everyone that all efforts
in that direction only introduce fresh dangers into personal and social
life, and do not render it more secure in any way.  He said he lost all interest when he found there was to be another
weak-eyed towhead in the family, and I guess he was in earnest about it, because he wasn't
even curious enough to be at the gate when Mr. Paget came.

Father stopped with a flourish, Laddie hurried around and helped Shelley, and then Mr. Paget
stepped down.  Goodness, gracious, sakes alive!  Little?  Towhead?  He was taller than Laddie.
His hair was most as black as ink, and wavy.  His eyes were big and dark; he was broad and
strong and there was the cleanest, freshest look about him. He put his arm spang around Shelley,
right there in the road, and mother said:  "Hold there!  Not so fast, young man!  I haven't
given my consent to that."

He laughed, and he said:  "Yes, but you'ah going to!"  And he put his other arm around mother,
so May and I crowded up, and we had a family reunion right between the day lilies and the snowball
bush.  We went into the house, and he LIKED us, his room, and everything went exactly right.
He was crazy about the cold buttermilk, and while he was drinking it Leon walked into the dining-room,
because he thought of course Mr. Paget and Shelley would be on the davenport in the parlour.
When he saw Robert he said lowlike to Shelley:  "Didn't Mr. Paget come? Who's that?"

Shelley looked so funny for a minute, then she remembered what she had told him and she just
laughed as she said:  "Mr. Paget, this is my brother."

Robert went to shake hands, and Leon said right to his teeth: "Well a divil of a towhead you are!"

"Towhead?" said Robert, bewildered-like.

"Shelley said you were a little bit of a man, with watery blue eyes, and whiter hair than mine."

"Oh I say!" cried Robert.  "She must have been stringin' you!"

Leon just whooped; because while Mr. Paget didn't talk like the 'orse, 'ouse people, he made
you think of them in the way he said things, and the sound of his voice.  Then we had dinner,
and I don't remember that we ever had quite such a feast before.  Mother had put on every single
flourish she knew.  She used her very best dishes, and linen, and no cook anywhere could beat
Candace alone; now she had Mrs. Freshett to help her, and mother also.  If she tried to show
Mr. Paget, she did it! No visitor was there except him, but we must have been at the table
two hours talking, and eating from one dish after another.  Candace LIKED to wear her white
dress, and carry things around, and they certainly were good.

And talk!  Father, Laddie, and Robert talked over all creation.  Every once in a while when
mother saw an opening, she put in her paddle, and no one could be quicker, when she watched
sharp and was trying to make a good impression.  Shelley was very quiet; she scarcely spoke
or touched that delicious food.  Once the Paget man turned to her, looking at her so fondlike,
as he picked up one of her sauce dishes and her spoon and wanted to feed her.  And he said:
"Heah child, eat your dinnah!  You have nawthing to be fussed ovah!  I mean to propose to you,
and your parents befowr night.  That is what I am heah for."

Every one laughed so, Shelley never got the bite; but after that she perked up more and ate
a little by herself.

At last father couldn't stand it any longer, so he began asking Robert about his trip to England,
and the case he had won.  When the table was cleared for dessert, Mr. Paget asked mother to
have Candace to bring his satchel.  He opened it and spread papers all over, so that father
and Laddie could see the evidence, while he told them how it was.

It seemed there was a law in England, all of us knew about it, because father often had explained
it.  This law said that a man who had lots of money and land must leave almost all of it to
his eldest son; and the younger ones must go into law, the army, be clergymen, or enter trade
and earn a living, while the eldest kept up the home place.  Then he left it to his eldest
son, and his other boys had to work for a living.  It kept the big estates together; but my!
it was hard on the younger sons, and no one seemed even to think about the daughters.  I never
heard them mentioned.

Now there was a very rich man; he had only two sons, and each of them married, and had one
son.  The younger son died, and sent his boy for his elder brother to take care of.  He pretended
to be good, but for sure, he was bad as ever he could be.  He knew that if his cousin were
out of the way, all that land and money would be his when his uncle died.  So he went to work
and he tried for years, and a lawyer man who had no conscience at all, helped him.  At last
when they had done everything they could think of, they took a lot of money and put it in the
pocket of the son they wanted to ruin; then when his father missed the money, and the house
was filled with policemen, detectives, and neighbours, the bad man said he'd feel more comfortable
to have the family searched too, merely as a formality, so he stepped out and was gone over,
and when the son's turn came, there was the money on him! That made him a public disgrace to
his family, and a criminal who couldn't inherit the estate, and his father went raving mad
and tried to kill him, so he had to run away.  At first he didn't care what he did, so he came
over here.  Robert said that man was his best friend, and as men went, he was a decent fellow,
so he cheered him up all he could, and went to work with all his might to prove he was innocent,
and to get back his family, and his money for him.

When Robert had enough evidence that he was almost ready to start to England, his man got a
cable from an old friend of his father's, who always had believed in him, and it said that
the bad man was dying--to come quick.  So Robert went all of a sudden, like the Dead Letters
told about.  Now, he described how he reached there, took the old friend of the father of his
friend with him, and other witnesses, and all the evidence he had, and went to see the sick
man.  When Robert showed him what he could prove, the bad man said it was no use, he had to
die in a few days, so he might as well go with a clean conscience, and he told about everything
he had done.  Robert had it all written out, signed and sworn to.  He told about all of it,
and then he said to father: "Have I made it clear to you?"

Leon was so excited he forgot all the manners he ever had, for he popped up before father could
open his head, and cried: "Clear as mud! I got that son business so plain in my mind, I'd know
the party of the first part, from the party of the second part, if I met him promenading on
the Stone Wall of China!"

Father and Laddie knew so much law they asked dozens of questions; but that Robert man wasn't
a smidgin behind, for every clip he had the answer ready, and then he could go on and tell
much more than he had been asked.  He said as a Case, it was a pretty thing to work on; but
it was much more than a case to him, because he always had known that his friend was not guilty;
that he was separated from his family, suffering terribly under the disgrace, and they must
be also.  He had worked for life for his friend, because the whole thing meant so much to both
of them.  He said he must go back soon and finish up a little more that he should have done
while he was there, if it hadn't been that he received no word from Shelley.

"When I didn't heah from heh for so long, and wrote so many letters, and had no reply, I thought
possibly some gay 'young Lochinvah had come out from the west,' and taken my sweet 'eart,"
he said, "and while I had my armour on, I made up my mind that I'd give him a fight too.  I
didn't propose to lose Shelley, if it were in my powah to win heh.  I hadn't been able to say
to heh exactly what I desiahed, on account of getting a start alone in this country; but if
I won this case, I would have ample means.  When I secuahed the requiahed evidence, I couldn't
wait to finish, so I came straight ovah, to make sure of heh."

He arose and handed the satchel to father.

"I notice you have a very good looking gun convenient," he said. "Would you put these papahs
where you consider them safe until I'm ready to return?  Our home, our living, and the honah
of a man are there, and we are mighty particular about that bag, are we not, Shelley?"

"Well I should think we are!" cried Shelley.  "For goodness sake, father, hang to it!  Is the
man still living?  Could you get that evidence over again?"

"He was alive when I left, but the doctors said ten days would be his limit, so he may be gone
befowr this."

Father picked up the satchel, set it on his knees, and stroked it as if it were alive.

"Well!  Well!" he said.  "Now would any one think such a little thing could contain so much?"

Shelley leaned toward Robert.

"Your friend!" she cried, "Your friend!  What DID he say to you?  What did he DO?"

"Well, for a time he was wildly happy ovah having the stain removed from his honah, and knowing
that he would have his family and faw'tn back; but there is an extremely sad feature to his
case that is not yet settled, so he must keep his head level until we work that out.  Now about
that hoss you wanted to show me----" he turned to Leon.

Mother gave the signal, and we left the table.  Father carried the satchel to his chest, made
room for it, locked it in and put the key in his pocket.  Then our men started to the barn
to show the Arab-Kentucky horse.  Mr. Paget went to Shelley and took her in his arms exactly
like Peter did Sally before the parlour door that time when I got into trouble, and he looked
at mother and laughed as he said:  "I hope you will excuse me, but I've been having a very
nawsty, anxious time, and I cawn't conform to the rules for a few days, until I become accustomed
to the fawct that Shelley is not lost to me.  It was beastly when I reached Chicago, had back
all my letters, and found she had gone home ill.  I've much suffering to recompense.  I'll
atone for a small portion immediately."

He lifted Shelley right off the floor--that's how big and strong he was--he hugged her tight,
and kissed her forehead, cheeks, and eyes.

"When I've gone through the fahmality of asking your parents for you, and they have said a
gracious 'yes,' I'll put the fust one on your lips," he said, setting her down carefully. 
"In the meantime, you be fixing your mouth to say, 'yes,' also, when I propose to you, because
it's coming befowr you sleep."

Shelley was like a peach blossom.  She reached up and touched his cheek, while she looked at
mother all smiling, and sparkling, as she said:  "You see!"

Mother smiled back.

"I do, indeed!" she answered.

Leon pulled Mr. Paget's sleeve.

"Aw quit lally-gaggin' and come see a real horse," he said.

Robert put his other arm around Leon, drew him to his side and hugged him as if he were a girl.
"I'm so glad Shelley has a lawge family," he said.  "Big families are jolly.  I'm so proud
of all the brothers I'm going to have.  I was the only boy at home."

"You haven't told us about your family," said mother.

"No," said Robert, "but I intend to.  I have a family!  One of the finest on uth.  We'll talk
about them after this hoss is inspected."

He let Shelley go and walked away, his arm still around Leon.  Shelley ran to mother and both
of them sobbed out loud.

"NOW YOU SEE HOW IT WAS!" she said.

"You poor child!" cried mother.  "Indeed I DO see how it was.  You've been a brave girl.  A
good, brave girl!  Father and I are mighty proud of you!"

"Oh mother!  I thought you were ashamed of me!" sobbed Shelley.

"Oh my child!" said mother quavery-like.  "Oh my child!  You surely see that none of us could
understand, as we do now."

She patted Shelley, and told her to run upstairs and lie down for a while, because she was
afraid she would be sick.

"We mustn't have a pale, tired girl right now," said mother.

"Well!" said Shelley, but she just stood there holding mother.

"Well?" said mother gripping her.

"You see!" said Shelley.

"Child," said mother, "I DO see!  I see six feet of as handsome manhood as I ever have seen
anywhere.  His manner is perfect, and I find his speech most attractive.  I am delighted with
him.  I do see indeed! Your father is quite as proud and pleased as I am.  Now go to bed."

Shelley held up her lips, and then went.  I ran to the barn, where the men were standing in
the shade, while Leon led his horse up and down before them, told about its pedigree, its record,
how he came to have it.  The Paget man stood there looking and listening gravely, as he studied
the horse.  At last he went over her, and gee! but he knew horse!  Then Laddie brought out
Flos and they talked all about her, and then went into the barn.  Father opened the east doors
to show how much land he had, which were his lines; and while the world didn't look quite so
pretty as it had in May, still it was good enough.  Then they went into the orchard, sat under
the trees and began talking about business conditions.  That was so dry I went back to the
house.  And maybe I didn't strike something interesting there!

As I came up the orchard path to a back yard gate, I saw a carriage at the hitching rack in
front of the house, so I took a peep and almost fell over.  It was the one the Princess had
come to Sally's wedding in; so I knew she was in the house visiting Shelley.  I went to the
parlour and there I had another shock; for lo and behold! in our big rocking chair, and looking
as well as any one, so far as you could see--of course you can't see heart trouble, though--sat
Mrs. Pryor.  The Princess and mother were there, all of them talking, laughing and having the
best time, while on the davenport enjoying himself as much as any one, was Mr. Pryor.  They
talked about everything, and it was easy to see that the Pryor door was OPEN so far as we were
concerned, anyway.  Mrs. Pryor was just as nice and friendly as she could be, and so was he.
Shelley sat beside him, and he pinched her cheek and said: "Something seems to make you especially
brilliant today, young woman!"

Shelley flushed redder, laughed, and glanced at mother, so she said: "Shelley is having a plain
old-fashioned case of beau.  She met a young man in Chicago last fall and he's here now to
ask our consent.  All of us are quite charmed with him.  That's why she's so happy."

Then the Princess sprang up and kissed Shelley, so did Mrs. Pryor, while such a chatter you
never heard.  No one could repeat what they said, for as many as three talked at the same time.

"Oh do let's have a double wedding!" cried the Princess when the excitement was over a little.
"I think it would be great fun; do let's!  When are you planning for?"

"Nothing is settled yet," said Shelley.  "We've had no time to talk!"

"Mercy!" cried the Princess.  "Go make your arrangements quickly! Hurry up, then come over,
and we'll plan for the same time.  It will be splendid!  Don't you think that would be fine,
Mrs. Stanton?"

"I can't see any objections to it," said mother.

"Where is your young man?  I'm crazy to see him," cried the Princess. "If you have gone and
found a better looking one than mine, I'll never speak to you again."

"She hasn't!" cried Mrs. Pryor calmly, like that settled it.  I like her.  "They're not made!"

"I am not so sure of that," said Shelley proudly.  "Mother, isn't my man quite as good looking,
and as nice in every way, as Laddie?"

"Fully as handsome, and so far as can be seen in such a short time, quite as fine," said mother.

I was perfectly amazed at her; as if any man could be!

"I don't believe it, I won't stand it, and I shan't go home until I have seen for myself!"
cried the Princess, laughing, and yet it sounded as if she were half-provoked, and I knew I
was.  The Paget man was all right, but I wasn't going to lose my head over him.  Laddie was
the finest, of course!

"Well, he's somewhere on the place with our men, this minute," said Shelley, "but you stay
for supper, and meet him."

"When you haven't your arrangements made yet!  You surely are unselfish!  Of course I won't
do that, but I'd love to have one little peep, then you bring him and come over to-morrow,
so all of us can become acquainted, and indeed, I'm really in earnest about a double wedding."

"Go see where the men are," said Shelley to me.

I went to the back door, and their heads were bobbing far down in the orchard.

"They're under the greening apple tree," I reported.

"If you will excuse us," said Shelley to Mr. and Mrs. Pryor, "we'll walk down a few minutes
and prove that I'm right."

"Don't stay," said Mrs. Pryor.  "This trip is so unusual for me that I'm quite tired.  For
a first venture, in such a long time, I think I've done well.  But now I'm beginning to feel
I should go home."

"Go straight along," said the Princess.  "I'll walk across the fields, or Thomas can come back
after me."

So Mr. and Mrs. Pryor went away, while the Princess, Shelley, May, and I walked through the
orchard toward the men.  They were standing on the top of the hill looking over the meadow,
and talking with such interest they didn't hear us or turn until Shelley said:  "Mr. Paget,
I want to present you to Laddie's betrothed--Miss Pamela Pryor."

He swung around, finishing what he was saying as he turned, the Princess took a swift step
toward him, then, at the same time, both of them changed to solid tombstone, and stood staring,
and so did all of us, while no one made a sound.  At last the Paget man drew a deep, quivery
breath and sort of shook himself as he gazed at her.

"Why, Pam!" he cried.  "Darling Pam, cawn it possibly be you?"

If you ever heard the scream of a rabbit when the knives of a reaper cut it to death, why that's
exactly the way she cried out.

She covered her eyes with her hands.  He drew back and smiled, the red rushed into his face,
and he began to be alive again.  Laddie went to the Princess and took her hands.

"What does this mean?" he begged.

She pulled away from him, and went to the Paget man slowly, her big eyes wild and strained.

"Robert!" she cried.  "Robert! how did you get here?  Were you hunting us?"

"All ovah England, yes," he said.  "Not heah!  I came heah to see Shelley.  But you?  How do
you happen to be in this country?"

"We've lived on adjoining land for two years!"

"You moved heah!  To escape the pity of our friends?"

"Father moved!  Mother and I had no means, and no refuge.  We were forced.  We never believed
it!  Oh Robert, we never--not for a minute! Oh Robert, say you never did it!"

"Try our chawming cousin Emmet your next guess!"

"That devil!  Oh that devil!"

She cried out that hurt way again, so he took her tight in his arms; but sure as ever Laddie
was my brother, he was hers, so that was all right.  When they were together you wondered why
in this world you hadn't thought of it the instant you saw him alone.  They were like as two
peas.  They talked exactly the same, only he sounded much more so, probably from having just
been in England for weeks, while in two years she had grown a little as we were.  We gazed
at them, open-mouthed, like as not, and no one said a word.

At last Mr. Paget looked over the Princess' shoulder at father and said:  "I can explain this,
Mr. Stanton, in a very few wuds.  I am my friend.  The case was my own.  The evidence I secuahed
was for myself. This is my only sisteh.  Heh people are mine----"

"The relationship is apparent," said father.  "There is a striking likeness between you and
your sister, and I can discern traces of your parents in your face, speech and manner."

"If you know my father," said Robert, "then you undehstand what happened to me when I was found
with his money on my pehson, in the presence of our best friends and the police.  He went raving
insane on the instant, and he would have killed me if he hadn't been prevented; he tried to;
has he changed any since, Pam?"

The Princess was clinging to him with both hands, staring at him, wonder, joy, and fear all
on her lovely face.

"Worse!" she cried.  "He's much worse!  The longer he broods, the more mother grieves, the
bitterer he becomes.  Mr. Stanton, he is always armed.  He'll shoot on sight.  Oh what shall
we do?"

"Miss Pamela," said Leon, "did your man Thomas know your brother in England?"

"All his life."

"Well, then, we'd better be doing something quick.  He tied the horses and was walking up and
down the road while he waited, and he saw us plainly when we crossed the wood yard a while
ago.  He followed us and stared so, I couldn't help noticing him."

"Jove!" cried Robert.  "I must have seen him in the village this morning.  A man reminded me
of him, then I remembered how like people of his type are, and concluded I was mistaken.  Mr.
Stanton, you have agreed that the evidence I hold is sufficient.  Pam cawn tell you that while
I don't deny being full of tricks as a boy, they weh not dirty, not low, and while father always
taking Emmet's paht against me drove me to recklessness sometimes, I nevah did anything underhand
or disgraceful.  She knows what provocation I had, and exactly what happened.  Let heh tell you!"

"I don't feel that I require any further information," said father. "You see, I happen to be
fairly well acquainted with Mr. Pryor."

"Pryor?"

"He made us use that name here," explained the Princess.

"WELL, HIS NAME IS PAGET!" said Robert angrily.

Laddie told me long ago he didn't believe it was Pryor.

"Then, if you are acquainted with my father, what would you counsel? Unless I'm prepahed to
furnish the central figyah of interest in a funeral, I dare not meet him, until he has seen
this evidence, had time to digest it, and calm himself."

Shelley caught him by the arm.  No wonder!  She hadn't been proposed to, or even had a kiss
on her lips.  She pulled him.

"You come straight to the house," she said.  "Thomas may tell your father he thought he saw you."

That was about as serious as anything could be, but nothing ever stopped Leon.

Shelley just looked daggers at him, but she was too anxious to waste any time.

"Would Thomas tell your father?" she asked the Princess.

"The instant he saw him alone, yes.  He wouldn't before mother."

"Hold one minute!" cried father.  "We must think of our mother, just a little.  Shelley, you
and the girls run up and explain how this is. Better all of you go to the house, except Mr.
Paget.  He'll be safe here as anywhere.  Mr. Pryor will stop there, if he comes.  So it would
be best for you to keep out of sight, Robert, until I have had a little talk with him."

"I'll stay here," I offered.  "We'll talk until you get Mr. Pryor cooled off.  He can be awful
ragesome when he's excited, and it doesn't take much to start him."

"You're right about that!" agreed Robert.

So we sat under the greening and were having a fine visit while the others went to break the
news gently to mother that the Pryor mystery had gone up higher than Gilderoy's kite.  My!
but she'd be glad!  It would save her many a powerful prayer.  I was telling Robert all about
the time his father visited us, and what my mother said to him, and he said:  "She'd be the
one to talk with him now.  Possibly he'd listen to her, until he got it through his head that
his own son is not a common thief."

"Maybe he'll have to be held, like taking quinine, and made to listen," I said.

"That would be easy, if he were not a walking ahsenal," said Robert. "You have small chance
to reason with a half-crazy man while he is handling a pistol."

He meant revolver.

"But he'll shoot!" I cried.  "The Princess said he'd shoot!"

"So he will!" said Robert.  "Shoot first, then find out how things are, and kill himself and
every one else with remorse, afterward.  He is made that way."

"Then he doesn't dare see you until he finds out how mistaken he has been," I said, for I was
growing to like Robert better every minute longer I knew him.  Besides, there was the Princess,
looking like him as possible, and loving him of course, like I did Laddie, maybe.  And if anything
could cure Mrs. Pryor's heart trouble, having her son back would, because that was what made
it in the first place, and even before them, there was Shelley to be thought of, and cared for.

CHAPTER XVIII

The Pryor Mystery

  "And now old Dodson, turning pale,
  Yields to his fate--so ends my tale."

It didn't take me long to see why Shelley liked Robert Paget.  He was one of the very most
likeable persons I ever had seen.  We were sitting under the apple tree, growing better friends
every minute, when we heard a smash, so we looked up, and it was the sound made by Ranger as
Mr. Pryor landed from taking our meadow fence.  He had ridden through the pasture, and was
coming down the creek bank.  He was a spectacle to behold.  A mile away you could see that
Thomas had told him he had seen Robert, and where he was.  Father had been mistaken in thinking
Mr. Pryor would go to the house.  He had lost his hat, his white hair was flying, his horse
was in a lather, and he seemed to be talking to himself.  Robert took one good look.  "Ye Gods!"
he cried.  "There he comes now, a chattering madman!"

"The Station," I panted.  "Up that ravine!  Roll back the stone and pull the door shut after
you.  Quick!"

He never could have been inside, before Mr. Pryor's horse was raving along the embankment beside
the fence.

"Where is he?" he cried.  "Thomas saw him here!"

I didn't think his horse could take the fence at the top of the hill, but it looked as if he
intended trying to make it, and I had to stop him if I could.

"Saw who?" I asked with clicking teeth.

"A tall, slender man, with a handsome face, and the heart of a devil."

"Yes, there was a man here like that in the face.  I didn't see his heart," I said.

"Which way?" raved Mr. Pryor.  "Which way?  Is he at your house?"

Then I saw that he had the reins in his left hand, and a big revolver in his right.  So there
was no mistake about whether he'd really shoot. But that gun provoked me.  People have no business
to be careless with those things.  They're dangerous!

"He didn't do what you think he did," I cried, "and he can prove he didn't, if you'll stop
cavorting, and listen to reason."

Mr. Pryor leaned over the fence, dark purple like a beet now.

"You tell me where he is, or I'll choke it out of you," he said.

I guess he meant it.  I took one long look at his lean, clawlike fingers, and put both hands
around my neck.

"He knew Thomas saw him.  He went that way," I said, waving off toward the north.

"Hah! striking for petticoats, as usual!" he cried, and away he went in the direction of his
house.  Then I flew for the Station.

"Come from there, quick!" I cried.  "I've sent him back to his house, but when he finds you're
not there, he will come here again.  Hurry, and I'll put you in the woodshed loft.  He'd never
think of looking there."

He came out and we started toward the house, going pretty fast.  Almost to the back gate we
met Shelley.

"Does mother know?" I asked.

"I just told her," she said.

"Father," I cried, going in the back dining-room door.  "Mr. Pryor was down in the meadow on
Ranger.  Thomas did see Robert, and his father is hunting him with a gun.  We saw him coming,
so I hid Robert in the Station and sent Mr. Pryor back home--I guess I told him a lie, father,
or at least part of one, I said he went 'that way,' and he did, but not so far as I made his
father think; so he started back home, but when he gets there and doesn't find Robert he'll
come here again, madder than ever.  Oh father, he'll come again, and he's crazy, father!  Clear,
raving crazy!  I know he'll come again!"

"Yes," said father calmly.  "I think it very probable that he will come again."

Then he started around shutting and latching windows, closing and locking the doors, and he
carefully loaded his gun, and leaned it against the front casing.  Then he put on his glasses,
and began examining the papers they had brought out again.  Robert stood beside him, and explained
and showed him.

"You see with me out of the way, the English law would give everything to my cousin," he said,
and he explained it all over again.

"And to think how he always posed for a perfect saint!" cried the Princess.  "Oh I hope the
devil knows how to make him pay for what all of us have suffered!"

"Child!  Child!" cried mother.

"I can't help it!" said the Princess.  "Let me tell you, Mr. Stanton."

Then SHE told everything all over again, but it was even more interesting than the way Robert
explained it, because what she said was about how it had been with her and her mother.

"It made father what he is," she said.  "He would have killed Robert, if our friends hadn't
helped him away.  He will now, if he isn't stopped.  I tell you he will!  He sold everything
he could legally control, for what any one chose to give him, and fled here stricken in pride,
heartbroken, insane with anger, the creature you know.  In a minute he'll be back again.  Oh
what are we going to do?"

Father was laying out the papers that he wanted to use very carefully.

"These constitute all the proof any court would require," he said to Robert.  "If he returns,
all of you keep from sight.  This is my house; I'll manage who comes here, in my own way."

"But you must be allowed to take no risk!" cried Robert.  "I cawn't consent to youah facing
danger for me."

"There will be no risk," said father.  "There is no reason why he should want to injure me.
As the master of this house, I am accustomed to being obeyed.  If he comes, step into the parlour
there, until I call you."

He was busy with the papers when he saw Mr. Pryor coming.  I wondered if he would jump the
yard fence and ride down mother's flowers, but he left his horse at the hitching rack, and
pounded on the front door.

"Did any of you notice whether he was displaying a revolver?" asked father.

"Yes father!  Yes!" I cried.  "And he's shaking so I'm afraid he'll make it go, when he doesn't
intend to."

Father picked up and levelled his rifle on the front door.

"Leon," he said, "you're pretty agile.  Open this door, keep yourself behind it, and step around
in the parlour.  The rest of you get out, and stay out of range."

Those nearest hurried into the parlour.  Candace, May, and I crouched in the front stairway,
but things were so exciting we just had to keep the door open a tiny crack so we could see
plain as anything.  There had been nothing for Mrs. Freshett to do all afternoon, so she had
gone over to visit an hour with Amanda Deam.  Now Mr. Pryor probably thought father would meet
him with the Bible in his hand, and read a passage about loving your neighbour as yourself.
I'll bet anything you can mention that he never expected to find himself looking straight down
the barrel of a shining big rifle when that door swung open.  It surprised him so, he staggered,
and his arm wavered.  If he had shot and hit anything then, it would have been an accident.

"Got you over the heart," said father, in precisely the same voice he always said, "This is
a fine day we are having."  "Now why are you coming here in such a shape?"  This was a little
cross.  "I'm not the man to cringe before you!"  This was quite boastful.  "You'll get bullet
for bullet, if you attempt to invade my house with a gun."  This pinged as if father shot words
instead of bullets.

"I want my daughter to come home," said Mr. Pryor.  "And if you're sheltering the thief she
is trying to hide, yield him up, if you would save yourself."

"Well, I'm not anxious about dying, with the family I have on my hands, neighbour," said father,
his rifle holding without a waver, "but unless you put away that weapon, and listen to reason,
you cannot enter my house.  Calm yourself, man, and hear what there is to be said!  Examine
the proof, that is here waiting to be offered to you."

"Once and but once, send them out, or I'll enter over you!" cried Mr. Pryor.

"Sorry," said father, "but if only a muscle of your trigger finger moves, you fall before I
do.  I've the best range, and the most suitable implement for the work."

"Implement for the work!"  Well, what do you think of father?  Any one who could not see, to
have heard him, would have thought he was talking about a hoe.  We saw a shadow before we knew
what made it; then, a little at a time, wonderingly, her jolly face a bewildered daze, her
mouth slowly opening, Mrs. Freshett, half-bent and peering, stooped under Mr. Pryor's arm and
looked in our door.  She had come back to help get supper, and because the kitchen was locked,
she had gone around the house to see if she could get in at the front.  What she saw closed
her mouth, and straightened her back.

"WHY, YOU TWO OLD FOOLS!" she cried.  "IF YE AIN'T DRAWED A BEAD ON EACH OTHER!"

None of us saw her do it.  We only knew after it was over what must have happened.  She had
said she'd risk her life for mother.

She never stopped an instant when her chance came.  She must have turned, and thrown her big
body against Mr. Pryor.  He was tired, old, and shaking with anger.  They went down together,
she gripping his right wrist with both hands, and she was strong as most men.  Father set the
gun beside the door, and bent over them.  A minute more and he handed the revolver to Leon,
and helped Mrs. Freshett to her feet.  Mr. Pryor lay all twisted on the walk, his face was
working, and what he said was a stiff jabber no one could understand.  He had broken into the
pieces we often feared he would.

Robert and Laddie came running to help father carry him in, and lay him on the couch.

"I hope, Miss Stanton," said Mrs. Freshett, "that I wa'n't too rough with him.  He was so shaky-like,
I was 'feered that thing would go off without his really makin' it, and of course I couldn't
see none of yourn threatened with a deadly weepon, 'thout buttin' in and doin' the best I could."

Mother put her arms around her as far as they would reach.  She would have had to take her
a side at a time to really hug all of her, and she said:  "Mrs. Freshett, you are an instrument
in the hands of the Lord this day.  Undoubtedly you have kept us from a fearful tragedy; possibly
you have saved my husband for me.  None of us ever can thank you enough."

"Loosen his collar and give him air," said Mrs. Freshett pushing mother away.  "I think likely
he has bust a blood vessel."

Father sent Leon flying to bring Dr. Fenner.  Laddie took the carriage and he and Robert went
after Mrs. Pryor, while father, mother, Mrs. Freshett, the Princess, May, and I, every last
one, worked over Mr. Pryor.  We poured hot stuff down his throat, put warm things around him,
and rubbed him until the sweat ran on us, trying to get his knotted muscles straightened out.
When Dr. Fenner came he said we were doing all he could; MAYBE Mr. Pryor would come to and
be all right, and maybe his left side would be helpless forever; it was a stroke.  Seemed to
me having Mrs. Freshett come against you like that, could be called a good deal more than a
stroke, but I couldn't think of the right word then.  And after all, perhaps stroke was enough.
He couldn't have been much worse off if the barn had fallen on him.  I didn't think there was
quite so much of Mrs. Freshett; but then she was scared, and angry; and he was about ready
to burst, all by himself, if no one had touched him. He had much better have stayed at home
and listened to what was to be said, reasonably, like father would; and then if he really had
to shoot, he would have been in some kind of condition to take aim.

After a long hard fight we got him limber, straightened out, and warm, it didn't rip so when
he breathed, then they put him in the parlour on the big davenport.  Leon said if the sparkin'
bench didn't bring him to, nothing would.  Laddie sat beside him and mother kept peeping. 
She wouldn't let Dr. Fenner go, because she said Mr. Pryor just must come out of it right,
and have a few years of peace and happiness.

Mrs. Pryor came back with Laddie and Robert.  He carried her in, put her in the big rocking
chair again, and he sat beside her, stroking and kissing her, while she held him with both
hands.  You could see NOW why his mother couldn't sleep, walked the road, and held her hands
over her heart.  She was a brave woman, and she had done well to keep alive and going in any
shape at all.  You see we knew.  There had been only the few hours when it seemed possible
that one of our boys had taken father's money and was gone.  I well remembered what happened
to our mother then.  And if she had been disgraced before every one, dragged from her home
away across a big sea to live among strangers, and not known where her boy was for years, I'm
not a bit sure that she'd have done better than Mrs. Pryor.  Yes, she would too; come to think
it out--she'd have kept on believing the Lord had something to do with it, and that He'd fix
it some way; and I know she and father would have held hands no matter what happened or where
they went.

I guess the biggest thing the matter with Pryors was that they didn't know how to go about
loving each other right; maybe it was because they didn't love God, so they couldn't know exactly
what PROPER LOVE was; because God is love, like father said.

Mrs. Pryor didn't want to see Mr. Pryor--I can't get used to calling them Paget--and she didn't
ask anything about him.  I guess she was pretty mad at him.  She never had liked the Emmet
cousin, and she'd had nothing but trouble with him all the time he had been in her family,
and then that awful disgrace, that she always THOUGHT was all him, but she couldn't prove it,
and she had no money.

That's a very bad thing.  A woman should always have some money.  She works as hard as any
one, and usually she has more that worries her, so it's only fair for her to have part of what
the work and worry bring. Mother always has money.  Why, she has so much, she can help father
out when he is pushed with bills, as she did last fall, to start Shelley to music school. 
It's no way to be forced to live with a man, just to get a home, food, and clothing.  I don't
believe mother ever would do it in all this world.  But then mother has worked all her life,
and so if father doesn't do as she wants him to, she'd know exactly how to go about taking
care of herself.

After all Mrs. Pryor didn't need to sit back on her dignity and look so abused.  He couldn't
knock her down, and drag her clear here.  Why didn't she say right out, in the beginning, that
her son COULDN'T be a thief, that she knew it, and she'd stay at home and wait for him to come
back?  She could have put a piece in the paper saying she knew her boy was all right, and for
him to come back, so they could go to work and PROVE it.  I bet if she'd had one tenth of the
ginger mother has, she'd have stopped the whole fuss in the start.  I looked at her almost
steadily, trying to figure out just what mother would have done in her place.  Maybe I'm mistaken
about exactly how she would have set to work, but this I KNOW: she'd have stuck to the Lord;
she'd have loved father, so dearly, he just COULDN'T have wanted her to do things that hurt
her until it gave her heart trouble; and she never, never would have given up one of us, and
sat holding her heart for months, refusing to see or to speak to any one, while she waited
for some one else to do something.  Mother never waits.  She always thinks a minute, if she's
in doubt she asks father; if he can't decide, both of them ask God; and then you ought to see
things begin to fly.

The more I watched Mrs. Pryor, the more I began to think she was a lady; and just about when
I was sure that was what ailed her, I heard father say:  "Perhaps the lady would like a cup
of tea."  I had a big notion to tell her to come on, and I would show her where the cannister
was, but I thought I better not.  I wanted to, though.  She'd have felt much better if she
had got up and worked like the rest of us.  With all the excitement, and everything happening
at once, you'd have thought mother would be flat on her back, but flat nothing!  Everything
was picked up and slid back, fast as it was torn down; she found time to flannel her nose and
brush her hair, her collar was straight, and the goldstone pin shone in the light, while her
starched white apron fluttered as she went through the doors.  She said a few words to Candace
and Mrs. Freshett, May took out a linen cloth and began to set places for all the grown people,
so I knew there'd be strawberry preserves and fried ham, but in all that, would you ever have
thought that she'd find a second to make biscuit, and tea cakes herself?  Plain as preaching
I heard her say to Mrs. Freshett:  "I do hope and pray that Mr. Pryor will come out of it right,
so we can take him home, and teach him to behave himself; but if he's gone this minute, I intend
to have another decent meal for Shelley to offer her young man; and I don't care if I show
Mrs. Pryor that we're not hungry over here, if we do lack servants to carry in food on silver
platters."

"That I jest would!" said Mrs. Freshett.  "Even if he turns up his toes, 'tain't YOUR funeral,
thank the Lord! an' looky here, I'd jest as soon set things in a bake pan an' pass 'em for
you, myself.  I'll do it, if you say the word."

Mother bit her lip, and fought her face to keep it straight, as she said confidential-like:
"No, I'm not going to toady to her.  I only want her to see that a meal really consists of
food after all; I don't mind putting my best foot foremost, but I won't ape her."

"Huccome they to fuss like this, peaceable as Mr. Stanton be, an' what's Shelley's beau to them?"

"I should think you could tell by looking at Pryors," said mother. "He's their mystery, and
also their son.  Shelley met him in Chicago, he came here to see her, and ran right into them.
I'll tell you about it before you go.  Now, I must keep these applications hot, for I've set
my head on pulling Mr. Pryor out so that he can speak, and have a few decent years of life yet."

"But why did the old devil--EX-cuse me, I mean the old GENTLEMAN, want to shoot your man?"

"He didn't!  I'll tell you all about it after they're gone."

"I bet you don't get shet of them the night," said Mrs. Freshett.

"All right!" said mother.  "Whatever Dr. Fenner thinks.  I won't have Mr. Pryor moved until
it can't hurt him, if he stays a week.  I blame her quite as much as I do him; from what I
know.  If a woman is going to live with a man, there are times when she's got to put her foot
down--flat--most unmercifully flat!"

"Ain't she though!" said Mrs. Freshett; then she and mother just laughed.

There!  What did I tell you?  I feel as good as if father had patted me on the head and bragged
on me a lot.  I THOUGHT mother wouldn't think that Mr. Pryor was ALL to blame, and she didn't.
I figured that out by myself, too.

Every minute Mr. Pryor grew better.  He breathed easier, and mother tilted on her toes and
waved her hands, when he moved his feet, threw back his head, lifted his hand to it, and acted
like he was almost over it, and still in shape to manage himself.  She hurried to tell Mrs.
Pryor, and I know mother didn't like it when she never even said she was glad, or went to see
for herself.

Laddie and the Princess watched him, while every one else went to supper.  Laddie picked up
Mrs. Pryor's chair, carried her to the dining-room, and set her in my place beside father.
He placed Dr. Fenner next her, and left Robert to sit with Shelley.  I don't think Mrs. Pryor
quite liked that, but no one asked her.

I watched and listened until everything seemed to be going right there, and then I slipped
into the parlour, where Laddie and the Princess were caring for Mr. Pryor.  With one hand Laddie
held hers, the other grasped Mr. Pryor's wrist.  Laddie never took his eyes from that white,
drawn face, except to smile at her, and squeeze her hand every little while.  At last Mr. Pryor
turned over and sighed, pretty soon he opened his eyes, and looked at Laddie, then at the Princess,
and it was nothing new to see them, so he smiled and dozed again.  After a while he opened
them wider, then he saw the piano--that was an eye-opener for any one--and the strange room,
so he asked, most as plain as he ever talked, why he was at our house again, and then he began
to remember. He struggled to sit up and the colour came into his face.  So Laddie let go the
Princess, and held him down while he said:  "Mr. Pryor, answer me this.  Do you want to spend
the remainder of your life in an invalid's chair, or would you like to walk abroad and sit
a horse again?"

He glared at Laddie, but he heard how things were plainly enough.

Laddie held him, while he explained what a fight we had to unlock his muscles, and start him
going again, and how, if we hadn't loved him, and wanted him so, and had left him untouched
until the Doctor came, very likely he'd have been paralyzed all the rest of his life, if he
hadn't died; and he said he wished he HAD, and he didn't THANK any one for saving him.

"Oh yes you do!" said Laddie, the same as he'd have talked to Leon. "You can't stuff me on
that, and you needn't try.  Being dead is a cold, clammy proposition, that all of us put off
as long as we can. You know you want to see Pamela in her own home.  You know you are interested
in how I come out with those horses.  You know you want the little people you spoke of, around
you.  You know the pain and suspense you have borne have almost driven you insane, and it was
because you cared so deeply.  Now lie still, and keep quiet!  All of us are tired and there's
no sense in making us go through this again, besides the risk of crippling yourself that you
run.  Right here in this house are the papers to prove that your nephew took your money, and
hid it in your son's clothing, as he already had done a hundred lesser things, before, purposely
to estrange you.  Hold steady!  You must hear this! The sooner you know it, the better you'll
feel.  You remember, don't you, that before your nephew entered your home, you idolized your
son. You thought the things he did were amusing.  A boy is a boy, and if he's alive, he's very
apt to be lively.  Mother could tell you a few pranks that Leon has put us through; but they're
only a boy's foolishness, they are not unusual or unforgivable.  I've gone over the evidence
your son brings, with extreme care, so has father.  Both of us are quite familiar with common
law.  He has every proof you can possibly desire.  You can't get around it, even if your heart
wasn't worn out with rebellion, and you were not crazy to have the loving sympathy of your
family again."

"I don't believe a word of it!"

"You have got to!  I tell you it is PROOF, man!  The documents are in this house now."

"He forged them, or stole them, as he took the money!"

Laddie just laughed.

"How you do long, and fight, to be convinced!" he said.  "I don't blame you!  When anything
means this much, of course you must be sure.  But you'll know your nephew's signature; also
your lawyer's.  You'll know letters from old friends who are above question. On closer examination,
therefore, it becomes evident that the income of the lords of manors, whether individuals or corporations,
was not increased, but considerably diminished, and that their position
was less favorable than it had been before the pestilence.



"Tell me!" he said at last, so they took turns explaining everything plain as day, and soon
he listened without being held.

When they had told him everything they could think of, he asked: "Did Robert kill Emmet?"

"I am very happy to be able to tell you that he did not.  It would have been painful, and not
helped a bad matter a particle.  Your nephew had dissipated until he was only a skeleton just
breathing his last.  It's probable that his fear of death helped your son out, so that he got
the evidence he wanted easier than he hoped to in the beginning.  I don't mean that he is dead
now; but he is passing slowly, and loathsomely. Robert thinks word that he has gone will come
any hour.  Think how pleasant it will be to have your son!  Think how happy your home will
be now!  Think how you will love to see Sandy, and all your old friends!  Think how glad you'll
be to go home, and take charge of your estate!"

"Think!" cried Mr. Pryor, pushing Laddie away and sitting up: "Think how I shall enjoy wringing
the last drop of blood from that craven's body with these old hands!"

What a sight he did look to be sure!  Sick, half-crazy, on the very verge of the grave himself,
and wanting to kill a poor man already dying.  Aren't some people too curious?

Laddie carefully laid him down, straightened him out and held him again.  Mother always said
he was "patient as Job," and that day it proved to be a good thing.

"You're determined to keep yourself well supplied with trouble," laughed Laddie.  I don't believe
any one else would have dared.  "Now to an unbiased observer, it would seem that you'd be ready
to let well enough alone.  You have your son back, you have him fully exonerated, you have
much of your property, you are now ready for freedom, life, and love, with the best of us;
you have also two weddings on your hands in the near future.  Why in the name of sense are
you anxious for more?"

"I should have thought that Sandy McSheel, if he's a real friend of mine----"

"Sandy tells you all about it in the letter he has sent.  He went with Robert fully intending
to do that very thing for you, but the poor creature was too loathsome.  The sight of him made
Sandy sick.  He writes you that when he saw the horrible spectacle, all he could think of was
to secure the evidence needed and get away."

Suddenly the Princess arose and knelt beside the davenport.  She put her arms around her father's
neck and drew his wrinkled, white old face up against her lovely one.

"Daddy!  Dear old Daddy!" she cried.  "I've had such a hard spot in my heart against you for
so long.  Oh do let's forget everything, and begin all over again; begin away back where we
were before Emmet ever came.  Oh Daddy, do let's forget, and begin all over new, like other
people!"

He held her tight a minute, then his lips began whispering against her ear.  Finally he said:
"Take yourselves off, and send Robert here.  I want my son.  Oh I want my boy!"

It was a long time before Robert came from the parlour; when he did, it was only to get his
mother and take her back with him; then it was a still longer time before the door opened;
but when it did, it was perfectly sure that they were all friends again.  Then Leon went to
tell Thomas, and he came with the big carriage.

White and shaking, Mr. Pryor was lifted into it and they went home together, taking Shelley
with them to stay that night; so no doubt she was proposed to and got her kiss before she slept.

That fall there were two weddings at our church at the same time.

Sally's had been fine; but it wasn't worth mentioning beside Laddie and the Princess, and Robert
and Shelley.  You should have seen my mother! She rocked like a kingbird on the top twig of
the winesap, which was the tallest tree in our orchard, and for once there wasn't a single
fly in her ointment, not one, she said so herself, and so did father.  As we watched the big
ve-hi-ackle, as Leon called it, creep slowly down the Little Hill, it made me think of that
pathetic poem, "The Three Warnings," in McGuffey's Sixth.  I guess I gave Mr. Pryor the first,
that time he got so angry he hit his horse until it almost ran away. Mother delivered the second
when she curry-combed him about the taxes, and Mrs. Freshett finished the job.  The last two
lines read as if they had been especially written about him:

  "And now old Dodson, turning pale,
  Yields to his fate--so ends my tale."