BRAVE MEN AND WOMEN

THEIR STRUGGLES, FAILURES, AND TRIUMPHS.

BY

O.E. FULLER, A.M.

"Find out what you are fitted for; work hard at that one thing, and keep a brave, honest heart."

       *       *       *       *       *

COPYRIGHT By O.E. FULLER 1884 All rights reserved.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE

Struggle, failure, triumph: while triumph is the thing sought, struggle has its joy, and failure
is not without its uses.

"It is not the goal," says Jean Paul, "but the course which makes us happy." The law of life
is what a great orator affirmed of oratory--"Action, action, action!" As soon as one point
is gained, another, and another presents itself.

"It is a mistake," says Samuel Smiles, "to suppose that men succeed through success; they much
oftener succeed through failure." Even when one turns to no new course, how many failures,
as a rule, mark the way to triumph, and brand into life, as with a hot iron, the lessons of defeat!

The brave man or the brave woman is one who looks life in the eye, and says: "God helping me,
I am going to  realize the best possibilities of my nature, by calling into action the beneficent
laws which govern and determine the development of each individual member of the race." And
the failures of such a person are the jewels of triumph; that triumph which is certain in the
sight of heaven, if not in the eyes of men.

"Brave Men and Women," the title of this volume, is used in a double sense, as referring not
only to those whose words and deeds are here recorded, or cited as examples, but also to all
who read the book, and are striving after the riches of character.

Some of the sketches and short papers are anonymous, and have been adapted for use in these
pages. Where the authorship is known, and the productions have been given verbatim, the source,
if not the pen of the editor, has been indicated. Thanks are due to the press, and to those
who have permitted the use of copyrighted matter.

In conclusion, the editor lays little claim to originality--save in the metrical pieces, and
in the use he has made of material. His aim has simply been to form a sort of mosaic or variegated
picture of the Brave Life--the life which recognizes the Divine Goodness in all things, striving
through good report and evil report, and in manifold ways, which one is often unqualified to
judge, to attain to the life of Him who is "the light of the world."

THE AUTHOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.--HIS FAME STILL CLIMBING TO HEAVEN--WHAT HE HAD DONE AT FIFTY-TWO--POOR
RICHARD'S ADDRESS

CHAPTER II.

DEFENCE OF A GREAT MAN.--WAS DR. FRANKLIN MEAN?--JAMES PARTON'S ANSWER

CHAPTER III.

SIR WALTER SCOTT AND HIS MOTHER.--THE MOTHER'S EDUCATION--THE SON'S TRAINING--DOMESTIC LOVE
AND SOCIAL DUTIES

CHAPTER IV.

ABIGAIL ADAMS.--THE WIFE OF OUR SECOND PRESIDENT--THE MOTHER OF OUR SIXTH

CHAPTER V.

TWO NEIGHBORS.--WHAT THEY GOT OUT OF LIFE

CHAPTER VI.

HORACE GREELEY.--THE MOLDER OF PUBLIC OPINION--THE BRAVE JOURNALIST

CHAPTER VII.

WENDELL PHILLIPS.--THE TIMES WHEN HE APPEARED--"WHO IS THIS FELLOW?"--A FLAMING ADVOCATE OF
LIBERTY--LIBERTY OF SPEECH AND THOUGHT--POWER TO DISCERN THE RIGHT--THE MOB-BEATEN HERO TRIUMPHANT

CHAPTER VIII.

MARY WORDSWORTH.--THE KINDLY WIFE OF THE GREAT POET

CHAPTER IX.

MADAME MALIBRAN.--HER CAREER AS A SINGER--KINDNESS OF HEART

CHAPTER X.

GARFIELD MAXIMS.--GATHERED FROM HIS SPEECHES, ADDRESSES, LETTERS, ETC.

CHAPTER XI.

WHAT I CARRIED TO COLLEGE.--A REMINISCENCE AT FORTY--PICTURES OF RURAL LIFE

CHAPTER XII.

SIR JOHN FRANKLIN.--HEROISM ON THE GREAT DEEP--A MARTYR OF THE POLAR SEA

CHAPTER XIII.

ELIZABETH ESTAUGH.--A QUAKER COURTSHIP IN WHICH SHE WAS THE PRINCIPAL ACTOR

CHAPTER XIV.

"CHINESE" GORDON.--IN THE TRENCHES OF THE CRIMEA--PUTS DOWN THE GREAT TAIPING REBELLION IN
CHINA, IN 1863-4--HERO OF THE SOUDAN--BEARDS THE MEN-STEALERS IN THEIR STRONGHOLDS AND MAKES
THE PEOPLE LOVE HIM

CHAPTER XV.

MEN'S WIVES.--BITS OF COMMON SENSE AND WISDOM ON A GREAT SUBJECT

CHAPTER XVI.

WOMEN'S HUSBANDS.--WHAT THE "BREAD-WINNERS" LIKE IN THEIR WIVES--A LITTLE CONSTITUTIONAL OPPOSITION

CHAPTER XVII.

JOHN PLOUGHMAN.--WHAT HE SAYS ABOUT RELIGIOUS GRUMBLERS--GOOD NATURE AND FIRMNESS, ETC.

CHAPTER XVIII.

CAROLINE LUCRETIA HERSCHEL.--A NOBLE, SELF-SACRIFICING WOMAN

CHAPTER XIX.

PESTIFEROUS LITERATURE.--THE PRINTING PRESS--THE FLOOD OF IMPURE AND LOATHSOME LITERATURE, ETC.

CHAPTER XX.

SATISFIED.--AND OTHER POEMS

CHAPTER XXI.

HEROES OF SCIENCE.--MICHAEL FARADAY--SIR WILLIAM SIEMENS--M. PASTEUR

CHAPTER XXII.

MY UNCLE TOBY.--ONE OF THE BEAUTIFUL CREATIONS OF A GREAT GENIUS

CHAPTER XXIII.

STEPHEN GIRARD.--THE NAPOLEON OF MERCHANTS--HIS LIFE SUCCESSFUL, AND YET A FAILURE

CHAPTER XXIV.

DISAPPOINTMENTS.--PLEASURE AFTER PAIN--PAIN AFTER PLEASURE

CHAPTER XXV.

THE THREE KINGS.--AN OLD STORY IN A NEW LIGHT

CHAPTER XXVI.

FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.--THE HEROINE OF THE CRIMEA

CHAPTER XXVII.

SHY PEOPLE.--HAWTHORNE--WASHINGTON, IRVING, AND OTHERS--MADAME RECAMIER

CHAPTER XXVIII.

JOHN MARSHALL.--IN THE REVOLUTIONARY ARMY--His MARRIAGE--LAW LECTURES--AT THE BAR--His INTELLECTUAL
POWERS--ON THE BENCH

CHAPTER XXIX.

A NOBLE MOTHER.--How SHE TRAINED HERSELF, AND EDUCATED HER BOYS

CHAPTER XXX.

THE CARE OF THE BODY.--WHAT DR. SARGENT, OF THE HARVARD GYMNASIUM, SAYS ABOUT IT--POINTS FOR
PARENTS, TEACHERS, AND PUPILS

CHAPTER XXXI.

SAINT CECILIA.--THE PATRONESS OF MUSIC--MYTHS CONCERNING THE ORIGIN OF MUSIC--ITS RELATION
TO WORK AND BLESSEDNESS

CHAPTER XXXII.

THOMAS DE QUINCEY.--A LIFE OF WONDER AND WARNING

CHAPTER XXXIII.

A VISION OF TIME.--NEW YEAR'S EVE

CHAPTER XXXIV.

JOHN BUNYAN.--FROM DARKNESS TO LIGHT

CHAPTER XXXV.

MADAME ROLAND.--THE MOST REMARKABLE WOMAN OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION--THE IPHIGENIA OF FRANCE

CHAPTER XXXVI.

CHEERFUL AND BRAVE.--THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON--SIR WALTER RALEIGH--XENOPHON--CÆSAR--NELSON, ETC.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

HAROLD.--THE LAST SAXON KING OF ENGLAND

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

PETER COOPER.--THE LESSONS OF A LONG AND USEFUL LIFE

CHAPTER XXXIX.

ILLUSIONS.--"THEREFORE TRUST TO THY HEART AND WHAT THE WORLD CALLS ILLUSIONS"

CHAPTER XL.

PHILLIPS BROOKS.--At Home

CHAPTER XLI.

ST. JOHN AND THE ROBBER.--A LEGEND OF THE FIRST CENTURY

CHAPTER XLII.

JOHN PLOUGHMAN AGAIN.--THE PITH AND MARROW OF CERTAIN OLD PROVERBS

CHAPTER XLIII.

HENRY WILSON.--FROM THE SHOEMAKER'S BENCH TO THE CHAIR OF VICE-PRESIDENT

CHAPTER XLIV.

JOAN OF ARC.--THE PEASANT MAIDEN WHO DELIVERED HER COUNTRY AND BECAME A MARTYR IN ITS CAUSE

CHAPTER XLV.

THE SONG OF WORK.--MANY PHASES AND MANY EXAMPLES

CHAPTER XLVI.

ALVAN S. SOUTHWORTH.--CROSSING THE NUBIAN DESERT

CHAPTER XLVII.

A FORBIDDEN TOPIC.--WHICH SOME PEOPLE PERSIST IN INTRODUCING

CHAPTER XLVIII.

IDA LEWIS WILSON.--THE GRACE DARLING OF AMERICA

CHAPTER XLIX.

RACHEL JACKSON.--THE WIFE OF OUR SEVENTH PRESIDENT

CHAPTER L.

DISCONTENTED GIRLS.--ONE PANACEA FOR THEM--AND ONE REFUGE

CHAPTER LI.

THE VOICE IN RAMAH.--"RACHEL WEEPING FOR HER CHILDREN, AND WOULD NOT BE COMFORTED BECAUSE THEY
WERE NOT"

CHAPTER LII.

LA FAYETTE.--THE FRIEND AND DEFENDER OF LIBERTY ON TWO CONTINENTS

CHAPTER LIII.

LYDIA SIGOURNEY.--THE LESSON OF A USEFUL AND BEAUTIFUL LIFE

CHAPTER LIV.

OLD AGE AND USEFULNESS.--THE GLORY OF BRAVE MEN AND WOMEN

CHAPTER LV.

RHYMES AND CHIMES.--SUITABLE FOR AUTOGRAPH ALBUMS

       *       *       *       *       *

I.

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

(BORN 1706--DIED 1790.)

HIS FAME STILL CLIMBING TO HEAVEN--WHAT HE HAD DONE AT FIFTY-TWO--POOR RICHARD'S ADDRESS. 

Measure the doll's neck for collar. Gradually widen each row in the back. Bring the third row
of web down in front to form the tabs; then up to the back of collarette and finish the back,
bringing the last row down in front into the tabs.

Paper patterns may be used as a guide, but children should be encouraged to draw and cut their own
patterns.

Tam O' Shanter Cap

Measure the doll's head and make the top of the crown twice the diameter of the head. It is sewed
in the same way as the circular mat. When the desired width of crown is obtained, begin the
under side of the crown by narrowing off--that is, taking two stitches
in the crown and sewing them into one stitch in the web.

Continue until the desired opening for the head is obtained.

Two rows of web will complete the headband.

Finish with a pompon on top.

Use round web.

Baby's Rattle

The foundation ring is made of a piece of splint or flat pith fifteen inches long. Form this
into a ring, having the ends lap two inches.

Wrap this with knitting cotton or yarn, being careful to keep winding even. When the winding
is completed, draw the end of cotton underneath the winding with a needle to fasten it.

Use three pieces of round web for spokes. Fasten all three together in the center. Bells may
be sewed on the outside or inside of the ring.

Toboggan Cap

To make a cap five inches long and four inches wide, knit eighty-four
inches of flat web.

After securing the top, twist and fold the piece of yarn remaining for a cord and fasten a number
of strands of yarn through the loop for a tassel.

Child's Bath or Bedroom Slippers

Length of sole, five and one-half inches. It is well to have the soles before beginning to sew. They
can be secured at any store.

Each slipper requires two and one-half yards of round web. Start at the back of the heel (A,
of illustration), and make the first two rows three inches high, then gradually shorten the
next three rows, and keep each row this height until the instep is finished. The first row on
the vamp (B, of illustration) is made one inch higher than the side. Each row is then gradually
shortened, the last row being three-fourths of an inch high (C, of illustration). This will
complete one-half of the slipper.

The other half is made in just the reverse way by continuing the sewing
from the toe (C, of illustration) back to the heel, taking care that
each row is exactly the same height as the corresponding row on the
opposite side.

Join the back of the heel and sew to the soles before closing the vamp in front. Sew vamp up the
center by catching corresponding loops together. Make cord and tassel to go around the top,
as in illustration of finished slippers.

       Small Mittens

Sixty inches of flat web will be required for each mitten.

Cut off eight pieces six inches long.

In cutting, clip just one stitch and run the ends across, and sew them into a cylindrical form.
Draw in the top with a needle and a piece of the material and fasten
securely. Leave an opening on one side for the thumb.

The thumb is
made of three pieces sewed together. The longest piece is three inches
and the others each two and three-fourths inches long. In sewing it
into the mitten, have the longest piece come down toward the wrist.
Gradually form and sew it in place. Draw in the top and fasten securely.

CORD

This
is made of round web, knitted the desired length. The length will
vary a little according to size of the child, but four and one-half
feet is a good length. The mittens are fastened to the ends of the
cord.

Doll's Hood

This requires two yards of round web.

Start with
the end of the web and sew into a circular form for the crown. (See
illustration A.) The sixth row is brought down to within one inch
of the center of the back. Turn and sew around to within one inch
from the center of the back on the opposite side. This will leave
two inches free in the back of the hood. Turn and continue sewing
in this way for five rows, which will form the side of hood.

The
remaining part of the web is then brought around the face of the hood
and across the back, as one would sew a cord.

Finish with cord and
tassel for tie-strings. A rosette of yarn may be made for the top
or side.

Doll's Coat or Jacket

This may be made of round or flat
web.

The coat is begun at the under-arm seam a. For a coat five inches
long begin three inches from the end of the web to make the first
turn. Sew from this turn to the starting end of the web b, fasten
the sewing thread and cut it off. The second row is made eleven inches
long, or long enough to go over the shoulder and down the back, b
to c.

Sew four rows in this way to form the front and part of the
back; then four rows five inches long for the back; then four more
rows eleven inches long for the other shoulder and front d to e. Sew
the fifth or last row up three inches for the other under-arm seam. Not a few
people who profess much admiration for Franklin in other respects seem to think that in money
matters there was something about him akin to meanness. To correct this false impression and
show "how Franklin got his money, how much he got, and what he did with it," one of his recent
biographers is called up in his defense, and to the question, "Was Dr. Franklin mean?" here is

JAMES PARTON'S ANSWER.

That was certainly not the act of a stingy, calculating boy.

His next purchase, of which we have any knowledge was made when he was about eleven years old;
and this time, I confess, he made a much better bargain. The first book he could ever call
his own was a copy of Pilgrim's Progress, which he read and re-read until he got from it all
so young a person could understand. But being exceedingly fond of reading, he exchanged his
Pilgrim's Progress for a set of little books, then much sold by peddlers, called "Burton's
Historical Collections," in forty paper-covered volumes, containing history, travels, tales,
wonders, and curiosities, just the thing for a boy. As we do not know the market value of his
Pilgrim's Progress, we can not tell whether the poor peddler did well by him or the contrary.
But it strikes me that that is not the kind of barter in which a mean, grasping boy usually
engages.

His father being a poor soap-and-candle maker, with a dozen children or more to support or
assist, and Benjamin being a printer's apprentice, he was more and more puzzled to gratify
his love of knowledge. But one day he hit upon an expedient that brought in a little cash.
By reading a vegetarian book this hard, calculating Yankee lad had been led to think that people
could live better without meat than with it, and that killing innocent animals for food was
cruel and wicked. So he abstained from meat altogether for about two years. As this led to
some inconvenience at his boarding-house, he made this cunning proposition to his master:

"Give me one-half the money you pay for my board and I will board myself."

The master consenting, the apprentice lived entirely on such things as hominy, bread, rice,
and potatoes, and found that he could actually live upon half of the half. What did the calculating
wretch do with the money? Put it into his money-box? No; he laid it out in the improvement
of his mind.

When at the age of seventeen, he landed in Philadelphia, a runaway apprentice, he had one silver
dollar and one shilling in copper coin. It was a fine Sunday morning, as probably the reader
remembers, and he knew not a soul in the place. He asked the boatmen upon whose boat he had
come down the Delaware how much he had to pay. They answered, Nothing, because he had helped
them row. Franklin, however, insisted upon their taking his shilling's worth of coppers, and
forced the money upon them. An hour after, having bought three rolls for his breakfast, he
ate one and gave the other two to a poor woman and her child who had been his fellow-passengers.
These were small things, you may say; but remember he was a poor, ragged, dirty runaway in
a strange town, four hundred miles from a friend, with three pence gone out of the only dollar
he had in the world.

Next year when he went home to see his parents, with his pocket full of money, a new suit of
clothes and a watch, one of his oldest Boston friends was so much pleased with Franklin's account
of Philadelphia that he determined to go back with him. On the journey Franklin discovered
that his friend had become a slave to drink. He was sorely plagued and disgraced by him, and
at last the young drunkard had spent all his money and had no way of getting on except by Franklin's
aid. This hard, calculating, mercenary youth, did he seize the chance of shaking off a most
troublesome and injurious traveling companion? Strange to relate, he stuck to his old friend,
shared his purse with him till it was empty, and then began on some money which he had been
intrusted with for another, and so got him to Philadelphia, where he still assisted him. It
was seven years before Franklin was able to pay all the debt incurred by him to aid this old
friend, for abandoning whom few would have blamed him.

A year after he was in still worse difficulty from a similar cause. He went to London to buy
types and a press with which to establish himself in business at Philadelphia, the governor
of Pennsylvania having promised to furnish the money. One of the passengers on the ship was
a young friend of Franklin's named James Ralph, with whom he had often studied, and of whom
he was exceedingly fond. Ralph gave out that he, too, was going to London to make arrangements
for going into business for himself at Philadelphia. The young friends arrived. Franklin nineteen
and Ralph a married man with two children. On reaching London Franklin learned, to his amazement
and dismay, that the governor had deceived him, that no money was to be expected from him,
and that he must go to work and earn his living at his trade. No sooner had he learned this
than James Ralph gave him another piece of stunning intelligence; namely, that he had run away
from his family and meant to settle in London as a poet and author.

Franklin had ten pounds in his pocket, and knew a trade. Ralph had no money, and knew no trade.
They were both strangers in a strange city. Now, in such circumstances, what would a mean,
calculating young man have done? Reader, you know very well, without my telling you. What Franklin
did was this: he shared his purse with his friend till his ten pounds were all gone; and having
at once got to work at his trade, he kept on dividing his wages with Ralph until he had advanced
him thirty-six pounds--half a year's income--not a penny of which was ever repaid. And this
he did--the cold-blooded wretch!--because he could not help loving his brilliant, unprincipled
comrade, though disapproving his conduct and sadly needing his money.

Having returned to Philadelphia, he set up in business as a printer and editor, and, after
a very severe effort, he got his business well established, and at last had the most profitable
establishment of the kind in all America. During the most active part of his business life
he always found some time for the promotion of public objects. He founded a most useful and
public-spirited club; a public library, which still exists, and assisted in every worthy scheme.
He was most generous to his poor relations, hospitable to his fellow-citizens, and particularly
interested in his journeymen, many of whom he set up in business.

The most decisive proof, however, which he ever gave that he did not overvalue money, was the
retirement from a most profitable business for the purpose of having leisure to pursue his
philosophical studies. He had been in business twenty years, and he was still in the prime
of life--forty-six years of age. He was making money faster than any other printer on this
continent. But being exceedingly desirous of spending the rest of his days in study and experiment,
and having saved a moderate competency, he sold his establishment to his foreman on very easy
terms, and withdrew. His estate, when he retired, was worth about a hundred thousand dollars.
If he had been a lover of money, I am confident that he could and would have accumulated one
of the largest fortunes in America. He had nothing to do but continue in business, and take
care of his investments, to roll up a prodigious estate. But not having the slightest taste
for needless accumulation, he joyfully laid aside the cares of business, and spent the whole
remainder of his life in the services of his country; for he gave up his heart's desire of
devoting his leisure to philosophy when his country needed him.

Being in London when Captain Cook returned from his first voyage to the Pacific, he entered
warmly into a beautiful scheme for sending a ship for the purpose of stocking the islands there
with pigs, vegetables, and other useful animals and products. A hard, selfish man would have
laughed such a project to scorn.

In 1776, when he was appointed embassador of the revolted colonies to the French king, the
ocean swarmed with British cruisers, General Washington had lost New York, and the prospects
of the Revolution were gloomy in the extreme. Dr. Franklin was an old man of seventy, and might
justly have asked to be excused from a service so perilous and fatiguing. But he did not. He
went. And just before he sailed he got together all the money he could raise--about three thousand
pounds--and invested it in the loan recently announced by Congress. This he did at a moment
when few men had a hearty faith in the success of the Revolution. This he did when he was going
to a foreign country that might not receive him, from which he might be expelled, and he have
no country to return to. There never was a more gallant and generous act done by an old man.

In France he was as much the main stay of the cause of his country as General Washington was
at home.

Returning home after the war, he was elected president of Pennsylvania for three successive
years, at a salary of two thousand pounds a year. But by this time he had become convinced
that offices of honor, such as the governorship of a State, ought not to have any salary attached
to them. He thought they should be filled by persons of independent income, willing to serve
their fellow-citizens from benevolence, or for the honor of it. So thinking, he at first determined
not to receive any salary; but this being objected to, he devoted the whole of the salary for
three years--six thousand pounds--to the furtherance of public objects. Part of it he gave
to a college, and part was set aside for the improvement of the Schuylkill River.

Never was an eminent man more thoughtful of people who were the companions of his poverty.
Dr. Franklin, from amidst the splendors of the French court, and when he was the most famous
and admired person in Europe, forgot not his poor old sister, Jane, who was in fact dependent
on his bounty. With that the Grand Vizier looked about him in search of someone to escort him
thither, when suddenly a kajkji leaped to his side and begged that he might be allowed to lead
the Grand Vizier to the Hall of Execution.

This sailor-man had just such a long grey beard as the Grand Vizier himself.

"How dost thou come to know me?" inquired Damad Ibrahim of the old man.

"Why we fought together, sir, beneath Belgrade, when both of us were
young fellows together."

"What is thy name?

    "Manoli."
      
    "I remember thee not."
      

"But I remember thee, for thou didst release me from captivity, and didst cherish me when I was
wounded."

"And therefore thou wouldst lead me to the executioner? I thank thee, Manoli!"

All this was spoken while they were passing through the garden on their way to the fatal chamber
into which Manoli disappeared with the Grand Vizier.

The Kizlar-Aga and the messengers of the insurgents waited till Manoli came forth again. He came
out, covering his face with his hands, no doubt he was weeping. The Grand Vizier remained
inside.

"To-morrow you shall see his dead body," said the Kizlar-Aga to the new Reis-Effendi, and with that
he sent him and his comrade back to Halil.

"We would rather have had them alive," said the ex-ciaus, so suddenly become one of the chief
dignitaries of the state.

That same evening Halil sent back Sulali with the message that the Chief Mufti might go free.

The old man quitted his comrades about midnight, and day had scarce
dawned when he was summoned once more to the presence of the Grand
Seignior.

All night long the Kizlar-Aga tormented Achmed with the saying of the Reis-Effendi: "We would rather
have them alive!"

"No, no," said the Sultan, "we will not have them delivered up alive. It shall not be in the power
of the people to torture and tear them to pieces. Rather let them die in my palace, an easy,
instantaneous death, without fear and scarce a pang of pain, wept and mourned for by their friends."

"Then
hasten on their deaths, dread sir, lest the morning come and they be demanded while still alive."

"Tarry
a while, I say, wait but for the morning. You would not surely kill
them at night! At night the gates of Heaven are shut. At night the
phantoms of darkness are let loose. You would not slay any living
creature at night! Wait till the day dawns."

The first ray of light
had scarce appeared on the horizon when the Kizlar-Aga once more stood
before the Sultan.

"Master, the day is breaking."

"Call hither the
mufti and Sulali!"

Both of them speedily appeared.

"Convey death
to those who are already doomed."

Sulali and the mufti fell down
on their knees.

"Wherefore this haste, O my master?" cried the aged
mufti, bitterly weeping as he kissed the Sultan's feet.

"Because
the rebels wish them to be surrendered alive."

"So it is," observed
the Kizlar-Aga by way of corroboration, "the whole space in front
of the kiosk is filled with the insurgents."

The Sultan almost collapsed
with horror.

"Hasten, hasten! lest they fall into their hands alive."

"Oh,
sir," implored Sulali, "let me first go down with the Imam of the
Aja Sophia to see whether the street really is filled with rebels
or not!"

The Sultan signified that they might go.

Sulali, Hassan,
and Ispirizade thereupon hastened through the gate of the Seraglio
down to the open space before the kiosk, but not a living soul did
they find there. Not satisfied with merely looking about them, they
wished to persuade themselves that the insurgents were approaching
the Seraglio from some other direction by a circuitous way.

Meanwhile
the Sultan was counting the moments and growing impatient at the prolonged
absence of his messengers.

"They have had time enough to cover the
distance to the kiosk and back twice over," remarked the Kizlar-Aga.
"No doubt they have fallen into the hands of the rebels who are holding
them fast so that they may not be able to bring any tidings back."

The
Sultan was in despair. It must often have been with anxiety, and sometimes
not without a struggle, that his mother--solicitous about every trifle which affected the training
of her child--decided on the books which she was to place in his hands. She wished him to develop
his intellectual faculties, but not at the expense of his spiritual; and romantic frivolity
and mental dissipation on the one hand, and a too severe repression--dangerous in its after
reaction--on the other, were the Scylla and Charybdis between which she had to steer. The ascetic
Puritanism of her training and surroundings would naturally have led her to the narrower and
more restrictive view, in which her husband, austerer yet, would have heartily concurred; but
her broad sense, quickened by the marvelous insight that comes from maternal love, led her
to adopt the broader, and, we may safely add, with Sir Walter's career and character before
us, the better course. Her courage was, however, tempered with a wise discretion; and when
he read to her she was wont, he says, to make him "pause upon those passages which expressed
generous and worthy sentiments"--a most happy method of education, and a most effective one
in the case of an impressionable boy. A little later, when he passed from the educational care
of his mother to that of a tutor, his relations to literature changed, as the following passage
from his autobiography will show: "My tutor thought it almost a sin to open a profane play
or poem; and my mother had no longer the opportunity to hear me read poetry as formerly. I
found, however, in her dressing-room, where I slept at one time, some odd volumes of Shakespeare;
nor can I easily forget the rapture with which I sat up in my shirt reading them by the light
of a fire in her apartment, until the bustle of the family rising from supper warned me that
it was time to creep back to my bed, where I was supposed to have been safely deposited since
9 o'clock." This is a suggestive, as well as frank, story. Supposing for a moment that instead
of Shakespeare the room had contained some of the volumes of verse and romance which, though
denying alike the natural and the supernatural virtues, are to be found in many a Christian
home, how easily might he have suffered a contamination of mind.

DOMESTIC LOVE AND SOCIAL DUTY.

It has been proudly said of Sir Walter as an author that he never forgot the sanctities of
domestic love and social duty in all that he wrote; and considering how much he did write,
and how vast has been the influence of his work on mankind, we can scarcely overestimate the
importance of the fact. Yet it might have been all wrecked by one little parental imprudence
in this matter of books. And what excuse is there, after all, for running the terrible risk?
Authors who are not fit to be read by the sons and daughters are rarely read without injury
by the fathers and mothers; and it would be better by far, Savonarola-like, to make a bonfire
of all the literature of folly, wickedness, and infidelity, than run the risk of injuring a
child simply for the sake of having a few volumes more on one's shelves. In the balance of
heaven there is no parity between a complete library and a lost soul. But this story has another
lesson. It indicates once more the injury which may be done to character by undue limitations.
Under the ill-considered restrictions of his tutor, which ran counter to the good sense of
his mother, whose wisdom was justified by the event, Walter Scott might easily have fallen
into tricks of concealment and forfeited his candor--that candor which developed into the noble
probity which marked his conduct to the last. Without candor there can not be truth, and, as
he himself has said, there can be no other virtue without truth. Fortunately for him, by the
wise sanction his mother had given to his perusal of imaginative writings, she had robbed them
of a mystery unhealthy in itself; and he came through these stolen readings substantially unharmed,
because he knew that his fault was only the lighter one of sitting up when he was supposed
to be lying down.

Luckily this tutor's stern rule did not last long; and when a severe illness attacked the youth
(then advanced to be a student at Edinburgh College) and brought him under his mother's charge
once more, the bed on which he lay was piled with a constant succession of works of imagination,
and he was allowed to find consolation in poetry and romance, those fountains which flow forever
for the ardent and the young. It was in relation to Mrs. Scott's control of her son's reading
that he wrote with gratitude, late in life, "My mother had good natural taste and great feeling."
And after her death, in a letter to a friend, he paid her this tribute: "She had a mind peculiarly
well stored. If I have been able to do any thing in the way of painting the past times, it
is very much from the studies with which she presented me. She was a strict economist, which,
she said, enabled her to be liberal. Out of her little income of about fifteen hundred dollars
a year, she bestowed at least a third in charities; yet I could never prevail on her to accept
of any assistance." Her charity, as well as her love for genealogy, and her aptitude for story-telling,
was transmitted to her son. It found expression in him, not only in material gifts to the poor,
but in a conscientious care and consideration for the feelings of others. This trait is beautifully
exhibited by many of the facts recorded by Lockhart in his famous memoir, and also by a little
incident, not included there, which I have heard Sir Henry Taylor tell, and which, besides
illustrating the subject, deserves for its own sake a place in print. The great and now venerable
author of "Philip Van Artevelde" dined at Abbotsford only a year or two before the close of
its owner's life. Sir Walter had then lost his old vivacity, though not his simple dignity;
but for one moment during the course of the evening he rose into animation, and it happened
thus: There was a talk among the party of an excursion which was to be made on the following
day, and during the discussion of the plans Miss Scott mentioned that two elderly maiden ladies,
living in the neighborhood, were to be of the number, and hinted that their company would be
a bore. The chivalrous kindliness of her father's heart was instantly aroused. "I can not call
that good-breeding," he said, in an earnest and dignified tone--a rebuke which echoed the old-fashioned
teaching on the duties of true politeness he had heard from his mother half a century before.

We would gladly know more than we do of Mrs. Scott's attitude toward her son when first his
penchant for authorship was shown. That she smiled on his early evidences of talent, and fostered
them, we may well imagine; and the tenderness with which she regarded his early compositions
is indicated by the fact that a copy of verses, written in a boyish scrawl, was carefully preserved
by her, and found, after her death, folded in a paper on which was inscribed, "My Walter's
first lines, 1782." That she gloried in his successes when they came, we gather; for when speaking
late in life to Dr. Davy about his brother Sir Humphrey's distinction, Sir Walter, doubtless
drawing on his own home memories, remarked, "I hope, Dr. Davy, that your mother lived to see
it; there must have been great pleasure in that to her." But with whatever zeal Mrs. Scott
may have unfolded Sir Walter's mind by her training, by her praise, by her motherly enthusiasm,
it is certain that, from first to last, she loved his soul, and sought its interest, in and
above all. Her final present to him before she died was not a Shakespeare or a Milton, but
an old Bible--the book she loved best; and for her sake Sir Walter loved it too.

Happy was Mrs. Scott in having a son who in all things reciprocated the affection of his mother.
With the first five-guinea fee he earned at the bar he bought a present for her--a silver taper-stand,
which stood on her mantle-piece many a year; when he became enamored of Miss Carpenter he filially
wrote to consult his mother about the attachment, and to beg her blessing upon it; when, in
1819, she died at an advanced age, he was in attendance at her side, and, full of occupations
though he was, we find him busying himself to obtain for her body a beautifully situated grave.
Thirteen years later he also rested from his labors. During the last hours of his lingering
life he desired to be read to from the New Testament; and when his memory for secular poetry
had entirely failed him, the words and the import of the sacred volume were still in his recollection,
as were also some of the hymns of his childhood, which his grandson, aged six years, repeated
to him.

So passed the great author of "Waverley" away. And when, in due course, his executors came
to search for his testament, and lifted up his desk, "we found," says one of them, "arranged
in careful order a series of little objects, which had obviously been so placed there that
his eye might rest on them every morning before he began his tasks." There were the old-fashioned
boxes that had garnished his mother's toilet-table when he, a sickly child, slept in her dressing-room;
the silver taper-stand which the young advocate bought for her with his first fee; a row of
small packets inscribed by her hand, and containing the hair of such of her children as had
died before her; and more odds and ends of a like sort--pathetic tokens of a love which bound
together for a little while here on earth, and binds together for evermore in heaven, Christian
mother and son.

      Sir Walter of the land
      Of song and old romance,
    Tradition in his cunning hand
      Obedient as the lance

      His valiant Black Knight bore,
      Wove into literature
    The legend, myth, and homely lore
      Which now for us endure,

      To charm our weary hours,
      To rouse our stagnant hearts,
    And leave the sense of new-born powers,
      Which never more departs.

      We thank him in the name
      Of One who sits on high,
    And aye abides in every fame
      Which makes a brighter sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

IV.

ABIGAIL ADAMS

(BORN 1744--DIED 1818.)

THE WIFE OF OUR SECOND PRESIDENT--THE MOTHER OF OUR SIXTH.

Abigail Smith, the daughter of a Congregational minister, of Weymouth, Massachusetts, was one
of the most noted women of our early history. She left a record of her heart and character,
and to some extent a picture of the stirring times in which she lived, in the shape of letters
which are of perennial value, especially to the young. "It was fashionable to ridicule female
learning" in her day; and she says of herself in one of her letters, "I was never sent to any
school." She adds in explanation, "I was always sick." When girls, however, were sent to school,
their education seldom went beyond writing and arithmetic. But in spite of disadvantages, she
read and studied in private, and by means of correspondence with relatives and others, cultivated
her mind, and formed an easy and graceful style of writing.

On the 25th of October, 1764, Miss Smith became the wife of John Adams, a lawyer of Braintree,
the part of the town in which he lived being afterwards called Quincy, in honor of Mrs. Adams's
maternal grandfather. Charles Francis Adams, her grandson, from whose memoir of her the material
for this brief sketch is drawn, says that the ten years immediately following her marriage
present little that is worth recording.

But when the days of the Revolution came on, those times that tried men's souls, women were
by no means exempt from tribulation, and they, too, began to make history. The strength of
Mrs. Adams's affection for her husband may be learned from an extract from one of her letters:
"I very well remember when Eastern circuits of the courts, which lasted a month, were thought
an age, and an absence of three months intolerable; but we are carried from step to step, and
from one degree to another, to endure that which we at first think impossible."

In 1778 her husband went as one of the commissioners to France. During his absence Mrs. Adams
managed, as she had often done before, both the household and the farm--a true wife and mother
of the Revolution. "She was a farmer cultivating the land, and discussing the weather and the
crops; a merchant reporting prices current and the rates of exchange, and directing the making
up of invoices; a politician speculating upon the probabilities of peace and war; and a mother
writing the most exalted sentiments to her son."

John Quincy Adams, the son, in his twelfth year, was with his father in Europe. The following
extracts are from letters to him, dated 1778-80:

"'Tis almost four months since you left your native land, and embarked upon the mighty waters,
in quest of a foreign country. Although I have not particularly written to you since, yet you
may be assured you have constantly been upon my heart and mind.

"It is a very difficult task, my dear son, for a tender parent to bring her mind to part with
a child of your years going to a distant land; nor could I have acquiesced in such a separation
under any other care than that of the most excellent parent and guardian who accompanied you.
You have arrived at years capable of improving under the advantages you will be likely to have,
if you do but properly attend to them. They are talents put into your hands, of which an account
will be required of you hereafter; and being possessed of one, two, or four, see to it that
you double your numbers.

"The most amiable and most useful disposition in a young mind is diffidence of itself; and
this should lead you to seek advice and instruction from him who is your natural guardian,
and will always counsel and direct you in the best manner, both for your present and future
happiness. You are in possession of a natural good understanding, and of spirits unbroken by
adversity and untamed with care. Improve your understanding by acquiring useful knowledge and
virtue, such as will render you an ornament to society, an honor to your country, and a blessing
to your parents. Great learning and superior abilities, should you ever possess them, will
be of little value and small estimation unless virtue, honor, truth, and integrity are added
to them. Adhere to those religious sentiments and principles which were early instilled into
your mind, and remember that you are accountable to your Maker for all your words and actions.

"Let me enjoin it upon you to attend constantly and steadfastly to the precepts and instructions
of your father, as you value the happiness of your mother and your own welfare. His care and
attention to you render many things unnecessary for me to write, which I might otherwise do;
but the inadvertency and heedlessness of youth require line upon line and precept upon precept,
and, when enforced by the joint efforts of both parents, will, I hope, have a due influence
upon your conduct; for, dear as you are to me, I would much rather you should have found your
grave in the ocean you have crossed, or that any untimely death crop you in your infant years,
than see you an immoral, profligate, or graceless child.

"You have entered early in life upon the great theater of the world, which is full of temptations
and vice of every kind. You are not wholly unacquainted with history, in which you have read
of crimes which your inexperienced mind could scarcely believe credible. You have been taught
to think of them with horror, and to view vice as

            'A monster of so frightful mien,
    That, to be hated, needs but to be seen.'

"Yet you must keep a strict guard upon yourself, or the odious monster will soon lose its terror
by becoming familiar to you. The modern history of our own times furnishes as black a list
of crimes as can be paralleled in ancient times, even if we go back to Nero, Caligula, or Cæsar
Borgia. Young as you are, the cruel war into which we have been compelled by the haughty tyrant
of Britain and the bloody emissaries of his vengeance, may stamp upon your mind this certain
truth, that the welfare and prosperity of all countries, communities, and, I may add, individuals,
depend upon their morals. That nation to which we were once united, as it has departed from
justice" eluded and subverted the wise laws which formerly governed it, and suffered the worst
of crimes to go unpunished, has lost its valor, wisdom, and humanity, and, from being the dread
and terror of Europe, has sunk into derision and infamy....

"Some author, that I have met with, compares a judicious traveler to a river, that increases
its stream the further it flows from its source; or to certain springs, which, running through
rich veins of minerals, improve their qualities as they pass along. It will be expected of
you, my son, that, as you are favored with superior advantages under the instructive eye of
a tender parent, your improvement should bear some proportion to your advantages. Nothing is
wanting with you but attention, diligence, and steady application. Nature has not been deficient.

"These are times in which a genius would wish to live. It is not in the still calm of life,
or the repose of a pacific station, that great characters are formed. Would Cicero have shone
so distinguished an orator if he had not been roused, kindled, and inflamed by the tyranny
of Catiline, Verres, and Mark Antony? The habits of a vigorous mind are formed in contending
with difficulties. All history will convince you of this, and that wisdom and penetration are
the fruit of experience, not the lessons of retirement and leisure. Great necessities call
out great virtues. When a mind is raised and animated by scenes that engage the heart, then
those qualities, which would otherwise lie dormant, wake into life and form the character of
the hero and statesman. War, tyranny, and desolation are the scourges of the Almighty, and
ought no doubt to be deprecated. Yet it is your lot, my son, to be an eye-witness of these
calamities in your own native land, and, at the same time, to owe your existence among a people
who have made a glorious defense of their invaded liberties, and who, aided by a generous and
powerful ally, with the blessing of Heaven, will transmit this inheritance to ages yet unborn.

"Nor ought it to be one of the least of your incitements towards exerting every power and faculty
of your mind, that you have a parent who has taken so large and active a share in this contest,
and discharged the trust reposed in him with so much satisfaction as to be honored with the
important embassy which at present calls him abroad.

"The strict and inviolable regard you have ever paid to truth gives me pleasing hopes that
you will not swerve from her dictates, but add justice, fortitude, and every manly virtue which
can adorn a good citizen, do honor to your country, and render your parents supremely happy,
particularly your ever affectionate mother.

... "The only sure and permanent foundation of virtue is religion. Let this important truth
be engraven upon your heart. And also, that the foundation of religion is the belief of the
one only God, and a just sense of his attributes, as a being infinitely wise, just, and good,
to whom you owe the highest reverence, gratitude, and adoration; who superintends and governs
all nature, even to clothing the lilies of the field, and hearing the young ravens when they
cry; but more particularly regards man, whom he created after his own image, and breathed into
him an immortal spirit, capable of a happiness beyond the grave; for the attainment of which
he is bound to the performance of certain duties, which all tend to the happiness and welfare
of society, and are comprised in one short sentence, expressive of universal benevolence, 'Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.'

"Justice, humanity, and benevolence, are the duties you owe to society in general. To your
country the same duties are incumbent upon you, with the additional obligation of sacrificing
ease, pleasure, wealth, and life itself for its defense and security. To your parents you owe
love, reverence, and obedience to all just and equitable commands. To yourself,--here, indeed,
is a wide field to expatiate upon. To become what you ought to be, and what a fond mother wishes
to see you, attend to some precepts and instructions from the pen of one who can have no motive
but your welfare and happiness, and who wishes in this way to supply to you the personal watchfulness
and care which a separation from you deprived you of at a period of life when habits are easiest
acquired and fixed; and though the advice may not be new, yet suffer it to obtain a place in
your memory, for occasions may offer, and perhaps some concurring circumstances unite, to give
it weight and force.

"Suffer me to recommend to you one of the most useful lessons of life--the knowledge and study
of yourself. There you run the greatest hazard of being deceived. Self-love and partiality
cast a mist before the eyes, and there is no knowledge so hard to be acquired, nor of more
benefit when once thoroughly understood. Ungoverned passions have aptly been compared to the
boisterous ocean, which is known to produce the most terrible effects. 'Passions are the elements
of life,' but elements which are subject to the control of reason. Whoever will candidly examine
themselves, will find some degree of passion, peevishness, or obstinacy in their natural tempers.
You will seldom find these disagreeable ingredients all united in one; but the uncontrolled
indulgence of either is sufficient to render the possessor unhappy in himself, and disagreeable
to all who are so unhappy as to be witnesses of it, or suffer from its effects.

"You, my dear son, are formed with a constitution feelingly alive; your passions are strong
and impetuous; and, though I have sometimes seen them hurry you into excesses, yet with pleasure
I have observed a frankness and generosity accompany your efforts to govern and subdue them.
Few persons are so subject to passion but that they can command themselves when they have a
motive sufficiently strong; and those who are most apt to transgress will restrain themselves
through respect and reverence to superiors, and even, where they wish to recommend themselves,
to their equals. The due government of the passions has been considered in all ages as a most
valuable acquisition. Hence an inspired writer observes, 'He that is slow to anger is better
than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit, than he than taketh a city.' This passion,
co-operating with power, and unrestrained by reason, has produced the subversion of cities,
the desolation of countries, the massacre of nations, and filled the world with injustice and
oppression. Behold your own country, your native land, suffering from the effects of lawless
power and malignant passions, and learn betimes, from your own observation and experience,
to govern and control yourself. Having once obtained this self-government, you will find a
foundation laid for happiness to yourself and usefulness to mankind. 'Virtue alone is happiness
below;' and consists in cultivating and improving every good inclination, and in checking and
subduing every propensity to evil. I have been particular upon the passion of anger, as it
is generally the most predominant passion at your age, the soonest excited, and the least pains
are taken to subdue it;

    'What composes man, can man destroy.'"

With such a mother to counsel him, one is led to ask, how could John Quincy Adams help becoming
a noble-minded and great man? Who wonders that, with good natural endowments and his excellent
privileges, coupled with maternal training, he fitted himself to fill the highest office in
the gift of a free people?

In June, 1784, Mrs. Adams sailed for London, to join her husband, who was then our Minister
at the Court of St. James. While absent, she visited France and Netherlands; resided for a
time in the former country; and returned with her knowledge of human nature, of men, manners,
etc., enlarged; disgusted with the splendor and sophistications of royalty, and well prepared
to appreciate the republican simplicity and frankness of which, she was herself a model. While
Mr. Adams was Vice-president and President, she never laid aside her singleness of heart and
that sincerity and unaffected dignity which had won for her many friends before her elevation,
and which, in spite of national animosity, conquered the prejudices and gained the heart of
the aristocracy of Great Britain. But her crowning virtue was her Christian humility, which
is beautifully exemplified in a letter which she wrote to Mr. Adams, on the 8th of February,
1797, "the day on which the votes for President were counted, and Mr. Adams, as Vice-president,
was required by law to announce himself the President elect for the ensuing term:"

    "'The sun is dressed in brightest beams,
    To give thy honors to the day.'

"And may it prove an auspicious prelude to each ensuing season. You have this day to declare
yourself head of a nation. 'And now, O Lord, my God, thou hast made thy servant ruler over
the people. Give unto him an understanding heart, that he may know how to go out and come in
before this great people; that he may discern between good and bad. For who is able to judge
this thy so great a people?' were the words of a royal sovereign; and not less applicable to
him who is invested with the chief magistracy of a nation, though he wear not a crown nor the
robes of royalty.

"My thoughts and my meditations are with you, though personally absent; and my petitions to
Heaven are, that 'the things which make for peace may not be hidden from your eyes.' My feelings
are not those of pride or ostentation, upon the occasion. They are solemnized by a sense of
the obligations, the important trusts, and numerous duties connected with it. That you may
be enabled to discharge them with honor to yourself, with justice and impartiality to your
country, and with satisfaction to this great people, shall be the daily prayer of your A.A."

From her husband's retirement from the Presidency in 1801, to the close of her life in 1818,
Mrs. Adams remained constantly at Quincy. Cheerful, contented, and happy, she devoted her last
years, in that rural seclusion, to the reciprocities of friendship and love, to offices of
kindness and charity, and, in short, to all those duties which tend to ripen the Christian
for an exchange of worlds.

But it would be doing injustice to her character and leaving one of her noblest deeds unrecorded,
to close without mentioning the influence for good which she exerted over Mr. Adams, and her
part in the work of making him what he was. That he was sensible of the benignant influence
of wives, may be gathered from the following letter, which was addressed to Mrs. Adams from
Philadelphia, on the 11th of August, 1777:

"I think I have sometimes observed to you in conversation, that upon examining the biography
of illustrious men you will generally find some female about them, in the relation of mother
or wife or sister, to whose instigation a great part of their merit is to be ascribed. You
will find a curious example of this in the case of Aspasia, the wife of Pericles. She was a
woman of the greatest beauty and the first genius. She taught him, it is said, his refined
maxims of policy, his lofty imperial eloquence, nay, even composed the speeches on which so
great a share of his reputation was founded.

"I wish some of our great men had such wives. By the account in your last letter, it seems
the women in Boston begin to think themselves able to serve their country. What a pity it is
that our generals in the northern districts had not Aspasias to their wives!

"I believe the two Howes have not very great women to their wives. If they had, we should suffer
more from their exertions than we do. This is our good fortune. A smart wife would have put
Howe in possession of Philadelphia a long time ago."

While Mr. Adams was wishing that some of our great men had such wives as Aspasia, he had such
a wife, was himself such a man, and owed half his greatness to his Aspasia. The exalted patriotism
and cheerful piety infused into the letters she addressed to him during the long night of political
uncertainty that hung over the country, strengthened his courage, fired his nobler feelings,
nerved his higher purposes, and, doubtless, greatly contributed to make him one of the chief
pillars of the young republic. All honor to a brave wife, and not less heroic mother. If her
husband and son kept the ship of state from the rocks, the light which guided them was largely
from her.

      Heroic wife and mother,
      Whose days were toil and grace,
    Thy glory gleams for many another,
      And shines in many a face.

      The heart, as of a nation,
      Throbs with thy tender love;
    And all our drama of salvation
      Thou watchest from above.

      Our days, which yet are evil,
      And only free in part,
    Have need of things with Heaven co-eval,
      Of Faith's unbounded heart.

      God grant the times approaching
      Be full of glad events,
    No unheroic aims reproaching
      Our line of Presidents.

       *       *       *       *       *

V.

TWO NEIGHBOURS.

WHAT THEY GOT OUT OF LIFE.

It was just two o'clock of one of the warmest of the July afternoons. Mrs. Hill had her dinner
all over, had put on her clean cap and apron, and was sitting on the north porch, making an
unbleached cotton shirt for Mr. Peter Hill, who always wore unbleached shirts at harvest-time.
Mrs. Hill was a thrifty housewife. She had pursued this economical avocation for some little
time, interrupting herself only at times to "shu!" away the flocks of half-grown chickens that
came noisily about the door for the crumbs from the table-cloth, when the sudden shutting down
of a great blue cotton umbrella caused her to drop her work, and exclaim:

"Well, now, Mrs. Troost! who would have thought you ever would come to see me!"

"Why, I have thought a great many times I would come," said the visitor, stamping her little
feet--for she was a little woman--briskly on the blue flag-stones, and then dusting them nicely
with her white cambric handkerchief, before venturing on the snowy floor of Mrs. Hill. And,
shaking hands, she added, "It has been a good while, for I remember when I was here last I
had my Jane with me--quite a baby then, if you mind--and she is three years old now." 

You are one of us--that's agreed--and in a few days you will return, to satisfy your creditors
and buy your mistress a shawl.'

'Stop a bit. You are going too fast. Wait a little. I haven't as yet
said Yes,' replied Olivier.

'I don't want your Yes now; you will say it at Boulogne. For the present go and pay your bill. We set
out in two hours; the post-horses are already ordered; we shall start from my house: be punctual.'

The
party reached Boulogne and put up at the Hotel de l'Univers.

On their arrival they were informed that no time was to be lost, as the count talked of leaving
next day. The two travellers took a hasty dinner, and at once proceeded to the apartment of
the Belgian millionnaire.

Chaffard, who had preceded them, introduced them as two of his friends, whose property was situated
in the vicinity of Boulogne.

M. le Comte de Vandermool was a man about fifty years of age, with
an open, candid countenance.

He wore several foreign decorations. He received the two gentlemen with charming affability; he
did more; he invited them to spend the evening with him.

Of course the invitation was accepted. When the conversation began to flag, the count proposed
a game--which was also, of course, very readily agreed to by the three comperes.

While the table was prepared, Chauvignac gave his young friend two
packs of cards, to be substituted for those which should be furnished
by the count.

Ecarte was to be the game, and Olivier was to play, the two other associates having pretended
to know nothing about the game, and saying that they would content themselves by betting with
each other. Of course Olivier was rather surprised at this declaration, but he soon understood
by certain signs from Chauvignac that this reservation was intended to do away with the count's
suspicions, in case of their success.

The count, enormously rich as he was, would only play for bank-notes. 'Metal smells bad in a room,'
he said. The novice, at first confused at being a party to the intended roguery, followed
the dictates of his conscience and, neglecting the advantages of
his hands, trusted merely to chance.

The result was that the only thousand-franc bank-note he had was speedily transferred to the count.
At that moment Chauvignac gave him a significant look, and this, together with the desire to retrieve
his loss, induced him to put into execution the culpable manoeuvres which his friend had taught
him. His work was of the easiest; the count was so short-sighted that he had to keep his nose
almost upon the cards to see them. Chance now turned, as might be expected, and thousand-franc
bank-notes soon accumulated in the hands of Olivier, who, intoxicated by this possession, worked
away with incredible ardour. Moreover, the count was not in the least out of humour at losing
so immensely; on the contrary, he was quite jovial; indeed, from his looks he might have been
supposed to be the winner. At length, however, he said with a smile, taking a pinch from his
golden snuff-box--'I am evidently not in vein. I have lost eighty thousand francs. I see that
I shall soon be in for one hundred thousand. But it is proper, my dear sir, that I should say I
don't make a habit of losing more than this sum at a sitting; and
if it must be so, I propose to sup before losing my last twenty thousand
francs.

Perhaps this will change my vein. I think you will grant me this indulgence.' The proposal was
agreed to.

Olivier, almost out of his senses at the possession of eighty thousand francs, could not resist
the desire of expressing his gratitude to Chauvignac, which he did,
grasping his hand with emotion and leading him into a corner of the
room.

Alas! the whole thing was only an infamous conspiracy to ruin the young man. The Belgian capitalist,
this count apparently so respectable, was only an expert card-sharper whom Chauvignac had brought
from Paris to play out the vile tragi-comedy, the denouement of which would be the ruin of
the unfortunate Olivier.

At the moment when the latter left the card-table to go to Chauvignac, the pretended millionnaire
changed the pack of cards they had been using for two other packs.

Supper went off very pleasantly. They drank very moderately, for the head had to be kept cool
for what had to follow. They soon sat down again at the card-table. 'Now,' said the Parisian
card-shaper, on resuming his seat, 'I should like to end the matter quickly: I will stake the
twenty thousand francs in a lump.'

Olivier, confident of success after his previous achievement, readily assented; but, alas,
the twenty thousand francs of which he made sure was won by his adversary.

Forty

thousand francs went in like manner. Olivier, breathless, utterly prostrate, knew not what to
do.

All his manoeuvres were practised in vain; he could give himself none but small cards. His
opponent had his hands full of trumps, and HE dealt them to him! In his despair he consulted
Chauvignac by a look, and the latter made a sign to him to go on.
The wretched young man went on, and lost again.

Bewildered, beside himself, he staked fabulous sums to try and make
up for his losses, and very soon found, in his turn, that he owed
his adversary one hundred thousand francs(L4166)!

    
    At this point the horrible denouement commenced.

The pretended count stopped, and crossing his arms on his breast, said sternly--'Monsieur Olivier
de ----, you must be very rich to stake so glibly such enormous sums. Of course you know your
fortune and can square yourself with it; but, however rich you may be, you ought to know that
it is not sufficient to lose a hundred thousand francs, but that you must pay it. Besides, I have
given you the example. Begin, therefore, by putting down the sum I have won from you; after which
we can go on.' . . .

'Nothing can be more proper, sir,' stammered out young Olivier, 'I
am ready to satisfy you; but, after all, you know that . . . .

gaming
debts . . . . my word . . . .'

'The d--l! sir,' said the pretended
count, giving the table a violent blow with his fist--'Why do you
talk to me about your WORD.

Gad! You are well entitled to appeal to the engagements of honour! Well! We have now to play another
game on this table, and we must speak out plainly. Monsieur Olivier de ----, you are a rogue . .
. Yes, a rogue! The cards we have been using are biseautees and YOU brought them hither.'

'Sir! . . You insult me!' said Olivier.

    'Indeed? Well, sir, that astonishes me!' replied the false Belgian
ironically.

'That is too much, sir. I demand satisfaction, and that on the very instant. Do you understand
me? Let us go out at once.'

'No! no! We must end this quarrel here, sir. Look here--your two friends shall be your "seconds;"
I am now going to send for MINE.'

The card-sharper, who had risen at these words, rang the bell violently.

His own servant entered. 'Go,' said he, 'to the Procureur de Roi, and request him to come here
on a very important matter. Be as quick as you can.'

'Oh, sir, be merciful!

Don't ruin me!' exclaimed the wretched Olivier; 'I will do what you
like.' At these words, the sharper told his servant to wait behind
the door, and to execute his order if he should hear nothing to the
contrary in ten minutes.

'And now, sir,' continued the sharper, turning to Olivier, 'and now, sir, for the business between
you and me. These cards have been substituted by you in the place of those which I supplied
. . .

You must do them up, write your name upon the cover, and seal it with the coat of arms on your
ring.'

Olivier looked first at Chauvignac and then at Chaffard, but both the fellows only made signs
to him to resign himself to the circumstances. He did what was ordered.

'That is not all, sir,' added the false Belgian; 'I have fairly won money from you and have
a right to demand a guarantee for payment.

You must draw me short bills for the sum of one hundred thousand francs.'

As the wretched young man hesitated to comply with this demand, his pitiless creditor rose to
ring the bell.

'Don't ring, sir, don't ring,' said Olivier, 'I'll sign.'

He signed, and the villany was consummated. Olivier returned to his family and made an humble
avowal of his fault and his engagements. His venerable father received the terrible blow with
resignation, and paid the 100,000 francs, estimating his honour far above that amount of money.(3)

(3)
This narrative is condensed from the account of the affair by Robert-Hondin,
Tricherics des Grecs devoilees.

AN ATTORNEY 'DONE' BY A GAMBLER.

A turfite and gambler, represented under the letters of Mr H--e, having
lost all his money at Doncaster and the following York Meeting, devised
a plan, with his coadjutor, to obtain the means for their departure
from York, which, no doubt, will be considered exceedingly ingenious.

He had heard of an attorney in the town who was very fond of Backgammon; and on this simple piece
of information an elaborate plan was concocted. Mr H--e feigned illness, went to bed, and sent for
a large quantity of tartar emetic, which he took.

After he had suffered the operation of the first dose he sent for
a doctor, who pronounced him, of course, very languid and ill; and
not knowing the cause, ordered him more medicine, which the patient
took good care not to allow to stay on his stomach.

       On the second day he asked the doctor, with great gravity, if he considered
him in danger, adding, 'because he had never made a WILL to bequeath
his property.' The doctor replied, 'No, not in absolute danger, but
there was no harm in making a WILL.'

The attorney, accordingly, was
sent for--of course the very man wished for--the lover of Backgammon
before mentioned.

The good man came; he took the 'instructions,' and drew up the last
will and testament of the ruined turfite, who left (in the will) about
L50,000, which no man ever heard of, living or dead.

The BUSINESS being done, the patient said that if he had a moment's
relaxation he thought he should rally and overcome the malady.

The poor lawyer said if he could in any way contribute to his comfort he should be happy. The
offer was embraced by observing that if he could sit up in bed--but he was afraid he was not able--a
hit at Backgammon would be a great source of amusement.

The lawyer, like all adepts in such matters, was only too willing to catch at the idea; the board was
brought.

Of course the man who had L50,000 to leave behind could not be expected to play 'for love;' and
so when Mr H--e proposed 'a pound a hit or treble a gammon,' the lawyer not only thought it
reasonable, but, conscious of his power in the game, eagerly accepted the terms of playing.
They played; but the lawyer was gammoned almost incessantly, till he lost L50. Then H--e proposed
'double or quits to L1000,'--thereupon the poor lawyer, believing
that fortune could not always forsake him, said he had but L2000 in
the world, but that he would set the L1000.

He lost; and became almost frantic.

In the midst of his excessive grief, H--e said, 'You have a HORSE, what is it worth?' L50 was
the answer. 'Well, well, you may win all back now, and I'll set L50 on your horse.'

They began again. Lost! 'You have a COW in your paddock, haven't you? What's that worth?' asked
Mr H--e. The attorney said L12. 'Well, I'll set that sum by way of giving you a chance.' The
game proceeded, and the poor lawyer, equally unfortunate, raved and swore he had lost his last
shilling. 'No, no!' said H--e,' you have not: I saw a HAY-RICK in your ground. It is of no
use now that the horse and cow are gone--what is that worth?' L15, replied the attorney, with a sigh.
'I set L15 then,' said H--e.

This seemed to be 'rather too much' for the lawyer. The loss of the hay-rick--like the last straw
laid on the overladen camel's back--staggered him. Besides, he thought he saw--as doubtless
he did see--H--e twisting his fingers round one of the dice. Up he started at once, and declared
that he was cheated!

Thereupon the sick man forgot his sickness, jumped out of bed, and gave the lawyer a regular
drubbing, got the cheque for the L2000,--but the horse, cow, and hay he said he would leave 'until
further orders.'

A VERY CURIOUS STORY.

An Archbishop of Canterbury was once on a tour, when a genteel man, apparently in earnest conversation,
though alone in a wood, attracted his notice. His Grace made up to him, and, after a little previous
conversation, asked him what he was about.

Stranger. 'I am at play.' Archbishop. 'At play? With whom? I see nobody.' Sir. 'I own, sir, my
antagonist is not visible: I am playing with God.' Abp. 'At what game, pray, sir?' Str. 'At Chess.'
Abp. 'Do you play for anything?' Str. 'Certainly.' Abp. 'You cannot have any chance, as your adversary
must be so superior to you.' Str. 'He takes no advantage, but plays merely as a man.' Abp.
'When you win or lose, how do you settle accounts?' Str. 'Very exactly and punctually.' Abp.
'Indeed! Pray, how stands your game now?' Str. 'There! I have just
lost!' Abp.

'How much have you lost?' Str. 'Fifty guineas.' Abp. 'How do you manage to pay it? Does God take
your money?' Str. 'No! The poor are his treasurers. He always sends some worthy person to receive
it, and you are at present his purse-bearer.'

Saying this, the stranger put fifty guineas into his Grace's hand, and retired, adding--'I
shall play no more to-day.'

The prelate was delighted; though he could not tell what to make of this extraordinary man. The guineas
were all good; and the archbishop applied them to the use of the poor, as he had been directed.

The
archbishop, on his return, stopped at the same town, and could not help going in search of
the chess-player, whom he found engaged as before, when the following dialogue ensued:--

Abp. 'How has the chance stood since we met before?' Str. 'Sometimes for me--sometimes against
me. I have lost and won.' Abp. 'Are you at play now?' Str. 'Yes, sir. We have played several
games to-day.' Abp. 'Who wins?' Str. 'The advantage is on my side. The game is just over. I have a
fine stroke--check-mate--there it is.' Abp. 'How much have you won?' Str. 'Five hundred guineas.'
Abp. 'That is a large sum. How are you to be paid?' Str. 'God always sends some good rich man
when I win, and YOU are the person. He is remarkably punctual on these occasions.'

The archbishop had received a considerable sum on that day, as the
stranger knew; and so, producing a pistol by way of receipt, he compelled
the delivery of it.

His Grace now discovered that he had been the dupe of a thief; and though he had greatly bruited
his first adventure, he prudently kept his own counsel in regard to the last.

Such is the tale. Se non e vero e ben trovato.

SKITTLE SHARPERS.

'I know a respectable tradesman,' says a writer in Cassell's Magazine--'I know him now, for
he lives in the house he occupied at the time of my tale--who was sent for to see a French
gentleman at a tavern, on business connected with the removal of this gentleman's property from
one of the London docks. The business, as explained by the messenger, promising to be profitable,
he of course promptly obeyed the summons, and during his walk found that his conductor had once
been in service in France. This delighted Mr Chase--the name by which I signify the tradesman--for
he, too, had once so lived in France; and by the time he reached the tavern he had talked himself
into a very good opinion of his new patron. The French gentleman was very urbane, gave Mr Chase
his instructions, let him understand expense was not to be studied, and, as he was at lunch,
would not be satisfied unless the tradesman sat down with him. This was a great honour for
the latter, as he found his employer was a baron. Well, the foreigner was disposed to praise
everything English; he was glad he had come to live in London--Paris was nothing to it; they
had nothing in France like the English beer, with which, in the exuberance of his hospitality,
he filled and refilled Mr Chase's glass; but that which delighted him above all that he had seen
"vos de leetle game vid de ball--vot you call--de--de--aha! de skittel." Mr Chase assented that it
was a very nice game certainly; and the French gentleman seeming
by this time to have had quite enough beer, insisted, before they
went to the docks--which was essential--that they should see just
one game played.

'As he insisted on paying Mr Chase for all the time consumed with him, and as his servant,
of course, could not object, the party adjourned to the "Select Subscription Ground" at once.
In the ground there was a quiet, insignificant-looking little man, smoking a cigar; and as they
were so few, he was asked to assist, which, after considerable hesitation and many apologies
for his bad play, he did. The end is of course guessed. The French gentleman was a foolish victim,
with more money than wits, who backed himself to do almost impossible feats, when it was evident
he could not play at all, and laid sovereigns against the best player, who was the little stranger,
doing the easiest. What with the excitement, and what with the beer, which was probably spiced
with some unknown relish a little stronger than nutmeg, Mr Chase could not help joining in winning
the foreign gentleman's money; it seemed no harm, he had so much of it.

'By a strange concurrence of events, it so happened that by random throws the Frenchman sometimes
knocked all the pins down at a single swoop, though he clearly could not play--Mr Chase was
sure of that--while the skilful player made every now and then one of the blunders to which
the best players are liable. That the tradesman lost forty sovereigns will be easily understood; and
did his tale end here it would have differed so little from a hundred others as scarcely to deserve
telling; but it will surprise many, as it did me, to learn that he then walked to and from his
own house--a distance of precisely a mile each way--fetched a bill for thirty pounds, which a customer
had recently paid him, got it discounted, went back to the skittle-ground, and, under the same
malignant star, lost the whole.

'It was the only case in my experience of the work going on smoothly after such a break. I never could
account for it, nor could Mr Chase. Great was the latter's disgust, on setting the police to work,
to find that the French nobleman, his servant, and the quiet stranger,
were all dwellers within half a mile or so of his own house, and slightly
known to him--men who had trusted, and very successfully, to great
audacity and well-arranged disguise.'

A vast deal of gambling still
goes on with skittles all over the country.

At a place not ten miles from London, I am told that as much as two thousand pounds has been seen
upon the table in a single 'alley,' or place of play. The bets were, accordingly, very high.
The instances revealed by exposure at the police-courts give but a faint idea of the extent
of skittle sharping.

Amidst such abuses of the game, it can scarcely surprise us that the police have been recently
directed to prohibit all playing at skittles and bowls. However much we may regret the interference
with popular pastimes, in themselves unobjectionable, it is evident that their flagrant abuse
warrants the most stringent measures in order to prevent their constantly
repeated and dismal consequences.

Even where money was not played for, pots of beer were the wager--leading, in many instances, to
intoxication, or promoting this habit, which is the cause of so much misery among the lower orders.

CHAPTER
II. PROFESSIONAL GAMESTERS AND THEIR FRAUDS.

A gambling house at the end of the last century was conducted by the following officials:--

1. A Commissioner,--who was always a proprietor; who looked in of a night, and audited the week's
account with two other proprietors.

2. A Director,--who superintended the room.

3. An Operator,--who dealt the cards at the cheating game called Faro.

4. Two Croupiers, or crow-pees, as they were vulgarly called, whose duty it was to watch the
cards and gather or rake in the money for the bank.

5. Two Puffs,--who had money given to them to decoy others to play.

6. A Clerk,--who was a check on the Puffs, to see that they sank none of the money given to
them to play with.

      
      7. A Squib,--who was a puff
    of a lower rank, serving at half salary,
      whilst learning to deal.

8. A Flasher,--to swear how often the bank
had been stripped by lucky players.

9. A Dunner,--who went about
to recover money lost at play.

10. A Waiter,--to fill out wine, snuff
candles, and attend the room.

11. An Attorney,--who was generally
a Newgate solicitor.

12. A Captain,--who was to fight any gentleman
who might be peevish at losing his money.

13. An Usher,--who lighted
the gentlemen up and down stairs, and gave the word to the porter.

14.
A Porter,--who was generally a soldier of the Foot Guards.

15. An
Orderly-man,--who walked up and down the outside of the door, to give
notice to the porter, and alarm the house at the approach of the constables.

16.
A Runner,--who was to get intelligence of the Justices' meetings.

17.
Link Boys, Coachmen, Chairmen, Drawers, and others, who brought the
first intelligence of Justices' meetings, of constables going out,
at half a guinea reward.

18. Common Bail, Affidavit Men, Ruffians,
Bravos, Assassins, &c. &c.

It may be proper to remark that the above
list of officials was only calculated for gambling houses of an inferior
order. In these it is evident that the fear of interruption and the
necessity for precaution presided over the arrangements. There were
others, however, which seemed to defy law, to spurn at justice, and
to remain secure, in every way, by the 'respectability' of their frequenters.
These were houses supported at an amazing expense--within sight of
the palace--which were open every night and all night--where men of
the first rank were to be found gambling away immense sums of money,
such as no man, whatever his fortune might be, could sustain. 'What,
then,' says a writer at the time, 'are the consequences? Why, that
the UNDONE part of them sell their VOTES for bread, and the successful
give them for honours.

'He who has never seen the gamblers' apartments
in some of the magnificent houses in the neighbourhood of St James's,
has never seen the most horrid sight that the imagination of a thinking
man can conceive.

'A new pack of cards is called for at every deal,
and the "old" ones are then thrown upon the floor, and in such an
immense quantity, that the writer of this letter has seen a very large
room nearly ANKLE-DEEP, in the greatest part of it, by four o'clock
in the morning! Judge, then, to what height they must have risen by
daylight.'

It is a melancholy truth, but confirmed by the history
of all nations, that the most polite and refined age of a kingdom
is never the most virtuous; not, indeed, that any such compliment
can be paid to that gross age, but still it was refined compared with
the past. The distinctions of personal merit being but little regarded--in
the low moral tone that prevailed--there needed but to support a certain
'figure' in life (managed by the fashionable tailor)(4), to be conversant
with a few etiquettes of good breeding and sentiments of modern or
current honour, in order to be received with affability and courteous
attention in the highest circles. The vilest sharper, having once
gained admission, was sure of constant entertainment, for nothing
formed a greater cement of union than the spirit of HIGH GAMING. There
being so little cognizance taken of the good qualities of the heart
in fashionable assemblies, no wonder that amid the medley of characters
to be found in these places the 'sharper' of polite address should
gain too easy an admission.

(4)

'How shalt THOU to Caesar's hall
repair? For, ah! no DAMAGED coat can enter there!'

BEATTIE'S Minstrel.

This
fraternity of artists--whether they were to be denominated rooks,(5)
sharps, sharpers, black-legs, Greeks, or gripes--were exceedingly
numerous, and were dispersed among all ranks of society.

(5) So called
because rooks are famous for stealing materials out of other birds'
nests to build their own.

The follies and vices of others--of open-hearted
youth in particular--were the great game or pursuit of this odious
crew. Though cool and dispassionate themselves, they did all in their
power to throw others off their guard, that they might make their
advantage of them.

In others they promoted excess of all kinds, whilst
they themselves took care to maintain the utmost sobriety and temperance.
'Gamesters,' says Falconer, 'whose minds must be always on the watch
to take advantages, and prepared to form calculations, and to employ
the memory, constantly avoid a full meal of animal food, which they
find incapacitates them for play nearly as much as a quantity of strong
liquor would have done, for which reason they feed chiefly on milk
and vegetables.'

As profit, not pleasure, was the aim of these knights
of darkness, they lay concealed under all shapes and disguises, and
followed up their game with all wariness and discretion.

      As Cæsar led his legions
      Triumphant over Gaul,
    And through still wilder, darker regions,
      So thou didst lead us all!

      Until we saw the chains
      Which bound our brothers' lives,
    And heard the groans and felt the pains,
      Which come from wearing gyves.

      To brave heroic men
      The false no more was true;
    And what the Nation needed then
      Could any soldier do.

       *       *       *       *       *

VII.

Long chapters of history are illumined as by as electric light in the following characteristic
address from his pulpit by Henry Ward Beecher, at the time the name of the great philanthropist
was added to the roll of American heroes.

THE TIMES WHEN HE APPEARED.

The condition of the public mind throughout the North at the time I came to the consciousness
of public affairs and was studying my profession may be described, in one word, as the condition
of imprisoned moral sense. All men, almost, agreed with all men that slavery was wrong; but
what can we do? The compromises of our fathers include us and bind us to fidelity to the agreements
that had been made in the formation of our Constitution. Our confederation first, and our Constitution
after. These were regarded everywhere as moral obligations by men that hated slavery. "The
compromises of the Constitution must be respected," said the priest in the pulpit, said the
politician in the field, said the statesmen in public halls; and men abroad, in England especially,
could not understand what was the reason of the hesitancy of President Lincoln and of the people,
when they had risen to arms, in declaring at once the end for which arms were taken and armies
gathered to be the emancipation of the slaves. There never has been an instance in which, I
think, the feelings and the moral sense of so large a number of people have been held in check
for reasons of fidelity to obligations assumed in their behalf. There never has been in history
another instance more notable, and I am bound to say, with all its faults and weaknesses, more
noble. The commercial question--that being the underlying moral element--the commercial question
of the North very soon became, on the subject of slavery, what the industrial and political
question of the South had made it. It corrupted the manufacturer and the merchant. Throughout
the whole North every man that could make any thing regarded the South as his legal, lawful
market; for the South did not manufacture; it had the cheap and vulgar husbandry of slavery.
They could make more money with cotton than with corn, or beef, or pork, or leather, or hats,
or wooden-ware; and Northern ships went South to take their forest timbers, and brought them
to Connecticut to be made into wooden-ware and ax-helves and rake-handles, and carried them
right back to sell to the men whose axes had cut down the trees. The South manufactured nothing
except slaves. It was a great manufacture, that; and the whole market of the North was bribed.
The harness-makers, the wagon-makers, the clock-makers, makers of all manner of implements,
of all manner of goods, every manufactory, every loom as it clanked in the North said, "Maintain,"
not slavery, but the "compromises of the Constitution." The Constitution--that was the veil
under which all these cries were continually uttered.

The distinction between the Anti-slavery men and Abolitionists was simply this: The Abolitionists
disclaimed the obligation to maintain this government and the compromises of the Constitution,
and the Anti-slavery men recognized the binding obligation and sought the emancipation of slaves
by the more circuitous and gradual influence; but Abolitionism covered both terms. It was regarded,
however, throughout the North as a greater sin than slavery itself, and none of you that are
under thirty years of age can form any adequate conception of the public sentiment and feeling
during the days of my young manhood. A man that was known to be an Abolitionist had better
be known to have the plague. Every door was shut to him. If he was born under circumstances
that admitted him to the best society, he was the black sheep of the family. If he aspired
by fidelity, industry, and genius, to good society, he was debarred. "An Abolitionist" was
enough to put the mark of Cain upon any young man that arose in my early day, and until I was
forty years of age. It was punishable to preach on the subject of liberty. It was enough to
expel a man from Church communion, if he insisted on praying in the prayer-meeting for the
liberation of the slaves. The Church was dumb in the North, not in the West. The great publishing
societies that were sustained by the contributions of the Churches were absolutely dumb.

"WHO IS THIS FELLOW?"

It was at the beginning of this Egyptian era in America that the young aristocrat of Boston
appeared. His blood came through the best colonial families. He was an aristocrat by descent
and by nature; a noble one, but a thorough aristocrat. All his life and power assumed that
guise. He was noble; he was full of kindness to inferiors; he was willing to be, and do, and
suffer for them; but he was never of them, nor equaled himself to them. He was always above
them, and his gifts of love were always the gifts of a prince to his subjects. All his life
long he resented every attack on his person and on his honor, as a noble aristocrat would.
When they poured the filth of their imaginations upon him, he cared no more for it than the
eagle cares what the fly is thinking about him away down under the cloud. All the miserable
traffickers, and all the scribblers, and all the aristocratic boobies of Boston were no more
to him than mosquitoes are to the behemoth or to the lion. He was aristocratic in his pride,
and lived higher than most men lived. He was called of God as much as ever Moses and the prophets
were; not exactly for the same great end, but in consonance with those great ends. You remember,
my brother, when Lovejoy was infamously slaughtered by a mob in Alton?--blood that has been
the seed of liberty all over this land! I remember it. At this time it was that Channing lifted
up his voice and declared that the moral sentiment of Boston ought to be uttered in rebuke
of that infamy and cruelty, and asking for Faneuil Hall in which to call a public meeting.
This was indignantly refused by the Common Council of Boston. Being a man of wide influence,
he gathered around about himself enough venerable and influential old citizens of Boston to
make a denial of their united request a perilous thing; and Faneuil Hall was granted to call
a public meeting to express itself on this subject of the murder of Lovejoy. The meeting was
made up largely of rowdies. They meant to overawe and put down all other expressions of opinion
except those that then rioted with the riotous. United States District-attorney Austin (when
Wendell Phillips's name is written in letters of light on one side of the monument, down low
on the other side, and spattered with dirt, let the name of Austin also be written) made a
truculent speech, and justified the mob, and ran the whole career of the sewer of those days
and justified non-interference with slavery. Wendell Phillips, just come to town as a young
lawyer, without at present any practice, practically unknown, except to his own family, fired
with the infamy, and, feeling called of God in his soul, went upon the platform. His first
utterances brought down the hisses of the mob. He was not a man very easily subdued by any
mob. They listened as he kindled and poured on that man Austin the fire and lava of a volcano,
and he finally turned the course of the feeling of the meeting. Practically unknown when the
sun went down one day, when it rose next morning all Boston was saying, "Who is this fellow?
Who is this Phillips?" A question that has never been asked since.

A FLAMING ADVOCATE OF LIBERTY.

Thenceforth he has been a flaming advocate of liberty, with singular advantages over all other
pleaders. Mr. Garrison was not noted as a speaker, yet his tongue was his pen. Mr. Phillips,
not much given to the pen, his pen was his tongue; and no other like speaker has ever graced
our history. I do not undertake to say that he surpassed all others. He had an intense individuality,
and that intense individuality ranked him among the noblest orators that have ever been born
to this continent, or I may say to our mother-land. He adopted in full the tenets of Garrison,
which were excessively disagreeable to the whole public mind. The ground which he took was
that which Garrison took. Seeing that the conscience of the North was smothered and mute by
reason of the supposed obligations to the compromises of the Constitution, Garrison declared
that the compromises of the Constitution were covenants with hell, and that no man was bound
to observe them. This extreme ground Mr. Phillips also took,--immediate, unconditional, universal
emancipation, at any cost whatsoever. That is Garrisonism; that is Wendell Phillipsism; and
it would seem as though the Lord rather leaned that way, too.

I shall not discuss the merits of Mr. Garrison or Mr. Phillips in every direction. I shall
say that while the duty of immediate emancipation without conditions was unquestionably the
right ground, yet in the providence of God even that could not be brought to pass except through
the mediation of very many events. It is a remarkable thing that Mr. Phillips and Mr. Garrison
both renounced the Union and denounced the Union in the hope of destroying slavery; whereas
the providence of God brought about the love of the Union when it was assailed by the South,
and made the love of the Union the enthusiasm that carried the great war of emancipation through.
It was the very antithesis of the ground which they took. Like John Brown, Mr. Garrison; like
John Brown, Mr. Phillips; of a heroic spirit, seeking the great and noble, but by measures
not well adapted to secure the end.

Little by little the controversy spread. I shall not trace it. I am giving you simply the atmosphere
in which he sprang into being and into power. His career was a career of thirty or forty years
of undiminished eagerness. He never quailed nor flinched, nor did he ever at any time go back
one step or turn in the slightest degree to the right or left. He gloried in his cause, and
in that particular aspect of it which had selected him; for he was one that was called rather
than one that chose. He stood on this platform. It is a part of the sweet and pleasant memories
of my comparative youth here, that when the mob refused to let him speak in the Broadway Tabernacle
before it moved up-town--the old Tabernacle--William A. Hall, now dead, a fervent friend and
Abolitionist, had secured the Graham Institute wherein to hold a meeting where Mr. Phillips
should be heard. I had agreed to pray at the opening of the meeting. On the morning of the
day on which it was to have taken place, I was visited by the committee of that Institute--excellent
gentlemen, whose feelings will not be hurt now, because they are all now ashamed of it; they
are in heaven. They visited me to say that in consequence of the great peril that attended
a meeting at the Institute, they had withdrawn the liberty to use it, and paid back the money,
and that they called simply to say that it was out of no disrespect to me, but from fidelity
to their supposed trust. Well, it was a bitter thing.

LIBERTY OF SPEECH AND THOUGHT.

If there is any thing on earth that I am sensitive to, it is the withdrawing of the liberty
of speech and thought. Henry C. Bowen, who certainly has done some good things in his life-time,
said to me: "You can have Plymouth Church if you want it." "How?" "It is the rule of the church
trustees that the church may be let by a majority vote when we are convened; but if we are
not convened, then every trustee must give his assent in writing. If you choose to make it
a personal matter, and go to every trustee, you can have it." He meanwhile undertook, with
Mr. Hall, to put new placards over the old ones, notifying men quietly that the meeting was
to be held here, and distributed thousands and tens of thousands of hand-bills at the ferries.
No task was ever more welcome. I went to the trustees man by man. The majority of the trustees
very cheerfully accorded the permission. One or two of them were disposed to decline and withhold
it. I made it a matter of personal friendship. "You and I will break, if you don't give me
this permission." And they signed. So the meeting glided from the Graham Institute to this
house. A great audience assembled. We had detectives in disguise, and every arrangement made
to handle the subject in a practical form if the crowd should undertake to molest us. The Rev.
Dr. R.S. Storrs consented to come and pray, for Mr. Wendell Phillips was by marriage a near
and intimate friend and relation of his. The reporters were here; when were they ever not?

Mr. Phillips began his lecture, and, you may depend upon it, by this time the lion was in him,
and he went careering on. Hie views were extreme; he made them extravagant. I remember at one
point--for he was a man without bluster, serene, self-poised, never disturbed in the least--he
made an affirmation that was very bitter, and the cry arose over the whole congregation. He
stood still, with a cold, bitter smile in his eye, and waited till they subsided, when he repeated
it with more emphasis. Again the roar went through. He waited and repeated it, if possible,
more intensely, and he beat them down with that one sentence until they were still, and let
him go on.

POWER TO DISCERN THE RIGHT.

The power to discern right amid all the wrappings of interest and all the seductions of ambition
was singularly his. To choose the lowly for their sake, to abandon all favor, all power, all
comfort, all ambition, all greatness--that was his genius and glory. He confronted the spirit
of the nation and of the age. I had almost said he set himself against nature, as if he had
been a decree of God over-riding all these other insuperable obstacles. That was his function.
Mr. Phillips was not called to be a universal orator any more than he was a universal thinker.
In literature and in history widely read, in person magnificent, in manners most accomplished,
gentle as a babe, sweet as a new-blown rose, in voice clear and silvery, yet he was not a man
of tempests, he was not an orchestra of a hundred instruments, he was not an organ, mighty
and complex. The nation slept, and God wanted a trumpet, sharp, wide-sounding, narrow and intense;
and that was Mr. Phillips. The long-roll is not particularly agreeable in music, or in times
of war, but it is better than flutes or harps when men are in a great battle, or are on the
point of it. His eloquence was penetrating and alarming. He did not flow as a mighty Gulf Stream;
he did not dash upon this continent as the ocean does; he was not a mighty rushing river. His
eloquence was a flight of arrows, sentence after sentence polished, and most of them burning.
He slung them one after the other, and where they struck they slew. Always elegant, always
awful. I think his scorn is and was as fine as I ever knew it in any human being. He had that
sublime sanctuary in his pride that made him almost insensitive to what would by other men
be considered obloquy. It was as if he said every day in himself: "I am not what they are firing
at. I am not there, and I am not that. It is not against me. I am infinitely superior to what
they think me to be. They do not know me." It was quiet and unpretentious, but it was there.
Conscience and pride were the two concurrent elements of his nature.

THE MOB-BEATEN HERO TRIUMPHANT.

He lived to see the slave emancipated, but not by moral means. He lived to see the sword cut
the fetter. After this had taken place, he was too young to retire, though too old to gather
laurels of literature or to seek professional honors. The impulse of humanity was not at all
abated. His soul still flowed on for the great under-masses of mankind, though, like the Nile,
it split up into scores of mouths, and not all of them were navigable. After a long and stormy
life his sun went down in glory. All the English-speaking people on the globe have written
among the names that shall never die the name of that scoffed, detested, mob-beaten, persecuted
wretch--Wendell Phillips. Boston, that persecuted and would have slain him, is now exceedingly
busy in building his tomb and rearing his statue. The men that would not defile their lips
with his name are thanking God to-day that he lived.

He has taught some lessons--lessons that the young will do well to take heed to--that the most
splendid gifts and opportunities and ambitions may be best used for the dumb and lowly. His
whole life is a rebuke to the idea that we are to climb to greatness by climbing up on the
backs of great men, that we are to gain strength by running with the currents of life, that
we can from without add any thing to the great within that constitutes man. He poured out the
precious ointment of his soul upon the feet of that diffusive Jesus who suffers here in his
poor and despised ones. He has taught young ambitions, too, that the way to glory is the way
often-times of adhesion simply to principle, and that popularity and unpopularity are not things
to be known or considered. Do right and rejoice. If to do right will bring you under trouble,
rejoice in it that you are counted worthy to suffer with God and the providences of God in
this world.

He belongs to the race of giants, not simply because he was, in and of himself a great soul,
but because he had bathed in the providence of God and came forth scarcely less than a god;
because he gave himself to the work of God upon earth, and inherited thereby, or had reflected
upon him, some of the majesty of his Master. When pigmies are all dead, the noble countenance
of Wendell Phillips will still look forth, radiant as a rising sun, a sun that will never set.
He has become to us a lesson, his death an example, his whole history an encouragement to manhood--and
to heroic manhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

VIII

MARY WORDSWORTH

(BORN 1770--DIED 1859.)

THE KINDLY WIFE OF THE GREAT POET.

    "A creature not too bright or good
    For human nature's daily food."

The last thing that would have occurred to Mrs. Wordsworth would have been that her departure,
or any thing about her, would be publicly noticed amidst the events of a stirring time. Those
who knew her well regarded her with as true a homage as they ever rendered to any member of
the household, or to any personage of the remarkable group which will be forever traditionally
associated with the Lake District; but this reverence, genuine and hearty as it was, would
not, in all eyes, be a sufficient reason for recording more than the fact of her death. It
is her survivorship of such a group which constitutes an undisputed public interest in her
decease. With her closes a remarkable scene in the history of the literature of our century.
The well-known cottage, mount, and garden at Rydal will be regarded with other eyes when shut
up or transferred to new occupants. With Mrs. Wordsworth, an old world has passed away before
the eyes of the inhabitants of the district, and a new one succeeds, which may have its own
delights, solemnities, honors, and graces, but which can never replace the familiar one that
is gone. There was something mournful in the lingering of this aged lady--blind, deaf, and
bereaved in her latter years; but she was not mournful, any more than she was insensible. Age
did not blunt her feelings, nor deaden her interest in the events of the day. It seems not
so very long ago that she said that the worst of living in such a place (as the Lake District),
was its making one unwilling to go. It is too beautiful to let one be ready to leave it. Within
a few years the beloved daughter was gone, and then the aged husband, and then the son-in-law,
and then the devoted friend, Mr. Wordsworth's publisher, Mr. Moxon, who paid his duty occasionally
by the side of her chair; then she became blind and deaf. Still her cheerfulness was indomitable.
No doubt, she would in reality have been "willing to go," whenever called upon, throughout
her long life; but she liked life to the end. By her disinterestedness of nature, by her fortitude
of spirit, and her constitutional elasticity and activity, she was qualified for the honor
of surviving her household--nursing and burying them, and bearing the bereavement which they
were vicariously spared. She did it wisely, tenderly, bravely, and cheerfully; and then she
will be remembered accordingly by all who witnessed the spectacle.

It was by the accident, so to speak, of her early friendship with Wordsworth's sister, that
her life became involved with the poetic element which her mind would hardly have sought for
itself in another position. She was the incarnation of good sense, as applied to the concerns
of the every-day world. In as far as her marriage and course of life tended to infuse a new
elevation into her views of things, it was a blessing; and, on the other hand, in as far as
it infected her with the spirit of exclusiveness, which was the grand defect of the group in
its own place, it was hurtful; but that very exclusiveness was less an evil than an amusement,
after all. It was rather a serious matter to hear the poet's denunciation of the railway, and
to read his well-known sonnets on the desecration of the Lake region by the unhallowed presence
of commonplace strangers; and it was truly painful to observe how the scornful and grudging
mood spread among the young, who thought they were agreeing with Wordsworth in claiming the
vales and lakes as a natural property for their enlightened selves. But it was so unlike Mrs.
Wordsworth, with her kindly, cheery, generous turn, to say that a green field, with buttercups,
would answer all the purposes of Lancashire operatives, and that they did not know what to
do with themselves when they came among the mountains, that the innocent insolence could do
no harm. It became a fixed sentiment when she alone survived to uphold it, and one demonstration
of it amused the whole neighborhood in a good-natured way. "People from Birthwaite" were the
bugbear--Birthwaite being the end of the railway. In the Summer of 1857, Mrs. Wordsworth's
companion told her (she being then blind) that there were some strangers in the garden--two
or three boys on the mount, looking at the view. "Boys from Birthwaite," said the old lady,
in the well-known tone, which conveyed that nothing good could come from Birthwaite. When the
strangers were gone, it appeared that they were the Prince of Wales and his companions. Making
allowance for prejudices, neither few nor small, but easily dissolved when reason and kindliness
had opportunity to work, she was a truly wise woman, equal to all occasions of action, and
supplying other persons' needs and deficiencies.

In the "Memoirs of Wordsworth" it is stated that she was the original of

    "She was a phantom of delight;"

and some things in the next few pages look like it; but for the greater part of the poet's
life it was certainly believed by some, who ought to know, that that wonderful description
related to another who flitted before his imagination in earlier days than those in which he
discovered the aptitude of Mary Hutchinson to his own needs. The last stanza is very like her;
and her husband's sonnet to the painter of her portrait, in old age, discloses to us how the
first stanza might be also, in days beyond the ken of the existing generation.

Of her early sorrows, in the loss of two children and a beloved sister, who was domesticated
with the family, there are probably no living witnesses. It will never be forgotten, by those
who saw it, how the late dreary train of afflictions was met. For many years Wordsworth's sister
Dorothy was a melancholy charge. Mrs. Wordsworth was wont to warn any rash enthusiasts for
mountain-walking by the spectacle before them. The adoring sister would never fail her brother;
and she destroyed her health, and then her reason, by exhausting walks and wrong remedies for
the consequences. Forty miles in a day was not a singular feat of Dorothy's. During the long
years of this devoted creature's helplessness she was tended with admirable cheerfulness and
good sense. Thousands of lake tourists must remember the locked garden-gate when Miss Wordsworth
was taking the air, and the garden-chair going round and round the terrace, with the emaciated
little woman in it, who occasionally called out to strangers and amused them with her clever
sayings. She outlived the beloved Dora, Wordsworth's only surviving daughter.

After the lingering illness of that daughter (Mrs. Quillinan), the mother encountered the dreariest
portion, probably, of her life. Her aged husband used to spend the long Winter evenings in
grief and tears--week after week, month after month. Neither of them had eyes for reading.
He could not be comforted. She, who carried as tender a maternal heart as ever beat, had to
bear her own grief and his too. She grew whiter and smaller, so as to be greatly changed in
a few months; but this was the only expression of what she endured, and he did not discover
it. When he, too, left her, it was seen how disinterested had been her trouble. When his trouble
had ceased, she, too, was relieved. She followed his coffin to the sacred corner of Grasmere
churchyard, where lay now all those who had once made her home. She joined the household guests
on their return from the funeral, and made tea as usual. And this was the disinterested spirit
which carried her through the last few years, till she had just reached the ninetieth. Even
then she had strength to combat disease for many days. Several times she rallied and relapsed;
and she was full of alacrity of mind and body as long as exertion of any kind was possible.
There were many eager to render all duty and love--her two sons, nieces, and friends, and a
whole sympathizing neighborhood.

The question commonly asked by visitors to that corner of Grasmere churchyard was: Where would
she be laid when the time came? The space was so completely filled. The cluster of stones told
of the little children who died a long life-time ago; of the sisters--Sarah Hutchinson and
Dorothy Wordsworth; and of Mr. Quillinan, and his two wives, Dora lying between her husband
and father, and seeming to occupy her mother's rightful place. And Hartley Coleridge lies next
the family group; and others press closely round. There is room, however. The large gray stone,
which bears the name of William Wordsworth, has ample space left for another inscription; and
the grave beneath has ample space also for his faithful life-companion.

Not one is left now of the eminent persons who rendered that cluster of valleys so eminent
as it has been. Dr. Arnold went first, in the vigor of his years. Southey died at Keswick,
and Hartley Coleridge on the margin of Rydal Lake; and the Quillinans under the shadow of Loughrigg;
and Professor Wilson disappeared from Elleray; and the aged Mrs. Fletcher from Lancrigg; and
the three venerable Wordsworths from Rydal Mount.

The survivor of all the rest had a heart and a memory for the solemn last of every thing. She
was the one to inquire of about the last eagle in the district, the last pair of ravens in
any crest of rocks, the last old dalesman in any improved spot, the last round of the last
peddler among hills where the broad white road has succeeded the green bridal-path. She knew
the district during the period between its first recognition, through Gray's "Letters," to
its complete publicity in the age of railways. She saw, perhaps, the best of it. But she contributed
to modernize and improve it, though the idea of doing so probably never occurred to her. There
were great people before to give away Christmas bounties, and spoil their neighbors, as the
established alms-giving of the rich does spoil the laboring class, which ought to be above
that kind of aid. Mrs. Wordsworth did infinitely more good in her own way, and without being
aware of it. An example of comfortable thrift was a greater boon to the people round than money,
clothes, meat, or fuel. The oldest residents have long borne witness that the homes of the
neighbors have assumed a new character of order and comfort, and wholesome economy, since the
poet's family lived at Rydal Mount. It used to be a pleasant sight when Wordsworth was seen
in the middle of a hedge, cutting switches for half a dozen children, who were pulling at his
cloak, or gathering about his heels; and it will long be pleasant to family friends to hear
how the young wives of half a century learned to make home comfortable by the example of the
good housewife at the Mount, who never was above letting her thrift be known.

Finally, she who had noted so many last survivors was herself the last of a company more venerable
than eagles, or ravens, or old-world yeomen, or antique customs. She would not, in any case,
be the first forgotten. As it is, her honored name will live for generations in the traditions
of the valleys round. If she was studied as the poet's wife, she came out so well from that
investigation that she was contemplated for herself; and the image so received is her true
monument. It will be better preserved in her old-fashioned neighborhood than many monuments
which make a greater show.

    "She was a phantom of delight
    When first she gleamed upon my sight;
    A lovely apparition, sent
    To he a moment's ornament;
    Her eyes, as stars of twilight fair;
    Like twilight's, too, her dusky hair;
    But all things else about her drawn
    From May-time and the cheerful dawn;
    A dancing shape, an image gay,
    To haunt, to startle, and waylay.
           *       *       *       *       *
    And now I see, with eye serene,
    The very pulse of the machine;
    A being breathing thoughtful breath,
    A traveler between life and death;
    The reason firm, the temperate will,
    Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill;
    A perfect woman, nobly planned,
    To warn, to comfort, and command;
    And yet a spirit still and bright,
    With something of an angel light."

          HARRIET MARTINEAU IN 1859.

       *       *       *       *       *

IX.

MADAME MALIBRAN.

(BORN 1808--DIED 1836.)

HER CAREER AS A SINGER--KINDNESS OF HEART.

Marie Felicita Garcia, who died at the early age of twenty-eight, was one of the greatest singers
the world has ever known. Born at Paris in 1808, according to some biographers at Turin, she
was the daughter of Manuel Garcia, the famous Spanish tenor singer, by whom she was so thoroughly
trained that she made her first public appearance in London March 25, 1826, and achieved a
remarkable and instant success.

She sang with wonderful acceptance in different parts of England, and in the Autumn of the
same year came to America as prima donna of an opera company under the management of her father.
In New York her success was without precedent. In the memory of many aged people there she
still holds her place as the Queen of Song.

In the following year she married Eugene Malibran, an elderly French merchant, under whose
name she was ever afterwards known.

Returning to Europe, she made her first appearance in Paris January 14, 1828, where she added
other jewels to the singer's crown.

We can not follow her throughout her brilliant career, but must hasten on to the closing scenes
of her life.

In May, 1836, she fell from her horse and was seriously injured. Not considering the matter
in its true aspect, she kept her engagements during the Summer, and in September appeared in
England, at the Manchester Musical Festival, though warned by her physician to desist. As the
result of the imprudence a nervous fever set in, and she died September 23d, 1836.

In one of the many notices of this great singer, these words are found:

"Madame Malibran's voice was a mezzo-soprano of great volume and purity, and had been brought
to absolute perfection by the severe training of her father. Her private character was irreproachable.
Few women have been more beloved for their amiability, generosity, and professional enthusiasm.
Her intellect was of a high order, and the charms of her conversation fascinated all who were
admitted into the circle of her intimate friends. Her benefactions amounted to such considerable
sums that her friends were frequently obliged to interfere for the purpose of regulating her
finances."

Many stories are told, which show her kindness of heart. The following is one of pathetic interest:

In a humble room in one of the poorest streets of London, Pierre, a faithful French boy, sat
humming by the bedside of his sick mother. There was no bread in the closet, and for the whole
day he had not tasted food. Yet he sat humming to keep up his spirits. Still at times he thought
of his loneliness and hunger, and he could scarcely keep the tears from his eyes; for he knew
that nothing would be so grateful to his poor invalid mother as a good, sweet orange, and yet
he had not a penny in the world.

The little song he was singing was his own--one he had composed, both air and words--for the
child was a genius.

He went to the window, and, looking out, saw a man putting up a great bill with yellow letters,
announcing that Madame Malibran would sing that night in public.

"O, if I could only go!" thought little Pierre; and then pausing a moment, he clasped his hands,
his eyes lighted with a new hope.

Running to the little stand, he smoothed his yellow curls, and taking from a little box some
old, stained paper, gave one eager glance at his mother, who slept, and ran speedily from the
house.

"Who did you say was waiting for me?" said the madame to her servant; "I am already worn out
with company."

"It's only a very pretty little boy, with yellow curls, who said if he can just see you he
is sure you will not be sorry, and he will not keep you a moment."

"O, well, let him come in!" said the beautiful singer, with a smile; "I can never refuse children."

Little Pierre came in, his hat under his arm, and in his hand a little roll of paper. With
manliness unusual for a child, he walked straight to the lady, and, bowing, said:

"I came to see you because my mother is very sick, and we are too poor to get food and medicine.
I thought, perhaps, that if you would sing my little song at some of your grand concerts, may
be some publisher would buy it for a small sum, and so I could get food and medicine for my
mother."

The beautiful woman arose from her seat. Very tall and stately she was. She took the little
roll from his hand and lightly hummed the air.

"Did you compose it?" she asked; "you, a child! And the words? Would you like to come to my
concert?" she asked.

"O yes!" and the boy's eyes grew bright with happiness; "but I couldn't leave my mother."

"I will send somebody to take care of your mother for the evening, and here is a crown with
which you may go and get food and medicine. Here is also one of my tickets. Come to-night;
that will admit you to a seat near me."

Almost beside himself with joy, Pierre bought some oranges, and many a little luxury besides,
and carried them home to the poor invalid, telling her, not without tears, of his good fortune.

When evening came, and Pierre was admitted to the concert hall, he felt that never in his life
had he been in so great a place. The music, the myriad lights, the beauty, the flashing of
diamonds and rustling of silks bewildered his eyes and brain.

At last she came, and the child sat with his glance riveted on her glorious face. Could he
believe that the grand lady, all blazing with jewels, and whom every body seemed to worship,
would really sing his little song?

Breathless he waited; the band--the whole band--struck up a plaintive little melody. He knew
it, and clasped his hands for joy. And O, how she sang it! It was so simple, so mournful. Many
a bright eye dimmed with tears, and naught could be heard but the touching words of that little
song--O, so touching!

Pierre walked home as if he were moving on the air.

What cared he for money now? The greatest singer in all Europe had sung his little song, and
thousands had wept at his grief.

The next day he was frightened at a visit from Madame Malibran. She laid her hand on his yellow
curls, and, turning to the sick woman, said, "Your little boy, madame, has brought you a fortune.
I was offered this morning, by the best publisher in London, $1,500 for his little song; and,
after he has realized a certain amount from the sale, little Pierre here is to share the profits.
Madame, thank God that your son has a gift from heaven."

The noble-hearted singer and the poor woman wept together. As to Pierre, always mindful of
Him who watches over the tried and tempted, he knelt down by his mother's bedside and uttered
a simple prayer, asking God's blessing on the kind lady who had deigned to notice their affliction.

The memory of that prayer made the singer more tender-hearted, and she, who was the idol of
England's nobility, went about doing good. And in her early, happy death, he who stood beside
her bed and smoothed her pillow, and lightened her last moments by his undying affection, was
little Pierre of former days, now rich, accomplished, and the most talented composer of the day.

      O singer of the heart,
      The heart that never dies!
    The Lord's interpreter thou art,
      His angel from the skies.

      Thy work on earth is great
      As his who saves a soul,
    Or his who guides the ship of state,
      When mountain-billows roll.

      The life of Heaven comes down
      In gleams of grace and truth;
    Sad mortals see the shining crown
      Of sweet, perennial youth.

      The life of God, in song
      Becomes the life of man;
    Ashamed is he of sin and wrong
      Who hears a Malibran!

       *       *       *       *       *

X.

GARFIELD.--MAXIMS.

GATHERED FROM HIS SPEECHES, ADDRESSES, LETTERS, ETC.

I would rather be beaten in right than succeed in wrong.

I feel a profounder reverence for a boy than for a man. I never meet a ragged boy in the street
without feeling that I may owe him a salute, for I know not what possibilities may be buttoned
under his coat.

If the power to do hard work is not talent, it is the best possible substitute for it.

We can not study nature profoundly without bringing ourselves into communion with the spirit
of art which pervades and fills the universe.

If there be one thing upon this earth that mankind love and admire better than another, it
is a brave man; it is a man who dares to look the devil in the face and tell him he is a devil.

It is one of the precious mysteries of sorrow that it finds solace in unselfish thought.

Every character is the joint product of nature and nurture.

It has been fortunate that most of our greatest men have left no descendants to shine in the
borrowed luster of a great name.

An uncertain currency, that goes up and down, hits the laborer, and hits him hard. It helps
him last and hurts him first.

We no longer attribute the untimely death of infants to the sin of Adam, but to bad nursing
and ignorance.

The granite hills are not so changeless and abiding as the restless sea.

In their struggle with the forces of nature, the ability to labor was the richest patrimony
of the colonists.

Coercion is the basis of every law in the universe--human or divine. A law is no law without
coercion behind it.

For the noblest man who lives there still remains a conflict.

We hold reunions, not for the dead; for there is nothing in all the earth that you and I can
do for the dead. They are past our help and past our praise. We can add to them no glory, we
can give them no immortality. They do not need us, but for ever and for evermore we need them.

Throughout the whole web of national existence we trace the golden thread of human progress
toward a higher and better estate.

Heroes did not make our liberties, but they reflected and illustrated them.

After all, territory is but the body of a nation. The people who inhabit its hills and valleys
are its soul, its spirit, its life. In them dwells its hope of immortality. Among them, if
anywhere, are to be found its chief elements of destruction.

It matters little what may be the forms of national institution if the life, freedom, and growth
of society are secured.

Finally, our great hope for the future--our great safeguard against danger--is to be found
in the general and thorough education of our people, and in the virtue which accompanies such
education.

The germ of our political institutions, the primary cell from which they were evolved, was
in the New England town, and the vital force, the informing soul, of the town was the town
meeting, which, for all local concerns, was kings, lords, and commons in all.

It is as much the duty of all good men to protect and defend the reputation of worthy public
servants as to detect public rascals.

Be fit for more than the thing you are now doing.

If you are not too large for the place, you are too small for it.

Young men talk of trusting to the spur of the occasion. That trust is vain. Occasions can not
make spurs. If you expect to wear spurs, you must win them. If you wish to use them, you must
buckle them to your own heels before you go into the fight.

Greek is perhaps the most perfect instrument of thought ever invented by man, and its literature
has never been equaled in purity of style and boldness of expression.

Great ideas travel slowly, and for a time noiselessly, as the gods whose feet were shod with wool.

What the arts are to the world of matter, literature is to the world of mind.

History is but the unrolled scroll of prophecy.

The world's history is a divine poem, of which the history of every nation is a canto and every
man a word. Its strains have been pealing along down the centuries, and though there have been
mingled the discords of warring cannon and dying men, yet to the Christian, philosopher, and
historian--the humble listener--there has been a divine melody running through the song which
speaks of hope and halcyon days to come.

Light itself is a great corrective. A thousand wrongs and abuses that are grown in darkness
disappear like owls and bats before the light of day.

Liberty can be safe only when suffrage is illuminated by education.

Parties have an organic life and spirit of their own, an individuality and character which
outlive the men who compose them; and the spirit and traditions of a party should be considered
in determining their fitness for managing the affairs of the nation.

      Of Garfield's finished days,
      So fair, and all too few,
    Destruction which at noonday strays
      Could not the work undo.

      O martyr, prostrate, calm!
      I learn anew that pain
    Achieves, as God's subduing psalm,
      What else were all in vain.

      Like Samson in his death
      With mightiest labor rife,
    The moments of thy halting breath
      Were grandest of thy life.

      And now amid the gloom
      Which pierces mortal years,
    There shines a star above thy tomb
      To smile away our tears.

    Nobody has brought me a kiss to-day,
    As forty comes marching along life's way;

    At least, only such as came in a letter,--
    And two hundred leagues from home, the debtor!

    So out of my life I will dig a treasure,
    And feast on a reminiscent pleasure.

    Our old New England folks, you know,
    Little favor to kissing were wont to show.

    It smacked, they thought, too much of Satan,
    Whose hook often has a pleasant bate on.

    And even as token of purity's passion,
    Sometimes, I think, it was out of fashion.

    So at least in the home my boyhood knew,
    And of other homes, no doubt, it was true.

    My grandsire and grandma, of the olden school,
    Were strict observers of the proper rule.

    And from New-Year on to the end of December,
    A kiss is something I do not remember.

    It seemed, I suppose, an abomination,
    Somewhat like a Christmas celebration,

    Or a twelfth-day pudding in English style,
    Whose plums are sweet as a maiden's smile.

    Hush! fountains New England fathers quaffed at
    Were surely something not to be laughed at.

    They drank, the heavens above and under,
    Eternity's abiding wonder.

    And here, I confess, in the joy of the present,
    The thought of those days is sacredly pleasant.

    Grandma, with the cares of the household on her,
    In the morning smoked in the chimney corner.

    She hung the tea-kettle filled with water
    While still asleep was her youngest daughter.

    Ah! there were reasons, good and plenty,
    Why she should indulge that baby of twenty.

    The rest were all courted and married and flown,
    And that little birdie was left alone.

    Grandmother, when she had finished her smoking,
    Bustled about--she never went poking--

    And fried the pork, and made the tea,
    And pricked the potatoes, if done to see;

    While grandsire finished his chapter of snores,
    And uncle and I were doing the chores.

    When breakfast was over, the Bible was read,
    And a prayer I still remember said.

    The old folks in reverence bowed them down,
    As those who are mindful of cross and crown.

    My uncle and aunt, who were unconverted,
    Their right to sit or stand asserted.

    And I, I fear, to example true,
    The part of a heathen acted too.

    But there was always for me a glory,
    Morning and night, in that Bible story.

    The heroes and saints of the olden time
    In beautiful vision moved sublime.

    I wondered much at the valor they had,
    And in wondering my soul was glad.

    My wonderment, I can hardly tell,
    At the boldness Jacob showed at the well

    In kissing Rachel, when meeting her first;
    I wondered not into tears he burst.

    Had I been constrained to choose between
    That deed at the well and that after-scene

    When David and Goliath met,
    My heart on the fight would have certainly set.

    And yet there was much for a bashful boy
    To gather up and remember with joy.

    God bless my grandsire's simple heart,
    Which made up in faith what it lacked in art,

    And led me on to the best of the knowledge
    Which years thereafter I carried to college.

    Tending the cattle stalled in the "linter,"
    Going to school eight weeks in the Winter;

    Planting and hoeing potatoes and corn,
    Milking the cows at night and morn;

    Spreading and raking the new-mown hay,
    Stowing it in the mow away;

    Gathering apples, and thinking of all
    The joys of Thanksgiving late in the Fall--

    So passed I the years in such like scenes
    Until I had grown well into my teens.

    And then, with many a dream in my heart,
    I struck for myself and a nobler part;

    I hardly knew what, yet some higher good,
    Earning and spending as fast as I could;

    Earning and spending in teaching and going
    To school, what time I to manhood was growing.

    My maiden aunt--and Providence
    Is approved in its blessed consequence--

    That baby of twenty, to thirty had grown,
    And from the nest had not yet flown.

    And a childless aunt, my uncle's wife,
    Had come to gladden that quiet life.

    God bless them both, for they were ever
    The foremost to second my life's endeavor.

    Our aunts sometimes are almost mothers,
    Toiling and planning and spending for others.

    Aunt Hannah, the maiden; Aunt Emily, wife,--
    How they labored to gird me for the strife,

    Cheering me on with words befitting,
    Doing my sewing and doing my knitting,

    And pressing upon me many a token
    Whose meaning was more than ever was spoken! 

    But the Junior Carlton Club, facing Pall
    Mall, has removed this stigma; it is a fine specimen of architecture.

    Demolition, previous to reconstruction, has
    already begun next to it.

    After this as far as John Street
    is a row of comparatively insignificant narrow houses of various
heights and styles.

    Some of the houses on the north side of Pall
    Mall were built before the completion of the square, so that there
was no room for large mansions here.

    At the corner of John Street and Pall Mall
    is what is called "Ye Olde Bull Tavern," a square box-like stuccoed
house.

    This is probably contemporary with
    the first building of Pall Mall, and may have been the substitute
of the seventeenth century wits and men of letters for the magnificent
clubs of the present day.

    
    

    Charles Street was built about 1671, and
    was, of course, named after the King.

    Burke and Canning are numbered among
    the former residents.

    
    York Street was named in compliment to the Duke of York, afterwards
James II.

    It may be noted that the four streets
    surrounding the square form the names King Charles and Duke of York.

    
    

    Bury Street was named after a Mr. Berry, who was
    landlord of many of the houses; the spelling is a corruption.

    Sir Richard Steele lodged here, also Thomas
    Moore and Crabbe, the poet, during one of his later visits to London,
when contact with cultured men had rubbed off his early boorishness.

    
    

    "St. James's Street is much more remarkable for
    the natural advantages and beauty of the ground, than from any addition
it has received from art," so says Ralph ("Critical Review of Public
Buildings," 1783 edition).

       In the very earliest maps of the parish a road is marked on this
site, leading northward from the palace.

The street was built about 1670, and was first known as Long Street.

In the time of the Stuarts it shared the aristocratic tendency of
the square, and had a list of noble occupiers.

It was levelled and made uniform in 1764, having previously descended
from Piccadilly by steps.

St. James's Street has been noted from the very beginning for its
clubs, gaming-houses, and convivial gatherings.

Its proximity to the Court attracted all the fops and beaux, and it was the resort of fashionable
and gay young idlers. Many anecdotes are related of the street, but chiefly in connection with
the clubs, for which it is still famous. White's (37 and 38) is one of the oldest; it was established
about 1698, and was at first a chocolate-house. It stood near the low end of the street, on the
west side. It was burnt down in 1733, and the present building, designed by Wyatt, was erected
in 1755, and altered nearly a century later by Lockyer. The gaming-room of the old house forms
the scene of the sixth plate of Hogarth's "Rake's Progress," where
the gamblers are represented intent on their cards, though the flames
are bursting out.

It was after the fire that the house became a private club, and it was long noted as a gambling-house
for high stakes and reckless betting. It is of White's that the story is told that a man dropped
down before the door insensible, and was taken inside. The members immediately began to bet
whether he were dead or not, and when the physician came to bleed him, those on the affirmative
side protested.

"Brooke's" is now No. 60, on the opposite side of the street from White's, at the northern
corner of Park Place, and was as notorious a gaming-house as White's.
It was of later origin, dating from 1764, and was originally in Pall
Mall.

It began life under the name of Almack's. The play was prodigiously high. Timbs says that
it was for rouleaux of £50 each, and there was generally £10,000 in specie on the table.

"Boodle's," is another celebrated club, which was also named the "Savoir Vivre." This is now No. 28.

The Cocoa-tree Club recalls by its name an old chocolate house of Queen Anne's time, a favourite
resort of the Tories, often mentioned by Addison.

Lord Byron was one of the members. The old house was situated nearer to the south end of the street
than the present club.

"Arthurs," south of St. James's Place, was founded by the proprietor
of White's in 1765.

The present building was erected in 1825 by Hopper. The Conservative Club house (74) was built
in 1845 from designs by Smirke and Basevi. The building is large, with slightly projecting wings,
and a stone balcony extending uninterruptedly across the frontage.

Next door is the "Thatched House" Club, which originated in the Thatched House Tavern, in which
the dilettanti and literary societies used to meet. Wheatley describes a row of low-built shops
standing before the tavern, one of which was that of the hairdresser Rowland, who made a fortune
by his macassar oil.

St. James's Coffee-house, a celebrated Whig rendezvous from the reign
of Queen Anne until the beginning of the nineteenth century, was at
this end of the street.

In this street there are also many other clubs of later origin. It was at the foot of St. James's
Street that the Duke of Ormond was attacked in his coach in 1670,
by the notorious Colonel Blood.

The Duke had been responsible for the execution of some of Blood's associates in Ireland, and
Blood determined to take him to Tyburn and hang him in revenge. He actually succeeded in dragging
him from his coach and mounting him on horseback behind one of his men. When they had proceeded
as far as Devonshire House, the Duke succeeded in unhorsing his companion, and in the delay that followed
his servants made their appearance and rescued him. For this outrage Blood was never punished.
Sir Christopher Wren died in St. James's Street in 1723, and Gibbon,
the historian, in 1794.

The names of Waller, the poet, Wolfe, C. Fox, and Lord Byron, are among the residents. It was
here that the last named was lodging when his "Childe Harold" created such an extraordinary sensation.
Alexander Pope was also a resident.

McLean, the famous highwayman, lodged opposite "White's."

He was hung in 1750, and the first Sunday after he was condemned 3,000 people went to see him in
gaol. St. James's Street at present is sufficiently noticeable because of its width, in which
the old palace gateway at the foot is framed.

Park Place was built in 1683. William Pitt came to live here in 1801. St. James's Place is a
medley of old and modern buildings, some having been built in the last decade. Wheatley speaks
of it because of its tortuous course, as "one of the oddest built streets in London." Wilkes
and Addison, and Mrs. Delaney, at whose house Miss Burney stayed,
have been among the residents.

Samuel Rogers lived for fifty years at No. 22, which looked out over the park.

Cleveland Square is an open space before the Duke of Bridgewater's House. The house was restored,
as an inscription over the doorway tells us, or in other words rebuilt,
in 1849.

This house has a history. It was originally Berkshire House, and belonged to the Howards, Earls of
Berkshire. Charles II. bought it in 1670, and gave it to that "beautiful fury," Barbara, Duchess
of Cleveland. She pulled down the house and sold part of the site before rebuilding. In 1730 the first
Duke of Bridgewater bought it, and it was alternately known by the
names of Cleveland and Bridgewater.

The third Duke died unmarried in 1803, when the title became extinct. He left the house and
the magnificent collection of pictures to his nephew, the Marquis of Stafford, afterwards
Duke of Sutherland, with reversion to the Marquis's second son.

This son was created Earl of Ellesmere in 1846. He rebuilt the house, still retaining the old
name. The famous collection of pictures within, includes works of Raphael, Titian, Vandervelde,
Turner, Rembrandt, Cuyp, and others, and is one of the finest private collections in England.

The
house opposite was the home of Grenville, First Lord of the Admiralty in 1806, and here he collected
the magnificent library which is now at the British Museum. Admiral Rodney lived in Cleveland Row
in 1772.

On Pall Mall the game of the same name was originally played. On both sides of the open space were
rows of elm-trees. But being such an obvious route from the palace to Charing Cross it was soon used
as a thoroughfare, and after the warrant for "building of the new street of St. James" Charles
II. laid out the new mall in the park. The street, when built, was at first called Catherine,
in honour of the Queen, but the older name soon returned into favour.

It early became fashionable. Nell Gwynne was one of the first residents. She had a house numbered 79,
near the War Office, afterwards, by the irony of fate, occupied by the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, and since rebuilt.

During Wyatt's insurrection in 1554, the mob passed along this road, and the Earl of Pembroke planted
artillery on the high ground of Hay Hill and Piccadilly, when a piece of the Queen's ordnance, we
are told, "slew three of Wyatt's followers, in a rank, and after carrying off their heads passed
through this wall into the park" (Jesse). In 1682 Thynne was murdered at the instigation of Count
Konigsmarck in what is now Pall Mall East, because he had married the heiress of the Percys,
whom the Count wished to marry himself. The principal was acquitted, but his three accomplices
or tools, who had actually committed the murder, were executed, according to the poetic justice of the
time, at the scene of their offence, in 1682.

The Star and Garter Hotel, nearly opposite the War Office, was a fashionable
tavern in the time of Queen Anne.

Here took place the famous duel between the fifth Lord Byron and Mr. Chaworth in 1765. They
fought in the house by the light of only a single candle. Byron killed his opponent, and was found
guilty of manslaughter by his peers. However, he claimed benefit
of a statute of Edward VI., and was discharged.

The original dispute was merely as to which gentleman had the larger amount of game on his
estate.

    Among other famous taverns in this street are mentioned the King's
Arms, under the Opera Colonnade in Pall Mall East.

        Also the Rumpsteak
        Club, which consisted
    of five Dukes, one Marquis,
        fifteen Earls, three
        Viscounts, and three
    Barons, all in opposition to Sir
    Robert Walpole.

        The King's Head, the
        George, the Smyrna
    Coffee-house, Giles' Coffee-house,
        Hercules Pillars, and
        the Tree, were among
    the ancient places of resort
    in this street--a foreshadowing of the palatial mansions of Clubland.

        
        
    The north side of the street is the poorer
        of the two. Beginning
        at the western end on
    the south side, we have the
    New Oxford and Cambridge Club, the Guards, and the Oxford and Cambridge
University Clubs.

        The first of
        these has a very
    massive entrance; the house has only
        a north aspect, the windows
        at the back being
    glazed with ground-glass so as
    not to overlook Marlborough House.

       A little further on is an old red-brick house with a portico on which
is a female figure in bas-relief with palette and brushes.

This is in great contrast to its neighbours; it is what remains (centre
and west wing) of Schomberg House, built about the middle of the seventeenth
century.

The first Schomberg came over in the train of William of Orange;
he was Count in his own country, bore several French titles, and was
created an English Duke.

He was killed at the Battle of the Boyne.

The house was later occupied by Cumberland of Culloden, George III.'s
uncle, and subsequently by Astley the painter.

Astley divided it into three parts, reserving the centre for his own use. Among the tenants
who succeeded him we find the names of Cosway, Paine the bookseller, and Nathaniel Hone. In the
western wing Gainsborough lived, so the building has every right to its distinguishing panel
of palette and brushes. During Gainsborough's occupancy everyone of wealth, beauty or fashion
in the society of the day resorted here to have their features immortalized. This house is now
part of the War Office, which, in a previous stage of its career, was the Ordnance Office.

The entrance to the War Office stands back behind a courtyard in which is a statue of Lord
Herbert of Lea. The War Office was originally at the Horse Guards, and since its removal has
gradually extended its premises by absorbing one house after another. We now come to a long series
of clubs. The Carlton is rich in ornament, with polished granite columns decorating a front
of Caen stone. The design was by Sydney Smirke, and is said to be founded on that of a Venetian
palace. It contrasts with its neighbour, the Reform, which presents a breadth of plain surface
broken only by little pediments over the windows. This was the work of Sir Charles Barry, and
was copied from the Farnese Palace at Venice, of which the upper storey was the work of Michael
Angelo. It is a dull, heavy-looking piece of work.

On part of its site stood the house of Angerstein, a Russian merchant, whose collection of
pictures formed the nucleus of our National Gallery.

The Travellers', next door, also the work of Barry, is in an Italian style. One of the rules
of this club is that no person shall be eligible for membership who
shall not have travelled out of the British Isles at least 500 miles
in a direct line from London.

The Athenæum is one of the most princely of clubs. It was established in 1823, and the present
house was built about half a dozen years later. Decimus Burton was the architect, and his
work is Grecian, with a frieze copied from the famous procession in the Parthenon. The recently-added
storey has been the subject of much criticism. Among those present at the preliminary meeting
we find the names of Sir Humphrey Davy, Sir Francis Chantrey, Sir Thomas Lawrence, the Earl
of Aberdeen, Sir Walter Scott, Thomas Moore and Faraday. Theodore Hook was one of the most popular
members.

At the corner of Pall Mall East and Waterloo Place is the United Service
Club built by Nash.

It was instituted after the Battle of Waterloo, and was at first at the corner of Charles Street,
on the site of the Junior Club of the same name.

The Guards' Monument, in Waterloo Place, was put up in 1859 in memory of the Crimea. Three figures
of guardsmen--Grenadier, Coldstream, and Fusilier--in full marching uniform, stand round a
granite pedestal, on which are inscribed the names of the famous Crimean battles; a pile of
Russian guns actually brought from Sebastopol completes the group.

The Church of St. Philip, on the west side of Lower Regent Street, is a quaint building with
Doric portico and curious little cupola, the latter a copy of the Lanthorn of Demosthenes at Athens.
It was built in 1820 by Repton, from designs by Sir W. Chambers, and has the merit of being almost
continually open for prayer and meditation.

On the east side the most important building is the Junior United Service Club, erected in 1852
by Nelson and James.

Market Street and St. James's Market recall the market held "west of the Haymarket, mid-way between
Charles and Jermyn Street." This originated in a fair held in St. James's Fields, before the
square was built, and from which Mayfair partly derives its name. This fair was suppressed on
account of disorder in 1651, but revived again, and was not finally stopped until the end of
Charles II.'s reign. After having been suppressed in the Fields in 1664, it was held in the market.
Strype describes this market as "a large place, with a commodious market-house in the midst filled
with butchers' shambles; besides the stalls in the market-place for country butchers, higglers
and the like, being a market now grown to great account, and much resorted unto as being served
with good provisions." In a house at the corner of Market Street lived Hannah Lightfoot, said to
have been married to King George III. when Prince of Wales. The market belonged to Lord St.
Albans, whose name is preserved in St. Albans Place, which ends in a foot-passage leading into
Charles Street.
 But Elizabeth
easily triumphed over all obstacles, by practical good sense and the quick promptings of her
ingenuity. She was one of those clear, strong natures, who always have a definite aim in view,
and who see at once the means best suited to the end. Her first inquiry was what grain was
best suited to the soil of her farm, and being informed that rye would yield best, "Then I
shall eat rye bread," was her answer. But when Winter came, and the gleaming snow spread its
unbroken silence over hill and plain, was it not dreary then? It would have been dreary to
one who entered upon this mode of life from mere love of novelty, or a vain desire to do something
extraordinary. But the idea of extended usefulness, which had first lured this remarkable girl
into a path so unusual, sustained her through all trials. She was too busy to be sad, and leaned
too trustingly on her Father's hand to be doubtful of her way. The neighboring Indians soon
loved her as a friend, for they found her always truthful, just, and kind. From their teachings
she added much to her knowledge of simple medicines. So efficient was her skill, and so prompt
her sympathy, that for many miles around, if man, woman, or child were alarmingly ill, they
were sure to send for Elizabeth Haddon; and, wherever she went, her observing mind gathered
some hint for farm or dairy. Her house and heart were both large, and as her residence was
on the way to the Quaker meeting-house in Newtown, it became a place of universal resort to
Friends from all parts of the country traveling that road, as well as an asylum for benighted
wanderers.

The Winter was drawing to a close, when, late one evening, the sound of sleigh-bells was heard,
and the crunching of snow beneath the hoofs of horses as they passed into the barn-yard gate.
The arrival of travelers was too common an occurrence to excite or disturb the well-ordered family.

Great logs were piled in the capacious chimney, and the flames blazed up with a crackling warmth,
when two strangers entered. In the younger Elizabeth instantly recognized John Estaugh, whose
preaching had so deeply impressed her at eleven years of age. This was almost like a glimpse
of home--her dear old English home. She stepped forward with more than usual cordiality, saying:

"Thou art welcome, Friend Estaugh, the more so for being entirely unexpected."

"I am glad to see thee, Elizabeth," he replied, with a friendly shake of the hand. "It was
not until after I landed in America that I heard the Lord had called thee here before me; but
I remember thy father told me how often thou hadst played the settler in the woods when thou
wast quite a little girl."

"I am but a child still," she replied, smiling.

"I trust thou art," he rejoined; "and as for these strong impressions in childhood, I have
heard of many cases where they seemed to be prophecies sent of the Lord. When I saw thy father
in London, I had even then an indistinct idea that I might sometime be sent to America on a
religious visit."

"And, hast thou forgotten, friend John, the ear of Indian corn which my father begged of thee
for me? I can show it to thee now. Since then I have seen this grain in perfect growth, and
a goodly plant it is, I assure thee. See," she continued, pointing to many bunches of ripe
corn which hung in their braided husks against the walls of the ample kitchen, "all that, and
more, came from a single ear no bigger than the one thou didst give my father. May the seed
sown by thy ministry be as fruitful!"

"Amen," replied both the guests.

The next morning it was discovered that the snow had fallen during the night in heavy drifts,
and the roads were impassable. Elizabeth, according to her usual custom, sent out men, oxen,
and sledges to open pathways for several poor families, and for households whose inmates were
visited by illness. In this duty John Estaugh and his friend joined heartily, and none of the
laborers worked harder than they. When he returned, glowing from this exercise, she could not
but observe that the excellent youth had a goodly countenance. It was not physical beauty;
for of that he had but little. It was that cheerful, child-like, out-beaming honesty of expression,
which we not unfrequently see in Germans, who, above all nations, look as if they carried a
crystal heart within their manly bosoms.

Two days after, when Elizabeth went to visit her patients, with a sled-load of medicines and
provisions, John asked permission to accompany her. There, by the bedside of the aged and the
suffering, she saw the clear sincerity of his countenance warmed with rays of love, while he
spoke to them words of kindness and consolation; and then she heard his pleasant voice modulate
itself into deeper tenderness of expression, when he took little children in his arms.

The next First Day, which we call the Sabbath, the whole family attended Newtown meeting; and
there John Estaugh was gifted with an outpouring of the Spirit in his ministry, which sank
deep into the hearts of those who listened to him. Elizabeth found it so remarkably applicable
to the trials and temptations of her own soul, that she almost deemed it was spoken on purpose
for her. She said nothing of this, but she pondered upon it deeply. Thus did a few days of
united duties make them more thoroughly acquainted with each other than they could have been
by years of fashionable intercourse.

The young preacher soon after bade farewell, to visit other meetings in Pennsylvania and New
Jersey. Elizabeth saw him no more until the May following, when he stopped at her house to
lodge, with numerous other Friends, on their way to the quarterly meeting at Salem. In the
morning quite a cavalcade dashed from her hospitable door on horseback; for wagons were then
unknown in Jersey. John Estaugh, always kindly in his impulses, busied himself with helping
a lame and very ugly old woman, and left his hostess to mount her horse as she could. Most
young women would have felt slighted; but in Elizabeth's noble soul the quiet, deep tide of
feeling rippled with an inward joy. "He is always kindest to the poor and the neglected," thought
she; "verily, he is a good youth." She was leaning over the side of her horse, to adjust the
buckle of the girth, when he came up on horseback and inquired if any thing was out of order.
She thanked, with a slight confusion of manner, and a voice less calm than her usual utterance.
He assisted her to mount, and they trotted along leisurely behind the procession of guests,
speaking of the soil and climate of this new country, and how wonderfully the Lord had here
provided a home for his chosen people. Presently the girth began to slip, and the saddle turned
so much on one side that Elizabeth was obliged to dismount. It took some time to readjust it,
and when they again started, the company were out of sight. There was brighter color than usual
in the maiden's cheeks, and unwonted radiance in her mild deep eyes. After a short silence
she said, in a voice slightly tremulous: "Friend John, I have a subject of importance on my
mind, and one which nearly interests thee. I am strongly impressed that the Lord has sent thee
to me as a partner for life. I tell thee my impression frankly, but not without calm and deep
reflection; for matrimony is a holy relation, and should be entered into with all sobriety.
If thou hast no light on the subject, wilt thou gather into the stillness and reverently listen
to thy own inward revealings? Thou art to leave this part of the country to-morrow, and not
knowing when I should see thee again, I felt moved to tell thee what lay upon my mind."

The young man was taken by surprise. Though accustomed to that suppression of emotion which
characterizes his religious sect, the color went and came rapidly in his face for a moment;
but he soon became calmer and said: "This thought is new to me, Elizabeth, and I have no light
thereon. Thy company has been right pleasant to me, and thy countenance ever reminds me of
William Penn's title-page, 'Innocency with her open face.' I have seen thy kindness to the
poor, and the wise management of thy household. I have observed, too, that thy warm-heartedness
is tempered by a most excellent discretion, and that thy speech is ever sincere. Assuredly,
such is the maiden I would ask of the Lord as a most precious gift; but I never thought of
this connection with thee. I came to this country solely on a religious visit, and it might
distract my mind to entertain this subject at present. When I have discharged the duties of
my mission, we will speak further."

"It is best so," rejoined the maiden; "but there is one thing which disturbs my conscience.
Thou hast spoken of my true speech; and yet, friend John, I have deceived thee a little, even
now, while we conferred together on a subject so serious. COARSE LANGUAGE OF GAMESTERS.

'I heard those who, in another place, even in the most polished courts, would take a high rank for
good breeding and gentlemanly education, at these tables make use of language which, I hope, Billingsgate
itself would turn from with disgust. It cannot be repeated; neither
would it be believed, unless by such as, like myself, have had "confirmation
strong," too strong to be rejected, if I did not, at the same time,
reject the evidence of my senses.'(45)

(45) Seymour Harcourt, The
Gaming Calendar.

They spoke no further concerning their union; but when he returned to England in July, he pressed
her hand affectionately, as he said: "Farewell, Elizabeth. If it be the Lord's will I shall
return to thee soon."

In October he returned to America, and they were soon married, at Newtown meeting, according
to the simple form of the Society of Friends. Neither of them made any change of dress for
the occasion, and there was no wedding-feast. Without the aid of priest or magistrate, they
took each other by the hand, and, in the presence of witnesses, calmly and solemnly promised
to be kind and faithful to each other. The wedded pair quietly returned to their happy home,
with none to intrude on those sacred hours of human life, when the heart most needs to be left
alone with its own deep emotions.

During the long period of their union, she three times crossed the Atlantic to visit her aged
parents, and he occasionally left her for a season, when called abroad to preach. These temporary
separations were felt as a cross; but the strong-hearted woman always cheerfully gave him up
to follow his own convictions of duty. In 1742 he parted from her to go on a religious visit
to Tortola, in the West Indies. He died there in the sixty-seventh year of his age. She published
a religious tract of his, to which she prefixed a preface entitled, "Elizabeth Estaugh's Testimony
concerning her Beloved Husband, John Estaugh." In this preface she says: "Since it pleased
divine Providence so highly to favor me with being the near companion of this dear worthy,
I must give some small account of him. Few, if any, in a married state ever lived in sweeter
harmony than we did. He was a pattern of moderation in all things; not lifted up with any enjoyments,
nor cast down at any disappointments; a man endowed with many good gifts, which rendered him
very agreeable to his friends and much more to me, his wife, to whom his memory is most dear
and precious."

Elizabeth survived her excellent husband twenty years, useful and honored to the last. The
monthly meeting of Haddonfield, in a published testimonial, speaks of her thus: "She was endowed
with great natural abilities, which, being sanctified by the spirit of Christ, were much improved;
whereby she became qualified to act in the affairs of the Church, and was a serviceable member,
having been clerk to the women's meeting nearly fifty years, greatly to their satisfaction.
She was a sincere sympathizer with the afflicted, of a benevolent disposition, and in distributing
to the poor, was desirous to do it in a way most profitable and durable to them, and, if possible,
not to let the right hand know what the left did. Though in a state of affluence as to this
world's wealth, she was an example of plainness and moderation. Her heart and house were open
to her friends, whom to entertain seemed one of her greatest pleasures. Prudently cheerful,
and well knowing the value of friendship, she was careful not to wound it herself, nor to encourage
others by whispering supposed failings or weaknesses. Her last illness brought great bodily
pain, which she bore with much calmness of mind and sweetness of spirit. She departed this
life as one falling asleep, full of days, like unto a shock of corn, fully ripe."

The town of Haddonfield, in New Jersey, took its name from her; and the tradition concerning
her courtship is often repeated by some patriarch among the Quakers.

Her medical skill is so well remembered, that the old nurses of New Jersey still recommend
Elizabeth Estaugh's salve as the "sovereignest thing on earth."

The following beautiful lines from Whittier, though inspired by another, well apply to this
Quakeress of the olden time:

    As pure and sweet, her fair brow seemed
      Eternal as the sky;
    And like the brook's low song, her voice,--
      A sound that could not die.

    And half we deemed she needed not
      The changing of her sphere,
    To give to heaven a shining one,
      Who walked an angel here.

    The blessing of her quiet life
      Fell on us like the dew;
    And good thoughts, where her footsteps pressed,
      Like fairy blossoms grew.

    Sweet promptings unto kindest deeds
      Were in her very look;
    We read her face as one who reads
      A true and holy book.

          *      *      *      *

    We miss her in the place of prayer,
      And by the hearth-fire's light;
    We pause beside her door to hear
      Once more her sweet "Good-night."

          *      *      *      *

    Still let her mild rebuking stand
      Between us and the wrong,
    And her dear memory serve to make
      Our faith in goodness strong.

At the present writing (Summer of 1884), General Gordon, who has won the heart of the world
by his brave deeds, is exciting a great deal of interest on account of his perilous position
in Khartoum. A sketch of his career will be acceptable to not a few readers.

The likeness which accompanies this chapter is from a photograph taken not long ago at Southampton,
England; but no portrait gives the expression of the man. His smile and his light-blue eyes
can not be painted by the sun. The rather small physique, and mild and gentle look, would not
lead the ordinary observer to recognize in General Gordon a ruler and leader of men; but a
slight acquaintance shows him to be a man of unusual power and great force of character.

His religious fervor and boundless faith are proverbial--so much so that some men call him
a fatalist; whilst others say, like Festus, "Thou art beside thyself." Neither of these judgments
is true, though it is certainly true that, from a desire to oblige others, Gordon has sometimes
made errors in judgment that have led him into sad dilemmas. With the break of day the gruesome task
of burying the dead began, and continued throughout the day, and by nightfall of May 3d the
Battle of Bayan was over and passed, but I cannot say forgotten, for that can never be, for the
memory of that battle will ever dwell in the minds of those who witnessed or participated
in that never-to-be-forgotten event.

JAMES EDGAR ALLEN.

REWARDS.

(PART SECOND.)

To receive praise for work accomplished, no matter in what form, is certainly pleasing to every phase
of humanity. And to be rewarded for our work gives us a certain feeling of satisfaction, and
assures us that our work along a certain line has been appreciated and admired. But to a soldier,
whose duty is to do battle, praise for his victories is more than
pleasing--it is exalting.

And when after struggling along almost indefinitely at a certain task, and finally accomplishing
it with overwhelming success, he is commended by anxious relatives and friends, usually the height
of his ambition has been reached.

But to be especially commended and congratulated for his achievements,
and by his superior officers and his commander-in-chief especially,
is one of the highest honors that could be conferred upon him.

When he has performed deeds of true valor and courage, wherein he exhibits exceptional bravery,
and is almost overwhelmingly besieged with letters of congratulation
and praise, he has received one of the greatest of earthly rewards.

But there are other rewards, such as promotion, for instance, and one has but to consult our army
records at Washington to find that many of those who constituted what is known as the Lake Lanao
Expedition have been fittingly rewarded for their gallant services on the 2d day of May, 1902.

That the reader may judge of the magnificent gallantry shown by those troops on that eventful
day, a few of the letters are hereby published in full.

COPY OF CONGRATULATORY MESSAGES.

CAMP VICARS (Mind.), P. I., May 7, 1902.

Announcement:

The troops of the Lake Lanao Expedition have been paraded in order that the following messages may
be read to them:

FIRST.

MANILA, May 4, 1902. TO GENERAL DAVIS:

Order that the following message of the President of the United States be read to every company
and troop in your Brigade. It will be published in Division Orders for the information of other commanders,
and as a special mark and tribute to the assaulting force of the
Battle of Bayan.

(Sgd.) CHAFFEE.

PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE.

WASHINGTON, D. C., May 5, 1902. TO GENERAL CHAFFEE, MANILA.

Accept for the Army under your command, and express to General Davis and Colonel Baldwin especially,
my congratulations and thanks for the splendid courage and fidelity which has again carried
our flag to victory. Your fellow countrymen at home will ever reverence the memory of the fallen, and
be faithful to the survivors, who have themselves been faithful unto
death for their country's sake.

(Sgd.) THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

SECOND.

MANILA, May 4, 1902. TO GENERAL DAVIS:

Please accept my congratulations for yourself, and express to Colonel Baldwin and all the officers
and men engaged in the Battle of May 2, my high appreciation of their bravery, gallantry and soldiery
conduct. My congratulations to both officers and men. I sincerely regret the death of some and
the wounding of others. Let no comfort be withheld from the latter that can be supplied them.

(Sgd.)
GENERAL A. R. CHAFFEE, Commanding Philippines.

THIRD.

CEBU, May 4, 1902. TO GENERAL DAVIS:

My sincere congratulations to Baldwin, and to the officers and men engaged yesterday. Also to yourself
for your energetic and skillful conduct of the whole affair, from first to last. It was necessary
to give the Moros a lesson, and it seems to have been done in such a manner that it will not have
to be repeated.

(Sgd.) BRIGADIER GENERAL WADE.

FOURTH.

REMARKS OF GENERAL GEORGE W. DAVIS.

SOLDIERS:

Words at my command fail to convey an adequate expression of admiration for the gallantry and self-sacrifice
which I saw displayed by the assaulting lines and investing cordon on the 2nd of May. The memory
of this sanguinary action will be treasured by all participants and observers as long as they
live. For the 27th Infantry and the 25th Battery of Field Artillery, Bayan will always be an
inspiration. At this moment of exaltation and triumph do not forget the vanquished foe, whose
persistent gallantry commanded the admiration of all who saw the magnificent defense of their
stronghold. A race of men who have been able to make such a fight, and who have turned this wilderness
into a garden, have many qualities which if guided right will make them and their posterity valuable
citizens. None can doubt who have seen what they have accomplished without the aid which civilized
people enjoy. Let no word or act be brought home to the American soldier that discredits or disparages
these Moros. Let it be the unremitting effort of every officer and soldier to assist and elevate
them, a sacred duty which is devolved upon the Army, an added burden
which must be borne; and every American relies upon our troops to
execute this sacred trust.

So far there has been no act of wanton despoilment, injury or insult; let none ever be charged to
an American soldier. Our flag is an emblem of freedom and honor, and it remains with you that
it shall become such an emblem to the Moros, and ever so remain.

(Sgd.) GEORGE W. DAVIS, Brigadier General, U. S. A., Commanding Seventh Separate Brigade.

FIFTH.

HEADQUARTERS LAKE LANAO EXPEDITION, CAMP VICARS (Mind.), P. I., May 7, 1902.

Announcement:

The commanding officer appreciates the gallantry of his regiment. The encounter of the 19th,
20th, and 21st of April, ending in the capture of Fort Pualos, and on May 2d in the capture of
nine fortified positions and the final overcoming of a most desperate enemy, in a thoroughly
equipped fortification known as Fort Pandapatan, where our losses
were far greater than those of an ordinary battle, is the initial
event in the history of the Regiment, and has set a high standard
of valor and courage which will never be lowered as long as the 27th
Infantry exists.

He also desires to express his high appreciation of the gallantry and devotion to duty of the
25th Battery of Field Artillery, and desires that they consider the foregoing remarks concerning
his regiment apply equally to them.

(Sgd.) F. D. BALDWIN, Colonel, Comd'g 27th Infantry.

SERMON ON "COURAGE."

Following is a copy of the admirable sermon preached by Chaplain George D. Rice of the 27th
Infantry, to the troops of the Lake Lanao Expedition, on the Sunday following the battle of Bayan:

"I
am going to speak to you to-day on courage, and how I saw it displayed
on May 2d, while you were engaged in open combat with the Moros.

"There was a time when I thought that true courage was the absence of fear. But after witnessing
the battle of this week I have seen that which has caused me to think differently now, because
you demonstrated to me on that day that true courage is not the absence of fear, but the conquest
of it. Surely, yours was the highest order of courage.

"I recollect when 'E' Company came to re-enforce. I turned and watched three men in skirmish line
coming through the tall grass under heavy fire from the fort.

They knew they were coming into the thickest of the fire, but the interval in that line was correct,
every piece right, no shouting or noise of any sort.

Simply a perfect line of determined men coming up to take part.

"'Tis more than courage, I thought. It is order, it is discipline and coolness. And the wounded!
Such courage! One man struck in the leg. We would help him to the rear; but no, he could crawl
and refused help. Another hit in the right arm, and he laughed. Then a bullet struck his left
arm and he only smiled and said: 'They did not treat me like this in the Panay campaign.'

"Lieut. Wagner was shot in the stomach and leg, and said to me: 'My only regret is to leave
the fort with my work unfinished.' I saw one soldier whom I supposed was dead, I pulled a shelter-half
over him; just then a soldier came running by. An officer shouted, 'Where are you going?'
'My ammunition is all gone,' replied the man. I saw the shelter-half move. In a moment my supposed
dead man was sitting upright. He removed his belt containing a few cartridges and gave it to the
soldier.

I wish I could remember this man, but there were twenty or thirty
dead and wounded near there, and they were doing brave and unexpected
things like this all the time.

"Brave Vicars fell, mortally wounded, leading 'F' Company.

Lieut. Jossman had hardly time to assume command when he, too, was shot, leaving 'F' Company
without an officer, yet his finely disciplined company held its line
perfectly.

A bullet struck Captain Moore in the head, and as he rolled into one of the ditches he was
heard to say, 'Do not retreat.' I saw a wounded soldier making a noble effort to get out of the line
of fire. Who would help him? 'I'm going to help that man if I die for it,' I heard someone say,
as the man repeatedly tottered and fell, with a terrible wound in
his side.

I looked, and in a moment brave Lieut. Bickham, tall and strong, was facing the numerous shot
and shell to save his man, and he succeeded.

A bullet passed through Major Scott's hat, grazed his head, and brought the Major to his knees,
but this officer remained on the line.

"During that awful fight I saw officers and men leave their positions in front of those terrible
portholes for two reasons only--either because wounded or to get more ammunition.

"There were hundreds of instances of heroism occurring about that
fort.

When Lieut. Fulmer called for volunteers to scale the walls, dozens of men responded. Lieuts.
Hawkins and Wilson performed noble service, and were a credit to
themselves and their regiment.

Battalion Adjutant Drum, with his face smeared with powder and the dust of battle, was as cool
as he was courageous. Captains Phillips, Rogers, Lyons and Hutton were with their respective
commands, encouraging their men and doing excellent service.

"It was surely a high order of courage that caused Sgt. Graves to swing himself over the outer
stockade of Binidayan when the fanatic Moro and his knife could be seen above. It was courage of the
most godly type that took Corporal McGoveren down into the trenches
to prop up the heads of wounded men and give them water, while fighting,
biting, dying Moros occupied the same trenches.

It was kingly courage on the part of Corpl. Keeler, who, when shot in the leg, refused help, and
said to me, 'I can get to the rear alone, sir; help someone else.' It was courage of the Christian
soldier that inspired Sergt. Major Ingold and Sergt. McCarthy, both wounded, to speak words
of hope to their comrades.

"The courage displayed by the Moros was very different.

The Moros were caught in a trap. They knew it, and they fought the desperate fight of their
lives. You can drive a mouse into a corner like this, and he, too, will turn. Bravery through
necessity is not the true courage which comes of Christ.

"Officers and soldiers of the 27th Infantry, I congratulate you to-day.

You have been tested and shown what you can do. You deserve credit for what you did, and it is
my earnest desire that the credit be equally divided. When you write home to your people and tell
them of the gallant victory of the 27th Regiment, I want you to remember to speak of others
whose presence and deeds rendered it possible for you to accomplish what you did. I want you
to remember the officers and enlisted men of the 25th Battery. After the work of the battery
was done, the members of the battery came to the front with litters made of rifles, bamboo
poles, ponchos, and shelter-halves, with which they picked up many wounded and took them to the
surgeon. These men came to the line in squads, each with litters, asking for wounded men, and
several wounded men owe their lives to these brave batterymen. They would go anywhere to get
a wounded man. They faced the thickest of the fire. A wounded man was pointed out in a bunch of
grass, and the bullets struck there so fast that one could see the grass cut off. But these Artillerymen
went there, and in a few moments had the man safe in a litter. And all night these noble fellows kept
up the work. They took wounded from the jungles, the trenches and the open, and carried them
to a place of safety. Let us never forget the work of the officers and men of the 25th Battery.

"Captain
McNair, and Lieutenants Clark, Sunderland, and Deems of this battery are worthy of our praise
and thanks. Major Porter, surgeon, tried to get on the line to treat a wounded man when a
shot struck him and brave Porter had to be taken to the rear.

Just behind him I saw hospital corps man Johnson also trying to reach a wounded man when Johnson
fell into one of the terrible and dark pitfalls of the enemy, but got out later and did good
work with the wounded. Young Dr. Allan deserves credit for dressing numberless wounds of officers
and men in the trenches close to the fort and under fire that day. Drs. LeCompte and Grabenstatter
worked like heroes. Major Anderson, chief surgeon of the expedition, made every preparation
possible for the care of the wounded officers and enlisted men. The entire medical corps remained
up all night attending to the wounded. They deserve great credit for their work on that rainy,
chilly and dark night under the fire of the enemy.

"And do not forget the men of the pack-train.

Do you know that these men brought a pack-train of ammunition to you over the slippery dangerous trail
that night?

"Captains Shuttleworth and Andrus, Lieutenants Peck and Fries and their packers worked hard for
you. They toiled constantly until they had every wounded officer and man supplied with tentage,
cots, blankets, and clean clothes. Likewise, kindly remember the engineers and signal corps men.
Their work in this expedition will never be forgotten. Our commanding officer, Colonel Baldwin,
never rested that night. He was up and planning for the morrow and for you. General Davis and
his orderly and a small guard rode many miles that night to the next camp below to arrange
for more troops to come up."

Thus spoke Chaplain Rice, equally dividing the credit of the victory, and praising all for their part
taken in the battle. But in all his words there is one thing that he failed to do, which is
characteristic of this noble man. He failed to mention his own gallant services, of which too
much praise cannot be given. Almost from the beginning of hostilities he was on the firing
line, and up near the fort, speaking words of cheer and comfort to the men in the trenches, and "God
bless the chaplain," are the words of every man of the Lake Lanao Expedition.

JAMES EDGAR ALLEN.

BATTLE OF GAUAN.

It is night again, the battle of Bayan is now fought and indeed very gloriously won. The last
reports of the yet warm cannon have ceased to echo through the distant hills and ravines. The
khaki-clad warriors and laurel-crowned victors, blood stained and weary from the struggle of
the recent battle, have sought a well earned and much needed repose. But their sleep is not one
of comfort or rest, for they have contentedly lain down uncovered on the cold damp ground.

The shrill notes of the bugle call them from their dreamy slumbers
at an early hour and their first duty is to finish burying the dead
and lend what aid is possible to the sick and wounded, who were too
sick and exhausted at this time to be removed over the rugged trails
to the hospitals at Malabang.

To do this it was absolutely necessary to establish a camp, somewhere adjacent to the centre
of hostilities.
It was then that the post of Camp Vicars, now so widely known throughout
the nations of the earth, first had its origin. It was so named in
honor of the brave and ever dauntless soldier, Lieut. Vicars, who
unfortunately lost his life from a wound received, while heroically
engaged in the capture of the stronghold.

Everything is now placid,
hostilities had ceased for a time at least, the Moros driven as they
were from their forts, and stockades, which had been their sole protection
for centuries past against all foreign invasion, had sought shelter
from the yet unconquered tribes wherever it could be had, offering
scarcely any resistance or hostilities to the troops then at the camp.

GENERAL
CHAFFEE ARRIVES.

General Adna R. Chaffee soon afterwards paid a visit
to the recently established camp, arriving with his escort May 10,
1902.

He was given a full account of the battles hitherto fought
in that region--Bayan included--from officers who themselves had been
daring participants in all the fights.

He immediately decided to
send messages to the principal sultans and dattos, who were then commanding
tribes of savage bolomen along the most impassable regions of the
lake shores. The subject matter of his messages were authoritative
invitations to come into the camp and hold a friendly conference with
him.

He received favorable replies from many of them and two days
later the following named sultans and dattos decided to respond to
his invitation: Sultan of Genassi; Sultan Amai Tampugao of Tubaran;
Sultan of Binidayan; Datto Sa Bayang of Bayan; Datto Pedro of Uato;
Datto Agar of Makadah; Datto Agato of Madatlum; Datto Amay Mala-Mala
of Taburan; Datto Amay Magatano of Binidayan.

After they had reported
it was thought that the greater part of the Moro trouble had subsided.
But this was not so--far from it. Their terms of peace were, to say
the least, short lived, for in the early part of the month of July
a detachment of men was brutally and unexpectedly attacked by a band
of bolomen on the trail. They were outnumbered by the enemy, and consequently
many of the Americans were wounded and some three or four killed outright.

TREATIES
BROKEN.

It was now very evident, judging from their recreant action,
that the natives had broken all treaties of peace and violated the
laws of friendship, so honorably laid down by the Americans.

This
evidence of their recriminating and rebellious nature was doubly substantiated,
when on August 1st the Sultan of Bacolod, who until then had remained
peaceable, sent to Captain J. J. Pershing, commander of the troops
at Camp Vicars, the following insolent message, which is translated
below for the benefit of our readers:

TRANSLATION.

We ask you to
return to the sea because you should not be here among civilized Moros,
for you are not religious. If you stay here we will fight you this
month, and in no event will be your friends, because you eat pork.
We say to you that if you do not leave this region, come here and
the Sultan will sacrifice you, and if you do not wish to come we will
come to you and fight.

This was followed in a few days by another
message to the commanding officer, from the Sultan of Maciu, which
was also of a defiant nature.

Circumstances now began to look rather
grave at Camp Vicars. The Americans had endeavored by every means
in their power to prevent further hostilities and trouble, but had
failed in all their efforts to bring about peace between themselves
and the dark-skinned natives of the trackless plains of Mindanao.

A
BLOODY DEED.

The Moros did not, however, make any advances until
the night of August 12, when the most appalling and most ghastly murder
that has ever been witnessed took place about two hundred yards from
the camp. The moon had disappeared temporarily behind a dark cloud,
the men had all retired for the night, and everything seemed tranquil,
when suddenly the camp was aroused by the firing of shots in rapid
succession by the members of the outpost. No doubt all women, when they fall in love, do so with that which they conceive to be
great and noble in the character of the object. But they still love on when all the glitter
of novelty has fallen off, and when they have been behind the scenes and found how bare and
gloomy was the framework of the scene they admired. All illusions may be gone; the hero may
have sunk into the cowardly braggart; the saint into the hypocritical sinner; the noble aspirant
into a man whose mouth alone utters but empty words which his heart can never feel; but still
true love remains, "nor alters where it alteration finds." The duration of this passion, the
constancy of this affection, surprises many; but, adds a writer, such persons--

             "Know not woman, the blest being
    Who, like a pitying angel, gifts the mean
    And sordid nature even with more love
    Than falls to the lot of him who towers above
    His fellow-men; like parasitic flowers
    That grow not on high temples, where the showers
    And light of heaven might nourish, but alone
    Cloth the rent altar and the fallen stone."

There must be some great reason, some combination of feeling, for this. M. Ernest Feydeau,
in a popular story of very bad principles, seems to hit the right nail on the head. "What woman,"
he asks, "would not love her husband, and be ever true to him, without thinking of a lover,
if her husband would give her that which a lover gives her, not alone attention, politeness,
and a cold friendship, but a little of that balm which is the very essense of our existence--a
little love?" Probably these very bad men, for whom women will so generously ruin themselves,
are, by their nature, soft and flattering; and, after cruelties and excesses, will, by soft
words and Belial tongues, bind to them yet more closely the hearts of their victims.

The ideal wife has been often painted, but the real far exceeds her. When Ulric von Hutten
wrote to Frederick, he painted such a portrait as must have made that staunch advocate for
the marriage of the clergy glow with admiration. "Da mihi uxorem," he commences. "Get me a
wife, Frederick, after my own heart, such as you know I should like--neat, young, fairly educated,
modest, patient; one with whom I may joke and play, and yet be serious; to whom I may babble
and talk, mixing hearty fun and kisses together; one whose presence will lighten my anxiety
and soften the tumult of my cares."

It is not too much to say that the great majority of wives equal this ideal. United to such
a woman, a man becomes better. He can never be the perfect man unless married. With marriage
he undertakes those duties of existence which he is born to fulfill. The excitements of life
and of business, the selfishness of daily existence, diminish; the generosities of the heart
expand; the health of the mind becomes daily more robust; small repressions of selfishness,
daily concessions, and daily trials, render him better; the woman of his choice becomes his
equal, and in lifting her he lifts himself. He may not be a genius, nor she very clever; but,
once truly married, the real education of life begins. That is not education which varnishes
a man or a woman over with the pleasant and shining accomplishments which fit us for society,
but that which tends to improve the heart, to bring forward the reflective qualities, and to
form a firm and regular character; that which cultivates the reason, subdues the passions,
restrains them in their proper place, trains us to self-denial, makes us able to bear trials,
and to refer them, and all our sentiments and feelings to their proper source; which makes
us look beyond this world into the next. A man's wife, if properly chosen, will aid in all
this. The most brilliant and original thinker, and the deepest philosopher we have--he who
has written books which educate the statesmen and the leaders of the world--has told us in
his last preface that he, having lost his wife, has lost his chief inspiration. Looking back
at his works, he traces all that is noble, all that is advanced in thought and grand in idea,
and all that is true in expression, not to a poet or a teacher, but to his own wife; in losing
her he says he has lost much, but the world has lost more. So, also, two men, very opposite
in feelings, in genius, and in character, and as opposite in their pursuits, declared at a
late period in their lives--lives spent in industry and hard work, and in expression of what
the world deemed their own particular genius--"that they owed all to their wives." These men
were Sir Walter Scott and Daniel O'Connell. "The very gods rejoice," says Menu the sage, "when
the wife is honored. When the wife is injured, the whole family decays; when the contrary is
the case, it flourishes." This may be taken as an eternal truth--as one of those truths not
to be put by, not to be argued down by casual exceptions. It is just as true of nations as
it is of men; of the whole people as it is of individual families. So true it is, that it may
be regarded as a piece of very sound advice when we counsel all men, married or single, to
choose only such men for their friends as are happy in their wedded lives. No man can afford
to know a broken family. Quarreling, discord, and connubial disagreements are catching. With
unhappiness at home, no man is safely to be trusted, no woman to be sought in friendship. The
fault may not be his or hers, but it must be between them. A man and woman must prove that
they can be a good husband and wife before they can be admitted to have proved that they are
good citizens. Such a verdict may seem harsh, but it is necessary and just. Young people just
married can not possibly afford to know unhappy couples; and they, in their turn, may, with
mutual hypocrisy, rub on in the world; but in the end they feel that the hypocrisy can not
be played out. They gradually withdraw from their friends and acquaintance, and nurse their
own miseries at home.

All good men feel, of course, that any distinctive separation of the sexes, all those separate
gatherings and marks which would divide woman from man, and set her upon a separate pedestal,
are as foolish as they are really impracticable. You will find no one who believes less in
what certain philanthropists call the emancipation of women than a happy mother and wife. She
does not want to be emancipated; and she is quite unwilling that, instead of being the friend
and ally of man, she should be his opponent. She feels truly that the woman's cause is man's.

    "For woman is not undeveloped man,
    But diverse. Could we make her as the man,
    Sweet love were slain, whose dearest bond is this--
    Not like to like, but like in difference."

The very virtues of woman, not less than her faults, fit her for her attachment to man. There
is no man so bad as not to find some pitying woman who will admire and love him; and no man
so wise but that he shall find some woman equal to the full comprehension of him, ready to
understand him and to strengthen him. With such a woman he will grow more tender, ductile,
and appreciative; the man will be more of woman, she of man. Whether society, as it is at present
constituted, fits our young women to be the good wives they should be is another question.
In lower middle life, and with the working classes, it is asserted that the women are not sufficiently
taught to fulfill their mission properly; but, if in large towns the exigencies of trade use
up a large portion of the female population, it is no wonder that they can not be at the same
time good mill-hands, bookbinders, shopwomen, and mothers, cooks, and housewives. We may well
have recourse to public cookery, and talk about working men's dinners--thus drifting from an
opposite point into the coming socialism--when we absorb all the home energies of the woman
in gaining money sufficient for her daily bread. Yet these revelations, nor those yet more
dreadful ones which come out daily in some of our law courts, are not sufficient to make us
overlook the fact that with us by far the larger portion of marriages are happy ones, and that
of men's wives we still can write as the most eloquent divine who ever lived, Jeremy Taylor,
wrote, "A good wife is Heaven's last, best gift to man--his angel and minister of graces innumerable--his
gem of many virtues--his casket of jewels. Her voice is sweet music--her smiles his brightest
day--her kiss the guardian of his innocence--her arms the pale of his safety, the balm of his
health, the balsam of his life--her industry his surest wealth--her economy his safest steward--her
lips his faithful counselors--her bosom the softest pillow of his cares--and her prayers the
ablest advocate of Heaven's blessings on his head."

It would not be holding the balance of the sexes fairly, if after saying all that can be said
in favor of men's wives, we did not say something on the side of women's husbands. In these
clever days the husband is a rather neglected animal. Women are anxious enough to secure a
specimen of the creature, but he is very soon "shelved" afterwards; and women writers are now
so much occupied in contemplating the beauties of their own more impulsive sex that they neglect
to paint ideals of good husbands. There has been also too much writing tending to separate
the sexes. It is plain that in actual life all the virtues can not be on one side, and all
the faults on the other; yet some women are not ashamed to write and speak as if such were
really the case. The wife is taught to regard herself as a woman with many wrongs, because
her natural rights are denied her. She is cockered up into a domestic martyr, and is bred into
an impatience of reproof which is very harmful and very ungraceful. If we look about us, we
find that in our cities, especially, this is producing some very sad results. Some of the men
are getting very impatient at the increasing demands of women for attention, for place, and
for consideration; and, on merely selfish grounds, it is hardly doubtful whether our women
in the upper and middle classes do not demand too much. It is evident that, as society is constituted,
man is the working and woman, generally, the ornamental portion, of it, at least in those classes
to which Providence or society has given what we call comfortable circumstances. Woman may
do, and does do, a great deal of unpleasant, tiresome work; she fritters away her time upon
occupations which require "frittering;" but beyond that she does not do the "paying" work.
The husband, or houseband, still produces the money. He is the poor, plain, working bee; and
the queen bee too often sits in regal state in her comfortable hive while he is toiling and
moiling abroad.

It results from the different occupations of the two sexes, that the husband comes home too
often worried, cross, and anxious; that he finds in his wife a woman to whom he can not tell
his doubts and fears, his humiliations and experience. She, poor woman, with little sense of
what the world is, without any tact, may bore him to take her to fresh amusements and excitements;
for, while he has been expending both brain and body, she has been quietly at home. A certain
want of tact, not unfrequently met with in wives, often sets the household in a flame of anger
and quarreling, which might be avoided by a little patience and care on the part of the wife.

It is not in human nature for a man who has been hard at work all day to return to his home
toiled and weary, or with his mind agitated after being filled with many things, and to regard
with complacency little matters which go awry, but which at another time would not trouble
him. The hard-working man is too apt to regard as lazy those who work less than himself, and
he therefore looks upon the slightest unreadiness or want of preparation in his wife as neglect.
Hence a woman, if she be wise, will be constantly prepared for the return of her husband. He,
after all, is the bread-winner; and all that he requires is an attention less by far than we
should ordinarily pay to a guest. In the good old Scotch song, which thrills our heart every
time it is sung, and makes us remember, however skeptical we may have grown, the true worth
and divinity of love, the wife's greatest pleasure is that of looking forward to the return
of her husband. She puts on-her best clothes and her sweetest smile; she clothes her face with
that fondness which only a wife's look can express; she makes her children look neat and pretty--"gi'es
little Kate her cotton gown, and Jock his Sunday coat" because the husband is returning. There
is not a prettier picture throughout the whole range of literature. How her love breathes forth--

    "Sae sweet his voice, sae smooth his tongue;
      His breath like caller air;
    His very foot has music in 't
      As he comes up the stair."

And the love which thus colors with its radiant tints the common things of this life, which
makes poverty beautiful, and the cottage richer than the palace, will be sure to teach the
heart which possesses it how to manage the husband.

In "managing a man"--an important lesson, which some women are very anxious to impress upon
others--immense tact and delicacy are wanted, but are very seldom found. Wives should remember
that they had better, very much better, never try to manage, than try and not succeed. And
yet all men like to be managed, and require management. No one can pretend to be the be-all
and end-all in a house. It is from his wife that the husband should learn the true value of
things--his own dignity, his position, and even his secondary position by her side as manageress.
But, if she be wise, she will not make this too apparent. Directly the voice gets too loud,
the tone too commanding, and the manner too fussy, the unhappy man begins to suspect that he
is being "managed," and in nine cases out of ten sinks into utter imbecility, or breaks away
like an obstinate pig. Both these symptoms are bad, and perhaps the first is the worst. No
true woman can love and reverence a man who is morally and intellectually lower than herself,
and who has driveled down into a mere assenting puppet. On the other hand, the pig-headed husband
is very troublesome. He requires the greatest care; for whatever his wife says he will refuse
to do; nay, although it may be the very essence of wisdom, he will refuse it because he knows
the behest proceeds from his wife. He is like a jibbing horse, which you have to turn one way
because you want him to start forward on the other; or he more closely resembles the celebrated
Irish pig, which was so obstinate that his master was obliged to persuade him that he was being
driven to Dublin, when his back was towards that city, and he was going to Athlone!

One part of management in husbands lies in a judicious mixture of good humor, attention, flattery,
and compliments. All men, as well as women, are more or less vain; the rare exceptions of men
who do not care to be tickled by an occasional well-turned compliment only prove the rule.
But, in the case of a husband, we must remember that this love of being occasionally flattered
by his wife is absolutely a necessary and natural virtue. No one needs to be ashamed of it.
We are glad enough to own, to remember, to treasure up every little word of approval that fell
from the lips of the woman we courted. Why should we forget the dear sounds now she is our
wife? If we love her, she may be sure that any little compliment--an offered flower, a birthday
gift, a song when we are weary, a smile when we are sad, a look which no eye but our own will
see--will be treasured up, and will cheer us when she is not there. Judiciously used, this
conduct is of the greatest effect in managing the husband. A little vanity does not, moreover,
in such cases as these, prove a man to be either a bad man or a fool. "All clever men," says
a great observer, "are more or less affected with vanity. It may be blatant and offensive,
it may be excessive, but not unamusing, or it may show itself just as a large soupçon, but
it is never entirely absent." The same writer goes on to say that this vanity should by no
means be injudiciously flattered into too large a size. A wife will probably admire the husband
for what he is really worth; and the vanity of a really clever man probably only amounts to
putting a little too large a price on his merits, not to a mistake as to what those merits
are. The wife and husband will therefore think alike; but, if she be wise, she will only go
to a certain point in administering the domestic lumps of sugar. "A clever husband," says the
writer we have quoted, "is like a good despot; all the better for a little constitutional opposition."
Or the same advice may be thus put, as it often is, by a wise and cautious mother-in-law: "My
dear," she would say, "you must never let your husband have matters all his own way."

A woman who abdicates all her authority, who is not queen over her kitchen, her chamber, and
her drawing-room or best parlor, does a very dangerous and foolish thing, and will soon dwarf
down into a mere assenting dummy. Now old Burleigh, the wise counselor of Queen Elizabeth,
has, in his advice to his son, left it upon record that "thou shalt find there is nothing so
irksome in life as a female fool." A wife who is the mere echo of her husband's opinions; who
waits for his advice upon all matters; who is lazy, indolent, and silly in her household; fussy,
troublesome, and always out of the way or in the way when she is traveling; who has no opinions
of her own, no temper of her own; who boasts that "she bears every thing like a lamb;" and
who bears the breakage of her best china and the desecration of her white curtains with tobbaco-smoke
with equal serenity; such a woman may be very affectionate and very good, but she is somewhat
of a "she-fool." Her husband will too often first begin to despise and then to neglect her.
She will follow so closely on the heels of her husband's ideas and her husband's opinions that
she will annoy him like an echo. Her genuine love will be construed into something like cunning
flattery; her very devotion will be mistaken; her sweet nature become tiresome and irksome,
from want of variety; and, from being the mistress of the house, she will sink into the mere
slave of the husband. A wife should therefore learn to think, to walk alone, to bear her full
share of the troubles and dignities of married life, never to become a cipher in her own house,
but to rise to the level of her husband, and to take her full share of the matrimonial throne.
The husband, if a wise man, will never act without consulting his wife; nor will she do any
thing of importance without the aid and advice of her husband.

There is, however--and in these days of rapid fortune-making we see it constantly--a certain
class of men who rise in the world without the slightest improvement in their manners, taste,
or sense. Such men are shrewd men of business, or perhaps have been borne to the haven of fortune
by a lucky tide; and yet these very men possess wives who, although they are of a lower sphere,
rise at once with their position, and in manner, grace, and address are perfect ladies, whilst
their husbands are still the same rude, uncultivated boors. These wives must be wise enough
to console themselves for their trials; for indeed such things are a very serious trial both
to human endurance and to human vanity. They must remember that they married when equals with
their husbands in their lowliness, and that their husbands have made the fortune which they
pour at their feet. They will recollect also that their husbands must have industry, and a
great many other sterling good qualities, if they lack a little polish; and, lastly, that they
are in reality no worse off than many other women in high life who are married to boors, to
eccentric persons, or, alas! too often to those who, with many admirable virtues, may blot
them all by the indulgence in a bosom sin or an hereditary vice.

The last paragraph will lead us naturally enough to the faults of husbands. Now, although we
are inclined to think that these are greatly exaggerated, and that married men are, on the
whole, very good--excellent men and citizens, brave men, battling with the world and its difficulties,
and carrying forward the cumbrous machine in its path of progress and civilization--although
we think that, as a class, their merits are actually not fully appreciated, and that the bachelors
(sly fellows!) get very much the best of it--still, we must admit that there is a very large
class of thoroughly bad husbands, and that this class may be divided into the foolish, the
careless, and the vicious sub-classes, each of which would require at least a volume to be
devoted to their treatment and castigation. Nay, more than a volume. Archdeacon Paley notes
that St. John, apologizing for the brevity and incompleteness of Gospel directions, states
that, if all the necessary books were written, the world would not contain them. So we may
say of the faults of foolish husbands; we will, therefore, say no more about them, but return
to the part which the wives of such men ought to play.

In the first place, as a true woman, a wife will be as tender of those faults as she can be.
She will not talk to her neighbors about them, nor magnify them, nor dwell upon them. She,
alas! will never be without her share of blame; for the world, rightly or wrongly, often dowers
the wife with the faults of the husband, and, seeing no possibility of interfering and assigning
to each his or her share, suspects both. Moreover, in many cases she will have to blame herself
chiefly. We take it that the great majority of women marry the men that they choose. If they
do not do so, they should do so. They may have been unwise and vain enough to have been pleased
and tickled by the flattery of a fool. When they have married him, they find him, as Dr. Gregory
wrote to his daughters, "the most intractable of husbands; led by his passions and caprices,
and incapable of hearing the voice of reason." A woman's vanity may be hurt when she finds
that she has a husband for whom she has to blush and tremble every time he opens his lips.
She may be annoyed at his clownish jealousy, his mulish obstinacy, his incapability of being
managed, led, or driven; but she must reflect that there was a time when a little wisdom and
reflection on her own part would have prevented her from delivering her heart and her person
to so unworthy a creature.

Women who have wicked husbands are much more to be pitied: In early life the wives themselves
are innocent; and, from the nature of things, their innocence is based upon ignorance. Here
the value of the almost intuitive wisdom and perception of the gentler sex comes into full
play. During courtship, when this perception is in its full power and vigor, it should be freely
exercised. Scandal and common report, in themselves to be avoided, are useful in this.

Women should choose men of character and of unspotted name. It is a very old and true remark--but
one may as well repeat what is old and trite when that which is new would be but feeble repetition
at the best--that a good son generally makes a good husband; a wise companion in a walk may
turn out a judicious companion through life. The wild attempt to reform a rake, or to marry
a man of a "gay" life, in the hope that he will sow "his wild oats," is always dangerous, and
should never be attempted. A woman who has a sense of religion herself should never attach
herself to a man who has none. The choice of a husband is really of the greatest consequence
to human happiness, and should never be made without the greatest care and circumspection.
No sudden caprice, no effect of coquetry, no sally of passion, should be dignified by the name
of love. "Marriage," says the apostle, "is honorable in all;"' but the kind of marriage which
is so is that which is based upon genuine love, not upon fancy or caprice; which is founded
on the inclination of nature, on honorable views, cemented by a similarity of tastes, and strengthened
by the true sympathy of souls.

      Love is the tyranny
      So blessed to endure!
    Who mourns the loss of liberty,
      With all things else secure?

      Live on, sweet tyranny!
      (Cries heart within a heart)
    God's blossom of Eternity,
      How beautiful thou art! As to the "influence for good,"
the reader will judge when he has read the following choice bits from
the pages of that unique book. And we feel sure that he will thank us
for including John among our "Brave Men and Women."

RELIGIOUS GRUMBLERS.

When a man has a particularly empty head, he generally sets up for a great judge, especially
in religion. None so wise as the man who knows nothing. His ignorance is the mother of his
impudence and the nurse of his obstinacy; and, though he does not know B from a bull's foot,
he settles matters as if all wisdom were in his fingers' ends--the pope himself is not more
infallible. Hear him talk after he has been at meeting and heard a sermon, and you will know
how to pull a good man to pieces, if you never knew it before. He sees faults where there are
none, and, if there be a few things amiss, he makes every mouse into an elephant. Although
you might put all his wit into an egg-shell, he weighs the sermon in the balances of his conceit,
with all the airs of a bred-and-born Solomon, and if it be up to his standard, he lays on his
praise with a trowel; but, if it be not to his taste, he growls and barks and snaps at it like
a dog at a hedgehog. Wise men in this world are like trees in a hedge, there is only here and
there one; and when these rare men talk together upon a discourse, it is good for the ears
to hear them; but the bragging wiseacres I am speaking of are vainly puffed up by their fleshly
minds, and their quibbling is as senseless as the cackle of geese on a common. Nothing comes
out of a sack but what was in it, and, as their bag is empty, they shake nothing but wind out
of it. It is very likely that neither ministers nor their sermons are perfect--the best garden
may have a few weeds in it, the cleanest corn may have some chaff--but cavilers cavil at any
thing or nothing, and find fault for the sake of showing off their deep knowledge; sooner than
let their tongues have a holiday, they would complain that the grass is not a nice shade of
blue, and say that the sky would have looked neater if it had been whitewashed.

GOOD-NATURE AND FIRMNESS.

Do not be all sugar, or the world will suck you down; but do not be all vinegar, or the world
will spit you out. There is a medium in all things; only blockheads go to extremes. We need
not be all rock or all sand, all iron or all wax. We should neither fawn upon every body like
silly lap-dogs, nor fly at all persons like surly mastiffs. Blacks and whites go together to
make up a world, and hence, on the point of temper, we have all sorts of people to deal with.
Some are as easy as an old shoe, but they are hardly ever worth more than the other one of
the pair; and others take fire as fast as tinder at the smallest offense, and are as dangerous
as gunpowder. To have a fellow going about the farm as cross with every body as a bear with
a sore head, with a temper as sour as verjuice and as sharp as a razor, looking as surly as
a butcher's dog, is a great nuisance; and yet there may be some good points about the man,
so that he may be a man for all that; but poor, soft Tommy, as green as grass and as ready
to bend as a willow, is nobody's money and every body's scorn. A man must have a backbone,
or how is he to hold his head up? But that backbone must bend, or he will knock his brow against
the beam.

There is a time to do as others wish, and a time to refuse. We may make ourselves asses, and
then every body will ride us; but, if we would be respected, we must be our own masters, and
not let others saddle us as they think fit. If we try to please every body, we shall be like
a toad under a harrow, and never have peace; and, if we play lackey to all our neighbors, whether
good or bad, we shall be thanked by no one, for we shall soon do as much harm as good. He that
makes himself a sheep will find that the wolves are not all dead. He who lies on the ground
must expect to be trodden on. He who makes himself a mouse, the cats will eat him. If you let
your neighbors put the calf on your shoulders, they will soon clap on the cow. We are to please
our neighbor for his good to edification, but this is quite another matter.

PATIENCE.

Patience is better than wisdom; an ounce of patience is worth a pound of brains. All men praise
patience, but few enough can practice it; it is a medicine which Is good for all diseases,
and therefore every old woman recommends it; but it is not every garden that grows the herbs
to make it with. When one's flesh and bones are full of aches and pains, it is as natural for
us to murmur as for a horse to shake his head when the flies tease him, or a wheel to rattle
when a spoke is loose; but nature should not be the rule with Christians, or what is their
religion worth? If a soldier fights no better than a plowboy, off with his red coat. We expect
more fruit from an apple-tree than from a thorn, and we have a right to do so. The disciples
of a patient Savior should be patient themselves. Grin and bear it is the old-fashioned advice,
but sing and bear it is a great deal better. After all, we get very few cuts of the whip, considering
what bad cattle we are; and when we do smart a little, it is soon over. Pain past is pleasure,
and experience comes by it. We ought not to be afraid of going down into Egypt, when we know
we shall come out of it with jewels of silver and gold.

ON SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES.

Some men never are awake when the train starts, but crawl into the station just in time to
see that every body is off, and then sleepily say, "Dear me, is the train gone? My watch must
have stopped in the night!" They always come into town a day after the fair, and open their
wares an hour after the market is over. They make their hay when the sun has left off shining,
and cut their corn as soon as the fine weather is ended. They cry "Hold hard!" after the shot
has left the gun, and lock the stable-door when the steed is stolen. They are like a cow's
tail, always behind; they take time by the heels and not by the forelock, if indeed they ever
take him at all. They are no more worth than an old almanac; their time has gone for being
of use; but, unfortunately, you can not throw them away as you would the almanac, for they
are like the cross old lady who had an annuity left to her, and meant to take out the full
value of it--they won't die, though they are of no use alive. Take-it-easy and Live-long are
first cousins, they say, and the more's the pity. If they are immortal till their work is done,
they will not die in a hurry, for they have not even begun to work yet. Shiftless people generally
excuse their laziness by saying, "they are only a little behind;" but a little too late is
much too late, and a miss is as good as a mile. My neighbor Sykes covered up his well after
his child was drowned in it, and was very busy down at the Old Farm bringing up buckets of
water after every stick of the house had been burned; one of these days, he'll be for making
his will when he can't hold a pen, and he'll be trying to repent of his sins when his senses
are going.

FAULTS.

He who boasts of being perfect is perfect in folly. I have been a good deal up and down in
the world, and I never did see either a perfect horse or a perfect man, and I never shall till
two Sundays come together. You can not get white flour out of a coal sack, nor perfection out
of human nature; he who looks for it had better look for sugar in the sea. The old saying is,
"Lifeless, faultless;" of dead men we should say nothing but good; but as for the living, they
are all tarred more or less with the black brush, and half an eye can see it. Every head has
a soft place in it, and every heart has its black drop. Every rose has its prickles, and every
day its night. Even the sun shows spots, and the skies are darkened with clouds. Nobody is
so wise but he has folly enough to stock a stall at Vanity Fair. Where I could not see the
fool's cap, I have nevertheless heard the bells jingle. As there is no sunshine without some
shadows, so is all human good mixed up with more or less of evil; even poor-law guardians have
their little failings, and parish beadles are not wholly of heavenly nature. The best wine
has its lees. All men's faults are not written on their foreheads, and it's quite as well they
are not, or hats would need very wide brims; yet as sure as eggs are eggs, faults of some sort
nestle in every bosom. There's no telling when a man's sins may show themselves, for hares
pop out of the ditch just when you are not looking for them. A horse that is weak in the legs
may not stumble for a mile or two, but it is in him, and the driver had better hold him up
well. The tabby cat is not lapping milk just now, but leave the dairy door open, and see if
she is not as bad a thief as the kitten. There's fire in the flint, cool as it looks: wait
till the steel gets a knock at it, and you will see. Every body can read that riddle, but it
is not every body that will remember to keep his gunpowder out of the way of the candle.

If we would always recollect that we live among men who are imperfect, we should not be in
such a fever when we find out our friend's failings; what's rotten will rend, and cracked pots
will leak. Blessed is he who expects nothing of poor flesh and blood, for he shall never be
disappointed. The best of men are men at the best, and the best wax will melt.

    "It is a good horse that never stumbles,
    And a good wife that never grumbles."

HOME.

That word home always sounds like poetry to me. It rings like a peal of bells at a wedding,
only more soft and sweet, and it chimes deeper into the ears of my heart. It does not matter
whether it means thatched cottage or manor-house, home is home; be it ever so homely, there
is no place on earth like it. Green grows the house-leek on the roof forever, and let the moss
flourish on the thatch. Sweetly the sparrows chirrup and the swallows twitter around the chosen
spot which is my joy and rest. Every bird loves its own nest; the owls think the old ruins
the fairest spot under the moon, and the fox is of opinion that his hole in the hill is remarkably
cozy. When my master's nag knows that his head is toward home he wants no whip, but thinks
it best to put on all steam; and I am always of the same mind, for the way home, to me, is
the best bit of road in the country. I like to see the smoke out of my own chimney better than
the fire on another man's hearth; there's something so beautiful in the way in which it curls
up among the trees. Cold potatoes on my own table taste better than roast meat at my neighbor's,
and the honeysuckle at my own door is the sweetest I ever smell. When you are out, friends
do their best, but still it is not home. "Make yourself at home," they say, because every body
knows that to feel at home is to feel at ease.

    "East and west,
    Home is best."

Why, at home you are at home, and what more do you want? Nobody grudges you, whatever your
appetite may be; and you don't get put into a damp bed.

MEN WHO ARE DOWN.

No man's lot is fully known till he is dead; change of fortune is the lot of life. He who rides
in the carriage may yet have to clean it. Sawyers change-places, and he who is up aloft may
have to take his turn in the pit. In less than a thousand years we shall all be bald and poor
too, and who knows what he may come to before that? The thought that we may ourselves be one
day under the window, should make us careful when we are throwing out our dirty water. With
what measure we mete, it shall be measured to us again, and therefore let us look well to our
dealings with the unfortunate.

Nothing makes me more sick of human nature than to see the way in which men treat others when
they fall down the ladder of fortune: "Down with him," they cry, "he always was good for nothing."

    "Down among the dead men, down, down, down,
    Down among the dead men, there let him lie."

Dog won't eat dog, but men will eat each other up like cannibals, and boast of it too. There
are thousands in this world who fly like vultures to feed on a tradesman or a merchant as soon
as ever he gets into trouble. Where the carcass is thither will the eagles be gathered together.
Instead of a little help, they give the sinking man a great deal of cruelty, and cry, "Serves
him right." All the world will beat the man whom fortune buffets. If providence smites him,
all men's whips begin to crack. The dog is drowning, and therefore all his friends empty their
buckets over him. The tree has fallen, and every body runs for his hatchet. The house is on
fire, and all the neighbors warm themselves. The man has ill luck, therefore his friends give
him ill usage; he has tumbled into the road, and they drive their carts over him; he is down,
and selfishness cries, "Let him be kept down, then there will be the more room for those who
are up."

How aggravating it is when those who knocked you down kick you for not standing up! It is not
very pleasant to hear that you have been a great fool, that there were fifty ways at least
of keeping out of your difficulty, only you had not the sense to see them. You ought not to
have lost the game; even Tom Fool can see where you made a bad move. "He ought to have looked
the stable-door;" every body can see that, but nobody offers to buy the loser a new nag. "What
a pity he went so far on the ice!" That's very true, but that won't save the poor fellow from
drowning. When a man's coat is threadbare, it is an easy thing to pick a hole in it. Good advice
is poor food for a hungry family.

    "A man of words and not of deeds
    Is like a garden full of weeds."

Lend me a bit of string to tie up the traces, and find fault with my old harness when I get
home. Help my old horse to a few oats, then tell him to mend his pace. Feel for me and I shall
be much obliged to you, but mind you, feel in your pocket, or else a fig for your feelings.

HOPE.

Eggs are eggs, but some are rotten; and so hopes are hopes, but many of them are delusions.
Hopes are like women, there is a touch of angel about them all, but there are two sorts. My
boy Tom has been blowing a lot of birds'-eggs, and threading them on a string; I have been
doing the same thing with hopes, and here's a few of them, good, bad, and indifferent.

The sanguine man's hope pops up in a moment like Jack-in-the-box; it works with a spring, and
does not go by reason. Whenever this man looks out of the window he sees better times coming,
and although it is nearly all in his own eye and nowhere else, yet to see plum-puddings in
the moon is a far more cheerful habit than croaking at every thing like a two-legged frog.
This is the kind of brother to be on the road with on a pitch-dark night, when it pours with
rain, for he carries candles in his eyes and a fireside in his heart. Beware of being misled
by him, and then you may safely keep his company. His fault is that he counts his chickens
before they are hatched, and sells his herrings before they are in the net. All his sparrows'-eggs
are bound to turn into thrushes, at the least, if not partridges and pheasants. Summer has
fully come, for he has seen one swallow. He is sure to make his, fortune at his new shop, for
he had not opened the door five minutes before two of the neighbors crowded in; one of them
wanted a loaf of bread on trust, and the other asked change for a shilling. He is certain that
the squire means to give him his custom, for he saw him reading the name over the shop door
as he rode past. He does not believe in slips between cups and lips, but makes certainties
out of perhapses. Well, good soul, though he is a little soft at times, there is much in him
to praise, and I like to think of ope of his odd sayings, "Never say die till you are dead,
and then it's no use, so let it alone." There are other odd people in the world, you see, besides
John Ploughman.

MY FIRST WIFE.

My experience of my first wife, who will, I hope, live to be my last, is much as follows: matrimony
came from Paradise and leads to it. I never was half so happy before I was a married man as
I am now. When you are married, your bliss begins. I have no doubt that where there is much
love there will be much to love, and where love is scant faults will be plentiful. If there
is only one good wife in England, I am the man who put the ring on her finger, and long may
she wear it. God bless the dear soul, if she can put up with me, she shall never be put down by me.

HINTS AS TO THRIVING.

Hard work is the grand secret of success. Nothing but rags and poverty can come of idleness.
Elbow-grease is the only stuff to make gold with. No sweat, no sweet. He who would have the
crow's eggs must climb the tree. Every man must build up his own fortune nowadays. Shirt-sleeves
rolled up lead on to best broad cloth; and he who is not ashamed of the apron will soon be
able to do without it. "Diligence is the mother of good luck," as Poor Richard says; but "idleness
is the devil's bolster," John Ploughman says.

Make as few changes as you can; trees often transplanted bear little fruit. If you have difficulties
in one place, you will have them in another; if you move because it is damp in the valley,
you may find it cold on the hill. Where will the ass go that he will not have to work? Where
can a cow live and not get milked? Where will you find land without stones, or meat without
bones? Everywhere on earth men must eat bread in the sweat of their faces. To fly from trouble
men must have eagle's wings. Alteration is not always improvement, as the pigeon said when
she got out of the net and into the pie. There is a proper time for changing, and then mind
you bestir yourself, for a sitting hen gets no barley; but do not be forever on the shift,
for a rolling stone gathers no moss. Stick-to-it is the conqueror. He who can wait long enough
will win. This, that, and the other, any thing and every thing, all put together, make nothing
in the end; but on one horse a man rides home in due season. In one place the seed grows, in
one nest the bird hatches its eggs, in one oven the bread bakes, in one river the fish lives.

Do not be above your business. He who turns up his nose at his work quarrels with his bread
and butter. He is a poor smith who is afraid of his own sparks: there's some discomfort in
all trades, except chimney-sweeping. If sailors gave up going to sea because of the wet, if
bakers left off baking because it is hot work, if ploughmen would not plough because of the
cold, and tailors would not make our clothes for fear of pricking their fingers, what a pass
we should come to! Nonsense, my fine fellow, there's no shame about any honest calling; don't
be afraid of soiling your hands, there's plenty of soap to be had. All trades are good to good
traders. A clever man can make money out of dirt. Lucifer matches pay well, if you sell enough
of them.

You can not get honey if you are frightened at bees, nor sow corn if you are afraid of getting
mud on your boots. Lackadaisical gentlemen had better emigrate to fool's-land, where men get
their living by wearing shiny boots and lavender gloves. When bars of iron melt under the south
wind, when you can dig the fields with toothpicks, blow ships along with fans, manure the crops
with lavender-water, and grow plum-cakes in flower-pots, then will be a fine time for dandies;
but until the millennium comes we shall all have a deal to put up with, and had better bear
our present burdens than run helter-skelter where we shall find matters a deal worse.

Keep your weather eye open. Sleeping poultry are carried off by the fox. Who watches not, catches
not. Fools ask what's o'clock, but wise men know their time. Grind while the wind blows, or
if not do not blame Providence. God sends every bird its food, but he does not throw it into
the nest: he gives us our daily bread, but it is through our own labor. Take time by the forelock.
Be up early and catch the worm. The morning hour carries gold in its mouth. He who drives last
in the row gets all the dust in his eyes: rise early, and you will have a clear start for the day.

TRY.

Can't do it sticks in the mud, but Try soon drags the wagon out of the rut. The fox said Try,
and he got away from the hounds when they almost snapped at him. The bees said Try, and turned
flowers into honey. The squirrel said Try, and up he went to the top of the beech-tree. The
snow-drop said Try, and bloomed in the cold snows of Winter. The sun said Try, and the Spring
soon threw Jack Frost out of the saddle. The young lark said Try, and he found his new wings
took him over hedges and ditches, and up where his father was singing. The ox said Try, and
ploughed the field from end to end. No hill too steep for Try to climb, no clay too stiff for
Try to plough, no field too wet for Try to drain, no hole too big for Try to mend. As to a
little trouble, who expects to find cherries without stones, or roses without thorns! Who would
win must learn to bear. Idleness lies in bed sick of the mulligrubs where industry finds health
and wealth. The dog in the kennel barks at the fleas; the hunting dog does not even know they
are there. Laziness waits till the river is dry, and never gets to market; "Try" swims it,
and makes all the trade. Can't do it couldn't eat the bread and butter which was cut for him,
but Try made meat out of mushrooms.

If you want to do good in the world, the little word "Try" comes in again. There are plenty
of ways of serving God, and some that will fit you exactly as a key fits a lock. Don't hold
back because you can not preach in St. Paul's; be content to talk to one or two in a cottage;
very good wheat grows in little fields. You may cook in small pots as well as big ones. Little
pigeons can carry great messages. Even a little dog can bark at a thief, and wake up the master
and save the house. A spark is fire. A sentence of truth has heaven in it. Do what you do right
thoroughly; pray over it heartily, and leave the result to God.

Alas! advice is thrown away on many, like good seed on a bare rock. Teach a cow for seven years,
but she will never learn to sing the Old Hundreth. Of some it seems true that when they were
born Solomon went by the door, but would not look in. Their coat-of-arms is a fool's cap on
a donkey's head. They sleep when it is time to plough, and weep when harvest comes. They eat
all the parsnips for supper, and wonder they have none left for breakfast.

    Once let every man say Try,
    Very few on straw would lie,
    Fewer still of want would die;
    Pans would all have fish to fry;
    Pigs would fill the poor man's sty;
    Want would cease and need would fly;
    Wives,and children cease to cry;
    Poor rates would not swell so high;
    Things wouldn't go so much awry--
    You'd be glad, and so would I.

       *       *       *       *       *

XVIII.

CAROLINE LUCRETIA HERSCHEL.

(BORN 1750--DIED 1848)

A NOBLE, SELF-SACRIFICING WOMAN.

March 16, 1750, and January 9, 1848. These are the dates that span the ninety-eight years of
the life of a woman whose deeds were great in the service of the world, but of whom the world
itself knows all too little. Of the interest attaching to the life of such a woman, whose recollections
went back to the great earthquake at Lisbon; who lived through the American War, the old French
Revolution, the rise and fall of Napoleon; who saw the development of the great factors of
modern civilization, "from the lumbering post wagon in which she made her first journey from
Hanover to the railroads and electric telegraphs which have intersected all Europe;" of the
interest which such a life possesses, apart from that which attaches to it as that of a noble,
self-sacrificing woman, who was content to serve when she might have led in a great cause,
but few will be insensible.

Caroline Herschel was born on the 16th of March 1750, and was the eighth child of ten children.
Her father, Isaac Herschel, traced his ancestry back to the early part of the seventeenth century,
when three brothers Herschel left Moravia through religious differences, they being Protestant.
The father, Isaac, was passionately fond of music, to the study of which, as a youth, he devoted
himself, and, at the time of his marriage in Hanover, was engaged as hautboy player in the
band of the Guards. When, in the course of time, his family grew up around him, each child
received an education at the garrison school, to which they were sent between the ages of two
and fourteen; and at home the father strove to cultivate the musical talents of his sons, one
of whom, William, soon taught his teacher, while another, Jacob, was organist of the garrison
church.

Of her very early childhood one gets the impression that Caroline was a quiet, modest little
maiden, "deeply interested in all the family concerns," content to be eclipsed by her more
brilliant and less patient elder sister, and overlooked by her thoughtless brothers, toward
one of whom, William, she already began to cherish that deep affection which she maintained
throughout their lives. The lives of this brother and sister, indeed, in this respect, recall
to mind those of Charles and Mary Lamb. When she was five years old the family life was disturbed
by war, which took away temporarily father and sons, and left the little girl at home, her
mother's sole companion. Her recollections of this time are very dismal, and may be read at
length in the memoir by Mrs. John Herschel, to which we are indebted for much aid. When she
was seventeen her father died, and the polished education which he had hoped to give her was
supplanted by the rough but useful knowledge which her mother chose to inculcate in her--an
education which was to help to fit her to earn her bread, and to be of great assistance to
her beloved brother William. He had now for some years been living at Bath, England, from which
he wrote in 1772, proposing that his sister should join him there to assist him in his musical
projects, for he had now become a composer and director. In August of this year she accomplished
a most adventurous and wearisome journey to London, encountering storms by land and sea, and
on the 28th of the month found herself installed in her brother's lodgings at Bath.

It will be necessary here to speak a little more at length of her brother's life as she found
it when she joined him, as thereafter her own existence was practically merged in his, and,
as she has said modestly of herself and her service: "I did nothing for my brother but what
a well-trained puppy-dog would have done; that is to say, I did what he commanded me. I was
a mere tool, which he had the trouble of sharpening." Posterity discredits this self-depreciation,
while it admires it, and Miss Herschel's services are now esteemed at their true worth. Her
brother then, when she came to Bath, had established himself there as a teacher of music, as
organist of the Octagon Chapel, and, as we have said before, was a composer and director of
more than ordinary merit. This was all a side issue, however. It was but a means to an end.
His music was the goose that laid the golden egg, which, once in his possession, he turned
over to the mistress of his soul--Astronomy.

Every spare moment of the day, we are told, and many hours stolen from the night, had long
been devoted to the studies which were compelling him to become himself an observer of the
heavens. He had worked wonders of mechanical invention, forced thereto by necessity; had become
a member of a philosophical society, and his name was beginning to be circulated among the
great, rumors of his work reaching and arresting even royal attention.

At this point his sister arrived, the quiet domestic life she had been living in Hanover being
suddenly changed for one of "ceaseless and inexhaustible activity" in her brother's service,
being at once his astronomical and musical assistant, and his housekeeper and guardian. Of
the latter, his erratic habits made him in great need. "For ten years she persevered at Bath,"
says her biographer, "singing when she was told to sing, copying when she was told to copy,
'lending a hand' in the workshop, and taking her full share in all the stirring and exciting
changes by which the musician became the king's astronomer and a celebrity; but she never,
by a single word, betrays how these wonderful events affected her, nor indulges in the slightest
approach to an original sentiment, comment, or reflection not strictly connected with the present
fact." In an ordinary case this would not be remarkable, but in the present instance it acquires
considerable significance from the fact that, to our best knowledge, Miss Herschel's was a
temperament which would be strongly affected by the life she was leading, and her silence as
to personal sentiment shows to what an extent she had become a tool in her brother's hands--rejoicing
in his successes, and sympathizing in his sorrows, but never revealing to what depth of self-sacrifice
she may have been plunged by her voluntary surrender and devotion to her brother.

As we understand her, Miss Herschel would have been eminently fitted to fill a position of
high domestic responsibility; and no woman of this sort, who has once dreamed of a home of
her own, with its ennobling and divine responsibilities, can, without a pang, give up so sweet
a vision for a life of sacrifice, although it be brilliant with the cold splendors of science.
Her life with her brother, as has been said, was one of ceaseless activity in all the capacities
in which she served him. As housekeeper, she occupied a small room in the attic, while her
brother occupied the ground-floor, furnished in new and handsome style. She received a sum
for weekly expenses, of which she must keep a careful account, and all the marketing fell to
her. She had to struggle with hot-tempered servants, and with the greatest irregularity and
disorder in the household; while her imperfect knowledge of English (this was soon after her
arrival at Bath) added a new pang to her homesickness and low spirits. Later on, in her capacity
as musical assistant, we are told that she once copied the scores of the "Messiah" and "Judas
Maccabaeus" into parts for an orchestra of nearly one hundred performers, and the vocal parts
of "Samson," besides instructing the treble singers, of whom she was now herself the first.
As astronomical assistant, she has herself given a glimpse of her experience in the following
words: "In my brother's absence from home, I was, of course, left solely to amuse myself with
my own thoughts, which were any thing but cheerful. I found I was to be trained for an assistant
astronomer, and, by way of encouragement, a telescope adapted for 'sweeping,' consisting of
a tube with two glasses, such as are commonly used in a 'finder,' was given me. I was 'to sweep
for comets,' and I see by my journal that I began August 22, 1782, to write down and describe
all remarkable appearances I saw in my 'sweeps,' which were horizontal. But it was not till
the last two months of the same year that I felt the least encouragement to spend the star-light
nights on a grass-plot covered with dew or hoar-frost, without a human being near enough to
be within call. I knew too little of the real heavens to be able to point out every object
so as to find it again without losing too much time by consulting the atlas." And, in another
place, she says: "I had, however, the comfort to see that my brother was satisfied with my
endeavors to assist him, when he wanted another person either to run to the clocks, write down
a memorandum, fetch and carry instruments, or measure the ground with poles, etc., of which
something of the kind every moment would occur." How successful she was in her sky-sweeping
may be judged from the fact that she herself discovered no less than eight different comets
at various times during her apprenticeship. Her work was not unattended by danger and accidents,
and on one occasion, on a cold and cloudy December night, when a strip of clear sky revealed
some stars and there was great haste made to observe them, in assisting her brother with his
huge telescope she ran in the dark on ground covered with melting snow a foot deep, tripped,
and fell on a large iron hook such as butchers use, and which was attached for some purpose
to the machine. It entered her right leg, above the knee, and when her brother called, "Make
haste," she could only answer by a pitiful cry, "I am hooked." He and the workmen were instantly
with her; but they did not free her from the torturing position without leaving nearly two
ounces of her flesh behind, and it was long before she was able to take her place again at
the instrument.

It would be interesting, if it were but practicable, to give a brief journal of her life during
the fifty years she lived in England, from the time of her arrival in Bath, August 28, 1772,
till the time of her brother's death, August 25, 1822, after which she returned to Hanover.

We have given enough, perhaps, to suggest the mode and the activity of her life; but of her
brother's marriage, and the trial it brought upon her in giving up the supreme place she had
held in his love and companionship for sixteen years; of the details of her discoveries, and
the interesting correspondence which accompanied them; of her various great and noble friends,
and her relations with them; of the death of her brother, then Sir William Herschel, and the
terrible blow it proved to her; of her return to Holland, to the home of another brother; of
her sorrow and disappointment at the changes which had taken place in the home of her youth
during the long years which had brought her to old age--she was then seventy-two--and to face
"the blank of life after having lived within the radiance of genius;" of the comfort she derived
from the members of her brother's family whom she had left behind in "happy England;" of the
honors which the chief scientific men in the kingdom bestowed upon her--of all these matters
we can do no more than to simply touch upon them as above, although, if we might refer to them
at greater length, it would be but to increase our admiration and esteem for one of the strongest,
most serviceable, and most faithful women that ever lived.

She died at eleven o'clock on the night of the 9th of January, 1848, at the age of ninety-eight;
and the holy words were spoken in the same little chapel in the garrison in which, "nearly
a century before, she had been christened and afterward confirmed." In the coffin with her
was placed, at her request, "a lock of her beloved brother's hair, and an old, almost obliterated
almanac that had been used by her father;" and with these tokens of the unswerving love and
fidelity she had always borne to parent and brother, she was laid away to rest, leaving the
memory of a noble woman, great in wisdom, and greater in womanliness, without which, in woman,
wisdom is unhallowed.--S.A. CHAPIN, JR., in the Christian Union.

       *       *       *       *       *

XIX.

PESTIFEROUS LITERATURE.

THE PRINTING-PRESS THE MIGHTIEST AGENCY ON EARTH FOR GOOD AND FOR EVIL--THE FLOOD OF IMPURE
AND LOATHSOME LITERATURE--WHAT CAN WE DO TO ABATE THIS PESTILENCE?--WHAT BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS
SHALL WE READ?--HOW PROTECT OUR CHILDREN.

He is a brave man, who, at the right time and in the right place and manner, lifts his voice
against a great evil of the day. Dr. Talmage has recently done this, with an earnestness like
that of the old Hebrew prophets. His timely words of warning >an not be unfruitful:

"Of making books there is no end." True in the times so long B.C., how much more true in the
times so long A.D.! We see so many books we do not understand what a book is. Stand it on end.
Measure it, the height of it, the depth of it, the length of it, the breadth of it. You can
not do it. Examine the paper, and estimate the progress made from the time of the impressions
on clay, and then on the bark of trees, and from the bark of trees to papyrus, and from papyrus
to the hide of wild beasts, and from the hide of wild beasts on down until the miracles of
our modern paper manufactories, and then see the paper, white and pure as an infant's soul,
waiting for God's inscription. A book! Examine the type of it; examine the printing, and see
the progress from the time when Solon's laws were written on oak planks, and Hesiod's poems
were written on tables of lead, and the Sinaitic commands were written on tables of stone,
on down to Hoe's perfecting printing-press. A book! It took all the universities of the past,
all the martyr-fires, all the civilizations, all the battles, all the victories, all the defeats,
all the glooms, all the brightnesses, all the centuries, to make it possible. A book! It is
the chorus of the ages--it is the drawing-room in which kings and queens, and orators, and
poets, and historians, and philosophers come out to greet you. If I worshiped any thing on
earth, I would worship that. If I burned incense to any idol, I would build an altar to that.
Thank God for good books, helpful books, inspiring books, Christian books, books of men, books
of women, books of God. The printing-press is the mightiest agency on earth for good and for
evil. The minister of the Gospel standing in a pulpit has a responsible position, but I do
not think it is as responsible as the position of an editor or a publisher. Take the simple
statistics that our New York dailies now have a circulation of 450,000 per day, and add to
it the fact that three of our weekly periodicals have an aggregate circulation of about one
million, and then cipher, if you can, how far up and how far down and how far out reach the
influences of the American printing-press. I believe the Lord intends the printing-press to
be the chief means for the world's rescue and evangelization, and I think that the great last
battle of the world will not be fought with swords or guns, but with types and press--a purified
Gospel literature triumphing over, trampling down, and crushing out forever that which is depraved.
The only way to right a bad book is by printing a good one. The only way to overcome unclean
newspaper literature is by scattering abroad that which is healthful. May God speed the cylinders
of an honest, intelligent, aggressive, Christian printing-press.

I have to tell you this morning that I believe that the greatest scourge that has ever come
upon this nation has been that of unclean journalism. It has its victims in all occupations
and departments. It has helped to fill insane asylums and penitentiaries, and alms-houses and
dens of shame. The bodies of this infection lie in the hospitals and in the graves, while their
souls are being tossed over into a lost eternity, an avalanche of horror and despair. The London
plague was nothing to it. That counted its victims by thousands; but this modern pest has already
shoveled its millions into the charnel-house of the morally dead. The longest rail train that
ever ran over the Erie or the Hudson tracks was not long enough or large enough to carry the
beastliness and the putrefaction which have gathered up in the bad books and newspapers of
this land in the last twenty years. Now, it is amid such circumstances that I put the questions
of overmastering importance to you and your families: What can we do to abate this pestilence?
What books and newspapers shall we read? You see I group them together. A newspaper is only
a book in a swifter and more portable shape, and the same rules which apply to book-reading
will apply to newspaper-reading. What shall we read? Shall our minds be the receptacle of every
thing that an author has a mind to write? Shall there be no distinction between the tree of
life and the tree of death? Shall we stoop down and drink out of the trough which the wickedness
of men has filled with pollution and shame? Shall we mire in impurity, and chase fantastic
will-o'-the-wisps across the swamps, when we might walk in the blooming gardens of God? O,
no. For the sake of our present and everlasting welfare, we must make an intelligent and Christian
choice.

Standing, as we do, chin-deep in fictitious literature, the first question that many of the
young people are asking me is, "Shall we read novels?" I reply, there are novels that are pure,
good, Christian, elevating to the heart, and ennobling to the life. But I have still further
to say, that I believe three-fourths of the novels in this day are baneful and destructive
to the last degree. A pure work of fiction is history and poetry combined. It is a history
of things around us, with the licenses and the assumed names of poetry. The world can never
repay the debt which it owes to such fictitious writers as Hawthorne, Mackenzie, and Landor
and Hunt, and others whose names are familiar to all. The follies of high life were never better
exposed than by Miss Edgeworth. The memories of the past were never more faithfully embalmed
than in the writings of Walter Scott. Cooper's novels are healthfully redolent with the breath
of the seaweed and the air of the American forest. Charles Kingsley has smitten the morbidness
of the world, and led a great many to appreciate the poetry of sound health, strong muscles,
and fresh air. For the sleeves, measure the length of the doll's arm and make the first row this
length. Make each row a little longer than the preceding row until the top or shoulder part is
reached, then gradually shorten each row until the desired width is obtained. The last row should
be the same length as the first row. When sewing them in the coat, have the longest part come
at the top of the shoulder. Buttons are made by braiding yarn and sewing it in the form of buttons.

A
cord for fastening is made by braiding, or twisting and folding the yarn. It is then sewed
into loops or used as cord and tassel for tying.

Bootees

Knit two yards of round web for each bootee.

Start two inches from the end of the web for the first turn. Sew into an elliptical form three
and one-half inches long for the sole. Sew two more rows without widening for the sides of the foot;
then sew two rows across the front for the toe; the third row bring all around the top to complete
the foot.

The leg of the bootee is made by bringing the web directly upward three inches before making the
first turn. Make each row three inches high and catch each row into the top of the foot while
sewing. Put cord and tassel around where the leg and foot meet.

Little Boy Blue

Make coat according to directions given for doll's coat.

Measure the length of the doll's leg for the length of the trousers. Use flat web and sew it
into two rectangular pieces wide enough to make each leg a little full.

Join the inside seams part way and then join the open edge of the right front with the open
edge of the left front. Do the same with the back edges. Put a draw-string around the top,
or a piece of the web may be used for a waistband. Put in a draw-string around the bottom of
each leg.

Little Red Riding-Hood

The doll shown in illustration is ten and one-half inches tall. To make cape and hood in one
piece sew two rows of flat web, six and one-half inches long, for the center of the back. These
two rows will also give the desired fulness. The next five rows are made nineteen inches long,
or long enough to reach over the head and down to form the two sides of the cape and hood. After
these five rows are completed, sew five rows six inches long on each side of the front of the cape,
to make it wide enough to meet across the chest.

Close the cape and the hood in the back.

The part above the six and a half inch rows will form the hood. Draw in the top of these two
short rows and sew to the base of the hood. Put in a draw-string around the top of the right
side of the cape in front, carry it around the base of the hood, around the top of the cape on
the left side and tie in front.

Doll's Skirt

This skirt is five inches long and made of flat web. The first and last rows are made one and
a quarter inch shorter than the other rows forming the skirt. These two rows are sewed together
when the skirt is finished, thus forming the placket and also the desired fulness in the back.

There
are sixteen rows in all. Each two, when sewed together, form a scollop at the top and bottom where
the web is turned. In sewing care must be taken to have each row the exact length of the preceding
row except in the first and last row.

The top of the skirt may be finished with a draw-string or a band made from cloth. The bottom
of the skirt may be left as it is, or be finished with a blanket stitch of some contrasting color.
The skirt requires five yards of flat web.

Little Boy's Hat

Measure the child's head for the size of the hat. Make the crown of the hat one-half of this
measurement. If the child's head measures twenty-two inches around, make the crown eleven inches
in diameter. The crown is circular and is made in the same way as the circular mat, taking
two stitches of web and sewing them into one stitch of the crown already sewed to keep it flat.
When it is of the desired size, begin the side by sewing one stitch of the web into one of the
crown, at the same time holding the web to be sewed directly under the last row in the crown.

Make
the side twice as long as the desired height of the hat. For instance, if the desired height
is to be three and a half inches, make the side seven inches long, as one-half of this measurement
is turned up.

Two colors may be used, one color for the crown and one for the side. Red and black or red
and white are pretty combinations.

A doll's hat of the same style, the crown three and a half inches in diameter, requires five yards
of round web.

Child's Muffler

This is a combination of flat and round web. Knit ten inches of flat web, change to round web by
bringing the yarn across the center of the hole in the knitter to the opposite post, and knit
ten inches, or the number of inches necessary to go around the neck. Change again to flat web,
knit ten inches and clip off.

Make seven such pieces and sew them together to form the muffler. The round web will form the
neck part.

Do not remove from the knitter while changing from flat to round web.

Child's Hood

This is made much in the same way as the doll's hood. Make the back of the hood five inches
in diameter, then turn the web and form the side. Sew around to within four inches of the place
of turning on the opposite side and turn again. So continue until the side is sufficiently
wide to cover the child's head. Extend this side three inches beyond the desired width, widening
on each row of the extended part to give fulness. This widening may be omitted, and the extended
part turned back, leaving it perfectly plain, if desired.

Trim with rosettes or pompons made of the same material as the hood.

Turn back the extended part and tack to the hood. Sew a pompon or a rosette of yarn over the
top of the sewing stitch. For tie-strings, use cord and tassel, or ribbon.

The hood requires from twenty-five to thirty yards.

Little Girl's Hat

This requires twenty-five yards of round web. Measure the child's
head for the size of the hat.

Start the crown in the same way as the circular mat. When it is five inches in diameter, gradually
turn the crown, while sewing the next five or six rows.

When the desired width is reached, begin forming the side by sewing one stitch of web into one stitch of
the crown, keeping each row exactly under the preceding row until the desired height is obtained;
then gradually widen to form the rim, which is three and a half or four inches broad.

Do not widen any on the last two rows, but draw the web a little tighter while sewing to make the
edge of the rim roll or turn inward.

Finish with cord and tassels around the crown, or pompons on the right or left side of the front
of the hat.

Doll's Sweater

This is made of five and one-half yards of flat web cut into pieces of a desired length. Cut three
pieces seven inches long for the front. One inch and a half of this will also form the neck.
When cutting, clip only one stitch and pull out the ends.

The next two pieces are cut five and one-half inches long and sewed one on each side of the front
one inch and a half below the top end. Each succeeding row is made a little shorter to form
the shoulder, the shortest pieces forming the outside edges.

Make the back of the sweater in the same way and sew front and back together, leaving one and
a quarter inch opening on each side for the sleeves.

The sleeve is made of five pieces, the longest piece being three inches, and the shortest two and
one-half inches long. Sew these pieces together to form the sleeve. When sewing it into the
sweater, place the longest part at the shoulder seam and stretch the armhole while sewing it
in.

Wristlets

These are made of round or flat web. Each wristlet requires one and one-half yards.

Measure five inches, the length of the wristlet, and turn. Start sewing from this point and sew
to the end of the five inches and turn again.

Continue until enough rows are sewed to make the wristlet the desired width, which in this model is two
and one-half inches.

Shoulder Shawl

This may be made of round or flat web, and of any desired size. If the shawl is to be thirty-six
inches long, clip the web into pieces of this length and sew them together until the shawl is
of the desired width, or the web may simply be turned at the end of each row, then proceed
with the sewing.

      The fringe for the ends is
      made by cutting the yarn into
    lengths twice as long as the desired
     length of the fringe--that is, if the fringe is to be five inches
long, cut the yarn into pieces ten inches long.

      
      
    Fold each ten-inch piece in two,
      slip the folded end through a stitch in the end of the shawl and
draw the two ends of the piece through the loop thus formed and pull
tight.

      
      
    Doll's Carriage Robe
      

      This robe is ten inches
      wide and eighteen inches
    long, and is made of four pieces
      of flat web, each piece three yards long.

       Any number of pieces of either round or flat web may be used, and
the robe made wider and longer if desired.

Measure fifteen inches of web and turn it.

    Begin sewing from this, turn down
     to the end of the fifteen inches and again turn, bringing the web
around over the end.

     Care must be taken while turning
     to keep the ends perfectly flat.

     
     

     When the three yards are used begin
     the other parts in the same way.

     Make four or any desired number
     of parts, and sew them together, alternating the colors.

     Put a tassel made of the same material
     on the rounded end of each part.

     
     

     If round web is used it will
     require more for each part, for the round is not as wide as the flat
web.

     
     

     Child's Leggings
     

     Leggings may be made of round
     or flat web.

      Measure five inches above
      the knee down to the vamp of the shoe for the length of the front
part of the legging.

      This gives the length of the
      first row.

      
      Turn the web and begin to sew from this point up to the top, then
turn again and sew down to the toe.

      Continue in this way until the
      front part is two and one-half inches wide.

Bring the remaining
rows down to within two inches of the end of the toe, until the legging
is wide enough to go around the child's leg, then sew to the opposite
side of the front. Sew a piece of tape to the instep.

Muffler

This
may be made of round or flat web. Make the part to go around the neck
first. In this model the neck band is ten inches long and three inches
wide. Sew four rows of flat or six rows of round web for the neck.
Begin three inches from the ends to make the front. Gradually shorten
each row until it is of the desired length.

Make loops of twisted
yarn and sew to one end of the neck band to slip over the buttons.
Sew the buttons on the opposite end and on the inside where they will
be hidden while the muffler is being worn.

Made of Knitting Cotton

Knitting
cotton can be secured at any department store. It comes in colors
white, black, red, navy blue, and mixed colors. This is not as elastic
as worsted and is used where strength is required, such as bags, hammocks,
wash-cloths, etc. It is very inexpensive and can be used to great
advantage.

Jumping Rope

Select a piece of jute, or stout cord the
length of the desired rope. Drop one end of this and one end of the
knitting cotton through the hole in the knitter (use knitter having
four posts), and draw it out at the other end three inches. Bring
the cotton leading from the ball around each post once, then proceed
with the knitting, covering the cord or jute which is used as a core
or foundation for the rope.

Cords for pillow tops may also be made
in this way.

Toy Horse Reins

These are made of coarse knitting cotton
on four-post knitters. Knit a piece three yards long for the reins.
The children measure each other for the breast-piece, which will be
from ten to twelve inches long. This is fastened to the reins nine
inches below the center of the neck on each side, to allow the head
to pass through easily.

Two colors may be used in knitting the reins,
working around first with one color, then with the other.

Fourteen
yards of knitting cotton will make one yard of web on the four-post
knitter.

Wash Cloth

This is made of white knitting cotton. It requires
nine yards of web for a cloth ten by twelve inches. Measure twelve
inches of web, turn and sew toward the end.

When the twelve-inch
piece is sewed turn again and sew. Continue in this way until the
desired size is obtained.

With a piece of the cotton make a loop
at one corner by which to hang it.

School Bag

This may be made of
round or flat web. A bag twelve inches deep and fourteen inches wide
requires thirty yards. Measure twenty-four inches of web and turn.
Begin sewing from this turn to the end of the twenty-four inches then
turn again. So continue until this oblong piece measures fourteen
by twenty-four inches. Fold this in two and sew up the sides. This
will avoid any seam in the bottom of the bag.

Make handles in the
same way as for jumping-rope, or a double thickness of the web may
be used for each handle and sewed to the top sides of the bag. Finish
by sewing a piece of the web around the top.

Laundry bags, sewing
bags, and little bags for holding paints and water-dish may be made
in similar way.

Chimney Cleaner

This is made of white knitting cotton.
It requires two yards of flat or three yards of round web.

Secure
a piece of stick or better still a piece of half-inch dowel ten or
twelve inches long, for a handle. Cut a groove with a knife around
one end to keep the web from slipping off.

Sew the web into loops
three and a half or four inches long. Draw them in around the end
of the handle with the sewing string just in the groove; then wind
the sewing string around two or three times, tie, and clip off the
ends.

Doll's Hammock

This is made of flat web. A hammock eight by
twelve inches requires five and one-half yards. Sew this into an oblong
piece twelve inches long and eight inches wide.

Secure a piece of
cardboard three inches longer than the oblong piece and one inch wider.

Round
off the corners with a pair of scissors (see illustration), and cut
notches or slits in ends one-half inch apart. Sew two brass rings
in the center of one side, and on the other baste the oblong piece
which is to be used for the hammock. Then with a needle and a long
piece of the knitting cotton begin making the ends of the hammock
by securing one end of the sewing string to the hammock and bring
it over the end of the cardboard in the first slit from the end and
through the ring on the opposite side of cardboard; back over cardboard,
through second slit and through hammock.

So continue until one end
is finished. Do the same with the other end. These strings may be
held in place by putting three or four rows of weaving just underneath
the rings.

Clip the basting stitches and remove from the cardboard.
Make fringe as for shawl.

       *       *       *       *       *

SACRIFICE

      Sacrifice! therein
    I find no superstition of the past,
    But one of Truth's great words, all life within,
      As into chaos cast.

      God, God put it there,
    A trumpet-note to every living soul,
    A prophecy of all that is most fair
      Through darkness to the goal.

      I can not efface
    The record of this wonder-working Word,
    Nor in my memory but faintly trace
      Stern voices I have heard.

      Voices come by day
    Between life's lightning-flash and thunder-peal,
    And sooner heaven and earth shall pass away
      Than what they there reveal.

      Voices come at night
    Amid the silence of deluding cares,
    And pain flows through the darkness and grows bright,
      And knowledge unawares.

      Voices fill the strife
    To which I give the beauty of my days,
    And testify that sacrifice is life,
      Availing prayer and praise.

      Life retained is lost,
    The tocsin of interminable war;
    And life relinquished is of life the cost,
      Which shineth as a star.

      Tongue can never tell
    God's revelations in this mighty Word,
    Nor how the mystery of life they spell,
      With which all hearts are stirred.

      I continue mute,
    In joyful awe before the Infinite,
    Until at length eternity transmute
      My darkness into light.

      I can only speak
    An earth-born language, that does not reveal
    The infinitude of duty which I seek
      To utter and but feel.

      Duty! heart of joy!
    Which giveth strength to suffer and endure,
    Till self-forgetfulness in God's employ
      Enthrones a life secure.

      Shepherd of the sheep,
    To whom God gives the universal charge,
    I think of Thy devotion and I weep,
      Thy love appears so large!

      And I think of all
    The grief which strengthened Thy exalting hand,
    Until great tears of Easter gladness fall,
      To think in Thee I stand,

         Out of whose great heart
    So glorious is death's sacrificial knife--
    To think I know Thee now somewhat, who art
         The way, the truth, the life;

         Who art with Thine own,
    Where Thou hast been through immemorial years,
    In every touch of consolation known,
         In every flood of tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Way of the Lord.

    I cast my lot with the surging world,
      To find out the way of the Lord;
    A pebble hither and thither hurled,
      To find out the way of the Lord.

    I sought where the foot of man was unknown,
      To find out the way of the Lord;
    In the desert alone, alone, alone,
      To find out the way of the Lord.

    I bowed my heart to the voice of the sea,
      To find out the way of the Lord;
    To the sob of unuttered mystery,
      To find out the way of the Lord.

    I went down into the depths of my soul,
      To find out the way of the Lord;
    Down where the years of eternity roll,
      To find out the way of the Lord.

    Ah, me! I had no interpreter
      To tell me the way of the Lord;
    For Nature, it was not in her
      To tell me the way of the Lord.

    I heard of One who came out from God
     To show me the way of the Lord;
    I entered the path which here He trod
    To show me the way of the Lord.

    I walked the way of humility
     To find out the way Of the Lord;
    It turned to the way of sublimity,
     To show me the way of the Lord.

    From grief and loss came joy and gain,
     To show me the way of the Lord;
    And the dead came back to life again,
     To show me the way of the Lord.

    Yea, into the heaven of heavens He went,
     To show me the way of the Lord;
    And the Comforter from the Father He sent,
     To show me the way of the Lord.

    I learned how for me He lived and died,
     To show me the way of the Lord;
    And bearing the cross, which He glorified,
     I found out the way of the Lord:

       *       *       *       *       *

Via Crucis.

    Cross uplifted, clouds are rifted,
    Vision clearer, God grown dearer!
    Via crucis via lucis.[1]

    Cross, thy way is where the day is;
    Thy surprises sweet sunrises!
    Via crucis via lucis.

    Life eternal, fair and vernal,
    Is the glory of the story,
    Via crucis via lucis;

    Dawns in beauty, born of duty,
    Joins thereafter Heaven's sweet laughter--
    Via crucis via lucis;

    Finds probation tribulation,
    Onward presses and confesses,
    Via crucis via lucis;

    Bursts the fetter of the letter,
    Reckons sorrow joy to-morrow--
    Via crucis via lucis;

    To the Master in disaster
    Bravely clinging, journeys singing,
    Via crucis via lucis;

    Ranges crownward, never downward,
    Always loving, always proving,
    Via crucis via lucis;

    Drinks forever from the river
    Everlasting, still forecasting,
    Via crucis via lucis;

    And presages all the ages,
    Light-enfolden, growing golden,
    Via crucis via lueis.

    O the shinings and refinings!
    O the sweetness of completeness!
    Via crucis via lucis!

The loftiest class of scientists pursue science because they love truth. They derive no animation
from the thought of any practical application which they can make from their scientific discoveries.
They have no dreams of patents and subsequent royalties, although these sometimes come. They
enter upon their work, smit with a passion for truth. If to any one of them it should happen
to be pointed out--as Sir Humphrey Davy showed the ardent young Michael Faraday--at the beginning
of his career, that science is a hard mistress who pays badly, they are so in love with science
that, really and truly, they prefer from their very hearts to live with her on bread and water
in a garret to living without her in palaces in which they might fare sumptuously every day.

There are others by whom science is regarded only in the measure of its fruitfulness in producing
material wealth. Their great men are not the discoverers of principles, but the inventors,
the men who can apply the discoveries of others to supplying such wants as men are willing
to pay largely to have satisfied. As has been said--

    "To some she is the goddess great;
      To some the milch-cow of the field;
    Their business is to calculate
      The butter she will yield."

Our highest admiration must be for the discoverers; but we may do well to remind ourselves,
from time to time, that to such men we are indebted not only for thrilling insight into the
beautiful mysteries of nature, and for the withdrawal of the veil which shuts out from ordinary
sight the august magnificences of nature, but also for the discovery of those principles which
can be turned to the best practical account, ministering to us in our kitchens and bed-chambers
and drawing-rooms and factories and shops and fields, filling our nights with brilliancy and
our days with potencies, giving to each man the capability of accomplishing in one year what
his ancestors, who lived in unscientific ages, could not have achieved in twenty; not only
exhibiting the forces of nature as steeds, but also showing how they may be harnessed to the
chariots of civilization.

To keep us in healthful gratitude to the men who, having turned away from the marts of the
money-makers, have unselfishly set themselves to discover what will enrich the money-makers,
and, content to live in simple sorts of ways, have sent down beauty and comfort into the homes
of rich and poor, it is well to make an occasional résumé of the results of the work of useful
scientists, and ponder the lessons of their single-mindedness.

FARADAY.

Few names on the roll of the worthies of science are better known through all the world than
that of Michael Faraday, who was born in England in 1791 and died in 1867. Rising from poverty,
he became assistant to Sir Humphrey Davy, in the Royal Institution, London, where he soon exhibited
great ability as an experimenter, and a rare genius for discovering the secret relation of
distant phenomena to one another, which gave him his skill as a discoverer, so that he came
to be regarded, according to Professor Tyndall, "the prince of the physical investigators of
the present age," "the greatest experimental philosopher the world has ever seen."

His greatest discoveries may be stated to have been magneto-electric induction, electro-chemical
decomposition, the magnetization of light, and diamagnetism, the last announced in his memoir
as the "magnetic condition of all matter." There were many minor discoveries. The results of
his labors are apparent in every field of science which has been cultivated since his day.
Indeed, they made a great enlargement of that field. His life of simple independence was a
great contribution to the highest wealth of the world. He might have been rich. He lived in
simplicity and died poor. It is calculated that, if he had made commercial uses of his earlier
discoveries, he might easily have gathered a fortune of a million of dollars. He preferred
to use his extraordinary endowments for the promotion of science, from which he would not be
turned away by honors or money, declining the presidency of the Royal Institution, which was
urged upon him, preferring to "remain plain Michael Faraday to the last," that he might make
mankind his legatees.

While Faraday does not claim the parentage of the electric telegraph, he was among the earliest
laborers in the practical application of his own discoveries, without which the telegraph would
probably never have had existence. It was on his advice that Mr. Cyrus W. Field determined
to push the enterprise of the submarine cable. His labors were essential to the success of
the efforts of his friend Wheatstone in telegraphy. It was his genius which discovered the
method of preventing the incrustation by ice of the windows of light-houses, and also a method
for the prevention of the fouling of air in brilliantly lighted rooms, by which health was
impaired and furniture injured. He discovered a light, volatile oil, which he called "bicarburet
of hydrogen." It is now known to us as benzine, which is so largely employed in the industrial
arts. Treated by nitric acid, that has produced a substance largely used by the perfumer and
the confectioner. From that came the wonderful base aniline, which was not only useful in the
study of chemistry, as throwing light on the internal structure of organic compounds, but has
come also into commerce, creating a great branch of industry, by giving strong and high colors
which can be fixed on cotton, woolen, and silken fabrics. It may be worth while to notice what
gratifying beauty was provided for the eye, while profitable work was afforded to the industrious.

It is not to be forgotten that, whatever we have of magneto-electric light, in all its various
applications, is due to Faraday's discoveries.

Faraday's distinguished successor, Professor Tyndall, in his admirable and generous tribute
to his famous predecessor, says: "As far as electricity has been applied for medical purposes,
it is almost exclusively Faraday's." How much of addition to human comfort that one sentence
includes, who can estimate? And who can calculate the money-value to commerce in the production
of instruments used in the application of electricity to medicine? Professor Tyndall continues:
"You have noticed those lines of wire which cross the streets of London. It is Faraday's currents
that speed from place to place through these wires. Approaching the point of Dungeness, the
mariner sees an unusually brilliant light, and from the noble Pharos of La Hève the same light
flashes across the sea. These are Faraday's sparks, exalted by suitable machinery to sunlight
splendor. At the present moment (1868), the Board of Trade and the Brethren of the Trinity
House, as well as the Commissioners of Northern Lights, are contemplating the introduction
of the magneto-electric light at numerous points upon our coast; and future generations will
be able to point to those guiding stars in answer to the question, what has been the practical
use of the labors of Faraday?"

SIEMENS

One of the most useful of modern men was Sir William Siemens, who was born in 1823 and died
in 1883. The year before his death he was president of the British Association, and was introduced
by his predecessor, Sir J. Lubbock, with the statement that "the leading idea of Dr. Siemens's
life had been to economize and utilize the force of Nature for the benefit of man." It is not
our purpose to give a sketch of his life, or a catalogue of his many inventions, all of which
were useful. It was his comprehensive and accurate study of the universe which led him to discover,
as he thought, that it is a vast regenerative gas furnace. The theory has been that the sun
is cooling down; but Dr. Siemens saw that the water, vapor, and carbon compounds of the interstellar
spaces are returned to the sun, and that the action of the sun on these literally converted
the universe into a regenerative furnace. On a small scale, in a way adapted to ordinary human
uses, and by ingenious contrivances, he produced a regenerative gas furnace which so utilized
what had hitherto been wasted that, in the last lecture delivered by Michael Faraday (1862)
before the Royal Society, he praised the qualities of the furnace for its economy and ease
of management; and it soon came into general use. It is probably impossible to calculate the
amount of saving to the world due to his practical application of the theory of the conservation
of force to the pursuits of industry. It has changed the processes for the production of steel
so as to make it much cheaper, and so revolutionized ship-building. The carrying power of steel
ships is so much greater than that of iron ships that the former earn twenty-five per centum
more than the latter. So great a gain is this, that one-fourth the total tonnage of British
ship-building in 1883 consisted of steel vessels.

Sir William Siemens's name is popularly associated with electric light. Perhaps it can not
be claimed that he was the sole inventor of it, since Faraday had discovered the principle,
and at the meeting of the Royal Society, in 1867, at which Siemens's paper was read, the same
application of the principle was announced in a paper which had been prepared by Sir Charles
Wheatstone, and a patent had been sought by Mr. Cromwell Varley, whose application involved
the same idea. But it is believed that Sir William did more than any other man to make the
discovery of wide and great practical benefit. His dynamo machine is capable of transforming
into electrical energy ninety per cent of the mechanical energy employed. His inventions for
the application of electricity to industry are too numerous to mention. He has made it a hewer
of wood and a drawer of water and a general farm-hand, and has shown how it can be applied
to the raising and ripening of fruits. He has shown us how gas can be made so that its "by-products"
shall pay for its production, and demonstrated that a pound of gas yields, in burning, 22,000
units, being double that produced by the combustion of a pound of common coal. He has put the
world in the way of making gas cheap and brilliant. His sudden death prevented the completion
of plans by which London will save three-fourths of its coal bill by getting rid of its hideous
fog. His suggestions will, undoubtedly, be carried out. He was also the inventor of the "chronometric
governor," an apparatus which regulates the movements of the great transit instruments at Greenwich.

These are some of the practical benefits bestowed upon mankind by Sir William Siemens. He did
much, by stimulating men, to make science practically useful, and has left suggestions which,
if followed out with energy and wisdom, will add greatly to the comfort of the world. He calculated
that "all the coal raised throughout the world would barely suffice to produce the amount of
power that runs to waste at Niagara alone," and said that it would not be difficult to realize
a large proportion of this wasted power by-turbines, and to use it at greater distances by
means of dynamo-electrical machines. Myriads of future inhabitants of America are probably
to reap untold wealth and comfort from what was said and done by Sir William Siemens.

PASTEUR.

M. Pasteur, now a member of the French Academy, after years of scientific training and study
and teaching, began a career of public usefulness which has been a source of incalculable pecuniary
profit to his country and to the world.

He began to study the nature of fermentation; and the result of this study made quite a revolution
in the manufacture of wine and beer. He discovered a process which took its name from him;
and now "pasteurization" is practiced on a large scale in the German breweries, to the great
improvement of fermented beverages.

This attracted the attention of the French Government. At that time an unknown disease was
destroying the silk-worm of France and Italy. It was so wide-spread as to threaten to destroy
the silk manufacture in those countries. M. Pasteur was asked to investigate the cause. At
that time he had scarcely ever seen a silk-worm; but he turned his acute, and practical intellect
to the study of this little worker, and soon detected the trouble. He showed that it was due
to a microscopic parasite, which was developed from a germ born with the worm; and he pointed
out how to secure healthy eggs, and so rear healthy worms. He thus gave his countrymen the
knowledge necessary to the saving of the French silk industry, and to a very large increase
of the value of the annual productiveness of the country.

Of course, a man who had gone thus far could not stop. If he «could save the silk-worm, he
might save larger animals. France was losing sheep and oxen at the rate of from fifteen to
twenty millions annually. The services of M. Pasteur were again in demand. Again he discovered
that the devastator was a microscopic destroyer. It was anthrax. The result of his experimenting
was the discovery of an antidote, a method of prevention by inoculation with attenuated microbes.
Similar studies and experiments and discoveries enabled him to furnish relief to the hog, at
a time when the hog-cholera was making devastations. As he had discovered a preventive remedy
for anthrax, he also found a remedy for chicken-cholera, to the saving of poultry to an incalculable
extent.

Having thus contributed more to the material wealth of his country than any other living Frenchman,
M. Pasteur naturally turned his discovery of the parasitic origin of disease toward human sufferers.
A man of convictions and of faith, he has had the courage to ask the French minister of commerce
to organize a scientific commission to go to Egypt to study the cholera there under his guidance.

M. Paul Best, who was M. Pasteur's early rival in scientific discussion, paid a generous tribute
to his great ability and services, and declared that the discovery of the prevention of anthrax
was the grandest and most fruitful of all French discoveries. M. Pasteur's native town, Dole,
on the day of the national fete last year (1883), placed a commemorative tablet on the house
in which he was born. The government's grant of a pension of $5,000 a year, to be continued
to his widow and children, was made on the knowledge that if M. Pasteur had retained proprietary
right in his discovery, he might have amassed a vast fortune; but he had freely given all to
the public. According to an estimate made by Professor Huxley, the labors of M. Pasteur are
equal in money value alone to the one thousand millions of dollars of indemnity paid by France
to Germany in the late war. It is also to be remembered that M. Pasteur's labors imparted stimulus
to discovery in many directions, setting many discoverers at work, who are now experimenting
on the working hypothesis of the parasitic origin of all other infectious diseases.

Now here are three men, to whom the world is probably more indebted than to any other twenty
men who have lived this century; indebted for health, wealth, comfort, and enjoyment; indebted
in kitchen, chamber, drawing-room, counting-house; at home and abroad, by day and by night,
for gratification of the bodily and aesthetic taste. They were the almoners of science. Practical
men would have no tools to work with if they did not receive them from those who, in abstraction,
wrought in the secluded heights of scientific investigation. It is base to be ungrateful to
the studious recluses who are the devotees of science.

These three men were Christians--simple, honest, devout Christians. Faraday was a most "just
and faithful knight of God," as Professor Tyndall says. Sir William Siemens, it is said, was
a useful elder in the Presbyterian Church, and M. Pasteur, still living, is a reverent Roman
Catholic. Surely, when we find these men walking a lofty height of science, higher than that
occupied by any of their contemporaries, and when we find these men sending down more enriching
gifts to the lowly sons of toil, and all the traders in the market places, and all seekers
of pleasure in the world, than any other scientific men, we must be safe in the conclusion
that to be an earnest Christian is not incompatible with the highest attainments in science;
and we can not find fault with those who look with contempt upon the men who disdain Christianity,
as if it were beneath them, when it is remembered that among the rejecters of our holy faith
are no men to whom we have a right to be grateful for any discovery that has added a dollar
to the world's exchequer, or a "ray to the brightness of the world's civilization."--DR. DEEMS,
in the New York Independent.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXII.

MY UNCLE TOBY

ONE OF THE BEAUTIFUL CREATIONS OF A GREAT GENIUS.

"If I were requested," says Leigh Hunt in his "Essay on Wit and Humor," "to name the book of
all others which combines wit and humor under their highest appearance of levity with the profoundest
wisdom, it would be 'Tristram Shandy,'" the chief work of Laurence Sterne, who was born in
1713, and died in 1768. The following story of LeFevre, drawn from that unique book, full of
simple pathos and gentle kindness, presents, perhaps, the best picture of the character that
names this chapter:

It was some time in the Summer of that year in which Dendermond was taken by the allies--which
was about seven years before my father came into the country, and about as many after the time
that my uncle Toby and Trim had privately decamped from my father's house in town, in order
to lay some of the finest sieges to some of the finest fortified cities in Europe--when my
uncle Toby was one evening getting his supper, with Trim sitting behind him at a small sideboard,
the landlord of a little inn in the village came into the parlor, with an empty phial in his
hand, to beg a glass or two of sack. "'Tis for a poor gentleman, I think, of the army," said
the landlord, "who has been taken ill at my house four days ago, and has never held up his
head since, or had a desire to taste any thing till just now, that he has a fancy for a glass
of sack and a thin toast. 'I think,' says he, taking his hand from his forehead, 'it would
comfort me.'"

"If I could neither beg, borrow, nor buy such a thing," added the landlord, "I would almost
steal it for the poor gentleman, he is so ill. I hope in God he will still mend," continued
he; "we are all of us concerned for him."

"Thou art a good-natured soul, I will answer for thee," cried my uncle Toby; "and thou shalt
drink the poor gentleman's health in a glass of sack thyself--and take a couple of bottles,
with my service, and tell him he is heartily welcome to them, and to a dozen more if they will
do him good."

"Though I am persuaded," said my uncle Toby, as the landlord shut the door, "he is a very compassionate
fellow, Trim, yet I can not help entertaining a very high opinion of his guest, too; there
must be something more than common in him, that in so short a time should win so much upon
the affections of his host." "And of his whole family," added the corporal, "for they are all
concerned for him." "Step after him," said my uncle Toby; "do, Trim; and ask if he knows his name."

"I have quite forgot it, truly," said the landlord, coming back into the parlor with the corporal,
"but I can ask his son again." "Has a son with him then?" said my uncle Toby. "A boy," replied
the landlord, "of about eleven or twelve years of age; but the poor creature has tasted almost
as little as his father; he does nothing but mourn and lament for him night and day; he has
not stirred from the bedside these two days."

My uncle Toby laid down his knife and fork, and thrust his plate from before him, as the landlord
gave him the account; and Trim, without being ordered, took them away without saying one word,
and in a few minutes after brought him his pipe and tobacco.

"Stay in the room a little," says my uncle Toby. "Trim," said my uncle Toby, after he had lighted
his pipe and smoked about a dozen whiffs. Trim came in front of his master and made his bow;
my uncle Toby smoked on and said no more. "Corporal," said my uncle Toby. The corporal made
his bow. My uncle Toby proceeded no farther, but finished his pipe. "Trim," said my uncle Toby,
"I have a project in my head, as it is a bad night, of wrapping myself up warm in my roquelaure,
and paying a visit to this poor gentleman." "Your honor's roquelaure," replied the corporal,
"has not been had on since the night before your honor received your wound, when we mounted
guard in the trenches before the gate of St. Nicholas; and, besides, it is so cold and rainy
a night, that what with the roquelaure and what with the weather, 't will be enough to give
your honor your death, and bring on your honor's torment in your groin." "I fear so," replied
my uncle Toby; "but I am not at rest in my mind, Trim, since the account the landlord has given
me. I wish I had not known so much of this affair," added my uncle Toby, "or that I had known
more of it. How shall we manage it!" "Leave it, an 't please your honor, to me," quoth the
corporal; "I'll take my hat and stick, and go to the house, reconnoitre, and act accordingly;
and I will bring your honor a full account in an hour." "Thou shalt go, Trim," said my uncle
Toby, "and here's a shilling for thee to drink with his servant." "I shall get it all out of
him," said the corporal, shutting the door. My uncle Toby filled his second pipe; and, had
it not been that he now and then wandered from the point, with considering whether it was not
full as well to have the curtain of the tennaile a straight line as a crooked one, he might
be said to have thought of nothing else but poor LeFevre and his boy the whole time he smoked it.

My uncle Toby had knocked the ashes out of his third pipe, when Trim returned and gave the
following account:

"I despaired at first," said the corporal, "of being able to bring back your honor any kind
of intelligence concerning the poor sick lieutenant." "Is he in the army, then?" said my uncle
Toby. "He is," said the corporal. "And in what regiment?" said my uncle Toby. "I'll tell your
honor," replied the corporal, "every thing straight forward, as I learnt it." "Then, Trim,
I'll fill another pipe," said my uncle Toby, "and not interrupt thee till thou hast done; so
sit down at thy ease, Trim, in the window-seat, and begin thy story again." The corporal made
his old bow, which generally spoke as plain as a bow could speak it. "Your honor is good,"
and, having done that, he sat down as he was ordered, and began the story to my uncle Toby
over again, in pretty nearly the same words.

"I despaired at first," said the corporal, "of being able to bring back any intelligence to
your honor about the lieutenant and his son; for when I asked where his servant was, from whom
I made myself sure of knowing every thing which was proper to be asked"--"That's a right distinction,
Trim," said my uncle Toby. "I was answered, an please your honor, that he had no servant with
him; that he had come to the inn with hired horses, which, upon finding himself unable to proceed
(to join, I suppose, the regiment), he had dismissed the morning after he came. 'If I get better,
my dear,' said he, as he gave his purse to his son to pay the man, 'we can hire horses from
hence.' 'But, alas! the poor gentleman will never get from hence,' said the landlady to me,
'for I heard the death-watch all night long; and when he dies, the youth, his son, will certainly
die with him, for he is broken-hearted already.'

"I was hearing this account," continued the corporal, "when the youth came into the kitchen
to order the thin toast the landlord spoke of; 'but I will do it for my father myself,' said
the youth. 'Pray let me save you the trouble, young gentleman,' said I, taking up a fork for
the purpose, and offering him my chair to sit down upon by the fire, whilst I did it. 'I believe,
sir,' said he, very modestly, 'I can please him best myself.' 'I am sure,' said I, 'his honor
will not like the toast the worse for being toasted by an old soldier.' The youth took hold
of my hand and instantly burst into tears."

"Poor youth," said my uncle Toby, "he has been bred up from an infant in the army, and the
name of a soldier, Trim, sounded in his ears like the name of a friend; I wish I had him here."

"I never, in the longest march," said the corporal, "had so great a mind to my dinner as I
had to cry with him for company. What could be the matter with me, an' please your honor?"
"Nothing in the world, Trim," said my uncle Toby, blowing his nose; "but that thou art a good-natured
fellow."

"When I gave him the toast," continued the corporal, "I thought it was proper to tell him I
was Captain Shandy's servant, and that your honor (though a stranger) was extremely concerned
for his father; and that if there was any thing in your house or cellar, ('and thou mightst
have added my purse, too,' said my uncle Toby,) he was heartily welcome to it. He made a very
low bow (which was meant to your honor), but no answer--for his heart was full--so he went
upstairs with the toast. 'I warrant you, my dear,' said I, as I opened the kitchen door, 'your
father will be well again.' Mr. Yorick's curate was smoking a pipe by the kitchen fire, but
said not a word, good or bad, to comfort the youth. I thought it was wrong," added the corporal.
"I think so, too," said my uncle Toby.

"When the lieutenant had taken his glass of sack and toast, he felt himself a little revived,
and sent down into the kitchen to let me know that in about ten minutes he should be glad if
I would come upstairs. 'I believe,' said the landlord, 'he was going to say his prayers, for
there was a book laid upon the chair by his bedside; and as I shut the door I saw his son take
up a cushion.'

"'I thought,' said the curate, 'that you gentlemen of the army, Mr. Trim, never said your prayers
at all.' 'I heard the poor gentleman say his prayers last night,' said the landlady, 'very
devoutly, and with my own ears, or I could not have believed it.' 'Are you sure of it,' replied
the curate. 'A soldier, an' please your reverence,' said I, 'prays as often (of his own accord)
as a parson; and when he is fighting for his king and for his own life, and for his honor too,
he has the most reason to pray to God of any one in the whole world.'" "'Twas well said of
thee, Trim," said my uncle Toby. "'But when a soldier,' said I, 'an' please your reverence,
has been standing for twelve hours together in the trenches up to his knees in cold water,
or engaged,' said I, 'for months together in long and dangerous marches; harassed, perhaps,
in his rear to-day; harassing others to-morrow; detached here; countermanded there; resting
this night upon his arms; beat up in his shirt the next; benumbed in his joints; perhaps without
straw in his tent to kneel on, he must say his prayers how and when he can, I believe,' said
I, for I was piqued," quoth the corporal, "for the reputation of the army. 'I believe, an't
please your reverence,' said I, 'that when a soldier gets time to pray, he prays as heartily
as a parson, though not with all his fuss and hypocrisy.'" "Thou shouldst not have said that,
Trim," said my uncle Toby, "for God only knows who is a hypocrite and who is not. At the great
and general review of us all, corporal, at the day of judgment (and not till then), it will
be seen who has done their duties in this world and who has not; and we shall be advanced,
Trim, accordingly." "I hope we shall," said Trim. "It is in the Scripture," said my uncle Toby,
"and I will show it thee to-morrow. In the meantime, we may depend upon it, Trim, for our comfort,"
said my uncle Toby, "that God Almighty is so good and just a governor of the world, that if
we have but done our duties in it, it will never be inquired into whether we have done them
in a red coat or a black one." "I hope not," said the corporal. "But go on, Trim," said my
uncle Toby, "with thy story."

"When, I went up," continued the corporal, "into the lieutenant's room, which I did not do
till the expiration of the ten minutes, he was lying in his bed with his head raised up on
his hand, with his elbow upon the pillow, and a clean white cambric handkerchief beside it.
The youth was just stooping down to take up the cushion upon which I supposed he had been kneeling;
the book was laid upon the bed, and as he rose, in taking up the cushion with one hand, he
reached out his other to take it away at the same time. 'Let it remain there, my dear,' said
the lieutenant.

"He did not offer to speak to me till I had walked up close to his bedside. 'If you are Captain
Shandy's servant,' said he, 'you must present my thanks to your master, with my little boy's
thanks along with them, for his courtesy to me, if he was of the Leven's,' said the lieutenant.
I told him your honor was. 'Then,' said he, 'I served three campaigns with him in Flanders,
and remember him; but 't is most likely, as I had not the honor of any acquaintance with him,
that he knows nothing of me. You will tell him, however, that the person his good nature has
laid under obligations to him, is one LeFevre, a lieutenant in Angus's; but he knows me not,'
said he a second time, musing. 'Possibly, he may my story,' added he; 'pray tell the captain
I was the ensign at Breda whose wife was most unfortunately killed with a musket-shot, as she
lay in my arms in my tent.' 'I remember the story, an't please your honor,' said I, very well.'
'Do you so?' said he, wiping his eyes with his handkerchief; 'then well may I.' In saying this,
he drew a little ring out of his bosom, which seemed tied with a black ribbon about his neck,
and kissed it twice. 'Here, Billy,' said he. The boy flew across the room to the bedside, and,
falling down upon his knee, took the ring in his hand, and kissed it, too; then kissed his
father, and sat down upon the bed and wept."

"I wish," said my uncle Toby, with a deep sigh, "I wish, Trim, I was asleep."

"Your honor," replied the corporal, "is too much concerned. Shall I pour your honor out a glass
of sack to your pipe?" "Do, Trim," said my uncle Toby.

"I remember," said my uncle Toby, sighing again, "the story of the ensign and his wife, with
a circumstance his modesty omitted; and particularly well that he, as well as she, upon some
account or other (I forget what), was universally pitied by the whole regiment; but finish
the story thou art upon." "Tis finished already," said the corporal, "for I could stay no longer,
so wished his honor good-night." Young LeFevre rose from off the bed and saw me to the bottom
of the stairs; and, as we went down together, told me they had come from Ireland, and were
on their route to join their regiment in Flanders. "But, alas," said the corporal, "the lieutenant's
last day's march is over." "Then what is to become of his poor boy?" cried my uncle Toby.

It was to my uncle Toby's eternal honor, though I tell it only for the sake of those who, when
cooped in betwixt a natural and a positive law, know not, for their souls, which way in the
world to turn themselves, that, notwithstanding my uncle Toby was warmly engaged at that time
in carrying on the siege of Dendermond, parallel with the allies, who pressed theirs on so
vigorously that they scarce allowed him to get his dinner, that, nevertheless, he gave up Dendermond,
although he had already made a lodgment upon the counterscarp, and bent his whole thoughts-toward
the private distresses at the inn, and that, except that he ordered the garden gate to be bolted
up, by which he might be said to have turned the siege of Dendermond into a blockade, he left
Dendermond to itself, to be relieved or not by the French king as the French king thought good,
and only considered how he himself should relieve the poor lieutenant and his son.

That kind Being, who is a friend to the friendless, shall recompense thee for this.

"Thou hast left this matter short," said my uncle Toby to the corporal, as he was putting him
to bed, "and I will tell thee in what, Trim. In the first place, when thou madest an offer
of my services to LeFevre, as sickness and traveling are both expensive, and thou knewest he
was but a poor lieutenant, with a son to subsist as well as himself out of his pay, that thou
didst not make an offer to him of my purse, because, had he stood in need, thou knowest, Trim,
he had been as welcome to it as myself."

"Your honor knows," said the corporal, "I had no orders." "True," quoth my uncle Toby, "thou
did'st very right, Trim, as a soldier, but certainly very wrong as a man."

"In the second place, for which, indeed, thou hast the same excuse," continued my uncle Toby,
"when thou offeredst him whatever was in my house, thou shouldst have offered him my house,
too. A sick brother officer should have the best quarters, Trim, and if we had him with us,
we could tend and look to him. Thou art an excellent nurse thyself, Trim, and what with thy
care of him, and the old woman's, and his boy's and mine together, we might recruit him again
at once and set him upon his legs."

"In a fortnight, or three weeks," added my uncle Toby, smiling, "he might march." "He will
never march, an', please your honor, in this world," said the corporal. "He will march," said
my uncle Toby, rising from the side of the bed with one shoe off. "An', please your honor,"
said the corporal, "he will never march, but to his grave." "He shall march," cried my uncle
Toby, marching the foot which had a shoe on, though without advancing an inch, "he shall march
to his regiment." "He can not stand it," said the corporal. "He shall be supported," said my
uncle Toby. "He'll drop at last," said the corporal, "and what will become of his boy?" "He
shall not drop," said my uncle Toby, firmly. "Ah, welladay, do what we can for him," said Trim,
maintaining his point, "the poor soul will die." "He shall not die, by G--d," cried my uncle Toby.

The accusing spirit which flew up to heaven's chancery with the oath, blushed as he gave it
in, and the recording angel, as he wrote it down, dropped a tear upon the word and blotted
it out forever.

My uncle Toby went to his bureau, put his purse into his breeches pocket, and, having ordered
the corporal to go early in the morning for a physician, he went to bed and fell asleep.

The sun looked bright the morning after to every eye in the village but LeFevre's and his afflicted
son's; the hand of death pressed heavy upon his eyelids, and hardly could the wheel at the
cistern turn round its circle when my uncle Toby, who had rose up an hour before his wonted
time, entered the lieutenant's room, and, without preface or apology, set himself down upon
the chair by the bedside, and independently of all modes and customs, opened the curtain in
the manner an old friend and brother officer would have done it, and asked him how he did;
how he had rested in the night; what was his complaint; where was his pain, and what could
he do to help him? and without giving him time to answer any one of the inquiries, went on
and told him of the little plan which he had been concerting with the corporal, the night before,
for him.

"You shall go home directly, LeFevre," said my uncle Toby, "to my house, and we'll send for
a doctor to see what's the matter, and we'll have an apothecary, and the corporal shall be
your nurse and I'll be your servant, LeFevre."

There was a frankness in my Uncle Toby, not the effect of familiarity, but the cause of it,
which let you at once into his soul and showed you the goodness of his nature; to this, there
was something in his looks, and voice, and manner superadded, which eternally beckoned to the
unfortunate to come and take shelter under him; so that before my uncle Toby had half finished
the kind offers he was making to the father, had the son insensibly pressed up close to his
knees, and had taken hold of the breast of his coat and was pulling it toward him. The blood
and spirits of LeFevre, which were waxing cold and slow within him, and were retreating to
their last citadel, the heart, rallied back, the film forsook his eyes for a moment, and he
looked up wishfully in my uncle Toby's face, then cast a look upon his boy, and that ligament,
fine as it was, was never broken.

Nature instantly ebbed again; the film returned to its place; the pulse fluttered--stopped--went
on--throbbed--stopped again--moved--stopped--shall I go on? No.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXIII.

STEPHEN GIRARD

(BORN 1750--DIED 1831.)

THE NAPOLEON OF MERCHANTS--HIS LIFE SUCCESSFUL, AND YET A FAILURE.

Imagine the figure of an old man, low in stature, squarely built, clumsily dressed, and standing
on large feet. To this uncouth form, add a repulsive face, wrinkled, cold, colorless, and stony,
with one eye dull and the other blind--a "wall-eye." His expression is that of a man wrapped
in the mystery of his own hidden thoughts. He looks--

    "Like monumental bronze, unchanged his look--
    A soul which pity never touched or shook--
    Trained, from his lowly cradle to his bier,
    The fierce extremes of good and ill to brook
    Unchanging, fearing but the charge of fear--
    A stoic of the mart, a man without a tear."

Such a man was Stephen Girard, one of the most distinguished merchants in the annals of commerce,
and the founder of the celebrated Girard College in Philadelphia. Let us briefly trace his
history and observe his character.

Girard was a Frenchman by birth, born in the environs of Bordeaux, in May, 1750, of obscure
parents. His early instruction was very limited; and, being deformed by a wall-eye, he was
an object of ridicule to the companions of his boyhood. This treatment, as is supposed by his
biographer, soured his temper, made him shrink from society, and led him to live among his
own thoughts rather than in mental communion with his fellows.

The precise cause of his leaving his native hearth-stone is unknown. The fact is certain that
he did leave it, when only ten or twelve years old, and sailed, a poor cabin-boy, to the West
Indies. This was his starting-point in life. Never had any boy a smaller capital on which to
build his fortune. He went out from his unhappy home, ignorant, poor, unfriended, and unknown.
That from such a cheerless beginning he should rise to the rank of a merchant prince must be
accounted one of the marvels of human history.

His first step was to gain the confidence of his superiors, not so much by affability and courtesy--for
of these social virtues he was never possessed--as by steady good conduct, fidelity to his
employers, temperance, and studied effort to do his humble duties well. Whatsoever his hands
found to do he did with his might. As a consequence, we find him, in a few years, in high favor
with a Captain Randall, of New York, who always spoke of him as "my Stephen," and who promoted
him from one position to another, until he secured him the command of a small vessel, and sent
him on trading voyages between the ports of New York and New Orleans. That the poor cabin-boy
should rise, by his own merits, in some six or seven years, to be the commander of a vessel
was success such as few lads have ever won with such slender means and few helps as were within
reach of young Girard.

When only nineteen, we find him in Philadelphia, driving a thrifty but quiet trade in a little
shop in Water Street. Shortly after opening this store, his fancy was taken captive by a maiden
of sixteen Summers, named Mary, but familiarly called Polly, Lum. She was a shipwright's daughter,
a pretty brunette, who was in the habit of going to the neighboring pump, barefooted, "with
her rich, glossy, black hair hanging in disheveled curls about her neck." When asked who is his
mother, Kundry answers for him: "His mother brought him an orphan into the world, and kept him
like a fool in the forest, a stranger to arms, so that he should
escape a premature death; but he fled from her and followed the wild
life of nature.

Her grief is over, for she is dead." Whereupon Parsifal flies at her and seizes her by the throat;
but Gurnemanz holds him back, and Kundry sinks down exhausted. Parsifal answers to the "Thor," but
it remains to be seen whether he is the "reine Thor." Gurnemanz conducts him to the temple
where the holy rites of the Grail are to be performed, hoping he is the redeemer whom the Grail
will disclose when the love-feast of the Saviour is celebrated.

The scene changes to the great hall of the castle and the celebration
of the feast of the Grail.

The scene is introduced with a solemn march by full orchestra, including trombones on the stage,
accompanied by the clanging of bells as the knights enter in stately procession. They sing a pious chant
in unison, the march theme still sounding. As the younger squires and pages enter, a new melody
is taken in three-part harmony, and finally an unseen chorus of boys from the extreme height of
the dome sing the chorale from the introduction, without accompaniment, in imitation of angel
voices. The shield-bearers bring in Amfortas upon his litter, when suddenly from a vaulted niche is heard
the voice of Titurel, Amfortas's aged father, and the founder of
Monsalvat, now too feeble to perform the holy offices, bidding the
Grail to be uncovered.

Amfortas, mourning that he, the unholiest of them, should be called, opens a golden shrine
and takes out the crystal vessel. Darkness falls upon the hall, but the Grail is illuminated
with constantly increasing brilliancy, while from the dome the children's voices sing, "Take
My blood in the name of our love, and take My body in remembrance
of me."

Parsifal watches the scene with bewildered eyes, but upon saying in reply that he does not
understand the holy rite, he is contemptuously ejected from the place.

The second act reveals Klingsor's enchanted palace. The magician gazing into a mirror sees Parsifal
approaching, and knows he is the redeemer who has been promised. He summons Kundry before
him, and commands her to tempt him with her spells. She struggles against the task, for in
her soul the powers of good and evil are always contending for the
mastery.

She longs for eternal sleep, and rest from her evil passions, but Klingsor holds her in his
power.

Parsifal enters, and the scene changes to a delightful garden filled with girls of ravishing beauty
in garments of flowers.

They crowd about him, and by their fascinating blandishments seek to gain his love, but in vain.
He is still the "guileless fool."

Then Kundry appears in all her loveliness, and calls him by name, the name he had heard his mother
speak. He sorrowfully sinks at Kundry's feet. The enchantress bends over him, appeals to him through
his longing for his mother, and kisses him. Instantly he comprehends all that he has seen, and
he cries, "The wound burns in my heart, oh, torment of love!"

Then quickly rising he spurns her from him. He has gained the world-knowledge. She flies to him again,
and passionately exclaims, "The gift of my love would make thee divine. If this hour has made
thee the redeemer, let me suffer forever, but give me thy love." He spurns her again, and cries,
"To all eternity thou wouldst be damned with me, if for one hour I should forget my mission,"
but says he will save her too, and demands to know the way to Amfortas. In rage she declares he shall
never find it, and summons the help of Klingsor, who hurls the sacred lance at Parsifal. The
weapon remains suspended over his head. He seizes it and makes the sign of the Cross. The gardens
and castle disappear. Parsifal and Kundry are alone in a desert. She sinks to the ground with
a mournful cry, and turning from her, his last words are, "Thou knowest
where only thou canst see me again."

In the third act we are again in the land of the Grail. Parsifal has wandered for years trying
to find Monsalvat, and at last encounters Gurnemanz, now a very old man, living as a hermit near
a forest spring, and the saddened Kundry is serving him. It is the Good Friday morning, and forests
and fields are bright with flowers and the verdure of spring. Gurnemanz recognizes him, and in
reply to his question what makes the world so beautiful, the aged knight makes answer:--

"The sad repentant tears of sinners Have here with holy rain Besprinkled field and plain, And
made them glow with beauty. All earthly creatures in delight At the Redeemer's trace so bright,
Uplift their prayers of duty. And now perceive each blade and meadow flower, That mortal foot
to-day it need not dread."

Kundry washes "the dust of his long wanderings" from his feet, and looks up at him with earnest
and beseeching gaze. Gurnemanz recognizes the sacred spear, hails him as the King of the Grail
and offers to conduct him to the great hall where the holy rites are once more to be performed.
Before they leave, Parsifal's first act as the redeemer is to baptize Kundry with water from
the spring.

The sound of tolling bells in the distance announces the funeral of Titurel, and the scene changes
to the hall where the knights are carrying the litter upon which Amfortas lies, awaiting the
funeral procession approaching to the strains of a solemn march. The knights demand he shall
again uncover the Grail, but he refuses, and calls upon them to destroy
him and then the Grail will shine brightly for them again.

Unobserved by them, Parsifal steps forward, touches the king's wound with the spear, and it is immediately
healed. Then he proclaims himself King of the Grail, and orders it to be uncovered. As Amfortas and
Gurnemanz kneel to do him homage, Kundry dies at his feet in the joy of repentance. Titurel
rises from his coffin and bestows a benediction.

Parsifal ascends to the altar and raises the Grail in all its resplendent beauty. A white dove
flies down from the dome of the hall and hovers over his head, while the knights chant their
praise to God, re-echoed by the singers in the dome, whose strains sound like celestial voices:--

"Miracle
of supreme blessing, Redemption to the Redeemer."

WALLACE.

William Vincent Wallace was born at Waterford, Ireland, in 1815. He first studied music with his
father, a bandleader, who afterwards sent him to Dublin, where he speedily became an excellent performer
on the clarinet, violin, and piano.

At the early age of fifteen he was appointed organist at the Cathedral of Thurles, and soon
afterwards was engaged as a theatre director and concert conductor. At the age of eighteen he
had a fit of sickness, and upon his recovery went to Australia for his health, and thence to Van
Diemen's Land and New Zealand.

He passed some time in the latter country, and then began a long
series of wanderings, in the course of which he visited the East and
West Indies, Mexico,--where he conducted Italian opera,--and the United
States.

He remained in New York a considerable period, and gave concerts
which were very remunerative.

In 1846 he returned to Europe, and shortly afterwards his pretty
little opera, "Maritana," appeared, and made quite a sensation among
the admirers of English opera.

In 1847 "Matilda of Hungary" was produced, and met with success. Thirteen years of silence elapsed,
and at last, in 1860, he produced his legendary opera, "Lurline,"
at Covent Garden.

It gave great satisfaction at the time, but is now rarely performed. Besides his operas he also
wrote many waltzes, nocturnes, studies, and other light works for the piano. After the production
of "Lurline" he went to Paris for the purpose of bringing out some of his operas, and while
in that city also composed the first act of an opera for London, but his health was too delicate
to admit of its completion. He died at Château de Bayen, Oct. 12, 1865.

MARITANA.

"Maritana," a romantic opera in three acts, words by Fitzball, founded
upon the well-known play of "Don Caesar de Bazan," was first produced
at Drury Lane, London, Nov. 15, 1845.

The text closely follows that of the drama.

The first act opens in a public square of Madrid, where a band of gypsies are singing to the populace,
among them Maritana, a young girl of more than ordinary beauty and vocal accomplishments. Among
the spectators is the young King Charles, who after listening to her is smitten with her charms.
Don José, his minister, to carry out certain ambitious plans of his
own, resolves to encourage the fascinations which have so attracted
the King.

He extols her beauty and arouses hopes in her breast of future grandeur and prosperity. At
this juncture Don Caesar de Bazan, a reckless, rollicking cavalier,
comes reeling out of a tavern where he has just parted with the last
of his money to gamblers.

In spite of his shabby costume and dissipated appearance he bears
the marks of high breeding.

In better days he had been a friend of Don José.

While he is relating the story of his downward career to the minister,
Lazarillo, a forlorn young lad who has just attempted to destroy himself,
accosts Don Caesar, and tells him a piteous tale of his wrongs.

Don Caesar befriends him, and in consequence becomes involved in
a duel, which leads to his arrest; for it is Holy Week, and duelling
during that time has been forbidden on pain of death.

While Don Caesar is on his way to prison, Don José delights Maritana
by promising her wealth, a splendid marriage, and an introduction
to the court on the morrow.

The second act opens in the prison, and discovers Don Caesar asleep,
with his faithful little friend watching by him.

It is five o'clock when he wakes, and at seven he must die.

Only two hours of life remain for him, but the prospect does not
disturb him.

On the other hand he is gayer than usual, and rallies Lazarillo with
playful mirth.

In the midst of his gayety the crafty Don José enters and professes
strong friendship for him.

When Don Caesar declares that he has but one last wish, and that is to die a soldier's death
instead of being ignominiously hanged, Don José says it shall be
gratified upon condition that he will marry.

The prisoner has but an hour and three quarters to live, but he consents.

He is provided with wedding apparel, and a banquet is spread in honor of the occasion. During
the feast Lazarillo brings in a paper to Don José containing the
King's pardon for Don Caesar, but the minister promptly conceals it.

Maritana, her features disguised by a veil, is introduced, and as the nuptial rites are performed
the soldiers prepare to execute the penalty. At the expiration of the hour Don Caesar is led
out to meet his fate, but Lazarillo has managed to abstract the balls from the guns. The soldiers
perform their duty, and Don Caesar feigns death; but as soon as the
opportunity occurs, he leaves the prison and hurries to a grand ball
given by the Marquis and Marchioness de Montefiori at their palace,
while the Marquis, who has had his instructions from Don José to recognize
Maritana as his long-lost niece, is introducing her as such.

Don Caesar enters and demands his bride. The astonished Don José, perceiving that his scheme
to introduce Maritana at court is liable to be frustrated, offers
the Marquis a rich appointment if he will induce his wife to play
the part he shall suggest.

The scheme is soon arranged, and the Marchioness, closely veiled, is presented to Don Caesar as the
Countess de Bazan. Disgusted at "the precious piece of antiquity," as he terms her, and fancying
that he has been duped, he is about to sign a paper relinquishing his bride, when he suddenly
hears Maritana's voice. He recognizes it as the same he had heard during the marriage rites.
He rushes forward to claim her, but she is quickly carried away, and he is prevented from following.

The
last act opens in a palace belonging to the King, where Maritana is surrounded with luxury, though
she is as yet unaware that she is in the royal apartments.

Don José, fancying that Don Caesar will not dare to make his appearance, as he does not know
of his pardon, carries out his plot by introducing the King to her
as her husband.

She at first rejects him, and as he presses his suit Don Caesar breaks into the apartment.
The King in a rage demands to know his errand. He replies that he is in quest of the Countess
de Bazan, and with equal rage inquires who he (the King) is.

The King in confusion answers that he is Don Caesar, whereupon the latter promptly replies, "Then
I am the King of Spain." Before further explanation can be made, a messenger arrives from the
Queen with the announcement that she awaits the King. After his departure Don Caesar and Maritana
mutually recognize each other, and upon her advice he resolves to appeal to the Queen to save
her. He waits for her Majesty in the palace garden, and while concealed, overhears Don José
informing her that the King will meet his mistress that night. He springs out, and denouncing him
as a traitor to his King slays him, and then returning to Maritana's apartment finds the King
there again, and tells him what has occurred. He has saved the King's honor: will the King
destroy his? The monarch, overcome with Don Caesar's gallantry and loyalty, consigns Maritana
to him and appoints him Governor of Granada. The appointment does not suit Don Caesar, for Granada
is too near his creditors. The King, laughing, changes it to Valencia, a hundred leagues away,
and thither Don Caesar conducts his happy bride.

The drama is one which is well adapted to bright, cheerful, melodious music, and the opportunity
has been well improved, for "Maritana" is one of the sprightliest
and brightest of all the English operas, and contains several ballads
which for beauty and expressiveness may well challenge any that Balfe
has written.

The principal numbers in the first act are Maritana's opening song in the public square ("It
was a Knight of princely Mien"); the romanza which she subsequently sings for Don José, "I hear
it again, 'tis the Harp in the Air," which is one of the sweetest and most delicate songs in
any of the lighter operas; the duet between Maritana and Don José, "Of fairy Wand had I the
Power;" Don Caesar's rollicking drinking-song, "All the World over, to love, to drink, to fight,
I delight;" and the tripping chorus, "Pretty Gitana, tell us what the Fates decree," leading up to
the stirring ensemble in the finale, when Don Caesar is arrested. The first scene of the second act
is the richest in popular numbers, containing an aria for alto, Lazarillo's song ("Alas! those
Chimes so sweetly pealing"); a charming trio for Don Caesar, Lazarillo, and Don José ("Turn
on, old Time, thine Hourglass"); Don Caesar's stirring martial song, "Yes, let me like a Soldier
fall;" the serious ballad, "In happy Moments, Day by Day," written by Alfred Bunn, who wrote so
many of the Balfe ballads; and the quartet and chorus closing the
scene, "Health to the Lady, the lovely Bride!"

The second scene opens with a pretty chorus in waltz time ("Ah, what Pleasure! the soft Guitar"),
followed by an aria sung by the King ("The Mariner in his Bark"), and introduced by an attractive violin
prelude. The finale is a very dramatic ensemble, quintet and chorus ("What Mystery must now
control"). The last act falls off in musical interest, though it is very strong dramatically.
It contains a few numbers, however, which are very popular; among them one of the most admired of
all English songs ("Scenes that are brightest"), which Maritana sings
in the King's apartments at the beginning of the act; the humorous
duet between the King and Don Caesar when they meet; the love-duet
between Don Caesar and Maritana ("This Heart with Bliss o'erflowing");
and Don Caesar's song, "There is a Flower that bloometh," which is
in the sentimental ballad style.

The freshness, brightness, and gracefulness of the music of this little opera, combined with
the unusual interest and delicate humor of the story, have always commended it to popular
admiration.

WEBER.

Carl Maria von Weber was born Dec. 18, 1786, at Eutin, and may almost be said to have been born
on the stage, as his father was at the head of a theatrical company, and the young Carl was carried
in the train of the wandering troupe all over Germany.

His first lessons were given to him by Henschkel, conductor of the
orchestra of Duke Friedrich of Meiningen.

At the age of fourteen he wrote his first opera, "Das Waldmädchen," which was performed several
times during the year 1800. In 1801 appeared his two-act comic opera, "Peter Schmoll and his Neighbors,"
and during these two years he also frequently played in concerts
with great success.

He then studied with the Abbé Vogler, and in his eighteenth year was engaged for the conductorship
of the Breslau opera. About this time appeared his first important opera, "Rubezahl." At the
conclusion of his studies with Vogler he was made director of the Opera at Prague. In 1814 he wrote
a cantata, "The Lyre and Sword," for a festive occasion, and it was greeted with the wildest enthusiasm.
In 1816 he went to Berlin, where he was received with the highest marks of popular esteem, and thence
to Dresden as Hofcapellmeister. This was the most brilliant period in his career. It was during
this time that he married Caroline Brandt, the actress and singer, who had had a marked influence
upon his musical progress, and to whom he dedicated his exquisite "Invitation to the Dance."
The first great work of his life, "Der Freischütz," was written at
this period.

Three other important operas followed,--"Preciosa," "Euryanthe," the first performance of which
took place in Vienna in 1823, and "Oberon," which he finished in London and brought out there.
Weber's last days were spent in the latter city; and it was while making preparations to return
to Germany, which he longed to see again, that he was stricken down with his final illness.
On the 4th of June, 1826, he was visited by Sir George Smart, Moscheles, and other musicians
who were eager to show him attention. He declined to have any one watch by his bedside, thanked
them for their kindness, bade them good-by, and then turned to his friend Fürstenau and said,
"Now let me sleep." These were his last words. The next morning he was found dead in his bed.
He has left a rich legacy of works besides his operas,--a large collection of songs, many cantatas
(of which "The Jubilee," with its brilliant overture, is the finest), some masses, of which that
in E flat is the most beautiful, and several concertos, besides many brilliant rondos, polaccas,
and marches for the piano.

DER FREISCHÜTZ.

"Der Freischütz," a romantic opera in three acts, words by Friedrich Kind, was first produced at Berlin,
June 18, 1821. It is one of the most popular operas in the modern repertory.

Our ducks are ever to be geese, our geese swans; and we can not bear the truth when it comes
upon us. Hence our disappointments; hence Solomon cried out that all was vanity, that he had
tried every thing, each pleasure, each beauty, and found it very empty. People, he writes,
should be taught by my example; they can not go beyond me--"What can he do that comes after
the king?"

It is very doubtful whether, to an untried or a young man, the warnings of Solomon, or the
outpourings of that griefful prophet whose name now passes for a lamentation, have done much
good. Hope balances caution, and "springs eternal in the human breast." The old man fails,
but the young constantly fancies he shall succeed. "Solomon," he cries, "did not know every
thing;" but in a few years his own disappointments tell him how true the king's words are,
and he cherishes the experience he has bought. But experience does not serve him in every case;
it has been said that it is simply like the stern-lights of a ship, which lighten the path
she has passed over, but not that which she is about to traverse. To know one's self is the
hardest lesson we can learn. Few of us ever realize our true position; few see that they are
like Bunyan's hero in the midst of Vanity Fair, and that all about them are snares, illusions,
painted shows, real troubles, and true miseries, many trials and few enjoyments.

Perhaps the bitterest feelings in our life are those which we experience, when boys and girls,
at the failures of our friendships and our loves. We have heard of false friends; we have read
of deceit in books; but we know nothing about it, and we hardly believe what we hear. Our friend
is to be true as steel. He is always to like us, and we him. He is a second Damon, we a Pythias.
We remember the fond old stories of celebrated friendships; how one shared his fortune, another
gave his life. Our friend is just of that sort; he is noble, true, grand, heroic. Of course,
he is wonderfully generous. We talk of him; he will praise us. The whole people around, who
laugh at the sudden warmth, we regard as old fogies, who do not understand life half as well
as we do. But by and by our friend vanishes; the image which we thought was gold we find made
of mere clay. We grow melancholy; we are fond of reading Byron's poetry; the sun is not nearly
so bright nor the sky so blue as it used to be. We sing, with the noble poet--

    "My days are in the yellow leaf,
    The flowers and fruits of love are gone;
    The worm, the canker, and the grief
    Are mine alone.!"

We cease to believe in friendship; we quote old saws, and fancy ourselves cruelly used. We
think ourselves philosophic martyrs, when the simple truth is, that we are disappointed.

The major part of the misery in marriage arises from the false estimate which we make of married
happiness. A young man, who is a pure and good one, when he starts in life is very apt to fancy
all women angels. He loves and venerates his mother; he believes her better, purer far, than
his father, because his school-days have taught him practically what men are; but he does not
yet know what women are. His sisters are angels too, and the wife he is about to marry, the
best, the purest woman in the world, also an angel, of course. Marriage soon opens his eyes.
It would be out of the course of nature for every body to secure an angel; and the young husband
finds that he has married a woman of the ordinary pattern--not a whit better on the whole than
man; perhaps worse, because weaker. The high-flown sentiment is all gone, the romantic ideas
fade down to the light of common day. "The bloom of young desire, the purple light of love,"
as Milton writes in one of the most beautiful lines ever penned, too often pass away as well,
and a future of misery is opened up on the basis of disappointment. After all, the difficulty
to be got over is this--how is mankind to be taught to take a just estimate of things? Is it
possible to put old heads upon young shoulders? Is not youth a perpetual state of intoxication?
Is not every thing better and brighter far then than in middle life? These are the questions
to be solved, and once solved we shall be happy; we shall have learnt the great lesson, that
whatever is, is ordained by a great and wise power, and that we are therewith to be content.

A kindly consideration for others is the best method in the world to adopt, to ease off our
own troubles; and this consideration is to be cultivated very easily. There is not one of those
who will take up this book who is perfectly happy, and not one who does not fancy that he or
she might be very much better off. Perhaps ten out of every dozen have been disappointed in
life. They are not precisely what they should be. The wise poor man, in spite of his wisdom,
envies the rich fool; and the fool--if he has any appreciation--envies the wisdom of the other.
One is too tall, the other is too short; ill-health plagues a third, and a bad wife a fourth;
and so on. Yet there is not one of the sorrows or troubles that we have but might be reasoned
away. The short man can not add a cubit to his stature; but he may think, after all, that many
great heroes have been short, and that it is the mind, not the form, that makes the man. Napoleon
the Great, who had high-heeled boots, and was, to be sure, hardly a giant in stature, once
looked at a picture of Alexander, by David. "Ah!" said he, taking snuff, with a pleased air,
"Alexander was shorter than I." The hero last mentioned is he who cried because he had no more
worlds to conquer, and who never thought of conquering himself. But if Alexander were disappointed
about another world, his courtiers were much more so because they were not Alexanders. But
the world would not have cared for a surplus of them; one was enough. Conquerers are very pleasant
fellows, no doubt, and are disappointed and sulky because they can not gain more battles; but
we poor frogs in the world are quite satisfied with one King Stork.

If we look at a disappointment as a lesson, we soon take the sting out of it. A spider will
teach us that. He is watching for a fly, and away the nimble fellow flies. The spider upon
this runs round his net to see whether there be any holes, and to mend them. When doing so,
he comes upon an old body of one of his victims, and he commences again on it, with a pious
ejaculation of "Better luck next time." So one of the greatest and wisest missionaries whom
we have ever had, tried, when a boy, to climb a tree. He fell down, and broke his leg. Seriously
lamed, he went on crutches for six months, and at the end of that time quietly set about climbing
the tree again, and succeeded. He had, in truth, a reserve fund of good-humor and sound sense,
saw where he failed, and conquered it. His disappointment was worth twenty dozen successes
to him, and to the world too. It is a good rule, also, never to make too sure of any thing,
and never to put too high a price on it. Every thing is worth doing well; every thing, presuming
you like it, is worth having. The girl you fall in love with may be silly and ill-favored;
but what of that? she is your love. "'Tis a poor fancy of mine own to like that which none
other man will have," says the fool Touchstone; but he speaks like a wise man. He is wiser
than the melancholy Jacques in the same play, who calls all people fools, and mopes about preaching
wise saws. If our young men were as wise, there would not be half the ill-assorted marriages
in the world, and there would be fewer single women. If they only chose by sense or fancy,
or because they saw some good quality in a girl--if they were not all captivated by the face
alone, every Jill would have her Jack, and pair off happily, like the lovers in a comedy. But
it is not so. We can not live without illusions; we can not, therefore, subsist without disappointments.
They, too, follow each other as the night the day, the shade the sunshine; they are as inseparable
as life and death.

The difference of our conditions alone places a variety in these illusions; perhaps the lowest
of us have the brightest, just as Cinderella, sitting amongst the coals, dreamed of the ball
and beautiful prince as well as her sisters. "Bare and grim to tears," says Emerson, "is the
lot of the children I saw yesterday; yet not the less they hung it round with frippery romance,
like the children of the happiest fortune, and would talk of 'the dear cottage where so many
joyful hours had flown.' Well, this thatching of hovels is the custom of the country. Women,
more than all, are the element and kingdom of illusion." Happy is it that they are so. These
fancies and illusions bring forth the inevitable disappointments, but they carry life on with
a swing. If every hovel-born child had sat down at his doorstep, and taken true stock of himself,
and had said, "I am a poor miserable child, weak in health, without knowledge, with little
help, and can not do much," we should have wanted many a hero. We should have had no Stephenson,
no Faraday, no Arkwright, and no Watt. Our railways would have been unbuilt, and the Atlantic
Ocean would have been unbridged by steam. But hope, as phrenologists tells us, lies above caution,
and has dangerous and active neighbors--wit, imagination, language, ideality--so the poor cottage
is hung round with fancies, and the man exists to help his fellows. He may fail; but others
take up his tangled thread, and unravel it, and carry on the great business of life. He is
like a strong swimmer; the waves dash over him, but he is never submerged. We can not help
applauding and admiring such a man; and the world, good-natured and wise in its verdict, cheers
him when he gains the goal. There may be brutality in the sport, but there can be no question
as to the merit, when the smaller prizefighter, who receives again and again his adversary's
knockdown blow, again gets up and is ready for the fray. Old General Blucher was not a lucky
general. He was beaten almost every time he ventured to battle; but in an incredible space
of time he had gathered together his routed army, and was as formidable as before. The Germans
liked the bold old fellow, and called, and still call him, Marshal Forwards. He had his disappointments,
no doubt, but turned them, like the oyster does the speck of sand which annoys it, to a pearl.
To our minds, the best of all these heroes is Robert Hall, the preacher, who, after falling
on the ground in paroxysms of pain, would rise with a smile, and say, "I suffered much, but
I did not cry out, did I? did I cry out?" Beautiful is this heroism. Nature, base enough under
some aspects, rises into grandeur in such an example, and shoots upwards to an Alpine height
of pure air and cloudless sunshine; the bold, noble, and kindly nature of the man, struggling
against pain, and asking, in an apologetic tone, "Did I cry out?" whilst his lips were white
with anguish, and his tongue, bitten through in the paroxysm, was red with blood!

There is a companion picture of ineffaceable grandeur to this in Plato's "Phoedo," where Socrates,
who has been unchained simply that he may prepare for death, sits upon his bed, and, rubbing
his leg gently where the iron had galled it, begins, not a complaint against fate, or his judges,
or the misery of present death, but a grateful little reflection. "What an unaccountable thing,
my friends, that seems to be which men call pleasure; and how wonderful it is related to that
which appears to be its contrary--pain, in that they will not both be present to a man at the
same time; yet if any one pursues and attains the one, he is almost always compelled to receive
the other, as if they were both united together from one head." Surely true philosophy, if
we may call so serene a state of mind by that hackneyed word, never reached, unaided, a purer
height!

There is one thing certain, which contains a poor comfort, but a strong one--a poor one, because
it reduces us all to the same level--it is this: we may be sure that not one of us is without
disappointment. The footman is as badly off as his master, and the master as the footman. The
courtier is disappointed of his place, and the minister of his ambition. Cardinal Wolsey lectures
his secretary Cromwell, and tells him of his disappointed ambition; but Cromwell had his troubles
as well. Henry the Eighth, the king who broke them both, might have put up the same prayer;
and the pope, who was a thorn in Harry's side, no doubt had a peck of disappointments of his
own. Nature not only abhors a vacuum, but she utterly repudiates an entirely successful man.
There probably never lived one yet to whom the morning did not bring some disaster, the evening
some repulse. John Hunter, the greatest, most successful surgeon, the genius, the wonder, the
admired of all, upon whose words they whose lives had been spent in science hung, said, as
he went to his last lecture, "If I quarrel with any one to-night, it will kill me." An obstinate
surgeon of the old school denied one of his assertions, and called him a liar. It was enough.
Hunter was carried into the next room, and died. He had for years suffered from a diseased
heart, and was quite conscious of his fate. That was his disappointment.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXV.

THE THREE KINGS.

AN OLD STORY IN A NEW LIGHT.

    Gaspar, a king and shepherd,
     Alone at the door of his tent,
    Thus mused, his eyes uplifted
     And fixed on the firmament:

    "Is it a dream, this vision
     That haunts me day and night,
    This beautiful manifestation
     Of some eternal delight?

    God set me to watching and waiting
     Long years and years ago,
    Waiting and watching for something
     My heart could not forego.

    I caught the hope of the nations,
     The desire of the common heart,
    Which grew to an expectation
     That would not from me depart.

    My soul was filled with hunger
     Deeper than I can tell,
    The while I watched for the shining
     Of the Star in Israel.

    O Star, to arise in Jacob!
     I cried as my heart grew bold;
    O Star, to arise in Jacob,
     By prophecy seen of old!

    For the sight of Thee I am dying,
     For the joy of Thy Beautiful Face!
    Of Thy coming give me a token,
     Grant me this favor and grace!

    At length there came an answer
     Flaming the desolate year,
    A revelation of beauty,
     A more than mortal cheer;

    For afar in the kindly heavens
     The blessed token I saw!
    And now my life is transfigured,
     And lost in a nameless awe.

    In a nameless awe I wander,
     As one with a joy untold,
    Too great for his own defining,
     Too great for him to withhold.

    But deep in my heart is the secret,
     And in yonder beckoning Star,
    And I must wait for the telling
     Until I can hasten afar,--

    Until I can find in travel
     A heart akin to mine,
    That day and night is adoring
     And imploring beauty divine.

    And so I will share the gladness
     Which God intends for the world;
    And so will I lift the banner,
     To remain forever unfurled."

    Hardly had Gaspar ended
     The musing he loved so well,
    When he heard the dreamy tinkle
     Of a distant camel-bell.

    He set his tent in order;
     He brought forth of his best,
    After the Arab custom,
     To welcome the coming guest.

    Who is this eager stranger
     Dismounted so soon at the door?
    A king from another kingdom,
     Who has traveled the desert o'er,

    In search of the same communion
     That Gaspar was longing for.
    And before of food he tasted,
     Thus spake King Melchior:

    "O Gaspar, God hath sent me
     In the light of a peaceful Star,
    To tell thee, my royal brother,
     What my sweet communings are.

    My life has been hid with Nature
     For many a quiet year,
    And in the hearts of my people,
     Whose love hath cast out fear.

    And I have been a dweller
     With God, who is everywhere,
    On earth, in the stars, the Spirit
     Sublimest, calmest, most fair.

    Among his mediators
     And messengers of rest,
    Which fill the earth and the heavens,
     The stars I reckoned the best.

    To the stars I gave my study,
     I watched them rise and set,
    And heard the music of silence
     My soul can not forget;--

    The music that seemed prophetic
     Of the reign of peace to come,
    When men shall live as lovers
     In the quiet of one dear home.

    But contemplation only
     My heart could not satisfy:
    I longed for the very presence
     The stars did prophesy,

    And eagerly looked for a token
     Of heaven descended to earth,
    A manifestation to tell me
     The Prince had come to his birth--

    The Prince to rule the nations,
     The blessed Prince of Peace,
    Through the scepter of whose kingdom
     Confusion and war shall cease.

    And God to me has been gracious,
     Though one of his children the least,
    For I have seen his token
     All glorious in the east.

    Yea, God to me has been gracious,
     And shown me the way of love,
    A revelation of goodness
     As fair as heaven above."

    The kings sat down together,
     Communed in the breaking of bread,
    And each the heart of the other
     As an open volume read.

    They felt the new force within them
     Through fellowship increase:
    The one he called it beauty,
     The other named it peace.

    All through the silent night-tide
     Their thoughts one burden bore:
    There was a joy eternal
     Their longing souls before.

    But still they waited, waited,
     They hardly knew what for.
    "What lack we yet, O Gaspar!"
     At length asked Melchior.

    "Three lights in yonder heaven
     Wait on the polar star.
    Hast eyes to read the poem?
     Dost see how calm they are?

    Three lights in yonder heaven
     Wait on the polar star;
    But we are two," said Gaspar.
    "Not two, but three we are,"

    Belthazzar said, dismounting,
     Another king from far;
    "And we whom God hath chosen
     Follow a greater Star.

    O, what are peace and beauty,
     Except they stir the soul
    And make the man a hero,
     To gain some happier goal?

    O, what are peace and beauty
     That stop this side of God,
    Though infinite the distance
     Remaining to be trod?"

    In haste, in haste they mounted,
     The kings in God's employ,
    And quickly peace and beauty
     Began to change to joy.

    They left behind their kingdoms
     Whose lure was far too small,
    To keep them apart from the kingdom
     Of Him who is all in all.

    They left behind their people,
     Of loving and loved a host,
    The first of the thronging Gentiles,
     To love the Redeemer most.

    They left behind possessions,
     Their flocks in all their prime,
    In haste to greet the Shepherd
     Whose charge is the most sublime.

    They passed through hostile regions;
     For fear they halted not;
    And weariness and hunger
     Were less than things forgot.

    So on and on they hastened
     Where they never before had trod,
    And the flaming Guide that led them,
     Was ever the Glory of God.

    By night in yonder heavens,
     Within their hearts by day,
    As of old the blessed Shekinah
     Along the Red Sea way.

    And they have troubled Herod
     And left Jerusalem,
    The joy-giving Star before them,
     The Star of Bethlehem.

    And they have seen and worshiped
     The Everlasting Child,
    In whom sweet Truth and Mercy
     Were never unreconciled.

    They have kissed the Beauty of Heaven,
     Incarnate on the earth,
    The Babe in the lap of Mary,
     Of whom He came to his birth.

    Their gifts of love they have rendered
     Unto the new-born King,
    Their gold and myrrh and frankincense,
     The best that they could bring.

    And vanished the Star forever,
     When they turned from the Child away?
    Shone it not then in their bosoms,
     The light of Eternal Day?

    They could not return to Herod--
     Too precious for any swine,
    The pearls which they had gathered
     Out of the Sea Divine!

    O Vision of the Redeemer,
     In which faith has struggled to sight!
    They carried it back to their country,
     And published it day and night.

    They carried it back to their country,
     The vision since Eden's fall,
    Which seen afar off has sweetened
     The wormwood and the gall.

    And it has become the story
     Of every triumphant soul,
    That in seeking the Eternal
     Reaches a blessed goal.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXVI.

FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.

THE HEROINE OF THE CRIMEA.

"The care of the poor," said Hannah More, herself one of the most illustrious women of her
time, "is essentially the profession of women." In her own person, Florence Nightingale has
proved this; and not in one or two cases, but by a whole life passed in devotion to the needs
of the poor and humble, the sick and the distressed. Comparatively little was known of Miss
Nightingale before the year 1854, when the needs of the English army in the Crimea called forth
the heroism of thousands. Then it was that Florence Nightingale and other heroic women went
out to the East, and personally succored the wounded, comforted the weak-hearted, and smoothed
the pillows of the dying.

Miss Nightingale is every way a remarkable woman. The daughter of an Englishman, W. Shore Nightingale,
of Embly Park, Hampshire, she was born in Florence, in the year 1823, and from this fair city
she received her patronymic. From her earliest youth she was accustomed to visit the poor,
and, as she advanced in years, she studied in the schools, hospitals, and reformatory institutions
of London, Edinburgh, and other principal cities of England, besides making herself familiar
with similar places on the Continent. In 1851, "when all Europe," says a recent writer, "seemed
to be keeping holiday in honor of the Great Exhibition, she took up her abode in an institution
at Kaiserwerth, on the Rhine, where Protestant sisters of mercy are trained for the business
of nursing the sick, and other offices of charity. For three months she remained in daily and
nightly attendance, accumulating the most valuable practical experience, and then returned
home to patiently wait until an occasion should arise for its exercise. This occasion soon
arose; for, after attending various hospitals in London, the cry of distress which, in 1854,
arose from the distressed soldiery in Russia, enlisted her warmest sympathies. Lady Mary Forester,
Mrs. Sidney Herbert, and other ladies, proposed to send nurses to the seat of war. The government
acceded to their request, and Miss Florence Nightingale, Mrs. Bracebridge, and thirty-seven
others, all experienced nurses, went out to their assistance, and arrived at Constantinople
on the 5th of November. The whole party were soon established in the hospital at Scutari, and
there pursued their labor of love and benevolence. The good they did, and the wonders they
accomplished, are too well known to need particular detail. "Every day," says one, writing
from the military hospital, "brought some new combination of misery to be somehow unraveled
by the power ruling in the sisters' town. Each day had its peculiar trial to one who has taken
such a load of responsibility in an untried field, and with a staff of her own sex, all new
to it. She has frequently been known to stand twenty hours, on the arrival of fresh detachments
of sick, apportioning quarters, distributing stores, directing the labors of her corps, assisting
at the most painful operations, where her presence might soothe or support, and spending hours
over men dying of cholera or fever. Indeed, the more awful to every sense any particular case
might be, the more certainly might her slight form be seen bending over him, administering
to his case by every means in her power, and seldom quitting his side until death had released
him. And yet, probably, Miss Nightingale's personal devotion in the cause was, in her own estimation,
the least onerous of her duties. The difficulties thrown in her way by the formalities of system
and routine, and the prejudices of individuals, will scarcely be forgotten, or the daily contests
by which she was compelled to wring from the authorities a scant allowance of the appliances
needed in the daily offices of her hand, until the co-operation of Mr. Macdonald, the distributor
of the Times fund, enabled her to lay in stores, to institute separate culinary and washing
establishments, and, in short, to introduce comfort and order into the department over which
she presided." And so, during the greater part of the momentous campaign, she did the work
that she had set out to do, bravely and faithfully, and earnestly and well; and we may be sure
that on her return to England she was welcomed gladly. The queen presented her with a costly
diamond ornament, to be worn as a decoration, and accompanied it with an autograph letter,
in which her great merits were fully, gracefully, and gratefully acknowledged. It was proposed
to give Miss Nightingale a public reception; but, with true modesty, she shrunk from appearing
in any other than her own character of nurse and soother, and at once passed into retirement.
But that retirement was not allowed to be unproductive. So soon as her health, which was at
all times delicate, and had suffered considerably in the Crimea, had been somewhat restored,
she set to work to render the fruits of her experience useful to the world. In 1859 she produced
her "Hints on Nursing," one of the most useful and practical little books ever published. In
it she showed how much might be done, even with small means, and in the midst of manifold difficulties
and discouragements; and it is no small triumph to the advocates of female labor, in proper
spheres, that Florence Nightingale and her friends have shown that, as a nurse and comforter
on the field of battle, woman may work out her mission quietly and unostentatiously, without,
at the same time, interfering with the occupations of the other sex. In Florence Nightingale
we have an example of a lady bred in the lap of luxury, and educated in the school of wealth
and exclusiveness, breaking down the barriers of custom, and proving to the world that true
usefulness belongs to no particular rank, age, or station, but is the privilege of all Eve's
daughters, and that any employment sanctified by devotion and fervor and earnest desire to
do good is essentially womanly and graceful, and fitting alike to the inheritors of wealth
or poverty.

That the absence of feminine influence must tend to materialize, to sensualize, and to harden,
must, we think, be admitted by all the thoughtful. Woman is instituted by God the guardian
of the heart as man is of the mind. How many husbands, sons, and brothers, driven and driving,
through life in the absorbing excitement of a professional or mercantile career, can testify
to the arresting, reposeful, humanizing atmosphere of a home where the wife, mother, or sister
exerts her kindly sway; and it is as necessary to the immaterial interests of a nation, to
the prevention of the legislative mind and executive hands being completely swallowed up in
the actual, the present, the mechanical, the sensible, that some counteracting influence should
be allowed and encouraged similar to that of woman in her home.

To show the influence for good of associations of women for charitable ends, Mrs. Jameson,
in "Sisters of Charity at Home and Abroad," has collected accounts from history and biography
of many Romanist orders of sisters, besides vindicating and putting forward Miss Nightingale
and her companions as examples. She would not for the world that the woman should aspire to
be the man, and aim at a masculine independence for which she was never meant; and we thank
the noble champion of Protestant sisterhoods for disclaiming connection with any who want her
to take part in the public and prominent life of society, so to speak. It is co-operation that
is insisted upon--the ministering influence of the woman with the business tact of the man.
In prisons, hospitals, work-houses, and lunatic asylums the influence of well-trained women,
to soften rigor, charm routine, beguile poverty, and tranquilize distraction is often wanted;
not so much to talk as to think, feel, and do.

It may be said that there can not be the same need in a Protestant country as in Roman Catholic
countries of communities of single women, where they are doubtless called for, if only in opposition
to the immense bodies of the higher and lower clergy; but, besides the fact of there always
being a greater number of women in a country in proportion to the number of men, our commerce
requires many sailors, not to mention our army and navy, which in years past have swallowed
up so many. Surely, ministering women would be a blessing to the widows and orphans of our
gallant soldiers and sailors. There are numbers of daughters in large families kept in conventual
bondage by a father or brother or their own timidity. Daughters, sisters, widows, we appeal
to you! Are there not some few among you with courage to lead where multitudes would follow--some
to whom a kind Providence has given liberty of action? It is far from our intention to excite
rebellion in families, or tempt away from the manifest calls of duty; but can not some one
begin what others will continue? And we must not be indefinite: begin what? continue what?
A system which, in this Protestant land, would give to the poor outcast, the little criminal,
the child of the State, a mother as well as a father; that would give to the wretched of all
ages a sister as well as a brother.

Alluding to Florence Nightingale, Mrs. Jameson says: "No doubt but it will be through the patience,
faith, and wisdom of men and women working together. In an undertaking so wholly new to our
English customs, so much at variance with the usual education given to women in this country,
we shall meet with perplexities, difficulties--even failures. All the ladies who have gone
to Scutari may not turn out heroines. There may be vain babblings and scribblings and indiscretions,
such as may put weapons into adverse hands. The inferior and paid nurses may, some of them,
have carried to Scutari bad habits, arising from imperfect training. Still, let us trust that
a principle will be recognized in the country which will not be again lost sight of. It will
be the true, the lasting glory of Florence Nightingale and her band of devoted assistants that
they have broken through what Goethe calls a Chinese wall of prejudices--prejudices religious,
social, professional--and established a precedent which will, indeed, multiply the good to
all time. No doubt there are hundreds of women who would now gladly seize the privileges held
out to them by such an example, and crowd to offer their services; but would they pay the price
of such dear and high privileges? Would they fit themselves duly for the performance of such
services, and earn by distasteful, and even painful studies, the necessary certificates for
skill and capacity? Would they, like Miss Nightingale, go through a seven years' probation,
to try at once the steadiness of their motives and the steadiness of their nerves? Such a trial
is absolutely necessary; for hundreds of women will fall into the common error of mistaking
an impulse for a vocation. But I do believe that there are also hundreds who are fitted, or
would gladly, at any self-sacrifice, fit themselves for the work, if the means of doing so
were allowed to them. At present, an English lady has no facilities whatever for obtaining
the information or experience required; no such institutions are open to her, and yet she is
ridiculed for presenting herself without the competent knowledge! This seems hardly just." 

"Death to the Kapudan Pasha!

"Death to the Kiaja Beg!"

"H'm!" said the Kapudan Pasha to himself. "No doubt that was written by some softa or other,
for cobblers and tailors cannot write of course. Not a bad hand by any means. I should like to
make the fellow my teskeredji."

As he trotted nearer to the palace, he perceived a great multitude surging around it, and amongst them
a mounted trumpeter with one of those large Turkish field-horns which are audible a mile off,
and are generally used at Stambul during every popular rising, their very note has a provocative
tone.

The trumpeting herald was thus addressing the mob assembled around him:

"Inhabitants of Stambul, true-believing Mussulmans, our commander is Halil Patrona, the chief of
the Janissaries, and in the name of the Stambul Cadi, Hassan Sulali, I proclaim: Let every true
believing Mussulman shut up his shop, lay aside his handiwork, and assemble in the piazza;
those of you, however, who are bakers of bread or sellers of flesh, keep your shops open, for whosoever
resists this decree his shop will be treated as common booty. As for the unbelieving giaours
at present residing at Stambul, let them remain in peace at home, for those who do not stir abroad
will have no harm done to them. And this I announce to you in the names of Halil Patrona and Hassan
Sulali."

The Kapudan Pasha listened to the very last word of this proclamation, then he spurred his horse upon
the crier, and snatching the horn from his hand hit him a blow with it on the back, which resounded
far and wide, and then with a voice of thunder addressed the suddenly pacified crowd:

"Ye worthless vagabonds, ye filthy sneak-thieves, mud-larking crab-catchers, pitchy-fingered
slipper-botchers, huddling opium-eaters, swindling knacker-sellers, petty hucksters, ye ragged,
filthy, whey-faced tipplers!--I, Abdi, the Kapudan Pasha, say it to you, and I only regret
that I have not the tongue of a Giaour of the Hungarian race that I might be able to heap upon
you all the curses and reproaches that your conduct deserves, ye dogs! What do you want then?
Have you not enough to eat? Do you want war because you are tired of peace? War, indeed, though
you would take good care to keep out of it. To remain at home here and wage war against women and
girls is much more to your liking; booths not fortresses are what
you like to storm.

    Be off to your homes from
    whence you have come, I say,
    for whomsoever I find in the streets
    an hour hence his head shall dangle in front of the Pavilion of Justice.

    Mark my words!"
    
    With these words Abdi gave his horse
    the spur and galloped through the thickest part of the mob, which
dispersed in terror before him, and with proud self-satisfaction the
Kapudan Pasha saw how the people hid away from him in their houses
and vanished, as if by magic, from the streets and house-tops.

    
    
    He galloped into the town without
    opposition.

    At every street corner he
    blew a long blast in the
    captured horn, and addressed some well-chosen
    remarks to the people assembled there, which scattered them in every
direction.

At last he reached the Bezesztan, where every shop was closed.

"Open your shops, ye dogs!" thundered Abdi to the assembled merchants and tradesmen. "I suppose
your heels are itching?--or perhaps you are tired of having ears and noses? Open all your shop-doors
this instant, I say! for whoever keeps them closed after this command shall be hanged up in
front of his own shop-door!"

The shopkeepers, full of terror, began to take down their shutters forthwith.

From thence he galloped off towards the Etmeidan.

The great fishmarket, which he passed on his way, was filled with people from end to end. Not
a word could be heard for the fearful din, which completely drowned
the voices of a few stump-orators who here and there had climbed up
the pillars near the drinking-fountains to address the mob.

Nevertheless the resonant, penetrating voice of the horn blown by the Kapudan Pasha dominated the
tumult, and turned every face in his direction.

Rising in his stirrups, Abdi addressed them with a terrible voice:

"Ye
fools, whose mad hands rise against your own heads!

Do ye want to make the earth quake beneath you that so many of you
stand in a heap in one place?

What fool among you is it would drag the whole lot of you down to perdition? Would that the
heavens might fall upon you!--would that these houses might bury you!--would that ye might turn into
four-footed beasts who can do nothing but bark! Lower your heads, ye wretched creatures, and
go and hide yourselves behind your mud-walls! And let not a single cry be heard in your streets,
for if you dare to come out of your holes, I swear by the shadow of Allah that I'll make a rubbish-heap
of Stambul with my guns, and none shall live in it henceforth but serpents and bats and your
accursed souls, ye dogs!"

And nobody durst say him nay. They listened to his revilings in silence, gave way before him,
and made a way for his prancing steed. Halil was not there, had he but been there the Kapudan
Pasha would not have waited twice for an answer.

So here also Abdi succeeded in trotting through the ranks of the rioters, and so at last directed his
way towards the Etmeidan.

By this time not only the caldron of the first but the caldron of the fifth Janissary regiment
had been erected in the midst of the camp. They had been taken by force from the army blacksmiths,
and a group of Janissaries stood round each of them.

Abdi Pasha appeared among them so unexpectedly that they were only
aware of his presence when he suddenly bawled at them:

"Put down
your weapons!"

They all regarded the Kapudan Pasha with fear and wonder. How had he got here? Not one of them
dared to draw a sword against him, yet not one of them submitted, and everyone of them felt that
Patrona was badly wanted here.

The banner of the insurgents was waving in the midst of the piazza. Abdi Pasha rode straight
towards it. The Janissaries remained rooted to the spot, staring after him with astonishment.

Suddenly
Musli leaped forth from amongst them, and anticipating the Kapudan, seized the flag himself.

"Give me that banner, my son!" said Abdi with all the phlegm of a true seaman.

Musli had not yet sufficiently recovered to be able to answer articulately,
but he shook his head by way of intimating that surrender it he would
not.

"Give me that banner, Janissary!" cried Abdi once more, sternly regarding Musli straight between
the eyes.

Instead of answering Musli simply proceeded to wind the banner round its pole.

"Give me that banner!" bellowed Abdi for the third time, with a voice of thunder, at the same time
drawing his sword.

But now Musli twisted the pole round so that the mud-stained end which had been sticking in the earth rose
high in the air, and he said:

"I honour you, Abdi Pasha, and I will not hurt you if you go away. I would rather see you fall
in battle fighting against the Giaours, for you deserve to have a glorious name; but don't
ask me for this banner any more, for if you come a step nearer I
will run you through the body with the dirty end."

And at these words all the other Janissaries leaped to their feet and, drawing their swords,
formed a glittering circle round the valiant Musli.

"I am sorry for you, my brave Janissaries," observed the Kapudan Pasha sadly.

"And we are sorry for you, famous Kapudan Pasha!"

Then Abdi quitted the Etmeidan. He perceived how the crowd parted before him everywhere as he
advanced; but it also did not escape him that behind his back they immediately closed up again
when he had passed.

"These people can only be brought to their senses by force of arms," he said to himself as away
he rode through the city, and nobody laid so much as a finger upon him.

* * * * *

Meanwhile, in the camp outside, a great council of war was being held. On the news of the insurrection
which had been painted in the most alarming colours by the fugitive
Kiaja and the Janissary Aga, the Sultan had called together the generals,
the Ulemas, the Grand Vizier, the Chief Mufti, the Sheiks, and the
Kodzhagians in the palace by the sea-shore.

An hour before in the same palace he had held a long deliberation
with his aunt, the wise Sultana Khadija.

Good counsel was now precious indeed.

The Grand Vizier opined that the army, leaving the Sultan behind at
Brusa, should set off at once towards Tebrif to meet the foe.

If it were found possible to unite with Abdullah Pasha all was won. Stambul was to be left
to itself, and the rebels allowed to do as they liked there. Once let the external enemy be well
beaten and then their turn would come too.

The Chief Mufti did not believe it to be possible to lead the host to battle just then; but
he wished it to be withdrawn from Stambul, lest it should be affected by the spirit of rebellion.

The
Kiaja advised negociating with the rebels and pacifying them that way.

    At this last proposal the Sultan nodded his head approvingly.

The Sultana Khadija was also of the same opinion.

As to the mode of carrying out these negociations there was some slight difference of detail
between the plan of the Kiaja and the plan of the Sultana. In the opinion of the former, while
the negociations were still proceeding, the ringleaders of the rebellion were to be quietly
disposed of one after the other, whereas the Sultana insinuated that the Sultan should appease
the rebels by handing over to them the detested Kiaja and any of the other great officers of
state whose heads the mob might take a fancy to. And that, of course, was a very different thing.

The
Sultan thought the counsel of the Kiaja the best.

At that very moment, the Kapudan Pasha, Abdi, entered the council-chamber.

Everybody regarded him with astonishment. According to the account of the Kiaja he had already
been cut into a thousand pieces.

He came in with just as much sangfroid as he displayed when he had
ridden through the rebellious city.

He inquired of the doorkeepers as he passed through whether his messengers had arrived yet with the
tulips. "No," was the reply. "Then where have they got to, I wonder," he muttered; "since I quitted
them I have been from one end of Stambul to the other?"

Then he saluted the Sultan, and in obedience to a gesture from the Padishah, took his place
among the viziers, and they regarded him with as much amazement as if it was his ghost that
had come among them.

"You have been in Stambul, I understand?" inquired the Grand Vizier at last.

"I have just come from thence within the last hour."

"What do the people want?" asked the Padishah.

"They want to eat and drink."

"It is blood they would drink then," murmured the Chief Mufti in his beard.

"And what do they complain about?"

"They complain that the sword does not wage war of its own accord, and that the earth does not
produce bread without being tilled, and that wine and coffee do not trickle from the gutters
of the houses."

"You speak very lightly of the matter, Abdi. How do you propose to pacify this uproar?"

"The thing is quite simple. The cobblers and petty hucksters of Stambul are not worth a volley,
and, besides, I would not hurt the poor things if possible. Many of them have wives and children.
Those who have stirred them up are in the camp of the Janissaries--there you will find their
leaders. It would be a pity, perhaps, to destroy all who have excited the people in Stambul
to revolt, but they ought to be led forth regiment by regiment and every tenth man of them shot
through the head. That will help to smooth matters."

All the viziers were horrified.

       "Who would dare to do such a thing?" they asked.

"That is what I would do," said Abdi bluntly. After that he held his peace.

It was the Sultan who broke the silence.

"Before you arrived," said he, "we had resolved, by the advice of
the Kiaja Beg, to go back to the town with the banner of the Prophet
and the princes.

"That also is not bad counsel," said Abdi; "thy
glorious presence will and must quell the uproar. Unfurl the banner
of the Prophet in front of the Gate of the Seraglio, let the Chief
Mufti and Ispirizade open the Aja Sophia and the Mosque of Achmed,
and let the imams call the people to prayer. Let Damad Ibrahim remain
outside with the host, that in case of need he may hasten to suppress
the insurgents. Let the Kiaja Beg collect together the jebedjis, ciauses,
and bostanjis, who guard the Seraglio, and let them clear the streets.
And if all this be of no avail my guns from the sea will soon teach
them obedience."

Sultan Achmed shook his head.

"We have resolved
otherwise," said he; "none of you must quit my side. The Grand Vizier,
the Chief Mufti, the Kapudan Pasha, and the Kiaja must come along
with me."

And while he told their names, one after the other, the
Padishah did not so much as look at one of them.

The names of these
four men were all written up on the corners of the street. The heads
of these four men had been demanded by the people and by Halil Patrona.

What
then was their offence in the eyes of the people? They were the men
highest in power when misfortune overtook the realm. But how then
had they offended Halil Patrona? 'Twas they who had brought suffering
upon Gül-Bejáze.

The viziers bowed their heads.

At that same instant
Abdi's messengers arrived with the tulips. They were brought to the
Padishah, who was enchanted by their beauty, and ordered that they
should be conveyed to Stambul, to the Sultana Asseki, with the message
that he himself would not be long after them. Moreover, he patted
Abdi on the shoulder, and protested with tears in his eyes that there
was none in the world whom he loved better.

The Kapudan Pasha kissed
the hem of the Sultan's robe, and then remained behind with Ibrahim,
Abdullah, and the Kiaja.

"Abdullah, and you, my brave Ibrahim, and
you, Kiaja," said he, addressing them with a friendly smile, "in an
hour's time our four heads will not be worth an earless pitcher,"
whereupon Damad Ibrahim sadly bent his head, and whispered with a
voice resembling a sob:

"Poor, poor Sultan!"

Then they all four
accompanied Achmed to his ship. They were all fully convinced that
Achmed would first sacrifice them all and then fall himself.

CHAPTER
VIII.

A TOPSY-TURVY WORLD.

Halil Patrona was already the master
of Stambul.

The rebel leaders had assembled together in the central
mosque, and from thence distributed their commands.

At the sixth
hour (according to Christian calculation ten o'clock in the evening)
the ship arrived bearing the Sultan, the princes, the magnates, and
the sacred banner, and cast anchor beside the coast kiosk at the Gate
of Cannons.

Inside the Seraglio none knew anything of the position
of affairs. All through the city a great commotion prevailed with
the blowing of horns, in the cemetery bivouac fires had been everywhere
lighted.

"Why cannot I send a couple of grenades among them from
the sea?" sighed the Kapudan Pasha, "that would quiet them immediately,
I warrant."

As the Kizlar-Aga, Elhaj Beshir, came face to face with
the newly arrived ministers in the ante-chamber where the Mantle of
the Prophet was jealously guarded, he rubbed his hands together with
an enigmatical smile which ill became his coarse, brutal countenance
and cloven lips, and when the Padishah asked him what the rebels wanted,
he replied that he really did not know.

That smile of his, that rubbing
of the hands, which had been robbed of their thumbs by the savage
cruelty of a former master for some piece of villainy or other--these
things were premonitions of evil to all the officials present.

Elhaj
Beshir Aga had now held his office for fourteen years, during which
time he had elevated and deposed eight Grand Viziers.

And now, how
were the demands of the rebels to be discovered?

Damad Ibrahim suggested
that the best thing to do was to summon Sulali Hassan, a former cadi
of Stambul, whose name he had heard mentioned by the town-crier along
with that of Halil Patrona.

They found Sulali in his summer house,
and at the first summons he appeared in the Seraglio. He declared
that the rebels had been playing fast and loose with his name, and
that he knew nothing whatever of their wishes.

"Then take with you
the Chaszeki Aga and twenty bostanjis, and go in search of Halil Patrona,
and find out what he wants!" commanded the Padishah.

"It is a pity
to give worthy men unnecessary trouble, most glorious Sultan," said
Abdi Pasha bitterly. "I am able to tell you what the rebels want,
for I have seen it all written up on the walls. They demand the delivery
of four of the great officers of state--myself, the Chief Mufti, the
Grand Vizier, and the Kiaja. Surrender us then, O Sultan! yet surrender
us not alive! but slay us first and then their mouths will be stopped.
Let them glut their appetites on us. You know that no wild beast is
savage when once it has been well fed."

The Sultan pretended not
to hear these words. He did not even look up when the Kapudan spoke.

"Seek
out Halil Patrona!" he said to the Chaszeki Aga, "and greet him in
the name of the Padishah!"

What! Greet Halil Patrona in the name
of the Padishah! Greet that petty huckster in the name of the master
of many empires, in the name of the Prince of Princes, Shahs, Khans,
and Deys, the dominator of Great Moguls! Who would have believed in
the possibility of such a thing three days ago?

"Greet Halil Patrona
in my name," said the Sultan, "and tell him that I will satisfy all
his just demands, if he promises to dismiss his forces immediately
afterwards."

The Chaszeki Aga and Sulali Hassan, with the twenty
bostanjis, forced their way through the thick crowd which thronged
the streets till they reached the central mosque. Only nine of the
twenty bostanjis were beaten to death by the mob on the way, the eleven
others were fortunate enough to reach the mosque at least alive. This Thomas Marshall had been a playmate
of George Washington, and, like him, was a mountain surveyor, and they loved each other, and
when the Revolutionary War broke out both went into the service, Thomas Marshall being colonel
of one of the Virginia regiments. His son, John Marshall, who was not twenty years old when
the conflict began, became a lieutenant under his father. The mother of John Marshall was named
Mary Kieth, and his grandmother Elizabeth Markham, and the latter was born in England.

Marshall's father had a good mind, not much education; but he was a great reader, and especially
loved poetry, and he taught his son to commit poetry to memory, and to model his mind on the
clear diction and heroic strain of poets like Milton, Shakespeare, Dryden, and Pope. In these
books of poetry the great chief-justice found the springs to freshen his own good character.
To the last day of his life he loved literature, and was especially fond of novels, and of
books written by females. He held the view that the United States must be a literary nation
in the sense of having great and noble authors to leaven its people and teach them high thoughts.
His schools were chiefly down in the Chesapeake Bay, in the county of his birth, and his teachers
were poor Presbyterian clergymen from Scotland, who at that period were the teachers of nearly
all the Middle States, from New York southward. He knew some Latin, but not very much. One
of his teachers was his own father, who, with a large family, took delight in training this boy.

OUR JUDGE ON DRILL.

In 1775 the country hunters and boors on the Blue Ridge Mountain went to their mustering place,
and, the senior officer being absent, this young Marshall, with a gun on his shoulder, began
to show them how to use it. Like them, he wore a blue hunting shirt and trousers of some stuff
fringed with white, and in his round hat was a buck-tail for a cockade. He was about six feet
high, lean and straight, with a dark skin, black hair, a pretty low forehead, and rich, dark
small eyes, the whole making a face dutiful, pleasing, and modest. After the drill was over
he stood up and told those strange, wild mountaineers, who had no newspapers and knew little
of the world, what the war was about. He described to them the battle of Lexington. They listened
to him for an hour, as if he had been some young preacher.

Thus was our great chief-justice introduced to public life. He had come to serve, and found
that he must instruct. When he marched with the regiment of these mountaineers, who carried
tomahawks and scalping-knives, the people of Williamsburg trembled for their lives. At that
time, the country near Harper's Ferry was the Far West. In a very little while, these mountaineers,
by mingled stratagem and system, defeated Lord Dunmore, very much as Andrew Jackson defeated
the British at New Orleans thirty-five years later. Marshall then went with the army to the
vicinity of Philadelphia; was in the battles of Brandywine and Germantown, and in the long
Winter of Valley Forge. Almost naked at that place, he showed an abounding good-nature, that
kept the whole camp content. If he had to eat meat without bread, he did it with a jest. Among
his men he had the influence of a father, though a boy. He was so much better read than others
that he frequently became a judge advocate, and in this way he got to know Alexander Hamilton,
who was on Washington's staff. Marshall was always willing to see the greatness of another
person, and Judge Story says that he said of Hamilton that he was not only of consummate ability
as both soldier and statesman, but that, in great, comprehensive mind, sound principle, and
purity of patriotism, no nation ever had his superior.

It became Marshall's duty, in the course of twenty-five years, to try for high treason the
man who killed his friend Hamilton, but he conducted that trial with such an absence of personal
feeling that it was among the greatest marvels of our legal history. He could neither be influenced
by his private grief for Hamilton, nor by Jefferson's attempts as President to injure Burr,
nor by Burr himself, whom he charged the jury to acquit, but whom he held under bond on another
charge, to Burr's rage. Marshall was in the battle of Monmouth, and at the storming of Stony
Point, and at the surprise of Jersey City. In the army camps, he became acquainted with the
Northern men, and so far from comparing invidiously with them, he recognized them all as fellow-countrymen
and brave men, and never in his life was there a single trace of sectionalism.

HIS MARRIAGE.

Near the close of the Revolution, Marshall went to Yorktown, somewhat before Cornwallis occupied
it, to pay a visit, and there he saw Mary Ambler at the age of fourteen. She became his wife
in 1783. Her father was Jacqueline Ambler, the treasurer of the State of Virginia. She lived
with him forty-eight years, and died in December, 1831. He often remarked in subsequent life
that the race of lovers had changed. Said he: "When I married my wife, all I had left after
paying the minister his fee was a guinea, and I thought I was rich." General Burgoyne, whom
Marshall's fellow-soldiers so humiliated, wrote some verses, and among these were the following,
which Marshall said over to himself often when thinking of his wife:

    "Encompassed in an angel's frame,
      An angel's virtues lay;
    Too soon did heaven assert its claim
      And take its own away.
    My Mary's worth, my Mary's charms,
      Can never more return.
    What now shall fill these widowed arms?
      Ah, me! my Mary's urn."

LAW LECTURES.

The only law lectures Marshall ever attended were those of Chancellor Wythe, at William and
Mary College, Williamsburg, while the Revolution was still going on. Before the close of the
war he was admitted to the bar, but the courts were all suspended until after Cornwallis's
surrender. Before the war closed Marshall walked from near Manassas Gap, or rather from Oak
Hill, his father's residence, to Philadelphia on foot to be vaccinated. The distance was nearly
two hundred miles; but he walked about thirty-five miles a day, and when he got to Philadelphia
looked so shabby that they repelled him at the hotel; but this only made him laugh and find
another hotel. He never paid much attention to his dress, and observed through life the simple
habits he found agreeable as a boy. For two years he practiced in one rough, native county;
but it soon being evident that he was a man of extraordinary grasp of a law case, he removed
to Richmond, which had not long been the capital, and there he lived until his death, which
happened in 1835 in the city of Philadelphia, whither he had repaired to submit to a second
operation. The first of these operations was cutting to the bladder for the stone, and he survived
it. Subsequently, his liver became enlarged and had abcesses on it, and his stomach would not
retain much nutriment. Marshall was a social man, and at times convivial; and I should think
it probable that, though he lived to a good old age, these complaints were, to some extent,
engendered by the fried food they insist upon in Virginia, and addiction to Madeira wine instead
of lighter French or German wines. He was one of the last of the old Madeira drinkers of this
country, like Washington, and his only point of pride was that he had perhaps the best Madeira
at Richmond. Above all other men who ever lived at Richmond, Virginia, Marshall gives sanctity
and character to the place. His house still stands there, and ought to become the property
of the bar of this country. It is now a pretty old house, made of brick and moderately roomy.

AT THE BAR.

The basis of Marshall's ability at the bar was his understanding. Not highly read, he had one
of those clear understandings which was equal to a mill-pond of book-learning. His first practice
was among his old companions in arms, who felt that he was a soldier by nature, and one of
those who loved the fellowship of the camp better than military or political ambition. Halil Pelivan,
who had been appointed Kulkiaja, hid himself in a drain pipe for three whole days, and never
emerged therefrom so long as the uproar lasted.

Three days later all was quiet again.

A new name came to the front which quelled the risen tempest--the last scion of the famous Küprili
family, every member of which was a hero.

Achmed Küprilizade collected together the ten thousand shebejis, bostanjis, and baltajis who
dwelt round the Seraglio, and when everyone was in despair attacked the rebels in the open streets,
routed them in the piazzas, and in three days seven thousand of the people fell beneath his
blows--and so the realm had peace once more.

Janaki also fell. They chopped off his head and he offered not the slightest resistance.

As for Pelivan and Kabakulak they were banished for their cowardice.

So Achmed Küprilizade became Grand Vizier.

As for Achmed III. he lived nine years longer in the Seven Towers, and tradition says he died by
poison.

FOOTNOTES:

[17] Tiger.

[18] Mouse.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE EMPTY PLACE.

Everything was now calm and quiet, and the world pursued its ordinary course; but far away among
the Blue Mountains dwells a woman who knows nothing of all that is going on around her, and
who every evening ascends the highest summit of the hills surrounding her little hut and gazes
eagerly, longingly, in the direction of Stambul, following with her eyes the long zig-zag path
which vanishes in the dim distance--will he come to-day whom she has so long awaited in vain?
Every evening she returns mournfully to her little dwelling, and
whenever she sits down to supper she places opposite to her a platter
and a mug--and so she waits for him who comes not. At night she lays
Halil's pillow beside her, and puts their child between the pillow
and herself that he may find it there when he comes.

And so day follows
day.

One day there came a tapping at her window. With joy she leaps
from her bed to open it.

It is not Halil but a pigeon--a carrier-pigeon
bringing a letter.

Gül-Bejáze opens the letter and reads it through--and
a second time she reads it through, and then she reads it through
a third time, and then she begins to smile and whispers to herself:

"He
will be here directly."

From henceforth a mild insanity takes possession
of the woman's mind--a species of dumb monomania which is only observable
when her fixed idea happens to be touched upon.

At eventide she again
betakes herself to the road which leads out of the valley. She shows
the letter to an old serving-maid, telling her that the letter says
that Halil is about to arrive, and a good supper must be made ready
for him. The servant cannot read, so she believes her mistress.

An
hour later the woman comes back to the house full of joy, her cheeks
have quite a colour so quickly has she come.

"Hast thou not seen
him?" she inquires of the servant.

"Whom, my mistress?"

"Halil.
He has arrived. He came another way, and must be in the house by now."

The
servant fancies that perchance Halil has come secretly and she, also
full of joy, follows her mistress into the room where the table has
been spread for two persons.

"Well, thou seest that he is here,"
cries Gül-Bejáze, pointing to the empty place, and rushing to the
spot, she embraces an invisible shape, her burning kisses resound
through the air, and her eyes intoxicated with delight gaze lovingly--at
nothing.

"Look at thy child!" she cries, lifting up her little son;
"take him in thine arms. So!
The question was whether debts sequestrated by the Virginia Legislature during the war came
under this treaty. It is said that the Countess of Huntingdon heard the speeches on this case,
and said that every one of the lawyers, if in England, would have been given a peerage. Patrick
Henry broke his voice down in this case, and never again could speak with his old force. Marshall
surpassed them all in the cogency of his reasoning. At that time he was thought to be rather
lazy. He went into the State Legislature in 1782, just before he married. His personal influence
was such in Richmond that, although he was constantly in the minority, he was always elected.
His principal amusement was pitching the quoit, which he did to the end of his days, and could
ring the meg, it is said, at a distance of sixty feet frequently. He arose early in the morning
and went to market without a servant, and brought back his chickens in one hand and his market
basket on the other arm. He never took offense, and once when a dude stopped him on the street
and asked him where there was a fellow to take home his marketing, Marshall inquired where
he lived, and said, "I will take it for you." After he got home with the other man's marketing,
the dude was much distressed to find that Mr. Marshall had been his supposed servant.

INTELLECTUAL POWER.

Nevertheless, the intellectual existence of the man was decided. From the beginning of his
life he took the view that while Virginia was the State of his birth, his country was America;
that all he and his neighbors could accomplish on this planet would be under the great government
which comprehends all, and, true to this one idea, he never wavered in his life. Mr. Jefferson,
who was much his senior, he distrusted profoundly, regarding him as a man of cunning, lacking
in large faith, and constitutionally biased in mind. It is to be noticed that Marshall's "Life
of Washington," though written by the chief-justice of the United States, was not a success,
and passed through only one edition. It gave him more annoyance than any thing in his life.
He wrote it with labor and sincerity, but he was incapable of writing mere smart, vivacious
things, and, in the attempt to give Washington his due proportions, he insensibly failed of
making a popular book.

Jefferson, who had been urging Tobias Lear, Washington's secretary, to get out of Washington's
papers remarks injurious to himself, was greatly exercised at the publication of Marshall's
book about as much as the better element dudes are at Blaine's book.

Mr. Marshall, in 1788, assisted to make the new constitution of Virginia. By the desire of
Washington he ran for Congress as a Federalist. President Washington offered him the place
of attorney-general, which he declined. He also declined the minister to France, but subsequently
accepted the position from President Adams, and in France was insulted with his fellow-members
by Talleyrand. John Adams, on his return, wished to make him a member of the Supreme Court,
but this he declined, preferring the practice of the law.

It was at Mount Vernon that Washington prevailed upon him to run for Congress. The story being
raised that Patrick Henry was opposed to him, old Henry came forward and said: "I should rather
give my vote to John Marshall than to any citizen of this State at this juncture, one only
excepted," meaning Washington.

The father of Robert E. Lee was one of the old Federal minority rallying under Marshall. Marshall
had scarcely taken his seat in Congress, in 1799, when Washington died, and he officially announced
the death at Philadelphia, and followed his remarks by introducing the resolutions drafted
by General Lee, which contained the words, "First in war, first in peace, and first in the
hearts of his countrymen."

ON THE BENCH.

John Marshall was next Secretary of State of John Adams, succeeding Timothy Pickering. Adams
was defeated for re-election, but before he went out of office he appointed Marshall chief-justice,
at the age of forty-five.

At the head of that great bench sat Marshall more than one-third of a century. Before him pleaded
all the great lawyers of the country, like William Pinckney, Hugh Legaré, Daniel Webster, Horace
Binney, Luther Martin, and Walter Jones.

John Marshall left as his great legacy to the United States his interpretation of the Constitution.
While chief-justice he became a member of the Constitutional Convention of Virginia in company
with Madison and Monroe, both of whom had been President. He gave the Federal Constitution
its liberal interpretation, that it was not merely a bone thrown to the general government,
which must be watched with suspicion while it ate, but that it was a document with something
of the elasticity of our population and climate, and that it was designed to convey to the
general state powers noble enough to give us respect.

Without a spot on his reputation, without an upright enemy, the old man attended to his duty
absolutely, loved argument, encouraged all young lawyers at the bar, and he lived down to the
time of nullification, and when General Jackson issued his proclamation against the nullifiers
John Marshall and Judge Story went up to the White House and took a glass of wine with him.

And thus those two old men silently appreciated each other near the end of their days when
the suspicions of Jefferson had resulted in incipient rebellion that was to break out in less
than thirty years, and which Marshall predicted unless there was a more general assent to the
fact that we were one country, and not a parcel of political chicken-coops.--GEORGE ALFRED
TOWNSEND.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXIX.

A NOBLE MOTHER.

HOW SHE TRAINED HERSELF, AND EDUCATED HER BOYS

Harrietta Rea, in The Christian Union, some time ago, drew a picture of home life in the West,
which ought to be framed and hung up in every household of the land.

In one of the prairie towns of Northern Iowa, where the Illinois Central Railroad now passes
from Dubuque to Sioux City, lived a woman whose experience repeats the truth that inherent
forces, ready to be developed, are waiting for the emergencies that life may bring.

She was born and "brought up" in New England. With the advantages of a country school, and
a few terms in a neighboring city, she became a fair scholar--not at all remarkable; she was
married at twenty-one to a young farmer, poor, but intelligent and ambitious. In ten years,
after the death of their parents they emigrated to Iowa, and invested their money in land that
bade fair to increase in value, but far away from neighbors. Here they lived, a happy family,
for five years, when he died, leaving her, at the age of thirty-five, with four boys, the eldest
nearly fourteen, the youngest nine. The blow came suddenly, and at first was overwhelming.
Alone, in what seemed almost a wilderness, she had no thought of giving up the farm. It was
home. There they must stay and do the best they could. The prospect of a railroad passing near
them, in time, was good; then some of the land might be sold. A little money bad been laid
by--nothing that she ought to touch for the present. Daniel, the hired man, who had come out
with them, and who was a devoted friend and servant, she determined to keep--his judgment was
excellent in farm matters. Hitherto the boys had gone regularly to school, a mile or two away;
for a settlement in Iowa was never without its school-house. They were bright and quick to
learn. Their father had been eager to help and encourage them. Newspapers, magazines, and now
and then a good book, had found their way into this household. Though very fond of reading
herself, with the care of her house she had drifted along, as so many women do, until the discipline
of study, or any special application, had been almost forgotten. It was the ambition of both
parents that their sons should be well educated. Now Jerry and Thede, the two oldest, must
be kept at home during the summer to work. Nate and Johnnie could help at night and in the
morning. The boys had all been trained to habits of obedience. They were affectionate, and
she knew that she could depend upon their love.

One evening, alone in her bedroom, she overheard some part of a conversation as the children
were sitting together around the open fire-place:

"I don't mind the work," said Theodore, "if I could only be learning, too. Father used to say
he wanted me to be a civil engineer."

"If father was here," said eleven-year-old Nate, "you could study evenings and recite to him.
I wish mother could help; but, then I guess mother's--"

"Help how?" she heard Jerry ask sharply, before Nate could finish his sentence; and she knew
the boy was jealous at once for her. "Isn't she the best mother in the world?"

"Yes, she is; and she likes stories, too; but I was just thinking, now that you can't go to
school, if she only knew a lot about every thing, why, she could tell you."

"Well," replied Jerry, with all the gravity of a man, "we must just take hold and help all
we can; it's going to be hard enough for mother. I just hate to give up school and pitch into
work. Thede, you shall go next Winter, any way."

"Shan't we be lonesome next winter?" said little Johnnie, who had taken no part in the talk;
until now; "won't mother be afraid? I want my father back," and, without a word of warning,
he burst into tears.

Dead silence for a few minutes. The outburst was so sudden, she knew they were all weeping.
It was Jerry again who spoke first: "Don't let mother see us crying. Come, Johnnie, let's take
Bone, and all go down to the trap;" then she heard them pass out of the house.

Desolation fell upon that poor mother for the next hour. Like a knife, Nate's remark had passed
through her heart, "Father could have helped!" Couldn't she help her boys, for whom she was
ready to die? Was she only "mother," who prepared their meals and took care of their clothes?
She wanted a part in the very best of their lives. She thought it all over, sitting up far
into the night. If she could only create an interest in some study that should bind them all
together, and in which she could lead! Was she too old to begin? Never had the desire to become
the very center of interest to them taken such a hold upon her.

A few weeks after, she said one morning, at the breakfast table, "Boys, I've been thinking
that we might begin geology this summer, and study it, all of us together. Your father and
I meant to do it sometime. I've found a text-book; by and by, perhaps, Thede can draw us a
chart. Jerry will take hold, I know, and Nate and Johnnie can hunt for specimens. We'll have
an hour or two every night."

The children's interest awoke in a flash, and that very evening the question discussed was
one brought in by Nate: "What is the difference between limestone and granite?" A simple one,
but it opened the way for her, and their first meeting proved a success. She had to study each
day to be ready and wide awake for her class. They lived in a limestone region. Different forms
of coral abounded, and other fossils were plenty. An old cupboard in the shed was turned into
a cabinet. One day Nate, who had wandered off two or three miles, brought home a piece of rock,
where curious, long, finger-shaped creatures were imbedded. Great was the delight of all to
find them described as orthoceratites, and an expedition to the spot was planned for some half-holiday.
Question after question led back to the origin of the earth. She found the nebular hypothesis,
and hardly slept one night trying to comprehend it clearly enough to put it before others in
a simple fashion. Her book was always at hand. By and by they classified each specimen, and
the best of their kind were taken to shelves in the sitting-room. Her own enthusiasm in study
was aroused, and, far from a hardship, it now became a delight. Her spirit was contagious.
The boys, always fond of "mother," wondered what new life possessed her; but they accepted
the change all the same. She found that she could teach, and also could inspire her pupils.
They heard of a gully, five or six miles away, where crystals had been found. Making a holiday,
for which the boys worked like Trojans, they took their lunch in the farm wagon, and rode to
the spot; and if their search was not altogether successful, it left them the memory of a happy
time.

In the meantime the farm prospered. She did all the work in the house and all the sewing, going
out, too, in the garden, where she raised a few flowers, and helping to gather vegetables.
Daniel and the boys were bitterly opposed to her helping them. "Mother," said Jerry, "if you
won't ever think you must go out, I'll do any thing to make up. I don't want you to look like
those women we see sometimes in the fields." Generally she yielded; her work was enough for
one pair of hands. Through it all now ran the thought that her children were growing up; they
would become educated men; she would not let them get ahead, not so as to pass her entirely.

Winter came. Now Daniel could see to the work; but these habits of study were not to be broken.
"Boys, let us form a history club," was the proposition; "it shan't interfere with your lessons
at school." They took the history of the United States, which the two younger children were
studying. Beginning with the New England settlements, and being six in number, they called
each other, for the time, after the six States, persuading old Daniel to take his native Rhode
Island. "That woman beats all creation," he was heard to exclaim, "the way she works all day
and goes on at night over her books." The mother used to say she hardy knew if she were any
older than her boys when they were trying to trip each other with questions. The teacher of
the district school came over one Saturday afternoon. "I never had such pupils," said he, "as
your sons, in history; and indeed they want to look into every thing." Afterward he heard with
delight the story of their evening's work. The deep snows often shut them in, but the red light
shone clearly and bright from that sitting-room window, and a merry group were gathered around
the table. Every two weeks an evening was given to some journey. It was laid out in advance,
and faithfully studied. Once, Theodore remembers, a shout of laughter was raised when nine
o'clock came by Jerry's exclamation, "O, mother, don't go home now; we are all having such
a good time!" Five years they lived in this way, and almost entirely by themselves. They studied
botany. She knew the name of every tree and shrub for miles around. The little boys made a
collection of birds' eggs, and then began to watch closely the habits of the birds. It was
a pure, simple life. It would have been too wild and lonely but for the charm of this devoted
mother. Her hours of loneliness were hidden from them; but she learned in an unusual degree
to throw every energy into the day's work of study, and create, as it were, a fresh enthusiasm
for the present hour. Her loving sacrifice was rewarded. Each child made her his peculiar confidante.
She became the inspiration of his life.

English history opened a wide field to this family. One afternoon she brought in Shakespeare
to prove some historical question. It was a rainy day, and the boys were all at home. Jerry
began to read "Hamlet" aloud; it proved a treasure that brought them into a new world of delight.
Sometimes they took different characters for representation, and the evening ended in a frolic;
for good-natured mirth was never repressed.

First of all, a preparation had been made for the Sabbath. There was a church in this town,
but at a distance of several miles, and during many days the roads were impassable. She had
leaned upon infinite Strength, gathering wisdom through all these experiences. The secret of
many a promise had been revealed to her understanding; and, above every thing, she desired
that the Scriptures should become precious to her children. She took up Bible characters, bringing
to bear the same vivid interest, the same power of making them realities.

These lessons were varied by little sketches or reports of one Sunday to be read aloud the
next. Of this, Nate took hold with a special zest. None of this family could sing. She thought
of a substitute. They learned the Psalms, much of Isaiah, and many hymns, repeating them in
concert, learning to count upon this hour around the fire as others do upon their music. How
many of these times came to her in after life--the vision of the bright faces of her boys as
they clustered affectionately around her!

Time rolled by. The railroad passed through. A village sprang up, and the land was ready to
sell. She could keep enough for her own use, and the boys could prepare for college. Thede
and Nate went away to school. The old home was kept bright and pleasant; friends, new settlers,
came in, and now there was visiting and social life.

Jerry stayed on the farm; Theodore became a civil engineer; Nate a minister; Johnnie went into
business. Theodore used to say: "Mother, as I travel about, all the stones and the flowers
make me think of you. I catch sight of some rock, and stop to laugh over those blessed times."
Nate said: "Mother, when I am reading a psalm in the pulpit, there always comes to me a picture
of those old evenings, with you in the rocking-chair by the firelight, and I hear all your
voices again." Johnnie wrote: "Mother, I think that every thing I have has come to me through
you." When Jerry, who remained faithful always, had listened to his brothers, he put his arm
about her, saying tenderly: "There will never be any body like mother to me."

She died at sixty-five, very suddenly. Only a few hours before, she had exclaimed, as her children
all came home together: "There never were such good boys as mine. You have repaid me a thousand-fold.
God grant you all happy homes." They bore her coffin to the grave themselves. They would not
let any other person touch it. In the evening they gathered around the old hearth-stone in
the sitting-room, and drew their chairs together. No one spoke until Nate said, "Boys, let
us pray;" and then, all kneeling around her vacant chair, he prayed that the mantle of their
mother might fall upon them. They could ask nothing beyond that.

    No Longer My Own.

    In serving the Master I love,
      In doing his bidding each day,
    The sweetness of bondage I prove,
      And sing, as I go on my way--
    I never such freedom have known
    As now I'm no longer my own.

    His burden is easy to bear,
      My own was a mountain of lead;
    His yoke it is gladness to wear,
      My own with my life-blood was red--
    I never such gladness have known
    As now I'm no longer my own.

    Discharging the duties I owe
      To household and neighbor of mine,
    The beauty of bondage I know,
      And count it as beauty divine--
    I never such beauty have known
    As now I'm no longer my own.

    And everywhere, Master so dear,
      A dutiful bondman of thine,
    All things my possession appear,
      Their glory so verily mine--
    I never such glory have known
    As now I'm no longer my own.

    My heart overflows with brave cheer;
      For where is the bondage to dread,
    As long as the Master is dear,
      And love that is selfish is dead!--
    I never such safety have known
    As now I'm no longer my own.

The time is coming--indeed has come--when every writer will divide the subject of education
into physical, moral, and intellectual. We recognize theoretically that physical education
is the basis of all education. From the time of Plato down to the time of Horace Mann and Herbert
Spencer that has been the theory. It has also been the theory of German educators. The idea
that the mind is a distinct entity, apart from the body, was a theological idea that grew out
of the reaction against pagan animalism. The development of the body among the Greeks and Romans
was followed by those brutal exhibitions of physical prowess in the gladiatorial contests where
the physical only was cultivated and honored. With the dawn of Christianity a reaction set
in against this whole idea of developing the body. They thought no good could come from its
supreme development, because they had seen so much evil. The priests represented the great
danger which accompanied this physical training without moral culture, and there is no doubt
that they were right to a certain degree. Give a man only supreme physical education, without
any attention to the moral and intellectual, and he will go to pieces like our prize-fighters
and athletes. But the Christians went to the other extreme. They practiced the most absurd
system of asceticism, depriving themselves of natural food and rest, and, of course, the results
which followed on a grand scale were just what would follow in the individual. Let a person
follow the course they did, denying himself necessary raiment and food, taking no exercise,
and living in retirement, and nervous prostration will follow, and hysterical disturbances
and troubles. This result in the individual was found on a large scale throughout Christendom.
The idea that the Christians brought down from the very earliest dawn of Christianity, that
the body and soul are distinct, and that whatever is done to mortify the flesh increases the
spiritual, life, has a grain of truth in it. There were men in our army who, half-starved,
marched through the Southern swamps in a state of exaltation. They imagined they were walking
through floral gardens, with birds flitting about and singing overhead. But it was an unnatural,
morbid state. So priests deprived themselves of food, and reduced themselves to the lowest
extent physically, and then saw visions; and were in an exalted mental state. But it was morbid.
If a man sit up till twelve o'clock to write on a certain theme, he may not have a single idea
until that hour; but then his mind begins to work, and perhaps he can work better than under
any other circumstances. But his condition is abnormal. It does not represent the man's true
state of health. He is gaining that momentary advancement of power at terrible cost.

This disregard of physical conditions is giving rise to national disturbance. It has thoroughly
worked itself into our educational system. Though our schools profess to be purely secular,
they still adhere to this old theological idea. You can not get teachers to enter with zest
into exercises for physical development, because they think that a man who trains the body
must be inferior to the man who trains the mind. They do not see that the two are closely allied.
They will tell you that the time is all apportioned, so many hours for each study, and that
if you take half an hour out for exercise the boy must lose so much Latin or Greek, or something
else. The idea of the high-school is to get the boy into college. They care nothing about the
condition of the individual. The individual must be sacrificed to the reputation of the school,
or of the master; the standard must be kept up. If the master can not get just such a percentage
of scholars into college, his own reputation and the reputation of the school are injured. In
addition to this he was allowed a supper--which was, in fact, his dinner--at the gaming house,
whither he went every night at about eleven o'clock. Till supper-time (two o'clock in the morning)
he amused himself in watching the games and calculating the various chances, although incapable of
playing a single coup. At four o'clock he returned to his lodging, retired to bed, and lay till
between nine and ten o'clock on the following night. A cup of coffee was then brought to him, and,
having dressed himself, at the usual hour he again proceeded to the salon. This had been his
round of life for several years; and he told me that during all that time (excepting on a few mornings
about Midsummer) he had never beheld the sun!'

A Mr R--y, son of a baronet, left Wattier's club one night with only L4 in his pocket, saying that
he would look in at the hells.

He did so, and, returning after three o'clock in the morning, offered to bet L500 that he had
above L4000.

The result proved that he had L4300, all won at gaming tables, from the small beginning of L4.
He then sat down to play games of skill at Wattier's, and went home at six o'clock without
a single pound! The same man subsequently won L30,000, and afterwards lost it all, with L15,000
more, and then 'went to the Continent.'

A major of the Rifle Brigade, in consequence of gambling in London, by which he lost vast sums
of money, went out of his senses and died a few years ago in an asylum. This occurred within
the last ten or twelve years.

Says Mr Seymour Harcourt, in his 'Gaming Calendar,' 'I have myself seen hanging in chains a
man whom, a short time before, I saw at a Hazard table!'

Hogarth
lent his tremendous power to the portrayal of the ruined gamester,
and shows it to the life in his print of the gaming house in the 'Rake's
Progress.'

Three stages of that species of madness which attends
gaming are there described.

On the first shock all is inward dismay. The ruined gamester is represented leaning against a
wall with his arms across, lost in an agony of horror. Shortly after this horrible gloom bursts
into a storm and fury. He tears in pieces whatever comes near him, and, kneeling down, invokes
curses on himself. His next attack is on others--on every one whom
he imagines to have been instrumental in his ruin.

The eager joy of the winning gamester, the attention of the usurer, and the profound reverie
of the highwayman, are all strongly marked in this wonderful picture.

HOW MANY GAMESTERS LIVE BY PLAY?

It is an observation made by those who calculate on the gaming world, that above nine-tenths
of the persons who play LIVE by it.

Now, as the ordinary establishment of a GENTEEL gamester, as he is commonly called, cannot be
less than L1000 per annum, luck, which turns out EQUAL in the long run, will not support him;
he must therefore LIVE by what they call among themselves the BEST
OF THE GAME--or, in plain English, cheating.

So much for the inner and outer life of gamblers. And now I shall introduce Mr Ben. Disraeli,
recounting, in the happiest vein of his younger days, a magnificent gambling scene, quite on
a par with the legend of the Hindoo epic before quoted,(12) and which, I doubt not, will (to
use the young Disraeli's own words) make the reader 'scud along and warm up into friskiness.'

(12)
Chapter II.

A curious phrase occurs in the 9th chapter of 'The Young Duke,' in the paragraph at the beginning, after
the words--'O ye immortal gods!'

Although the scene of the drama is part of a novel, yet there can
be no doubt of its being 'founded on fact'--at any rate, I think there
never was a narrative of greater verisimilitude.

The Bird was out. This gambling is the turning-point in the young duke's career; he proves
himself at length not unworthy of his noble ancestry arm his high hereditary position,--takes
his place in the Senate, and weds the maiden of his love.

CHAPTER IV. ATROCITIES, DUELS, SUICIDES, AND EXECUTION OF GAMBLERS.

The history of all nations is but the record of their cupidity; and when the fury of gaming appears
on the scene, it has never failed to double the insolence and atrocities
of tyranny.

The atrocious gambling of the Hindoo Rajas has been related;(14) and I have incidentally adverted
to similar concomitants of the vice among all nations. I now propose to bring together a series
of facts specially elucidative of the harrowing theme.

(14) Chapter II.

One of the Ptolemys, kings of Egypt, required all causes to be submitted to him whilst at play,
and pronounced even sentence of death according to chance. On one occasion his wife, Berenice,
pronounced thereanent those memorable words:--'There cannot be too much deliberation when the
death of a man is concerned'--afterwards adopted by Juvenal--Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio
longa est.(15)

(15) Aelian, Var. Hist. lib. XLIV. c. xiii.; Juvenal, Sat. vi.

Tolomnius, King of the Veii, happened to be playing at dice when the arrival of Roman ambassadors
was announced. At the very instant he uttered the word KILL, a term of the game; the word was
misinterpreted by the hearers, and they went forthwith and massacred the ambassadors. Livy
suggests that this was an excuse alleged AFTER the commission of the deed; but gamesters are subject
to such absence of mind that there is really nothing incredible or astonishing in the act. 'Sire,'
exclaimed a messenger to the Caliph Alamin, 'it is no longer time for play--Babylon is besieged!'
'Silence!' said the caliph, 'don't you see I am on the point of giving checkmate?' The same story
is told of a Duke of Normandy.

Wars have arisen from very trivial causes--among the rest gambling. Henry, the son of William the
Conqueror, was playing at chess with Louis, the son of Philip, King of France. The latter,
perceiving that he was losing the game got into a passion, and calling Henry the son of a bastard,
flung the chess-board into his face. Henry took the chess-board and struck Louis with it so
violently that he drew blood, and would have killed him if his brother,
who happened to come in, had not prevented him.

The two brothers took to flight, but a great and lasting war was the consequence of the gambling
fracas.

A gaming quarrel was the cause of the slap in the face given by the Duc Rene to Louis XII.,
then only Duc d'Orleans. This slap was the origin of a ligue which was termed 'the mad war.' The
resentment of the outraged prince was not appeased until he mounted the throne, when he uttered
these memorable words:--'A King of France does not avenge insults offered to a Duke of Orleans.'

Many narratives of suicide committed by desperate gamblers are on record, some of which I now
adduce.

SIR JOHN BLAND, OF KIPPAX PARK.

Sir John Bland, of Kippax Park, flirted away his whole fortune at Hazard.

LORD MOUNTFORD.

Lord Mountford came to a tragic end through his gambling. He had lost money; feared to be reduced
to distress; asked for a government appointment, and determined to throw the die of life or
death on the answer received from court. The answer was unfavourable.

A SUICIDE ROBBING PETER TO PAY PAUL.

Gamblers have been known to set as coolly and deliberately about blowing out their brains as if
they had only been going to light their cigars.

    Lord Orford, in his correspondence
    with Horace Walpole, mentions
    two curious instances.
    

One of the fashionable young men of Lord Orford's day had been unhappily
decoyed into a gambling house, where his passion for play became so
great that he spent nearly the whole of his time in throwing the dice.

He continued to gamble until he had not only lost a princely fortune, but had incurred a large
amount of debt among his tradesmen. With the loss of his money, and the utter beggary which stared
him in the face, the unfortunate victim of play lost all relish for life; and sought in death the
only refuge he could fancy from the infamy and misery which he had brought upon himself. But whilst
fully resolved on self-destruction, he thought, before carrying his fatal purpose into execution,
he might as well do his tradesmen an act of justice, even if in so doing he should do injustice
to others. He insured his life to the extent of his debts, amounting to several thousand pounds.
Being acquainted with several of the directors of the company (he
called them his life-and-death brokers) in which he insured, he invited
them to dinner the following day, with the ostensible view of celebrating
the completion of the insurance.

The tradesmen also received strict orders to be present; and as the non-payment of their accounts
for a long period to come was the penalty of not acceding to his wishes in this respect, it
can scarcely be necessary to say that they were all 'punctual as lovers to the moment sworn.'
The dinner over, and a liberal allowance of wine having been quaffed, the ruined gambler desired
the servant to call up all who were in the hall below. In a few seconds the dining-room was
filled with tradesmen, all eager to receive payment of their accounts.

'Now, gentlemen,' said the gambler, addressing his guests, and pointing to the little crowd of
tradesmen,--'now, gentlemen, these are all my tradesmen; they are honest industrious men, to
whom I am indebted, and as I see no other earthly means of being ever able to meet their just
claims, you will be so kind as to pay them out of the sum for which I insured my life yesterday.
Allow me, gentlemen, to bid you farewell.' And so saying, he pulled
a pistol from his pocket, and placing it to his head, that instant
blew out his brains.

Of course his insurance office must have been one that undertook to pay insurances whatever might
be the cause of death, not excepting suicide--which, like duelling, has usually been a bar to
such claims.

REVELATIONS OF A GAMBLER ON THE POINT OF COMMITTING SELF-MURDER.

The following is 'A full and particular account of a person who threw himself into the Thames,
from Blackfriars Bridge, on Wednesday, July 10, 1782; with the melancholy paper he left behind him,
accounting to his wife and children for so rash an action.' It is said that several thousands
of the papers were dispersed through London, and it is to be hoped that some of them might
produce that good effect which seems to have been so anxiously desired by the person who wished
them to be distributed.

'Midnight, July 10, 1782.

'Whoever thou art that readest this paper, listen to the voice of one from the DEAD. While thine
eyes peruse the lines their writer may be suffering the most horrid
punishments which an incensed Creator can inflict upon the greatest
sinner.

'Reader, art thou of my own sex? Art thou a man? Oh, in whatever rank of life, whether high or
low,--beware of gambling! Beware of so much as approaching an E O table! Had I ever met with
such a dreadful warning as I now offer thee, I might perhaps have been saved from death--have
been snatched from damnation. Reader, art thou a woman? Oh, whether rich or poor, whether wife,
mother, sister, or daughter,--if thou suspect that the late hours, the feverish body, the
disturbed mind, the ruffled temper, the sudden extravagance of him whom thou lovest, are caused
by frequenting the gaming table, oh, fail not to discover thy suspicions--fail not to remonstrate!
Had but my dear wife remonstrated with me, when she saw me, in consequence of my winnings, indulge
in expense, which she must have known I could not honestly afford, she would not now, within
the next hour, be deprived of her husband--of the only support of herself and her three poor
children in this world,--and deprived of him in a manner which effectually cuts off all hopes
of our ever meeting in the happiness of another. * * * *

'Yes, in less than an hour, coward as I am, I shall have deserted
my duty and my family in this world; and, wretch as I am, shall have
rushed into all the horrors of hell in another world, by drowning
myself.

'By curiosity I was first led to the E O table. Ashamed to stand idle I put upon E, it came
E; upon O, it came O. Fortune favoured me (as I foolishly called
it), and I came away a winner.

Something worse than curiosity, though hardly more dangerous, carried
me to another table another night.

My view in going was answered. My view was to WIN, and again I WON in the course of the evening.
Again I went, and again I won.

For some weeks this was the constant story. Oh, happy had I lost at first! Now I went every
night.

Everything I ought to have done, neglected. Up all night, I was forced to lie in bed all day.
The strength of my mind, which at THIS moment might save me, was hourly wasting away. My wife
was deceived with continual falsehoods, to which nothing but her fondness for me blinded her.
Even my winnings, with the expense and extravagance in which I indulged myself and family,
were every day more than half exhausted. But I felt that I was always to win. Fortune favoured me.
Fortune was now my deity. * * * *

'But fortune, my new, my false deity, deserted me. My luck TURNED. I am undone! Ruined! A beggar! My
wife and children will want a morsel of bread to eat. * * * * To destroy myself is the only way
to preserve my family from want, and to keep myself from the GALLOWS. This morning I absolutely
hesitated whether I should not procure a sum of money with which to try my luck by FORGERY.
Gamesters, think of that--FORGERY! O my dear wife, is not anything better than seeing me conveyed
to Tyburn? Yes, it is better that before many hours you and your three helpless daughters should
be hanging in tears (I little merit) over my lifeless, cold, and swollen body.

'Readers, farewell! From my sad and voluntary death, learn wisdom. In consequence of gaming I
go to seek my destruction in the Thames.

Oh, think in what manner he deserves to be punished who commits a crime which he is fully
persuaded merits, and will not fail to meet, the severest punishment.'

The narrative proceeds to state that, 'between one and two o'clock in the morning he took a
sad farewell of this world, and leaped over Blackfriars Bridge.

It pleased Providence, however, that he should be seen committing
this desperate action by two watermen, who found his body after it
had been a considerable time under water.

In consequence of the methods used by the men of the Humane Society, he was at length almost
miraculously restored to life and to his family. It is further stated that--'In consequence of
the advice of a worthy clergyman he was restored to reason and to religion. He now wonders how he
could think of committing so horrid a crime; and is not without hope that by a life of continual
repentance and exemplary religion, he may obtain pardon hereafter. The paper which he wrote
before he set forth to drown himself he still desires should be made as public as possible,
and that this narrative should be added to it.

INCORRIGIBLE.

In the year 1799, Sir W. L--, Bart., finding his eldest son extremely distressed and embarrassed,
told him that he would relieve him from all his difficulties, on
condition that he would state to him, without reserve, their utmost
extent, and give him his honour never to play again for any considerable
sum.

The debts--amounting to L22,000--were instantly discharged. Before a week had elapsed he fell into
his old habits again, and lost L5000 more at a sitting; upon which
he next morning shot himself!

SUICIDE IN 1816.

In 1816 a gentleman, the head of a first-rate concern in the city, put a period to his existence
by blowing out his brains. He had gone to the Argyle Rooms a few nights before the act, and
accompanied a female home in a coach, with two men, friends of the woman. When they got to her
residence the two men proposed to the gentleman to play for a dozen champagne to treat the
lady with, which the gentleman declined. They, however, after a great deal of persuasion, prevailed
on him to play for small sums, and, according to the usual trick of gamblers, allowed him to win
at first, till they began to play for double, when there is no doubt the fellows produced loaded
dice, and the gentleman lost to the amount of L1800!

This brought him to his senses--as well it might. He then invented an excuse for not paying
that sum, by saying that he was under an agreement with his partner
not to draw for a larger amount than L300 for his private account--and
gave them a draft for that amount, promising the remainder at a future
day.

This promise, however, he did not attend to, not feeling himself bound by such a villainous
transaction, especially after giving them so much.

    But the robbers found out who he
      was and his residence, and had
    the audacity to go, armed with
      bludgeons, and attack him publicly on his own premises, in the presence
of those employed there, demanding payment of their nefarious 'debt
of honour,' and threatening him, if he did not pay, that he should
fight!

    
      
    This exposure had such an effect
      on his feelings that he made an excuse to retire--did so--and blew
out his brains with a pistol!

    
      
    This rash act was the more to
      be lamented because it prevented the bringing to condign punishment,
the plundering villains who were the cause of it.(16)

(16) Annual
Register, vol. lviii.

    
      
    OTHER INSTANCES.
      

    A gallant Dutch officer, after
      having lost a splendid fortune
    not long since (1823) in a
      gambling house at Aix-la-Chapelle, shot himself.

       A Russian general, also, of immense wealth, terminated his existence
in the same manner and for the same cause.

More recently, a young Englishman, who lost the whole of an immense
fortune by gambling at Paris, quitted this world by stabbing himself
in the neck with a fork.

A short time previously another Englishman, whose birth was as high
as his wealth had been considerable, blew his brains out in the Palais
Royal, after having literally lost his last shilling.

Finally, an unfortunate printer at Paris, who had a wife and five
children, finished his earthly career for the same cause, by suffocating
himself with the fumes of charcoal; he said, in his farewell note
to his unhappy wife--'Behold the effect of gaming!'(17)

(17) Ubi
supra.

'IF I LOSE I SHALL COMMIT SUICIDE.'

A young man having gambled away his last shilling, solicited the loan of a few pounds from one of
the proprietors of the hell in which he had been plundered. 'What security will you give me?'
asked the fellow. 'My word of honour,' was the reply. 'Your word of honour! That's poor security,
and won't do,' rejoined the hellite; 'if you can pawn nothing better than that, you'll get no money
out of me.' 'Then you won't lend me a couple of pounds?' 'Not without security,' was the reply.
'Why, surely, you won't refuse me a couple of sovereigns, after having lost so much?' 'I won't
advance you a couple of shillings without security.'

Still bent upon play, and greedy for the means to gratify his passion, the unhappy man, as if struck
by a sudden thought, exclaimed--'I'll give you security--the clothes on my back are quite new,
and worth eight guineas; you shall have them as security. Lend me two sovereigns on them.'

'Suppose you lose,' doggedly rejoined the other, 'I cannot strip them off your back.' 'Don't
trouble yourself on that head,' replied the desperate wretch; 'if I lose I shall commit suicide,
which I have been meditating for some time, and you shall surely
have my clothes.

I shall return to my lodgings before daylight, in the most worn-out and worthless dressing-gown or
great-coat you can procure for me, leaving my clothes with you.'
The two sovereigns were advanced, and in ten or twelve minutes were
lost. The keeper of the table demanded the clothes, and the unfortunate
man stripped himself with the utmost coolness of manner, and wrapping
his body in a worn-out greatcoat, quitted the place with the full
purpose of committing self-murder. He did not direct his steps homeward,
however, but resolved to accomplish the horrid deed by suspending
himself from a lamp-post in a dark lane near the place. While making
the necessary preparations he was observed by a constable, who at
once took him into custody, and on the following morning he was carried
before the magistrate, where all the circumstances of the affair came
out.

SUICIDE AT VERDUN.

During the great French War, among other
means resorted to in order to ease the English prisoners at Verdun
of their loose cash, a gaming table was set up for their sole accommodation,
and, as usual, led to scenes of great depravity and horror. For instance,
a young man was enticed into this sink of iniquity, when he was tempted
to throw on the table a five-franc piece; he won, and repeated the
experiment several times successfully, until luck turned against him,
and he lost everything he had. The manager immediately offered a rouleau
of a thousand francs, which, in the heat of play, he thoughtlessly
accepted, and also lost. He then drew a bill on his agent, which his
captain (he was an officer in the English army) endorsed. The proceeds
of this went the way of the rouleau. He drew two more bills, and lost
again. The next morning he was found dead in his bed, with his limbs
much distorted and his fingers dug into his sides. On his table was
found an empty laudanum bottle, and some scraps of paper on which
he had been practising the signature of Captain B----. On inquiry
it was found that he had forged that officer's name to the two last
bills.

'IN AT THE DEATH.'

In 1819 an inquest was held on the body
of a gentleman found hanging from one of the trees in St James's Park.
The evidence established the melancholy fact that the deceased was
in the habit of frequenting gambling houses, and had sunk into a state
of dejection on account of his losses; and it seemed probable that
it was immediately after his departure from one of these receptacles
of rogues and their dupes that he committed suicide. The son of the
gate-keeper at St James's saw several persons round the body at four
o'clock in the morning, one of whom, a noted gambler, said: 'Look
at his face; why, have you forgotten last night? Don't you recollect
him now?' They were, no doubt, all gamblers--in at the death.'

The
three following stories, if not of actual suicide, relate crimes which
bear a close resemblance to self-murder.

A GAMBLER PAWNING HIS EARS.

A
clerk named Chambers, losing his monthly pay, which was his all, at
a gaming table, begged to borrow of the manager's; but they knew his
history too well to lend without security, and therefore demanded
something in pawn. 'I have nothing to give but my ears,' he replied.
'Well,' said one of the witty demons, 'let us have them.' The youth
immediately took a knife out of his pocket and actually cut off all
the fleshy part of one of his cars and threw it on the table, to the
astonishment of the admiring gamesters. He received his two dollars,
and gambled on.

A GAMBLER SUBMITTING TO BE HANGED.

The following
incident is said to have occurred in London:--Two fellows were observed
by a patrol sitting at a lamp-post in the New Road; and, on closely
watching them, the latter discovered that one was tying up the other,
who offered no resistance, by the neck. The patrol interfered to prevent
such a strange kind of murder, and was assailed by both, and very
considerably beaten for his good offices; the watchmen, however, poured
in, and the parties were secured. The survivors were reared in a country home, the incidents
of which, when of a kind to excite emotion, impressed themselves on this singular child's memory
from a very early age. We have known only two instances, in a rather wide experience of life,
of persons distinctly remembering so far back as a year and a half old. This was De Quincey's
age when three deaths happened in the family, which he remembered, not by tradition, but by
his own contemporary emotions. A sister of three and a half died, and he was perplexed by her
disappearance, and terrified by the household whisper that she had been ill-used just before
her death by a servant. A grandmother died about the same time, leaving little impression,
because she had been little seen. The other death was of a beloved kingfisher, by a doleful
accident. When the boy was five, he lost his playfellow and, as he says, intellectual guide,
his sister Elizabeth, eight years old, dying of hydrocephalus, after manifesting an intellectual
power which the forlorn brother recalled with admiration and wonder for life. The impression
was undoubtedly genuine; but it is impossible to read the "Autobiographical Sketch" in which
the death and funeral of the child are described without perceiving that the writer referred
back to the period he was describing with emotions and reflex sensations which arose in him
and fell from the pen at the moment. His father, meantime, was residing abroad, year after
year, as a condition of his living at all; and he died of pulmonary consumption before Thomas
was seven years old. The elder brother, then twelve, was obviously too eccentric for home management,
if not for all control; and, looking no further than these constitutional cases, we are warranted
in concluding that the Opium-eater entered life under peculiar and unfavorable conditions.

He passed through a succession of schools, and was distinguished by his eminent knowledge of
Greek. At fifteen he was pointed out by his master (himself a ripe scholar) to a stranger in
the remarkable words, "That boy could harangue an Athenian mob better than you or I could address
an English one." And it was not only the Greek, we imagine, but the eloquence, too, was included
in this praise. In this, as in the subtlety of the analytical power (so strangely mistaken
for entire intellectual supremacy in our day), De Quincey must have strongly resembled Coleridge.
Both were fine Grecians, charming discoursers, eminent opium-takers, magnificent dreamers and
seers; large in their promises, and helpless in their failure of performance. De Quincey set
his heart upon going to college earlier than his guardians thought proper; and, on his being
disappointed in this matter, he ran away from his tutor's house, and was lost for several months,
first in Wales and afterward in London. He was then sixteen. His whole life presents no more
remarkable evidence of his constant absorption in introspection than the fact that, while tortured
with hunger in the streets of London, for many weeks, and sleeping (or rather lying awake with
cold and hunger) on the floor of an empty house, it never once occurred to him to earn money.
As a classical corrector of the press, and in other ways, he might no doubt have obtained employment;
but it was not till afterward asked why he did not, that the idea ever entered his mind. How
he starved, how he would have died but for a glass of spiced wine in the middle of the night
on some steps in Soho Square, the Opium-eater told all the world above thirty years since;
and also of his entering college; of the love of wine generated by the comfort it had yielded
in his days of starvation; and again, of the disorder of the functions of the stomach which
naturally followed, and the resort to opium as a refuge from the pain. It is to be feared that
the description given in those extraordinary "Confessions" has acted more strongly in tempting
young people to seek the eight years' pleasures he derived from laudanum than, that of his
subsequent torments in deterring them. There was no one to present to them the consideration
that the peculiar organization of De Quincey, and his bitter sufferings, might well make a
recourse to opium a different thing to him than to any body else. The quality of his mind and
the exhausted state of his body enhanced to him the enjoyments which he called "divine," whereas
there is no doubt of the miserable pain by which men of all constitutions have to expiate an
habitual indulgence in opium. Others than De Quincey may or may not procure the pleasures he
experienced; but it is certain that every one must expiate his offense against the laws of
the human frame. And let it be remembered that De Quincey's excuse is as singular as his excess.
Of the many who have emulated his enjoyment, there can hardly have been one whose stomach had
been well-nigh destroyed by months of incessant, cruel hunger.

This event of his life, his resort to opium, absorbed all the rest. There is little more to
tell in the way of incident. His existence was thenceforth a series of dreams, undergone in
different places, now at college, and now in a Westmoreland cottage, with a gentle, suffering
wife, by his side, striving to minister to a need which was beyond the reach of nursing. He
could amuse his predominant faculties by reading metaphysical philosophy and analytical reasoning
on any subject, and by elaborating endless analyses and reasonings of his own, which he had
not energy to embody. Occasionally the torpor encroached even on his predominant faculties,
and then he roused himself to overcome the habit; underwent fearful suffering in the weaning;
began to enjoy the vital happiness of temperance and health, and then fell back again. The
influence upon the moral energies of his nature was, as might be supposed, fatal. Such energy
he once had, as his earlier efforts at endurance amply testify. But as years passed on, he
had not only become a more helpless victim to his prominent vice, but manifested an increasing
insensibility to the most ordinary requisitions of honor and courtesy, to say nothing of gratitude
and sincerity. In his hungry days, in London, he would not beg nor borrow. Five years later
he wrote to Wordsworth, in admiration and sympathy; received an invitation to his Westmoreland
Valley; went, more than once, within a few miles, and withdrew and returned to Oxford, unable
to conquer his painful shyness; returned at last to live there, in the very cottage which had
been Wordsworth's; received for himself, his wife, and a growing family of children, an unintermitting
series of friendly and neighborly offices; was necessarily admitted to much household confidence,
and favored with substantial aid, which was certainly not given through any strong liking for
his manners, conversation, or character. How did he recompense all this exertion and endurance
oh his behalf? In after years, when living (we believe) at Edinburgh, and pressed by debt,
he did for once exert himself to write, and what he wrote was an exposure of every thing about
the Wordsworths which he knew merely by their kindness. He wrote papers, which were eagerly
read, and, of course, duly paid for, in which Wordsworth's personal foibles were malignantly
exhibited with ingenious aggravations. The infirmities of one member of the family, the personal
blemish of another, and the human weaknesses of all, were displayed, and all for the purpose
of deepening the dislike against Wordsworth himself, which the receiver of his money, the eater
of his dinners, and the dreary provoker of his patience strove to excite. Moreover, he perpetrated
an act of treachery scarcely paralleled, we hope, in the history of literature. In the confidence
of their most familiar days, Wordsworth had communicated portions of his posthumous poem to
his guest, who was perfectly well aware that the work was to rest in darkness and silence till
after the poet's death. In these magazine articles DeQuincey, using for this atrocious purpose
his fine gift of memory, published a passage, which he informed us was of far higher merit
than any thing else we had to expect. And what was Wordsworth's conduct under this unequaled
experience of bad faith and bad feeling? While so many anecdotes were going of the poet's fireside,
the following ought to be added: An old friend was talking with him by that fireside, and mentioned
DeQuincey's magazine articles. Wordsworth begged to be spared any account of them, saying that
the man had long passed away from the family life and mind, and that he did not wish to ruffle
himself in a useless way about a misbehavior which could not be remedied. The friend acquiesced,
saying: "Well, I will tell you only one thing that he says, and then we will talk of other
things. He says your wife is too good for you." The old poet's dim eyes lighted up instantly,
and he started from his seat and flung himself against the mantel-piece, with his back to the
fire, as he cried with loud enthusiasm: "And that's true! There he is right!" And his disgust
and contempt for the traitor were visibly moderated.

During a long course of years DeQuincey went on dreaming always, sometimes scheming works of
high value and great efficacy, which were never to exist; promising largely to booksellers
and others, and failing through a weakness so deep-seated that it should have prevented his
making any promises. When his three daughters were grown up, and his wife was dead, he lived
in a pleasant cottage at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, well-known by name to those who have never
seen its beauties as the scene of Scott's early married life and first great achievements in
literature. There, while the family fortunes were expressly made contingent on his abstinence
from his drug, DeQuincey did abstain, or observe moderation. His flow of conversation was then
the delight of old acquaintance and admiring strangers, who came to hear the charmer and to
receive the impression, which could never be lost, of the singular figure and countenance and
the finely modulated voice, which were like nothing else in the world. It was a strange thing
to look upon the fragile form and features, which might be those of a dying man, and to hear
such utterances as his--now the strangest comments and insignificant incidents; now pregnant
remarks on great subjects, and then malignant gossip, virulent and base, but delivered with
an air and a voice of philosophical calmness and intellectual commentary such as caused the
disgust of the listener to be largely qualified with amusement and surprise. One good thing
was, that nobody's name and fame could be really injured by any thing DeQuincey could say.
There was such a grotesque air about the mode of his evil speaking, and it was so gratuitous
and excessive, that the hearer could not help regarding it as a singular sort of intellectual
exercise, or an effort in the speaker to observe, for once, something outside of himself, rather
than as any token of actual feeling towards the ostensible object.

Let this strange commentator on individual character meet with more mercy and a wiser interpretation
than he was himself capable of. He was not made like other men; and he did not live, think,
or feel like them. A singular organization was singularly and fatally deranged in its action
before it could show its best quality. Marvelous analytical faculty he had; but it all oozed
out in barren words. Charming eloquence he had; but it degenerated into egotistical garrulity,
rendered tempting by the gilding of his genius. It is questionable whether, if he had never
touched opium or wine, his real achievements would have been substantial, for he had no conception
of a veritable stand-point of philosophical investigation; but the actual effect of his intemperance
was to aggravate to excess his introspective tendencies, and to remove him incessantly further
from the needful discipline of true science. His conditions of body and mind were abnormal,
and his study of the one thing he knew any thing about--the human mind--was radically imperfect.
His powers, noble and charming as they might have been, were at once wasted and weakened through
their own partial excess. His moral nature relaxed and sank, as must always be the case where
sensibility is stimulated and action paralyzed; and the man of genius who, forty years before
his death, administered a moral warning to all England, and commanded the sympathy and admiration
of a nation, lived on, to achieve nothing but the delivery of some confidences of questionable
value and beauty, and to command from us nothing more than a compassionate sorrow that an intellect
so subtle and an eloquence so charming in its pathos, its humor, its insight, and its music,
should have left the world in no way the better for such gifts, unless by the warning afforded
in "Confessions" first, and then, by example, against the curse which neutralized their influence
and corrupted its source.--HARRIET MARTINEAU.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXXIII.

A VISION OF TIME.

NEW-YEAR'S EVE.

    O did you not see him that over the snow
    Came on with a pace so cautious and slow?--

    That measured his step to a pendulum-tick,
    Arriving in town when the darkness was thick?

    In the midst of a vision of mind and heart,
    A drama above all human art,

    I saw him last night, with locks so gray,
    A long way off, as the light died away.

    And I knew him at once, so often before
    Had he silently, mournfully passed at my door.

    He must be cold and weary, I said,
    Coming so far, with that measured tread.

    I will urge him to linger awhile with me
    Till his withering chill and weariness flee.

    A story--who knows?--he may deign to rehearse,
    And when he is gone I will put it in verse.

    I turned to prepare for the coming guest,
    With curious, troublous thoughts oppressed.

    The window I cheered with the taper's glow
    Which glimmered afar o'er the spectral snow.

    My anxious care the hearth-stone knew,
    And the red flames leaped and beckoned anew.

    But chiefly myself, with singular care,
    Did I for the hoary presence prepare.

    Yet with little success, as I paced the room,
    Did I labor to banish a sense of gloom.

    My thoughts were going and coming like bees,
    With store from the year's wide-stretching leas;

    Some laden with honey, some laden with gall,
    And into my heart they dropped it all!

    O miserable heart! at once overrun
    With the honey and gall thou can'st not shun.

    O wretched heart! in sadness I cried,
    Where is thy trust in the Crucified?

    And in wrestling prayer did I labor long
    That the Mighty One would make me strong.

    That prayer was more than a useless breath:
    It brought to my soul God's saving health.

    The hours went by on their drowsy flight,
    And came the middle watch of the night;

    In part unmanned in spite of my care,
    I beheld my guest in the taper's glare,

    A wall of darkness around him thick,
    As onward he came to a pendulum-tick.

    Then quickly I opened wide the door,
    And bade him pass my threshold o'er,

    And linger awhile away from the cold,
    And repeat some story or ballad old,--

    His weary limbs to strengthen with rest,
    For his course to the ever-receding West.

    Through the vacant door in wonder I glanced,
    And stood--was it long?--as one entranced.

    Silence so awful did fill the room,
    That the tick of the clock was a cannon's boom.

    And my heart it sank to its lowest retreat,
    And in whelming awe did muffle its beat.

    For now I beheld, as never before;
    And heard to forget--ah, nevermore!

    For with outstretched hand, with scythe and glass,
    With naught of a pause did the traveler pass.

    And with upturned face he the silence broke,
    And thus, as he went, he measuredly spoke:

    My journey is long, but my limbs are strong;
    And I stay not for rest, for story, or song.

    It is only a dirge, that ever I sing;
    It is only of death, the tale that I bring;

    Of death that is life, as it cometh to pass;
    Of death that is death, alas! alas!

    And these I chant, as I go on my way,
    As I go on my way forever and aye.

    Call not thyself wretched, though bitter and sweet
    In thy cup at this hour intermingle and meet.

    Some cloud with the sunshine must ever appear,
    And darkness prevails till morning is near.

    But who doth remember the gloom and the night,
    When the sky is aglow with the beautiful light?

    O alas! if thou drinkest the bitter alone,
    Nor heaven nor earth may stifle thy moan!

    Thy moan!--and the echo died away--
    Thy moan! thy moan forever and aye!

    His measured voice I heard no more;
    But not till I stand on eternity's shore,

    And the things of time be forgotten all,
    Shall I cease that traveler's words to recall.

    As onward he moved to a pendulum-tick,
    The gloom and the darkness around him thick,

    I fell on my knees and breathed a prayer;
    And it rose, I ween, through the midnight air,

    To a God who knoweth the wants and all
    The evil and good of this earthly thrall;

    To One who suffered as on this day,
    And began our sins to purge away:

    To Him who hath promised to heed our cry,
    And a troubled heart to purify.

    And I feel that the gall will ever grow less,
    Till I see His face in righteousness.

    And now my soul is filled with cheer
    For the march of a bright and happy New Year.

    As years roll on, whether sun doth shine
    Or clouds overcast, I will never repine;

    For I know, when the race of time is run,
    I shall enter a realm of Eternal Sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXXIV.

JOHN BUNYAN

(BORN 1628--DIED 1688.)

FROM DARKNESS TO LIGHT.

John Bunyan, the most popular religious writer in the English language, was born at Elstow,
about a mile from Bedford, in the year 1628. He may be said to have been born a tinker. The
tinkers then formed a hereditary caste, which was held in no high estimation. They were generally
vagrants and pilferers, and were often confounded with the gypsies, whom, in truth, they nearly
resembled. Bunyan's father was more respectable than most of the tribe. He had a fixed residence,
and was able to send his son to a village school, where reading and writing were taught.

The years of John's boyhood were those during which the Puritan spirit was in the highest vigor
all over England; and nowhere had that spirit more influence than in Bedfordshire. It is not
wonderful, therefore, that a lad to whom nature had given a powerful imagination, and sensibility
which amounted to a disease, should have been early haunted by religious terrors. Before he
was ten, his sports were interrupted by fits of remorse and despair; and his sleep was disturbed
by dreams of fiends trying to fly away with him. As he grew older, his mental conflicts became
still more violent. The strong language in which he described them has strangely misled all
his biographers except Mr. Southey. It has long been an ordinary practice with pious writers
to cite Bunyan as an instance of the supernatural power of divine grace to rescue the human
soul from the lowest depths of wickedness. He is called in one book the most notorious of profligates;
in another, the brand plucked from the burning. He is designated in Mr. Ivimey's "History of
the Baptists" as the depraved Bunyan, the wicked tinker of Elstow. Mr. Ryland, a man once of
great note among the Dissenters, breaks out into the following rhapsody: "No man of common
sense and common integrity can deny that Bunyan was a practical atheist, a worthless, contemptible
infidel, a vile rebel to God and goodness, a common profligate, a soul-despising, a soul-murdering,
a soul-damning, thoughtless wretch as could exist on the face of the earth. Now, be astonished,
O heavens, to eternity! and wonder, O earth and hell, while time endures! Behold this very
man become a miracle of mercy, a mirror of wisdom, goodness, holiness, truth, and love." But
whoever takes the trouble to examine the evidence, will find that the good men who wrote this
had been deceived by a phraseology which, as they had been hearing it and using it all their
lives, they ought to have understood better. There can not be a greater mistake than to infer,
from the strong expressions in which a devout man bemoans his exceeding sinfulness, that he
has led a worse life than his neighbors. Many excellent persons, whose moral character from
boyhood to old age has been free from any stain discernible to their fellow-creatures, have,
in their autobiographies and diaries, applied to themselves, and doubtless with sincerity,
epithets as severe as could be applied to Titus Oates or Mrs. Brownrigg. It is quite certain
that Bunyan was, at eighteen, what, in any but the most austerely Puritan circles, would have
been considered as a young man of singular gravity and innocence. Indeed, it may be remarked
that he, like many other penitents who, in general terms, acknowledged themselves to have been
the worst of mankind, fired up and stood vigorously on his defense whenever any particular
charge was brought against him by others. He declares, it is true, that he had let loose the
reins on the neck of his lusts, that he had delighted in all transgressions against the divine
law, and that he had been the ringleader of the youth of Elstow in all manner of vice. But,
when those who wished him ill accused him of licentious amours, he called on God and the angels
to attest his purity. No woman, he said, in heaven, earth, or hell could charge him with having
ever made any improper advances to her. Not only had he been strictly faithful to his wife,
but he had, even before marriage, been perfectly spotless. It does not appear from his own
confessions, or from the railings of his enemies, that he ever was drunk in his life. One bad
habit he contracted, that of using profane language; but he tells us that a single reproof
cured him so effectually that he never offended again. The worst that can be laid to the charge
of this poor youth, whom it has been the fashion to represent as the most desperate of reprobates,
as a village Rochester, is that he had a great liking for some diversions, quite harmless in
themselves, but condemned by the rigid precisians among whom he lived, and for whose opinion
he had a great respect. The four chief sins of which he was guilty were dancing, ringing the
bells of the parish church, playing at tip-cat, and reading the "History of Sir Bevis of Southampton."
A rector of the school of Laud would have held such a young man up to the whole parish as a
model. But Bunyan's notions of good and evil had been learned in a very different school; and
he was made miserable by the conflict between his tastes and his scruples.

When he was about seventeen, the ordinary course of his life was interrupted by an event which
gave a lasting color to his thoughts. He enlisted in the Parliamentary army, and served during
the decisive campaign of 1645. All that we know of his military career is that, at the siege
of Leicester, one of his comrades, who had taken his post, was killed by a shot from the town.
Bunyan ever after considered himself as having been saved from death by the special interference
of Providence. It may be observed that his imagination was strongly impressed by the glimpse
which he had caught of the pomp of war. To the last he loved to draw his illustrations of sacred
things from camps and fortresses, from guns, drums, trumpets, flags of truce, and regiments
arrayed, each under its own banner. His Greatheart, his Captain Boanerges, and his Captain
Credence are evidently portraits, of which the originals were among those martial saints who
fought and expounded in Fairfax's army.

In a few months Bunyan returned home and married. His wife had some pious relations, and brought
him as her only portion some pious books. And now his mind, excitable by nature, very imperfectly
disciplined by education, and exposed, without any protection, to the infectious virulence
of the enthusiasm which was then epidemic in England, began to be fearfully disordered. In
outward things he soon became a strict Pharisee. He was constant in attendance at prayers and
sermons. His favorite amusements were, one after another, relinquished, though not without
many painful struggles. In the middle of a game at tip-cat he paused, and stood staring wildly
upward with his stick in his hand. He had heard a voice asking him whether he would leave his
sins and go to heaven, or keep his sins and go to hell; and he had seen an awful countenance
frowning on him from the sky. The odious vice of bell-ringing he renounced; but he still for
a time ventured to go to the church-tower and look on while others pulled the ropes. But soon
the thought struck him that, if he persisted in such wickedness, the steeple would fall on
his head; and he fled in terror from the accursed place. To give up dancing on the village
green was still harder; and some months elapsed before he had the fortitude to part with this
darling sin. When this last sacrifice had been made, he was, even when tried by the maxims
of that austere time, faultless. All Elstow talked of him as an eminently pious youth. But
his own mind was more unquiet than ever. Having nothing more to do in the way of visible reformation,
yet finding in religion no pleasures to supply the place of the juvenile amusements which he
had relinquished, he began to apprehend that he lay under some special malediction; and he
was tormented by a succession of fantasies which seemed likely to drive him to suicide or to
Bedlam.

At one time he took it into his head that all persons of Israelite blood would be saved, and
tried to make out that he partook of that blood; but his hopes were speedily destroyed by his
father, who seems to have had no ambition to be regarded as a Jew.

At another time, Bunyan was disturbed by a strange dilemma: "If I have not faith, I am lost;
if I have faith, I can work miracles." He was tempted to cry to the puddles between Elstow
and Bedford, "Be ye dry," and to stake his eternal hopes on the event.

Then he took up a notion that the day of grace for Bedford and the neighboring villages was
passed; that all who were to be saved in that part of England were already converted; and that
he had begun to pray and strive some months too late.

Then he was harassed by doubts whether the Turks were not in the right, and the Christians
in the wrong. Then he was troubled by a maniacal impulse which prompted him to pray to the
trees, to a broomstick, to the parish bull. As yet, however, he was only entering the Valley
of the Shadow of Death. Soon the darkness grew thicker. Hideous forms floated before him. Sounds
of cursing and wailing were in his ears. His way ran through stench and fire, close to the
mouth of the bottomless pit. He began to be haunted by a strange curiosity about the unpardonable
sin, and by a morbid longing to commit it. But the most frightful of all the forms which his
disease took was a propensity to utter blasphemy, and especially to renounce his share in the
benefits of the redemption. Night and day, in bed, at table, at work, evil spirits, as he imagined,
were repeating close to his ear the words, "Sell him! sell him!" He struck at the hobgoblins;
he pushed them from him; but still they were ever at his side. He cried out in answer to them,
hour after hour, "Never, never! not for thousands of worlds--not for thousands!" At length,
worn out by this long agony, he suffered the fatal words to escape him, "Let him go, if he
will." Then his misery became more fearful than ever. He had done what could not be forgiven.
He had forfeited his part of the great sacrifice. Like Esau, he had sold his birthright, and
there was no longer any place for repentance. "None," he afterward wrote, "knows the terrors
of those days but myself." He has described his sufferings with singular energy, simplicity,
and pathos. He envied the brutes; he envied the very stones in the street, and the tiles on
the houses. The sun seemed to withhold its light and warmth from him. His body, though cast
in a sturdy mould, and though still in the highest vigor of youth, trembled whole days together
with the fear of death and judgment. He fancied that this trembling was the sign set on the
worst reprobates, the sign which God had put on Cain. The unhappy man's emotion destroyed his
power of digestion. He had such pains that he expected to burst asunder like Judas, whom he
regarded as his prototype.

Neither the books which Bunyan read nor the advisers whom he consulted were likely to do much
good in a case like his. His small library had received a most unseasonable addition--the account
of the lamentable end of Francis Spira. One ancient man of high repute for piety, whom the
sufferer consulted gave an opinion which might well have produced fatal consequences. "I am
afraid," said Bunyan, "that I have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost." "Indeed," said
the old fanatic, "I am afraid that you have."

At length the clouds broke; the light became clearer and clearer, and the enthusiast, who had
imagined that he was branded with the mark of the first murderer, and destined to the end of
the arch-traitor, enjoyed peace and a cheerful confidence in the mercy of God. Years elapsed,
however, before his nerves, which had been so perilously overstrained, recovered their tone.
When he had joined a Baptist society at Bedford, and was for the first time admitted to partake
of the Eucharist, it was with difficulty that he could refrain from imprecating destruction
on his brethren while the cup was passing from hand to hand. After he had been some time a
member of the congregation he began to preach; and his sermons produced a powerful effect.
He was, indeed, illiterate; but he spoke to illiterate men. The severe training through which
he had passed had given him such an experimental knowledge of all the modes of religious melancholy
as he could never have gathered from books; and his vigorous genius, animated by a fervent
spirit of devotion, enabled him not only to exercise a great influence over the vulgar, but
even to extort the half-contemptuous admiration of scholars. Yet it was long before he ceased
to be tormented by an impulse which urged him to utter words of horrible impiety in the pulpit.

Counter-irritants are of as great use in moral as in physical diseases. It should seem that
Bunyan was finally relieved from the internal sufferings which had embittered his life by sharp
persecution from without. He had been five years a preacher when the Restoration put it in
the power of the Cavalier gentlemen and clergymen all over the country to oppress the Dissenters;
and, of all the Dissenters whose history is known to us, he was, perhaps, the most hardly treated.
In November, 1660, he was flung into Bedford jail; and there he remained, with some intervals
of partial and precarious liberty, during twelve years. His persecutors tried to extort from
him a promise that he would abstain from preaching; but he was convinced that he was divinely
set apart and commissioned to be a teacher of righteousness, and he was fully determined to
obey God rather than man. He was brought before several tribunals, laughed at, caressed, reviled,
menaced, but in vain. He was facetiously told that he was quite right in thinking that he ought
not to hide his gift; but that his real gift was skill in repairing old kettles. He was compared
to Alexander the coppersmith. He was told that, if he would give up preaching, he should be
instantly liberated. He was warned that, if he persisted in disobeying the law, he would be
liable to banishment; and that if he were found in England after a certain time, his neck would
be stretched. His answer was, "If you let me out to-day, I will preach again to-morrow." Year
after year he lay patiently in a dungeon, compared with which the worst prison now to be found
in the island is a palace. His fortitude is the more extraordinary because his domestic feelings
were unusually strong. Indeed, he was considered by his stern brethren as somewhat too fond
and indulgent a parent. He had several small children, and among them a daughter who was blind,
and whom he loved with peculiar tenderness. He could not, he said, bear even to let the wind
blow on her; and now she must suffer cold and hunger, she must beg, she must be beaten. "Yet,"
he added, "I must, I must do it." While he lay in prison, he could do nothing in the way of
his old trade for the support of his family. He determined, therefore, to take up a new trade.
He learned to make long tagged thread-laces; and many thousands of these articles were furnished
by him to the hawkers. While his hands were thus busied, he had other employment for his mind
and his lips. He gave religious instruction to his fellow-captives, and formed from among them
a little flock, of which he was himself the pastor. He studied indefatigably the few books
which he possessed. His two chief companions were the Bible and Fox's "Book of Martyrs." His
knowledge of the Bible was such that he might have been called a living concordance; and on
the margin of his copy of the "Book of Martyrs" are still legible the ill-spelled lines of
doggerel in which he expressed his reverence for the brave sufferers, and his implacable enmity
to the mystical Babylon.

At length he began to write, and though it was some time before he discovered where his strength
lay, his writings were not unsuccessful. They were coarse, indeed, but they showed a keen mother-wit,
a great command of the homely mother-tongue, an intimate knowledge of the English Bible, and
a vast and dearly bought spiritual experience. They, therefore, when the corrector of the press
had improved the syntax and the spelling, were well received by the humbler class of Dissenters.

Much of Bunyan's time was spent in controversy. He wrote sharply against the Quakers, whom
he seems always to have held in utter abhorrence. It is, however, a remarkable fact that he
adopted one of their peculiar fashions; his practice was to write, not November or December,
but eleventh month and twelfth month.

He wrote against the liturgy of the Church of England. No two things, according to him, had
less affinity than the form of prayer and the spirit of prayer. Those, he said with much point,
who have most of the spirit of prayer are all to be found in jail; and those who have most
zeal for the form of prayer are all to be found at the ale-house. The doctrinal articles, on
the other hand, he warmly praised, and defended against some Arminian clergymen who had signed
them. The most acrimonious of all his works is his answer to Edward Fowler, afterward bishop
of Gloucester, an excellent man, but not free from the taint of Pelagianism.

Bunyan had also a dispute with some of the chiefs of the sect to which he belonged. He doubtless
held with perfect sincerity the distinguishing tenet of that sect, but he did not consider
that tenet as one of high importance, and willingly joined in communion with pious Presbyterians
and Independents. The sterner Baptists, therefore, loudly pronounced him a false brother. A
controversy arose which long survived the original combatants. In our own time the cause which
Bunyan had defended with rude logic and rhetoric against Kiffin and Danvers was pleaded by
Robert Hall with an ingenuity and eloquence such as no polemical writer has ever surpassed.

During the years which immediately followed the Restoration Bunyan's confinement seems to have
been strict; but as the passions of 1660 cooled, as the hatred with which the Puritans had
been regarded while their reign was recent gave place to pity, he was less and less harshly
treated. The distress of his family, and his own patience, courage, and piety, softened the
hearts of his persecutors. Like his own Christian in the cage, he found protectors even among
the crowd of Vanity Fair. The bishop of the diocese, Dr. Barlow, is said to have interceded
for him. At length the prisoner was suffered to pass most of his time beyond the walls of the
jail, on condition, as it should seem, that he remained within the town of Bedford.

He owed his complete liberation to one of the worst acts of one of the worst governments that
England has ever seen. In 1671 the Cabal was in power. Charles II had concluded the treaty
by which he bound himself to set up the Roman Catholic religion in England. The first step
which he took toward that end was to annul, by an unconstitutional exercise of his prerogative,
all the penal statutes against the Roman Catholics; and in order to disguise his real design,
he annulled at the same time the penal statutes against Protestant Non-conformists. Bunyan
was consequently set at large. In the first warmth of his gratitude, he published a tract in
which he compared Charles to that humane and generous Persian king who, though not himself
blessed with the light of the true religion, favored the chosen people, and permitted them,
after years of captivity, to rebuild their beloved temple. To candid men, who consider how
much Bunyan had suffered, and how little he could guess the secret designs of the court, the
unsuspicious thankfulness with which he accepted the precious boon of freedom will not appear
to require any apology.

Before he left his prison he had begun the book which has made his name immortal. The history
of that book is remarkable. The author was, as he tells us, writing a treatise, in which he
had occasion to speak of the stages of the Christian progress. He compared that progress, as
many others had compared it, to a pilgrimage. Soon his quick wit discovered innumerable points
of similarity which had escaped his predecessors. Images came crowding on his mind faster than
he could put them into words: quagmires and pits, steep hills, dark and horrible glens, soft
vales, sunny pastures; a gloomy castle, of which the courtyard was strewn with the skulls and
bones of murdered prisoners; a town all bustle and splendor, like London on the Lord Mayor's
Day; and the narrow path, straight as a rule could make it, running on uphill and down hill,
through city and through wilderness, to the Black River and the Shining Gate. He had found
out--as most people would have said, by accident; as he would doubtless have said, by the guidance
of Providence--where his powers lay. He had no suspicion, indeed, that he was producing a masterpiece.
He could not guess what place his allegory would occupy in English literature, for of English
literature he knew nothing. Those who suppose him to have studied the "Fairy Queen," might
easily be confuted, if this were the proper place for a detailed examination of the passages
in which the two allegories have been thought to resemble each other. The only work of fiction,
in all probability, with which he could compare his pilgrim, was his old favorite, the legend
of Sir Bevis of Southampton. He would have thought it a sin to borrow any time from the serious
business of his life, from his expositions, his controversies, and his lace tags, for the purpose
of amusing himself with what he considered merely as a trifle. It was only, he assures us,
at spare moments that he returned to the House Beautiful, the Delectable Mountains, and the
Enchanted Ground. He had no assistance. Nobody but himself saw a line till the whole was complete.
He then consulted his pious friends. Some were pleased. Others were much scandalized. It was
a vain story, a mere romance about giants, and lions, and goblins, and warriors, sometimes
fighting with monsters, and sometimes regaled by fair ladies in stately palaces. The loose,
atheistical wits at Will's might write such stuff to divert the painted Jezebels of the court;
but did it become a minister of the Gospel to copy the evil fashions of the world? There had
been a time when the cant of such fools would have made Bunyan miserable. But that time was
passed, and his mind was now in a firm and healthy state. He saw that in employing fiction
to make truth clear and goodness attractive, he was only following the example which every
Christian ought to propose to himself; and he determined to print.

The "Pilgrim's Progress" stole silently into the world. Not a single copy of the first edition
is known to be in existence. The year of publication has not been ascertained. It is probable
that during some months, the little volume circulated only among poor and obscure sectaries.
But soon the irresistible charm of a book which gratified the imagination of the reader with
all the action and scenery of a fairy tale, which exercised his ingenuity by setting him to
discover a multitude of curious analogies, which interested his feelings for human beings,
frail like himself, and struggling with temptations from within and from without, which every
moment drew a smile from him by some stroke of quaint yet simple pleasantry, and nevertheless
left on his mind a sentiment of reverence for God and of sympathy for man, began to produce
its effect. In Puritanical circles, from which plays and novels were strictly excluded, that
effect was such as no work of genius, though it were superior to the "Iliad," to "Don Quixote,"
or to "Othello," can ever produce on a mind accustomed to indulge in literary luxury. In 1668
came forth a second edition, with additions; and then the demand became immense. In the four
following years the book was reprinted six times. The eighth edition, which contains the last
improvements made by the author, was published in 1682, the ninth in 1684, the tenth in 1685.
The help of the engraver had early been called in, and tens of thousands of children looked
with terror and delight on execrable copperplates, which represented Christian thrusting his
sword into Apollyon or writhing in the grasp of Giant Despair. In Scotland and in some of the
colonies, the Pilgrim was even more popular than in his native country. Bunyan has told us,
with very pardonable vanity, that in New England his Dream was the daily subject of the conversation
of thousands, and was thought worthy to appear in the most superb binding. He had numerous
admirers in Holland and among the Huguenots of France. With the pleasure, however, he experienced
some of the pains of eminence. Knavish booksellers put forth volumes of trash under his name,
and envious scribblers maintained it to be impossible that the poor ignorant tinker should
really be the author of the book which was called his.

He took the best way to confound both those who counterfeited him and those slandered him.
He continued to work the gold-field which he had discovered, and to draw from it new treasures;
not, indeed, with quite such ease and in quite such abundance as when the precious soil was
still virgin, but yet with success which left all competition far behind. In 1684 appeared
the second part of the "Pilgrim's Progress." It was soon followed by the "Holy War," which,
if the "Pilgrim's Progress" did not exist, would be the best allegory that ever was written.

Bunyan's place in society was now very different from what it had been. There had been a time
when many Dissenting ministers, who could talk Latin and read Greek, had affected to treat
him with scorn. But his fame and influence now far exceeded theirs. He had so great an authority
among the Baptists that he was popularly called Bishop Bunyan. His episcopal visitations were
annual. From Bedford he rode every year to London, and preached there to large and attentive
congregations. From London he went his circuit through the country, animating the zeal of his
brethren, collecting and distributing alms, and making up quarrels. The magistrates seem in
general to have given him little trouble. But there is reason to believe that, in the year
1685, he was in some danger of again occupying his old quarters in Bedford jail. In that year,
the rash and wicked enterprise of Monmouth gave the government a pretext for prosecuting the
Non-conformists; and scarcely one eminent divine of the Presbyterian, Independent, or Baptist
persuasion remained unmolested. Baxter was in prison; Howe was driven into exile; Henry was
arrested. Two eminent Baptists, with whom Bunyan had been engaged in controversy, were in great
peril and distress. Danvers was in danger of being hanged, and Kiffin's grandsons were actually
hanged. The tradition is, that during those evil days, Bunyan was forced to disguise himself
as a wagoner, and that he preached to his congregation at Bedford in a smock-frock, with a
cart-whip in his hand. But soon a great change took place. James the Second was at open war
with the Church, and found it necessary to court the Dissenters. Some of the creatures of the
government tried to secure the aid of Bunyan. They probably knew that he had written in praise
of the indulgence of 1672, and therefore hoped that he might be equally pleased with the indulgence
of 1687. But fifteen years of thought, observation, and commerce with the world had made him
wiser. Nor were the cases exactly parallel. Charles was a professed Protestant; James was a
professed papist. The object of Charles's indulgence was disguised; the object of James's indulgence
was patent. Bunyan was not deceived. He exhorted his hearers to prepare themselves by fasting
and prayer for the danger which menaced their civil and religious liberties, and refused even
to speak to the courtier who came down to remodel the corporation of Bedford, and who, as was
supposed, had it in charge to offer some municipal dignity to the bishop of the Baptists.

Bunyan did not live to see the Revolution. In the Summer of 1688 he undertook to plead the
cause of a son with an angry father, and at length prevailed on the old man not to disinherit
the young one. This good work cost the benevolent intercessor his life. He had to ride through
heavy rain. He came drenched to his lodgings on Snow Hill, was seized with a violent fever,
and died in a few days. He was buried in Bunhill Fields; and the spot where he lies is still
regarded by the Non-conformists with a feeling which seems scarcely in harmony with the stern
spirit of their theology. Many Puritans, to whom the respect paid by Roman Catholics to the
relics and tombs of saints seemed childish or sinful, are said to have begged with their dying
breath that their coffins might be placed as near as possible to the coffin of the author of
the "Pilgrim's Progress."

The fame of Bunyan during his life, and during the century which followed his death, was indeed
great, but was almost entirely confined to religious families of the middle and lower classes.
Very seldom was he, during that time, mentioned with respect by any writer of great literary
eminence. Young coupled his prose with the poetry of the wretched D'Urfey. In the "Spiritual
Quixote," the adventures of Christian are ranked with those of Jack the Giant-killer and John
Hickathrift. Cowper ventured to praise the great allegorist, but did not venture to name him.
It is a significant circumstance that, till a recent period, all the numerous editions of the
"Pilgrim's Progress" were evidently meant for the cottage and the servants' hall. The paper,
the printing, the plates were all of the meanest description. In general, when the educated
minority and the common people differ about the merit of a book, the opinion of the educated
minority finally prevails. The "Pilgrim's Progress" is perhaps the only book about which, after
the lapse of a hundred years, the educated minority has come over to the opinion of the common
people.--MACAULAY.

    O king without a crown,
    O priest above the line
    Whose course is through the ages down,
    What wondrous eyes were thine!

    As in the sea of glass,
    So pictured in those eyes
    Were all the things that come to pass
    Beneath, above the skies;

    Between two worlds the way,
    The sun, the cloud, the snares,
    The pilgrim's progress day by day,
    The gladness God prepares.

    Enough, enough this vision,
    By thee built into story,
    To crown thy life by Heaven's decision,
    With monumental glory.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXXV.

MADAME ROLAND

(BORN 1754--DIED 1793.)

THE MOST REMARKABLE WOMAN OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION--THE IPHIGENIA OF FRANCE.

Marie-Jeanne Phlipon, for this was her maiden name, was born in Paris in the year 1754. Her
father was an engraver. The daughter does not delineate him in her memoirs with such completeness
as she has sketched her mother, but we can infer from the fleeting glimpses which she gives
of him that he was a man of very considerable intellectual and physical force, but also of
most irregular tendencies, which in his later years debased him to serious immoralities. He
was a superior workman, discontented with his lot. He sought to better it by speculative operations
outside his vocation. As his daughter expresses it, "he went in pursuit of riches, and met
with ruin on his way." She also remarks of him, "that he could not be said to be a good man,
but he had a great deal of what is called honor."

Her mother was evidently an angelic woman. Many passages in the memoirs indicate that she possessed
uncommon intellectual endowments; but so exceeding were her virtues that, when her face rose
to the daughter's view in the night of after years, and gazed compassionately on her through
prison bars, the daughter, writing in the shadow of death, presents her in the light only of
purest, noblest womanhood.

Marie was so precocious that she could not remember when she was unable to read. The first
book she remembered reading was the Old and New Testament. Her early religious teaching was
most sufficient, and was submitted to by a mind which, although practical and realistic, was
always devout and somewhat affected by mystical, vague, and enthusiastic tendencies. She was
a prodigy in the catechism, and was an agent of terror to the excellent priest who taught her
and the other children, for she frequently confounded him in open class by questions which
have vexed persons of maturest years. She was taught the harp, the piano, the guitar, and the
violin. She was proficient in dancing. Such was her astonishing aptitude in all studies that
she says, "I had not a single master who did not appear as much flattered by teaching me as
I was grateful for being taught; nor one who, after attending me for a year or two, was not
the first to say that his instructions were no longer necessary." It was her habit in childhood,
after she had read any book, to lay it aside and reconstruct its contents by the processes
of a most powerful memory, and while doing so, to meditate upon, analyze, and debate with it
in the severest spirit of criticism and controversy.

When nine years of age she was reading Appian, the romances of Scarron, which disgusted and
did not taint her; the memoirs of De Paites and of Madame de Montpensier. She mastered a treatise
on heraldry so thoroughly that she corrected her father one day when she saw him engraving
a seal inconformably to some minor rule of that art. She essayed a book on contracts, but it
did not entice her to a complete perusal.

She took great delight in Plutarch, which she often carried to church instead of her missal.
She read the "Candide" of Voltaire, Fénelon on the education of girls, and Locke on that of
children. During all this time her mind was troubled by those unanswerable and saddening reflections
upon those recondite theological subjects which often torture such children, and which grown
up people are too often so forgetful of their own childhood that they fail to sympathize with
them. She regarded with disapproval the transformation of the Devil into a serpent, and thought
it cruel in God to permit it. Referring to the time when her first communion drew near, she
writes: "I felt a sacred terror take possession of my soul."

She became profoundly humble and inexpressibly timid. As she grew older she learned that she
was to live in a world of errors, sorrows, and sins, and the mere knowledge of their existence,
by some peculiar process of her wonderful mind, seemed to be the signal for their combined
attack upon her soul. She watched her thoughts until forbidden topics were generated in her
mind by the very act of watchfulness. She then regarded herself as an accomplice with every
profane image which invaded her innocent imagination. She subjected herself to physical mortifications
and austerities of a whimsical yet severe character. She aspired to the fate of holy women
of old, who had suffered martyrdom, and she finally resolved to enter a convent. She was then
eleven years old. She was placed in such an institution ostensibly for further education, but
with the intention on her part there to always remain. It was like entering the vestibule of
heaven. She records of her first night there: "I lifted up my eyes to the heavens; they were
unclouded and serene; I imagined that I felt the presence of the Deity smiling on my sacrifice,
and already offering me a reward in the consolatory peace of a celestial abode."

She was always an acute observer and a caustic commentator, and she soon discovered that the
cloister is not necessarily a celestial abode, and that its inmates do not inevitably enjoy
consolatory peace. She found feminine spite there of the same texture with that wreaked by
worldly women upon each other, and she notes the cruel taunts which good, old, ugly, and learned
sister Sophia received from some stupid nuns, who, she says, "were fond of exposing her defects
because they did not possess her talents." But her devotional fervor did not abate. She fainted
under the feeling of awe in the act of her first communion, for she literally believed that
her lips touched the very substance of her God, and thereafter she was long brooded over by
that perfect peace which passeth understanding.

She remained there a year, when her destiny was changed by some domestic events which made
her services necessary to her parents, and she returned home. Her resolution was unchanged,
and she read and meditated deeply upon the Philotee of Saint Francis de Sales, upon the manual
of Saint Augustine, and upon the polemical writings of Bossuet. But by this time the leaven
of dissent began to work in that powerful intellect, for she remarks upon these works, that
"favorable as they are to the cause which they defended, they sometimes let me into the secret
of objections which might be made to it, and set me to scrutinizing the articles of my faith;"
and she states that "this was the first step toward a skepticism at which I was destined to
arrive after having been successively Jansenist, Cartesian, Stoic, and Deist." By this skepticism
she doubtless meant merely skepticism as to creeds, for in her memoirs, written in daily expectation
of death, and in most intense self-communion, she writes upon the great subjects of immortality,
Deity, and providence in language of astonishing eloquence. "Can," she writes, "can the sublime
idea of a Divine Creator, whose providence watches over the world, the immateriality of the
soul and its immortality, that consolatory hope of persecuted virtue, be nothing more than
amiable and splendid chimeras? But in how much obscurity are these difficult problems involved?
What accumulated objections arise when we wish to examine them with mathematical rigor? No!
it is not given to the human mind to behold these truths in the full day of perfect evidence;
but why should the man of sensibility repine at not being able to demonstrate what he feels
to be true? In the silence of the closet and the dryness of discussion, I can agree with the
atheist or the materialist as to the insolubility of certain questions; but in the contemplation
of nature my soul soars aloft to the, vivifying principle which animates it, to the intellect
which pervades it, and to the goodness which makes it so glorious. Now, when immense walls
separate me from all I love, when all the evils of society have fallen upon us together, as
if to punish us for having desired its greatest blessings, I see beyond the limits of life
the reward of our sacrifices. How, in what manner, I can not say. I only feel that so it ought
to be." She read incongruously. Condillac, Voltaire, the Lives of the Fathers, Descartes, Saint
Jerome, Don Quixote, Pascal, Montesquieu, Burlamaqui, and the French dramatists, were read,
annotated, and commented on. She gives an appalling list of obsolete devotional books, which
she borrowed of a pious abbé, and returned with marginal notes which shocked him. She read
the Dictionnaire Philosophique, Diderot, D'Alembert, Raynal, Holbach, and took delight in the
Epistles of Saint Paul. She was, while studying Malebranche and Descartes, so convinced, that
she considered her kitten, when it mewed, merely a piece of mechanism in the exercise of its
functions. The chilling negations and arid skepticism of Helvetius shocked her, and she writes:
"I felt myself possessed of a generosity of soul of which he denied the existence." She concluded
at this time that a republic is the true form of government, and that every other form is in
derogation of man's natural rights.

She mastered Clairaut's geometry by copying the book, plates, and all, from beginning to end.
She read Pufendorf's folio on the law of nature. She learned English, and read the life of
Cromwell. She read the great French preachers, Bossuet, Flechier, Bourdaloue, and Massillon.
She was vexed by the terrorism of their arguments. She thought that they overrated the importance
of the devil. She did not believe him to be as powerful as they feared. She thought that they
might teach oftener what seemed to her the potent element of Christian faith--love--and leave
the devil out sometimes, and so she herself wrote a sermon on brotherly love, with which that
personage had nothing to do, and in which his name was not even mentioned. She also read the
Protestant preachers--Blair especially. She entangled herself in the acute skepticism of Bayle.

She seemed possessed of one of those assimilative intellects which extract by glances the substance
from a book as the flash of lightning demagnetizes the lodestone. Her acquisitions were consequently
immense. Though very yielding in the grasp of the mighty thinkers whom she encountered, yet
she read them in the spirit of criticism, controversy, and dissent.

She was, nevertheless, the farthest in the world from becoming a literary dragon. All this
did not impair the freshness of girlhood. She was meek and pure. Passages in her autobiography,
which I can not repeat, yet which ought to be read, establish this. She was throughout entirely
domestic. She did the marketing, cooked the food; nursed her mother; kept a sharp eye on the
apprentices; nearly fell in love, for when the young painter, Taborel, who was twenty, and
blushed like a girl, visited her father's workshop, she always had a crayon or something else
to seek there, but at the sight of him ran away trembling, without saying a word.

It was not difficult for her to be both scholar and housewife. Writing in after years, of domestic
cares, she says: "I never could comprehend how the attention of a woman who possesses method
and activity can be engrossed by them.... Nothing is wanting but a proper distribution of employments,
and a small share of vigilance.... People who know how to employ themselves always find leisure
moments, while those who do nothing are in want of time for any thing.... I think that a wife
should keep the linen and clothes in order, or cause them to be so kept; nurse her children;
give directions concerning the cookery, or superintend it herself, but without saying a word
about it, and with such command of her temper, and such management of her time, as may leave
her the means of talking of other matters, and of pleasing no less by her good humor than by
the graces natural to her sex.... It is nearly the same in the government of states as of families.
Those famous housewives who are always expatiating on their labors are sure either to leave
much in arrears, or to render themselves tiresome to every one around them; and, in like manner,
those men in power so talkative and so full of business, only make a mighty bustle about the
difficulties they are in because too awkward or ignorant to remove them."

An acquaintance which one of her uncles, who was an ecclesiastic, had with an upper servant
of the royal household, enabled her to spend some days at the palace of Versailles. She was
lodged with the servants, and enjoyed the servant's privilege of seeing every thing and sparing
nothing. Royalty was never put in the focus of eyes so critical. Her comments upon this visit
are very brief. She expresses her detestation of what she saw, saying, "It gives me the feeling
of injustice, and obliges me every moment to contemplate absurdity."

The studies and experiences which have been described bring us to her fifteenth year. She was
then a beautiful woman. In her memoirs she declines to state how she looked when a child, saying
that she knows a better time for such a sketch. In describing herself at fifteen, she says:
"I was five feet four inches tall; my leg was shapely; my hips high and prominent; my chest
broad and nobly decorated; my shoulders flat; ... my face had nothing striking in it except
a great deal of color, and much softness and expression; my mouth is a little too wide--you
may see prettier every day--but you will see none with a smile more tender and engaging; my
eyes are not very large; the color of the iris is hazel; my hair is dark brown; my nose gave
me some uneasiness; I thought it a little too flat at the end.... It is only since my beauty
has faded that I have known what it has been in its bloom. I was then unconscious of its value,
which was probably augmented by my ignorance."

That she understated her personal charms, the concurrent admiration of contemporary men and
women fully attests. Her physical beauty was marvelous, and when great men were subjected to
its influence, to the imperial functions of her intellect, and to the persuasions of an organization
exceedingly spiritual and magnetic, it is no wonder that her influence, domestic woman, housewife,
as she always was, became so effectual over them.

Let me here warn my hearers not to forestall this woman in their judgments. She was not a manlike
female. No better wife ever guided her husband anonymously by her intuitions, or assisted him
by her learning. In the farm house and in the palace she was as wifely and retiring as any
of the excellent women who have been the wives of American statesmen. Every one knew her abilities
and her stupendous acquirements, and she felt them herself, but, notwithstanding, she never
would consent to write a line for publication and avow it as her own, and never did, until
that time when her husband was an outlaw, when her child was torn from her, when she herself
stood in the shadow of the guillotine, and writhed under the foulest written and spoken calumnies
that can torture outraged womanhood into eloquence. She then wrote, in twenty-six days, her
immortal Appeal to Posterity, and those stirring letters and papers incident to her defense,
from which some extracts have been here presented. She was mistress of a faultless style. Her
command over the resources of her language was despotic. She could give to French prose an
Italian rhythmus. She had wit and imagination--a reasoning imagination. She was erudite. Probably
no woman ever lived better entitled to a high position in literature. But she never claimed
it. She holds it now only as a collateral result of her defense in the struggle in which her
life was the stake, and in which she lost. She says: "Never, however, did I feel the smallest
temptation to become an author. I perceived at a very early period that a woman who acquires
this title loses far more than she gains. She forfeits the affections of the male sex, and
provokes the criticisms of her own. If her works be bad, she is ridiculed, and not without
reason; if good, her right to them is disputed; or if envy be forced to acknowledge the best
part to be her own, her character, her morals, her conduct, and her talents are scrutinized
in such a manner that the reputation of her genius is fully counterbalanced by the publicity
given to her defects. Besides, my happiness was my chief concern, and I never saw the public
intermeddle with that of any one without marring it.... During twelve years of my life I shared
in my husband's labors as I participated in his repasts, because one was as natural to me as
the other. If any part of his works happened to be quoted in which particular graces of style
were discovered, or if a flattering reception was given to any of the academic trifles, which
he took a pleasure in transmitting to the learned societies, of which he was a member, I partook
of his satisfaction without reminding him that it was my own composition.... If during his
administration an occasion occurred for the expression of great and striking truths, I poured
forth my whole soul upon the paper, and it was but natural that its effusions should be preferable
to the laborious teemings of a secretary's brain. I loved my country. I was an enthusiast in
the cause of liberty. I was unacquainted with any interest or any passions that could enter
into competition with that enthusiasm; my language, consequently, could not but be pure and
pathetic, as it was that of the heart and of truth.... Why should not a woman act as secretary
to her husband without depriving him of any portion of his merit? It is well known that ministers
can not do every thing themselves; and, surely, if the wives of those of the old governments,
or even of the new, had been capable of making draughts of letters, of official dispatches,
or of proclamations, their time would have been better employed than in intriguing first for
one paramour and then for another." "An old coxcomb, enamored of himself, and vain of displaying
the slender stock of science he has been so long in acquiring, might be in the habit of seeing
me ten years together without suspecting that I could do more than cast up a bill or cut out
a shirt."

Suitors, she writes, came numerously from her fifteenth year. She marches them off en masse
in her memoirs. As is the custom in France, the first overture was made to her father, and
usually by letter. Her music teacher was her first devotee. He was followed by her dancing
master, who, as a propitiatory preparation had a wen cut out of his cheek; then came a wealthy
butcher; then a man of rank; then a dissolute physician, from marrying whom she narrowly escaped;
then a jeweler, and many others. The merits of these gentlemen--particularly those of the energetic
butcher---were warmly commended by their female friends, who, in France, are brokers in this
business on a very extensive scale. It is a unique proof of her ascendancy over every person
near her that the letters which her father received, requesting his permission to address her,
were submitted by him to her to draft the answer he was to send. So she placed herself loco
parentis, and wrote the most paternal letters of refusal; all of which her father dutifully
copied and sent, with many a pang when she let riches and rank pass by her. The suitors were
dismissed, one and all, and she resumed her books and studies.

Her mother died in 1775. She became the mistress of the house. "Oh, say not so, say not so!" stammered
the tender-hearted Sultan, pressing his gentle darling to his bosom and closing her lips with
his own as if, by the very act, he would have prevented her soul from escaping and flying
away.

And the cannons may continue thundering on the shores of the Bosphorus, the Imperial Ciauses may
summon the host to arms with the blasts of their trumpets, the camp of a whole nation may wait and
wait on the plains of Scutari, but Sultan Achmed is far too happy in the embraces of Adsalis
to think even for a moment of seizing the banner of the Prophet and leading his bloodthirsty battalions
to face the dangers of the battlefield.

The only army that he now has eyes for is the army of the odalisks and slave-girls, who seize their
tambourines and mandolines, and weave the light dance around the happy imperial couple, singing
sweet songs of enchantment, while outside through the streets of Stambul gun-carriages are
rattling along, and the mob, in a frenzy of enthusiasm, clamours for a war of extermination
against the invading Shiites.

Meanwhile a fine hubbub is going on around the kettle of the first Janissary regiment. These
kettles, by the way, play a leading part in the history of the Turkish Empire. Around them assemble
the Janissaries when any question of war or plunder arises, or when
they demand the head of a detested pasha, or when they wish to see
the banner of the Prophet unfurled; and so terrible were these kettles
on all such occasions that the anxious viziers and pashas, when driven
into a corner, were compelled to fill these same kettles either with
gold pieces or with their own blood.

An impatient group of Janissaries was standing round their kettle, which was placed on the top of
a lofty iron tripod, and amongst them we notice Halil Patrona and Musli. Both were wearing
the Janissary dress, with round turbans in which a black heron's plume was fastened (only the
officers wore white feathers), with naked calves only half-concealed by the short, bulgy pantaloons
which scarce covered the knee.

There was very little of the huckster of the day before yesterday in Halil's appearance now. His
bold and gallant bearing, his resolute mode of speech, and the bountiful
way in which he scattered the piastres which he had received from
Janaki, had made him a prime favourite among his new comrades.

Musli, on the other hand, was still drunk. With desperate self-forgetfulness he had been drinking
the health of his friend all night long, and never ceased bawling out before his old cronies
in front of the tent of the Janissary Aga that if the Aga, whose name was Hassan, was indeed
as valiant a man as they tried to make out, let him come forth from beneath his tent and not
think so much of his soft bearskin bed, or else let him give his white heron plume to Halil
Patrona and let him lead them against the enemy.

The Janissary Aga could hear this bellowing quite plainly, but he also could hear the Janissary
guard in front of the tent laughing loudly at the fellow and making
all he said unintelligible.

Meanwhile a troop of mounted ciauses was approaching the kettle of the first Janissary regiment
in whose leader we recognise Halil Pelivan. Allah had been with him--he was now raised to the
rank of a ciaus-officer.

The giant stood among the Janissaries and inquired in a voice of thunder:

"Which of you common Janissary fellows goes by the name of Halil Patrona?"

Patrona

stepped forth.

"Methinks, Halil Pelivan," said he, "it does not require much brain-splitting on your part to
recognise me."

"Where is your comrade Musli?"

"Can you not give me a handle to my name, you dog of a ciaus?" roared Musli. "I am a gentleman
I tell you. So long as you were a Janissary, you were a gentleman too. But now you are only a
dog of a ciaus. What business have you, I should like to know, in Begta's flower-garden?"

"To root out weeds. The pair of you, bound tightly together, must follow me."

"Look ye, my friends!" cried Musli, turning to his comrades, "that
man is drunk, dead drunk.

He can scarce stand upon his feet. How dare you say," continued he, turning towards Pelivan--"how
dare you say that two Janissaries, two of the flowers from Begta's garden, are to follow you when
the banners of warfare are already waving before us?"

"I am commanded by the Kapu-Kiaja to bring you before him."

"Say not so, you mangy dog you! Let him come for us himself if he has anything to say to us! What,
my friends! am I not right in saying that the Kapu-Kiaja, if he did his duty, ought to be here
with us, in the camp and on the battlefield? and that it is no business of ours to dance attendance
upon him? Am I not right? Let him come hither!"

This sentiment was greeted with an approving howl.

"Let him come hither if he wants to talk to a Janissary!" cried many voices. "Who ever heard
of summoning a Janissary away from his camp?"

It was as much as Pelivan could do to restrain his fury.

"You two are murderers," said he, "you have killed the Sultan's Berber-Bashi."

At this there was a general outburst of laughter. Everybody knew that already. Musli had told the
story hundreds of times with all sorts of variations. He had described to them how Halil had slain
Ali Kermesh with a single blow of his fist, and how the latter's jaw had suddenly fallen and
collapsed into a corner, all of which had seemed very comical indeed to the Janissaries.

So five or six of them, all speaking together, began to heckle and
cross-question Pelivan.

"Are there no more barbers in Stambul that you make such a fuss over this particular one?"

"What an infamous thing to demand the lives of a couple of Janissaries for the sake of a single
beard-scraper!"

"May you and your Kapu-Kiaja have no other pastime in Paradise than the shaving of innumerable
beards!"

At last Patrona stepped forth and begged his comrades to let him have his say in the matter.

"Hearken
now, Pelivan!" began he, "you and I are adversaries I know very well, nor do I care a straw
that it is so. I am not palavering now with you because I want to get out of a difficulty, but
simply because I want to send you back to the Kiaja with a sensible answer which I am quite sure
you are incapable of hitting upon yourself. Well, I freely admit that I did kill Ali Kermesh,
killed him single-handed. Nobody helped me to do the deed. And now I have thrown in my lot with
the Janissaries, and here I stand where it has pleased Allah to place me, that I may pay with
my own life for the life I have taken if it seem good to Him so to
ordain.

I am quite ready to die and glorify His name thereby. His Will be done! Let the honourable
Kiaja therefore gird up his loins, and let all those great lords who repose in the shadow of
the Padishah draw their swords and come among us once for all. I and all my comrades, the whole
Janissary host in fact, are ready to fall on the field of battle one after another at the
bare wave of their hand, but there is not a single Janissary present who would bow his knee before
the executioner."

These words, uttered in a ringing, sonorous voice, were accompanied by thunders of applause
from the whole regiment, and during this tumult Musli endeavoured
to add a couple of words on his own account to the message already
delivered by Patrona.

"And just tell your master, the Kiaja," said he, "and all your white-headed grand viziers and
grey-bearded muftis, that if they do not bring the Sultan and the
banner of the Prophet into camp this very day, not a single one of
them will need a barber on the morrow, unless they would like their
heels well shaved in default of heads."

Pelivan meanwhile was looking steadily into Halil's eyes. There was such a malicious scorn in
his gaze that Halil involuntarily grasped the hilt of his sword.

"Fear not, Patrona!" cried he jeeringly, "Gül-Bejáze will never again be conducted into the Seraglio.
She and your father-in-law have been captured as they were trying to fly, and the unbelieving Greek cattle-dealer
has been thrown into the dungeon set apart for evil-doers. As for that woman whom you call your
wife, she has been put into the prison assigned to those shameless ones whom the gracious Sultan
has driven together from all parts of the realm, and kept in ward lest the virtue of his faithful
Mussulmans should be corrupted. There you will find her."

Patrona, like a furious tiger that has burst forth from its cage, at these words rushed from out
the ranks of his comrades. His sword flashed in his hand, and if Pelivan had been doubly as
big as he was, his mere size could not have saved him. But the leader of the ciauses straightway
put spurs to his horse, and laughing loudly galloped away with his ciauses, almost brushing
the enraged Halil as he passed, and when he had already trotted a safe distance away, he turned
round and with a scornful Ha, ha, ha! began hurling insults at the Janissaries, five or six of
whom had set out to follow him.

"Ha! he is mocking us!" exclaimed Musli, whereupon the Janissaries who stood nearest perceiving
that they should never be able to overtake him on foot, hastened to the nearest battery, wrested
a mortar from the topijis by force, and fired it upon the retreating ciauses. The discharged
twelve-pounder whistled about their heads and then fell far away in the midst of a bivouac where
a number of worthy Bosniaks were cooking their suppers, scattering the hot ashes into their
eyes, ricochetting thence very prettily into the pavilion of the Bostanji Bashi, two of whose
windows it knocked out, thence bounding three or four times into the air, terrifying several recumbent
groups in its passage, and trundling rapidly away over some level ground, till at last it rolled
into the booth of a glass-maker, and there smashed to atoms an incalculable
quantity of pottery.

Here Pelivan finally ran it to earth, seized it, hauled it off to the Kiaja, and duly delivered
the message of the Janissaries, together with the twelve-pound cannon-ball,
at the same time reminding him that it was an old habit of the Janissaries
to accompany their messages with similar little douceurs.

Pelivan had anticipated that the Kiaja would foam with rage at the news, and would have the offending
Janissary regiment decimated at the very least; but the Kiaja, instead of being angry, seemed
very much afraid. He saw in this presumptuous message a declaration of rebellion, and hurried
off to the Grand Vizier as fast as his legs could carry him, taking
the heavy twelve-pounder along with him.

Ibrahim perfectly comprehended what was said to him, and placing the cannon-ball in a box nicely
lined with velvet took it to the Seraglio, and when he got there sent for the Kizlar-Aga, placed
it in his hands, and commissioned him to deliver it to the Sultan.

"The Army," said he, "has sent this present to the most glorious Padishah. It is a treasure which
is worth nothing so long as it is in our possession; it only becomes precious when we pay
our debts with it, but it is downright damaging if we let others pay their debts to us therewith.
Say to the most puissant of Sultans that if he finds this one specimen too little, the Army is ready
to send him a lot more, and then it will choose neither me nor thee to be the bearer thereof."

The
Kizlar-Aga, who did not know what was in the box, took it forthwith into the Hall of Delight, and there
delivered it to Achmed together with the message.

The Sultan broke open the box in the presence of the Sultana Asseki, and on perceiving therein the
heavy cannon-ball at once understood Ibrahim's message.

He was troubled to the depths of his soul when he understood it. He was so good, so gentle to
everyone, he tried so hard to avoid injuring anybody, and yet everybody seemed to combine to
make him miserable! It seemed as though they envied him his sweet delights, and were determined
that he should find no repose even in the very bosom of his family.

He embraced and kissed the fair Sultana again and again, and stammered with tears in his eyes:

"Die then, my pretty flower! fade away! wither before my very eyes! Die if thou canst that at
least my heart may have nothing to long for!"

The Sultana threw herself in despair at his feet, with her dishevelled tresses waving all about
her, and encircling Achmed's knees with her white arms she besought him, sobbing loudly, not
to go to the camp, at any rate, not that day. Let at least the memory of the evil dreams she
had dreamed the night before pass away, she said.

But no, he could remain behind no longer. In vain were all weeping and wailing, however desperate.
The Sultan had made up his mind that he must go. One single moment only did he hesitate, for
one single moment the thought did occur to him: Am I a mere tool in the hands of my army, and
why do I wear a sword at all if I do not decapitate therewith those who rise in rebellion
against me? But he very soon let that thought escape. He knew he was not capable of translating
it into action. Many, very many, must needs die if he acted thus; perhaps it were better,
much better, for everybody if he submitted.

"There is nought for thee but to die, my pretty flower," he whispered to the Sultana, who, sobbing
and moaning, accompanied him to the very door of the Seraglio, and there he gently removed her
arms from his shoulders and hastened to the council-chamber.

Adsalis did not die however, but made her way by the secret staircase to the apartments of
the White Prince and found consolation with him.

"The Sultan did not yield to my arguments," she said to the White Prince, who took her at once
to his bosom, "he is off to the camp. If only I could hold him back for a single day the rebellion would
burst forth--and then his dominion would vanish and his successor would be yourself."

"Calm yourself, we may still gain time! Remind him through the Kizlar-Aga that he neglect not
the pricking of the Koran."

"You have spoken a word in season," replied Adsalis, and she immediately sent the Kizlar-Aga into
the council-chamber.

The Grand Vizier, the Kapudan Pasha, the Kiaja, the Chief Mufti, and the Sheik of the Aja Sophia,
Ispirizade, were assembled in council with the Sultan who had just ordered the Silihdar to gird
him with the sword of Mahomet.

"Most illustrious Padishah!" cried the Kizlar-Aga, throwing himself to the ground and hiding his
face in his hands, "the Sultana Asseki would have me remind thee that thou do not neglect
to ask counsel from Allah by the pricking of the Koran, before thou hast come to any resolution,
as was the custom of thine illustrious ancestors as often as they had to choose between peace
and war."

"Well said!" cried Achmed, and thereupon he ordered the chief mufti
to bring him the Alkoran which, in all moments of doubt, the Sultans
were wont to appeal to and consult by plunging a needle through its
pages, and then turning to the last leaf in which the marks of the
needle-point were visible.

Whatever words on this last page happened to be pricked were regarded as oracular and worthy
of all obedience.

On every table in the council-chamber stood an Alkoran--ten copies in one room. The binding of
one of these copies was covered with diamonds. This copy the Chief Mufti brought to the Sultan,
and gave into his hands the needle with which the august ceremony was to be accomplished.

Meanwhile Ibrahim glanced impatiently at the three magnificent clocks standing in the room, one
beside the other. They all pointed to a quarter to twelve. It was already late, and this ceremony of
the pricking of the Koran always took up such a lot of time.

The Sultan opened the book at the last page, pricked through by the
needle, and these were the words he read:

"He who fears the sword
will find the sword his enemy, and better a rust-eaten sword in the
hand than a brightly burnished one in a sheath."

"La illah il Allah! God is one!" said Achmed bowing his head and kissing the words of the Alkoran.
"Make ready my charger, 'tis the will of God."

The Kizlar-Aga returned with the news to Adsalis and the White Prince.

Even
the pricking of the Koran had gone contrary to their plans.

"Go and
remind the Sultan," said Adsalis, "that he cannot go to the wars without
the surem of victory;" and for the second time the Kizlar-Aga departed
to execute the commands of the Sultana.

The surem, by the way, is
a holy supplication which it is usual for the chief Imam to recite
in the mosques before the Padishah goes personally to battle, praying
that Allah will bless his arms with victory.

Now, because time was
pressing, it was necessary to recite this prayer in the chapel of
the Seraglio instead of in the mosque of St. Sophia. Ispirizade accordingly
began to intone the surem, but he spun it out so long and made such
a business of it, that it seemed as if he were bent on wasting time
purposely. By the time the devotion was over every clock in the Seraglio
had struck twelve.

Ibrahim hastened to the Sultan to press him to
embark as soon as possible in the ship that was waiting ready to convey
him and the White Prince to Scutari; but at the foot of the staircase,
in the outer court of the Seraglio where stood the Sultan's chargers
which were to take him through the garden kiosk to the sea-shore,
the way was barred by the Kizlar-Aga, who flung himself to the ground
before the Sultan, and grasping his horse's bridle began to cry with
all his might:

"Trample me, oh, my master, beneath the hoofs of thy
horses, yet listen to my words! The noontide hour has passed, and
the hours of the afternoon are unlucky hours for any undertaking.
The true Mussulman puts his hand to nothing on which the blessing
of Allah can rest when noon has gone. Trample on my dead body if thou
wilt, but say not that there was nobody who would have withheld thee
from the path of peril!"

The soul of Achmed III. was full of all
manner of fantastic sentiments. Faith, hope, and love, which make
others strong, had in him degenerated into superstition, frivolity,
and voluptuousness--already he was but half a man.

At the words of
the Kizlar-Aga he removed his foot from the stirrup in which he had
dreamily placed it with the help of the kneeling Rikiabdar, and said
in the tone of a man who has at last made up his mind:

"We will go
to-morrow."

Ibrahim was in despair at this fresh delay. He whispered
a few words in the ear of Izmail Aga, whereupon the latter scarce
waiting till the Sultan had remounted the steps, flung himself on
his horse and galloped as fast as he could tear towards Scutari.

Meanwhile
the Grand Vizier and the Chief Mufti continued to detain the Sultan
in the Divan, or council-chamber.

Three-quarters of an hour later
Izmail Aga returned and presented himself before the Sultan all covered
with dust and sweat.

"Most glorious Padishah!" he cried, "I have
just come from the host. Since dawn they have all been on their feet
awaiting thy arrival. If by evening thou dost not show thyself in
the camp, then so sure as God is one, the host will not remain in
Scutari but will come to Stambul."

The host is coming to Stambul!--that
was a word of terror.

And Achmed III. well understood what it meant.
Well did he remember the message which, three-and-twenty years before,
the host had sent to his predecessor, Sultan Mustafa, who would not
quit his harem at Adrianople to come to Stambul: "Even if thou wert
dead thou couldst come here in a couple of days!" And he also remembered
what had followed. The Sultan had been made to abdicate the throne
and he (Achmed) had taken his place. And now just the same sort of
tempest which had overthrown his predecessor was shaking the seat
of the mighty rock beneath his own feet.

"Mashallah! the will of
God be done!" exclaimed Achmed, kissing the sword of Muhammad, and
a quarter of an hour later he went on board the ship destined for
him with the banner of the Prophet borne before him.

In the Seraglio
all the clocks one after another struck one as four-and-twenty salvoes
announced that the Sultan with the banner of the Prophet had arrived
in the camp.

And the people of the East believe that the blessing
of Allah does not rest on the hour which marks the afternoon.

CHAPTER
VI.

THE BURSTING FORTH OF THE STORM.

A contrary wind was blowing
across the Bosphorus, so that it was not until towards the evening
that the Sultan arrived at Scutari, and disembarked there at his seaside
palace with his viziers, his princes, the Chief Mufti, and Ispirizade.

Though
everything had quieted down close at hand, all night long could be
heard, some distance off, in the direction of the camp, a murmuring
and a tumult, the cause of which nobody could explain.

More than
once the Grand Vizier sent fleet runners to the Aga of the Janissaries
to inquire what was the meaning of all that noise in the camp. Hassan
replied that he himself did not understand why they were so unruly
after they had heard the arrival of the Sultan and the sacred banner
everywhere proclaimed.

Shortly afterwards Ibrahim commanded him to
seize all those who would not remain quiet. Hassan accordingly laid
his hands on sundry who came conveniently in his way; but, for all
that, the rest would pay no heed to him, and the tumult began to extend
in the direction of Stambul also.

Towards midnight a ciaus reached
the Kiaja with the intelligence that a number of soldiers were coming
along from the direction of Tebrif, crying as they came that the army
of Küprilizade had been scattered to the winds by Shah Tamasip, and
that they themselves were the sole survivors of the carnage--that
was why the army round Stambul was chafing and murmuring.

The Kiaja
went at once in search of the Grand Vizier and told him of this terrible
rumour.

"Impossible!" exclaimed Ibrahim. "Küprilizade would not allow
himself to be beaten. Only a few days ago I sent him arms and reinforcements
which were more than enough to enable him to hold his own until the
main army should arrive.

The traveler, standing upon the stone seats of the Flavian amphitheater, looks down into the
arena, and peoples the Coliseum with the criminals and the innocent martyrs, shut out from
hope by its merciless walls and by a populace more merciless, and slain by thousands by wild
beasts and swordsmen and spearsmen, to make a Roman holiday. How complacently he felicitates
himself upon the assumption that modern times present nothing like this. But less than one
hundred years ago, the pen of a lawyer erected in France a statute which inclosed a kingdom
with its architectural horror, made one arena of an empire, and in one year drank up more blood
than sank into the sands of the Coliseum in centuries.

The revolutionary tribunal was in permanent session. Its trials were summary. It heard with
predetermination, and decided without evidence. It was the mere routine formality of death.
Proof often consisted solely in the identification of the person whose death had been predetermined.
Prostitutes sold acquittals, and revenged themselves by convictions. Paris now ruled France,
the Jacobins ruled Paris, and the mob ruled the Jacobins. They had pressed the Girondists,
those men of lofty genius and superb eloquence, from their high position into complicity with
crimes with which they had no sympathy, and this want of sympathy now became their crime. It
was resolved to destroy them. The mob of Paris again came forth. Devilish men and women again
crowded the assembly, and even took part in its deliberations. The act of accusation was passed,
and twenty-six of the leaders of the Gironde went from their places to the scaffold, where
they suffered death sublimely.

Madame Roland was also arrested. Her husband had fled from Paris. She was consigned to the
prison of St. Pelagie, and afterwards, after suffering the cruel mockery of a release, she
was imprisoned in the Conciergerie. This prison was the abiding place of assassins, thieves,
and all impurity. It was the anteroom to the scaffold, for incarceration there was an infallible
symptom of death. The inmates were crowded into rooms with merciless disregard of their relative
characters or antecedents. Madame Roland was first associated with the duchess of Grammont,
with a female pick-pocket, with a nun, with an insane woman, and with a street-walker. She
finally procured a cell to herself, which she made bloom with flowers. The prison was populous
with the most degraded of her sex. Yet she asserted here the same marvelous ascendancy which
she had always possessed over her associates. The obscene outcries of lost women died away
when she approached. Her cell was an ark of safety for any dove seeking refuge from that deluge
of human sin. When she went into the courtyard the lost of her own sex gathered around her
with reverence, as around a tutelary and interceding angel, the same women who inflicted upon
Madame Du Barry, that princess of their caste, every torment which the malice of their sex
could inspire. Inmates and visitors crowded to the door of her cell, and she spoke to them
through its iron bars with eloquence, which increased as inspiring death drew near, of liberty,
country, equality, and of better days for France, but when they went away she would look through
her window to the sky, and, thinking of her hunted husband and sequestered little daughter,
cry and moan like the simplest wife and mother. Then she would send by surreptitious conveyance,
letters to refugee statesmen, which discussed the political situation as calmly as if written
upon the work-table of a secure and peaceful home. Calumny now busied itself to defile her.
Hebert, vilest of editors, flung the ordure of Pere Duchesne, vilest of newspapers, upon this
spotless woman, soon to be a saint, and sent the newsmen to cry the disgusting charges under
her prison windows, so that she heard them rendered in all the villainies of a language whose
under-drains have sources of vileness filthier than any other speech of man. She did not fear
death, but she did fear calumny. She had never delighted in any public display of her enormous
intellectual powers, and she had never made any such display. She had fixed the sentiment of
Lyons by an anonymous newspaper article, of which sixty thousand copies had been bought in
one day. She had written to the king a letter which drove her husband from power, and which,
when read by the people, compelled the king to restore him. She had written a dispatch to the
pope, claiming rights for certain French in Rome, in which the sanctity of his office and the
dignity of her country was respected, appealed to, and asserted. It is said that the state
papers were hers which persuaded William Pitt to abstain so long from intervention in the affairs
of France, in that time of English terror and hope, which furnished arguments to Fox, and which
drew from Burke those efforts of massive reason and gorgeous imagination which will endure
as long as the language itself. The counsel by which she had disentangled the perplexity of
wisest men had been repeated by them to applauding senates in tones less eloquent than those
by which they had been received, and triumph had followed. In none of these efforts did she
avow herself. She shrank from the honors which solicited her, though the world knew that they
came from her just as the world knows that moon and planets shine with the reflected light
of a hidden sun. But now, when thus assailed, she resolved to speak personally and for herself.
And so, sitting in her cell, she wrote in concealment and sent out by trusty hands, in cantos,
that autobiography in which she appealed to posterity, and by which posterity has been convinced.
She traced her career from earliest childhood down to the very brink of the grave into which
she was looking. Her intellectual, affectional and mental history are all there written with
a hand as steady and a mind as serene as though she were at home, with her baby sleeping in
its cradle by her side. Here are found history, philosophy, political science, poetry, and
ethics as they were received and given out again by one of the most receptive and imparting
minds ever possessed by woman. She knew that husband, home, child, and friends were not for
her any more, and that very soon she was to see the last of earth from beside the headsman
and from the block, and yet she turned from all regret and fear, and summoned the great assize
of posterity, "of foreign nations and the next ages," to do her justice. There was no sign
of fear. She looked as calmly on what she knew she must soon undergo as the spirit released
into never-ending bliss looks back upon the corporeal trammels from which it has just earned
its escape.

There are those who believe that a woman can not be great as she was and still be pure. These
ghouls of history will to the end of time dig into the graves where such queens lie entombed.
This woman has slept serenely for nearly a century. Sweet oblivion has dimmed with denial and
forgetfulness the obloquy which hunted her in her last days. Tears such as are shed for vestal
martyrs have been shed for her, and for all her faults she has the condonation of universal
sorrow. Nothing but the evil magic of sympathetic malice can restore these calumnies, and even
then they quickly fade away in the sunlight of her life. Nothing can touch her further. Dismiss
them with the exorcism of Carlyle, grown strangely tender and elegiac here. "Breathe not thy
poison breath! Evil speech! That soul is taintless; clear as the mirror sea." She was brought
to trial. The charge against her was, "That there has existed a horrible conspiracy against
the unity and indivisibility of the French people; that Marie Jeanne Phlipon, wife of Jean
Marie Roland has been one of the abettors or accomplices of that conspiracy." This was the
formula by which this woman was killed, and it simply meant that the Gironde had existed and
that she had sympathized with it.

She was racked with interrogations, and returned to the prison, weeping at the infernal imputations
which they cast upon her womanhood. On the day of her final trial she dressed herself in spotless
white, and let fall the voluminous masses of her brown, abundant hair. She was asked to betray
her husband by disclosing his hiding place. Her answer is full of wifely loyalty and dignity--"Whether
I know it or not I neither ought nor will say."

There was absolutely no evidence against her except of her affiliations with the Girondists.
The mockery ended by her condemnation to death within twenty-four hours, and this Iphigenia
of France went doomed back to her cell. Her return was awaited with dreadful anxiety by her
associates in confinement, who hoped against hope for her safe deliverance. As she passed through
the massive doors, she smiled, and drew her hand knife-like across her neck, and then there
went up a wail from all assembled there, the wail of titled women, of sacred nuns, of magdalens
and thieves, a dirge of inconsolable sorrow, of humanity weeping for its best beloved child.

Late in the afternoon of November 8, 1693, the rude cart which was to bear her to the guillotine
received her. She was dressed in white; her hair fell like a mantle to her knees. The chilly
air and her own courage brought back to her prison-blanched cheek the rosy hues of youth. She
spoke words of divine patience to the crowd which surged around her on her way and reviled
her. With a few low words she raised the courage of a terror-stricken old man who took with
her the same last journey, and made him smile. As the hours wore into twilight, she passed
the home of her youth, and perhaps longed to become a little child again and enter there and
be at rest. At the foot of the scaffold she asked for pen and paper to bequeath to posterity
the thoughts which crowded upon her; they were refused, and thus was one of the books of the
sibyls lost. She bowed to the great statue of Liberty near by, exclaiming, "O Liberté! comme
on t' a jouée!"[2] and gave her majestic form to the headsman to be bound upon the plank.

The knife fell, and the world darkened upon the death of the queenliest woman who ever lived
and loved.--EX-GOVERNOR C.K. DAVIS, of Minnesota.

    What though the triumph of thy fond forecasting
      Lingers till earth is fading from thy sight?
    Thy part with Him whose arms are everlasting,
      Is not forsaken in a hopeless night.

    Paul was begotten in the death of Stephen;
      Fruitful through time shall be that precious blood:
    No morning yet has ever worn to even
      And missed the glory of its crimson flood.

    There is a need of all the blood of martyrs,
      Forevermore the eloquence of God;
    And there is need of him who never barters
      His patience in that desert way the Master trod.

    What mean the strange, hard words, "through tribulation?"
      O Man of sorrows, only Thou canst tell,
    And such as in Thy life's humiliation,
      Have oft been with Thee, ay, have known Thee well.

    The failures of the world are God's successes,
      Although their coming be akin to pain;
    And frowns of Providence are but caresses,
      Prophetic of the rest sought long in vain. The baron, who is a very good authority on the subject,
having previously proved that every plan was laid in the duke's mind,
and Quatre Bras and Waterloo fully detailed, we may comprehend the value
of the sentence. It was the bold, trusting heart of the hero that made
him cheerful. He showed himself cheerful, too, at Waterloo. He was never
very jocose; but on that memorable 18th of June he showed a symptom of
it. He rode along the line and cheered men by his look and his face, and
they too cheered him. But, when the danger was over--when the 21,000
brave men of his own and the Prussian army lay stiffening in death--the
duke, who was so cheerful in the midst of his danger, covered his face
with his hands and wept. He asked for that friend, and he was slain; for
this, and a bullet had pierced his heart. The men who had devoted
themselves to death for their leader and their country had been blown to
pieces, or pierced with lances, or hacked with sabers, and lay, like
Ponsonby covered with thirteen wounds, upon the ground. Well might the
duke weep, iron though he was. "There is nothing," he writes, "nothing
in the world so dreadful as a battle lost, unless it be such a battle
won. Nothing can compensate for the dreadful cruelty, carnage, and
misery of the scene, save the reflection on the public good which may
arise from it."

Forty years' peace succeeded the great battle. Forty years of prosperity, during which he himself
went honored to his tomb, rewarded the constant brave look and tongue which answered his men,
when he saw the whole side of a square blown in, with "Hard work, gentlemen! They are pounding
away! We must see who can pound the longest." It is not too much to say that the constant cheerfulness
of the Duke of Wellington was one great element of success in the greatest battle ever fought,
one of the fifteen decisive battles in the world, great in the number engaged, greater in the
slaughter, greatest in the results. But all commanders ought to be cheerful. Gloomy looks do
not do in the army. A set of filibusters or pirates may wear looks and brows as black as the
sticking-plasters boots that their representatives are dressed in at the minor theaters; but
a soldier or a sailor should be, and as a rule is, the most cheerful of fellows, doing his
duty in the trench or the storm, dying when the bullet comes, but living like a hero the while.
Look, for instance, at the whole-hearted cheerfulness of Raleigh, when with his small English
ships he cast himself against the navies of Spain; or at Xenophon, conducting back from an
inhospitable and hostile country, and through unknown paths, his ten thousand Greeks; or Cæsar,
riding up and down the banks of the Rubicon, sad enough belike when alone, but at the head
of his men cheerful, joyous, well dressed, rather foppish, in fact, his face shining with good
humor as with oil. Again, Nelson, in the worst of dangers, was as cheerful as the day. He had
even a rough but quiet humor in him just as he carried his coxswain behind him to bundle the
swords of the Spanish and French captains under his arm. He could clap his telescope to his
blind eye, and say, "Gentlemen, I can not make out the signal," when the signal was adverse
to his wishes, and then go in and win, in spite of recall. Fancy the dry laughs which many
an old sea-dog has had over that cheerful incident. How the story lights up the dark page of
history! Then there was Henry of Navarre, lion in war, winner of hearts, bravest of the brave,
who rode down the ranks at Ivry when Papist and Protestant were face to face, when more than
his own life and kingdom were at stake, and all the horrors of religious war were loosened
and unbound, ready to ravage poor, unhappy France. That beaming, hopeful countenance won the
battle, and is a parallel to the brave looks of Queen Elizabeth when she cheered her Englishmen
at Tilbury.

But we are not all soldiers or sailors, although, too, our Christian profession hath adopted
the title of soldiers in the battle of life. It is all very well to cite great commanders who,
in the presence of danger, excited by hope, with the eyes of twenty thousand men upon them,
are cheerful and happy; but what is that to the solitary author, the poor artist, the governess,
the milliner, the shoemaker, the factory-girl, they of the thousand persons in profession or
trade who are given to murmur, and who think life so hard and gloomy and wretched that they
can not go through it with a smile on their faces and despair in their hearts? What are examples
and citations to them? "Hecuba!" cries out poor, melancholy, morbid Hamlet, striking on a vein
of thought, "what's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba?" Much.

We all have trials; but it is certain that good temper and cheerfulness will make us bear them
more easily than any thing else. "Temper," said one of our bishops, "is nine-tenths of Christianity."
We do not live now in the Middle Ages. We can not think that the sect of Flagellants, who whipped
themselves till the blood ran into their shoes, and pulled uncommonly long faces, were the
best masters of philosophy. "True godliness is cheerful as the day," wrote Cowper, himself
melancholy-mad enough; and we are to remember that the precept of the Founder of our faith,
that when we fast we are to anoint our countenances and not to seem to fast, enjoins a certain
liveliness of face. Sydney Smith, when a poor curate at Foster-le-Clay, a dreary, desolate
place, wrote: "I am resolved to like it, and to reconcile myself to it, which is more manly
than to fancy myself above it, and to send up complaints by the post of being thrown away,
or being desolated, and such like trash." And he acted up to this; said his prayers, made his
jokes, did his duty, and, Upon fine mornings, used to draw up the blinds of his parlor, open
the window, and "glorify the room," as he called the operation, with sunshine. But all the
sunshine without was nothing to the sunshine within the heart. It was that which made him go
through life so bravely and so well; it is that, too, which renders his life a lesson to us all.

We must also remember that the career of a poor curate is not the most brilliant in the world.
That of an apprentice boy has more fun in it; that of a milliner's girl has more merriment
and fewer depressing circumstances. To hear always the same mistrust of Providence, to see
poverty, to observe all kinds of trial, to witness death-bed scenes--this is not the most enlivening
course of existence, even if a clergyman be a man of mark and of station. But there was one
whose station was not honored, nay, even by some despised, and who had sorer trials than Sydney
Smith. His name is well known in literature; and his writings and his example still teach us
in religion. This was Robert Hall, professor of a somber creed in a somber flat country, as
flat and "deadly-lively," as they say, as need be. To add to difficulties and troubles, the
minister was plagued with about as painful an illness as falls to the lot of humanity to bear.
He had fought with infidelity and doubt; he had refused promotion, because he would do his
duty where it had pleased God to place him; next he had to show how well he could bear pain.
In all his trials he had been cheerful, forcible, natural, and straightforward. In this deep
one he preserved the same character. Forced to throw himself down and writhe upon the floor
in his paroxysms of pain, he rose up, livid with exhaustion, and with the sweat of anguish
on his brow, without a murmur.

In the whole library of brave anecdote there is no tale of heroism which, to us, beats this.
It very nearly equals that of poor, feeble Latimer, cheering up his fellow-martyr as he walked
to the stake, "Be of good cheer, brother Ridley; we shall this day light such a fire in England
as by God's grace shall not be readily put out." The very play upon the torture is brave, yet
pathetic. Wonderful, too, was the boldness and cheerfulness of another martyr, Rowland Taylor,
who, stripped to his shirt, was forced to walk toward the stake, who answered the jeers of
his persecutors and the tears of his friends with the same noble constant smile, and, meeting
two of his very old parishioners who wept, stopped and cheered them as he went, adding, that
he went on his way rejoicing.

Heroes and martyrs are perhaps too high examples, for they may have, or rather poor, common,
every-day humanity will think they have, a kind of high-pressure sustainment. Let us look to
our own prosaic days; let us mark the constant cheerfulness and manliness of Dr. Maginn, or
that much higher heroic bearing of Tom Hood. We suppose that every body knows that Hood's life
was not of that brilliant, sparkling, fizzing, banging, astonishing kind which writers such
as Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, and some others, depict as the general life of literary men. He
did not, like Byron, "jump up one morning, and find himself famous." All the libraries were
not asking for his novel, though a better was not written; countesses and dairy-women did not
beg his autograph. His was a life of constant hard work, constant trial or disappointment,
and constant illness, enlivened only by a home affection and a cheerfulness as constant as
his pain. When slowly, slowly dying, he made cheerful fun as often almost as he said his prayers.
He was heard, after, perhaps, being almost dead, to laugh gently to himself in the still night,
when his wife or children, who were the watchers, thought him asleep. Many of the hard lessons
of fate he seasoned, as old Latimer did his sermons, with a pun, and he excused himself from
sending more "copy" for his magazine by a sketch, the "Editor's Apologies," a rough pen-and-ink
drawing of physic-bottles and leeches. Yet Hood had not only his own woes to bear, but felt
for others. No one had a more tender heart--few men a more catholic and Christian sympathy
for the poor--than the writer of the "Song of the Shirt."

What such men as these have done, every one else surely can do. Cheerfulness is a Christian
duty; moroseness, dulness, gloominess, as false, and wrong, and cruel as they are unchristian.
We are too far advanced now in the light of truth to go back into the Gothic and conventual
gloom of the Middle Ages, any more than we could go back to the exercises of the Flagellants
and the nonsense of the pre-Adamites. All whole-hearted peoples have been lively and bustling,
noisy almost, in their progress, pushing, energetic, broad in shoulder, strong in lung, loud
in voice, of free brave color, bold look, and bright eyes. They are the cheerful people in
the world--

    "Active doers, noble livers--strong to labors sure to conquer;"

and soon pass in the way of progress the more quiet and gloomy of their fellows. That some
of this cheerfulness may be simply animal is true, and that a man may be a dullard and yet
sit and "grin like a Cheshire cat;" but we are not speaking of grinning. Laughter is all very
well; is a healthy, joyous, natural impulse; the true mark of superiority between man and beast,
for no inferior animal laughs; but we are not writing of laughter, but of that continued even
tone of spirits, which lies in the middle zone between frantic merriment and excessive despondency.
Cheerfulness arises from various causes: from health; but it is not dependent upon health;--from
good fortune; but it does not arise solely from that;--from honor, and position, and a tickled
pride and vanity; but, as we have seen, it is quite independent of these. The truth is, it
is a brave habit of the mind; a prime proof of wisdom; capable of being acquired, and of the
very greatest value. Then the brave man, as our German cousins say, possesses the world, whereas
the melancholy man does not even possess his own share of it. Exercise, or continued employment
of some kind, will make a man cheerful; but sitting at home, brooding and thinking, or doing
little, will bring gloom. The reaction of this feeling is wonderful. It arises from a sense
of duty done, and it also enables us to do our duty. Cheerful people live long in our memory.
We remember joy more readily than sorrow, and always look back with tenderness on the brave
and cheerful. Autolycus repeats the burden of an old song with the truth that "a merry heart
goes all the day, but your sad ones tires a mile a!" and what he says any one may notice, not
only in ourselves, but in the inferior animals also. A sulky dog, and a bad-tempered horse,
wear themselves out with half the labor that kindly creatures do. An unkindly cow will not
give down her milk, and a sour sheep will not fatten; nay, even certain fowls and geese, to
those who observe, will evidence temper--good or bad.

We can all cultivate our tempers, and one of the employments of some poor mortals is to cultivate,
cherish, and bring to perfection, a thoroughly bad one; but we may be certain that to do so
is a very gross error and sin, which, like all others, brings its own punishment, though, unfortunately,
it does not punish itself only. If he "to whom God is pleasant is pleasant to God," the reverse
also holds good; and certainly the major proposition is true with regard to man. Addison says
of cheerfulness, that it lightens sickness, poverty, affliction; converts ignorance into an
amiable simplicity, and renders deformity itself agreeable; and he says no more than the truth.
Such a spirit is within every body's reach. Let us get out into the light of things. The morbid
man cries out that there is always enough wrong in the world to make a man miserable. Conceded;
but wrong is ever being righted; there is always enough that is good and right to make us joyful.
There is ever sunshine somewhere; and the brave man will go on his way rejoicing, content to
look forward if under a cloud, not bating one jot of heart or hope if for a moment cast down;
honoring his occupation, whatever it may be; rendering even rags respectable by the way he
wears them; and not only being happy himself, but causing the happiness of others.

       *       *       *       *       *

XXXVII.

HAROLD.

THE LAST SAXON KING OF ENGLAND.

The father of Harold, the last Saxon king of England, was named Godwin, and was the first great
English statesman. It was from him that Harold in a great measure inherited his vigor and power,
though, indeed, he came altogether of a noble race, both by lineage and character, for his
mother was a daughter of Canute the Great.

All the English loved Harold; he was strong and generous, and a better counselor than Godwin,
his father, in many ways. At first he never sought any thing for himself; but as time went
on, and he found how he was obeyed, and how he was beloved, how the whole country turned her
eyes to him as the fittest king when Edward the Confessor should be gone, he also took the
same idea into his mind, and gave himself to rule, to teach, and to act as one who should by
and by be king.

Edward's queen, Edith, was Harold's sister; but there was another Edith, who influenced Harold
more than any one else in many ways. From his boyhood he and she had played together, and they
grew up, never so much as thinking that a time would come when they would separate.

The more Harold saw her the more he felt he should like to ask her to be his wife, and have
her always with him; but there were many things which made that impossible. And then England
required Harold. If he thought only of his own happiness his country must suffer. The great
nobles wished him to establish the kingdom by marrying the daughter of one of the most powerful
lords; this would connect the people and the land more closely, and prevent quarrels and divisions;
and the government required the whole of Harold's services, and the people required his watchfulness,
his thought, his care, his presence.

All his life through he had consulted Edith, and now at this terrible moment he consulted her
again. He stood before her, and in great trouble and agony of spirit told her just how things
were, scarcely daring to look at the woman he loved; for if he looked at her, England, her
greatness and her needs, all melted away, and he saw nothing but a beaming vision of a quiet,
beloved home, free from the storms of the great world outside.

But Edith too was unselfish, pure and good; so she put all thought of personal happiness away,
and putting her hand on his shoulder, said, "Never, O Harold, did I feel so proud of thee,
for Edith could not love thee as she doth, and will till the grave clasp her, if thou didst
not love England more than Edith." So these two separated.

His whole energy was given to his king and his country. He had no great love for the monks;
but he sought out the good and noble ones, put power into their hands, and gave them his support
in ruling wisely and well. Finally--a bibliographical note.

Originally "A Fehér Rózsa," under the title of "Halil Patrona," formed
the first part of "A Janicsárok végnapjai," a novel first published
at Pest in three volumes in 1854.

The two tales are, however, quite distinct, and have, since then, as a matter of fact, frequently
been published separately.

The second part of "A Janicsárok végnapjai" was translated by me from the Hungarian original,
some years ago, under the title of "The Lion of Janina," and published by Messrs. Jarrold and
Sons as one of their "Jókai" Series in 1898. The striking favour with which that story was then
received justifies my hope that its counterpart, which I have re-named "Halil the Pedlar,"
from its chief character, may be equally fortunate.

R. NISBET BAIN.

September, 1901.

HALIL THE PEDLAR.

CHAPTER I.

THE PEDLAR.

Time out of mind, for hundreds and hundreds of years, the struggle between the Shiites and the
Sunnites has divided the Moslem World.

Persia and India are the lands of the Shiites; Turkey, Arabia, Egypt,
and the realm of Barbary follow the tenets of the Sunna.

Much blood, much money, many anathemas, and many apostasies have marked the progress of this
quarrel, and still it has not even yet been made quite clear whether
the Shiites or the Sunnites are the true believers.

The question to be decided is this: which of the four successors of the Prophet, Ali, Abu
Bekr, Osmar, and Osman, was the true Caliph. The Shiites maintain that Ali alone was the true
Caliph.

The Sunnites, on the other hand, affirm that all four were true Caliphs and equally holy. And certainly
the Shiites must be great blockheads to allow themselves to be cut into mince-meat by thousands,
rather than admit that God would enrich the calendar with three saints
distasteful to them personally.

       

The head Mufti had already hurled three fetvas at the head of Shah
Mahmud, and just as many armies of valiant Sunnites had invaded the
territories of the Shiites.

The redoubtable Grand Vizier, Damad Ibrahim, had already wrested
from them Tauris, Erivan, Kermandzasahan, and Hamadan, and the good
folks of Stambul could talk of nothing else but these victories--victories
which they had extra good reason to remember, inasmuch as the Janissaries,
at every fresh announcement of these triumphs, all the more vigorously
exercised their martial prowess on the peaceful inhabitants they were
supposed to protect, and not only upon them, but likewise upon the
still more peaceful Sultan who, it must be admitted, troubled himself
very little either about the Sunnites, or the victories of his Grand
Vizier, being quite content with the contemplation of his perpetually
blooming tulips and of the damsels of the Seraglio, who were even
fairer to view than the tulips whose blooms they themselves far outshone.

*

* * * *

The last rays of sunset were about to depart from the minarets of Stambul. The imposing shape
of the City of the Seven Hills loomed forth like a majestic picture in the evening light. Below,
all aflame from the reflection of the burning sky, lies the Bosphorus, wherein the Seraglio
and the suburbs of Pera and Galata, with their tiers upon tiers of houses and variegated fairy palaces,
mirror themselves tranquilly. The long, winding, narrow streets climb from one hill to another,
and every single hill is as green as if mother Nature had claimed her due portion of each from
the inhabitants, so different from our western cities, all paved and swept clean, and nothing
but hard stone from end to end. Here, on the contrary, nothing but green meets the eye. The bastions
are planted with vines and olive-trees, pomegranate and cypress trees stand before the houses
of the rich. The poorer folks who have no gardens plant flowers on their house-tops, or at
any rate grow vines round their windows which in time run up the whole house, and from out of
the midst of this perennial verdure arise the shining cupolas of eighty mosques. At the end
of every thoroughfare, overgrown with luxuriant grass and thick-foliaged cypresses, only the turbaned
tombstones show that here is the place of sad repose. And the effect of the picture is heightened
by the mighty cupola of the all-dominating Aja Sofia mosque, which looks right over all these palaces
into the golden mirror of the Bosphorus.

Soon this golden mirror changes into a mirror of bronze, the sun disappears, and the tranquil oval
of the sea borrows a metallic shimmer from the dark-blue sky. The kiosks fade into darkness;
the vast outlines of the Rumili Hisar and the Anatoli Hisar stand out against the starry heaven; and
excepting the lamps lit here and there in the khans of the foreign merchants and a few minarets,
the whole of the gigantic city is wrapped in gloom.

The muezzin intone the evening noómát from the slender turrets of the mosques; everyone hastens
to get home before night has completely set in; the mule-drivers urge on their beasts laden
on both sides with leather bottles, and their tinkling bells resound in the narrow streets; the
shouting water-carriers and porters, whose long shoulder-poles block up the whole street, scare
out of their way all whom they meet; whole troops of dogs come forth from the cemeteries to
fight over the offal of the piazzas. Every true believer endeavours as soon as possible to get
well behind bolts and bars, and would regard it as a sheer tempting of Providence to quit his
threshold under any pretext whatsoever before the morning invocation of the muezzin. He especially
who at such a time should venture to cross the piazza of the Etmeidan would have been judged
very temerarious or very ill-informed, inasmuch as three of the gates of the barracks of the Janissaries
open upon this piazza; and the Janissaries, even when they are in a good humour, are not over
particular as to the sort of jokes they choose to play, for their own private amusement, upon
those who may chance to fall into their hands. Every faithful Mussulman, therefore, guards his
footsteps from any intrusion into the Etmeidan, as being in duty bound to know and observe that
text of the Koran which says, "A fool is he who plunges into peril
that he might avoid."

The tattoo had already been beaten with wooden sticks on a wooden board, when two men encountered
each other in one of the streets leading into the Etmeidan.

One of them was a stranger, dressed in a Wallachian gunya, long shoes, and with a broad reticule
dangling at his side. He looked forty years old and, so far as it was possible to distinguish
his figure and features in the twilight, seemed to be a strong, well-built man, with a tolerably
plump face, on which at that moment no small traces of fear could be detected and something of that
uncomfortable hesitation which is apt to overtake a man in a large foreign city which he visits
for the very first time.

The other was an honest Mussulman about thirty years old, with a thick, coal-black beard and
passionate, irritable features, whose true character was very fairly reflected in his pair
of flashing black eyes. His turban was drawn deep down over his temples, obliterating his
eyebrows completely, which made him look more truculent than ever.

The stranger seemed to be going towards the Etmeidan, the other man to be coming from it. The
former let the latter pass, by squeezing himself against the wall, and only ventured to address
him when he perceived that he had no evil intentions towards him.

"I prythee, pitiful Mussulman, be not wrath with me, but tell me where the Etmeidan piazza is."

The
person so accosted instantly stopped short, and fixing the interrogator with a stony look, replied
angrily:

"Go straight on and you'll be there immediately."

At these words the knees of the questioner smote together.

"Woe is me! worthy Mussulman, I prythee be not wrath, I did not ask thee where the Etmeidan
was because I wanted to go there, but to avoid straying into it. I am a stranger in this city,
and in my terror I have been drawing near to the very place I want to avoid. I prythee leave
me not here all by myself. Every house is fast closed. Not one of the khans will let me in
at this hour. Take me home with you, I will not be a burden upon you, I can sleep in your courtyard,
or in your cellar, if only I may escape stopping in the streets all night, for I am greatly afraid."

The
Turk so addressed was carrying in one hand a knapsack woven out of rushes. This he now opened and
cast a glance into it, as if he were taking counsel with himself whether the fish and onions
he had just bought in the market-place for his supper would be sufficient for two people. Finally
he nodded his head as if he had made up his mind at last.

"Very well, come along!" said he, "and follow me!"

The stranger would have kissed his hand, he could not thank his new
friend sufficiently.

"You had better wait to see what you are going to get before you thank me," said the Turk; "you
will find but scanty cheer with me, for I am only a poor man."

"Oh, as for that, I also am poor, very poor indeed," the new-comer hastened to reply with the crafty
obsequiousness peculiar to the Greek race. "My name is Janaki, and I am a butcher at Jassy.
The kavasses have laid their hands upon my apprentice and all my live-stock at the same time, and
that is why I have come to Stambul. I shall be utterly beggared if I don't get them back."

"Well,
Allah aid thee. Let us make haste, for it is already dark."

And then, going on in front to show the way, he led the stranger through the narrow winding labyrinth
of baffling lanes and alleys which lead to the Hebdomon Palace, formerly the splendid residence of
the Greek Emperors, but now the quarter where the poorest and most sordid classes of the populace herd
together. The streets here are so narrow that the tendrils of the vines and gourds growing on the
roofs of the opposite houses meet together, and form a natural baldachino for the benefit
of the foot-passenger below.

Suddenly, on reaching the entrance of a peculiarly long and narrow lane, the loud-sounding note
of a song, bawled by someone coming straight towards them, struck upon their ears. It was some
drunken man evidently, but whoever the individual might be, he was certainly the possessor of
a tremendous pair of lungs, for he could roar like a buffalo, and not content with roaring, he
kept thundering at the doors of all the houses he passed with his fists.

"Alas! worthy Mussulman, I suppose this is some good-humoured Janissary, eh?" stammered the new-comer
with a terrified voice.

"Not a doubt of it. A peace-loving man would not think of making such a bellowing as that."

"Would it not be as well to turn back?"

"We might meet a pair of them if we went another way. Take this lesson from me: Never turn
back from the path you have once taken, as otherwise you will only plunge into still greater misfortunes."

Meanwhile
they were drawing nearer and nearer to the bellowing gentleman, and before long his figure came full
into view.

And certainly his figure was in every respect worthy of his voice. He was an enormous, six-foot
high, herculean fellow, with his shirt-sleeves rolled up to his shoulders, and the disorderly
appearance of his dolman and the crooked cock of his turban more than justified the suspicion
that he had already taken far more than was good for him of that fluid which the Prophet has forbidden
to all true believers.

"Gel, gel! Ne miktár dir, gel!" ("Come along the whole lot of you!") roared the Janissary with
all his might, staggering from one side of the lane to the other, and flourishing his naked
rapier in the air.

"Woe is me, my brave Mussulman!" faltered the Wallachian butcher in a terrified whisper, "wouldn't
it be as well if you were to take my stick, for he might observe that I had it, and fancy I want to
fight him with it."

The Turk took over the stick of the butcher as the latter seemed to be frightened of it.

"H'm! this stick of yours is not a bad one. I see that the head of it is well-studded with knobs,
and that it is weighted with lead besides. What a pity you don't know how to make use of it!"

"I
am only too glad if people will let me live in peace."

"Very well, hide behind me, and come along boldly, and when you pass him don't so much as look
at him."

The Wallachian desired nothing better, but the Janissary had already caught sight of him from
afar, and as, clinging fast to his guide's mantle, he was about to slip past the man of war,
the Janissary suddenly barred the way, seized him by the collar with his horrible fist, and
dragged the wretched creature towards him.

"Khair evetlesszin domusz!" ("Not so fast, thou swine!") "a word in thine ear! I have just bought
me a yataghan. Stretch forth thy neck! I would test my weapon upon thee and see whether it
is sharp."

The poor fellow was already half-dead with terror. With the utmost obsequiousness he at once
began unfastening his neck-cloth, whimpering at the same time something about his four little
children: what would become of them when they had nobody to care for them.

But his conductor intervened defiantly.

"Take yourself off, you drunken lout, you! How dare you lay a hand upon my guest. Know you
not that he who harms the guest of a true believer is accursed?"

"Na, na, na!" laughed the Janissary mockingly, "are you mad, my worthy Balukji, that you bandy
words with the flowers of the Prophet's garden, with Begtash's sons, the valiant Janissaries?
Get out of my way while you are still able to go away whole, for if you remain here much longer,
I'll teach you to be a little more obedient."

"Let my guest go in peace, I say, and then go thine own way also!"

"Why, what ails you, worthy Mussulman? Has anyone offended thee? Mashallah! what business is it
of thine if I choose to strike off the head of a dog? You can pick up ten more like him in the
street any time you like."

The Turk, perceiving that it would be difficult to convince a drunken man by mere words, drew nearer
to him, and grasped the hand that held the yataghan.

"What do you want?" cried the Janissary, fairly infuriated at this act of temerity.
"Come! Go thy way!"

"Do you know whose hand thou art grasping? My
name is Halil."

"Mine also is Halil."

"Mine is Halil Pelivan--Halil
the Wrestler!"

"Mine is Halil Patrona."

By this time the Janissary
was beside himself with rage at so much opposition.

"Thou worm! thou
crossed-leg, crouching huckster, thou pack-thread pedlar! if thou
dost not let me go immediately, I will cut off thy hands, thy feet,
thine ears, and thy nose, and then hang thee up."

"And if thou leave
not go of my guest, I will fell thee to the earth with this stick
of mine."

"What, thou wilt fell me? Me? A fellow like thou threaten
to strike Halil Pelivan with a stick? Strike away then, thou dog,
thou dishonourable brute-beast, thou dregs of a Mussulman! strike
away then, strike here, if thou have the courage!"

And with that
he pointed at his own head, which he flung back defiantly as if daring
his opponent to strike at it.

But Halil Patrona's courage was quite
equal even to such an invitation as that, and he brought down the
leaded stick in his hand so heavily on the Janissary's head that the
fellow's face was soon streaming with blood.

Pelivan roared aloud
at the blow, and, shaking his bloody forehead, rushed upon Patrona
like a wounded bear, and disregarding a couple of fresh blows on the
arms and shoulders which had the effect, however, of making him drop
his yataghan, he grasped his adversary with his gigantic hands, lifted
him up, and then hugged him with the embrace of a boa-constrictor.
But now it appeared that Patrona also was by no means a novice in
the art of self-defence, for clutching with both hands the giant's
throat, he squeezed it so tightly that in a few seconds the Janissary
began to stagger to and fro, finally falling backwards to the ground,
whereupon Patrona knelt upon his breast and plucked from his beard
a sufficient number of hairs to serve him as a souvenir. Pelivan,
overpowered by drink and the concussion of his fall, slumbered off
where he lay, while Patrona with his guest, who was already half-dead
with fright, hastened to reach his dwelling.

After traversing a labyrinth
of narrow, meandering lanes, and zig-zagging backwards and forwards
through all kinds of gardens and rookeries, Halil Patrona arrived
at last at his own house.

Were we to speak of "his own street door,"
we should be betraying a gross ignorance of locality, for in the place
where Patrona lived the mere idea of a street never presented itself
to anybody's imagination. There was indeed no such thing there. The
spot was covered by half a thousand or so of wooden houses, mixed
together, higgledy-piggledy, so inextricably, that the shortest way
to everybody's house was through his neighbour's passage, hall, or
courtyard, and inasmuch as the inmates of whole rows of these houses
were in the habit of living together in the closest and most mysterious
harmony, every house was so arranged that the inhabitants thereof
could slip into the neighbouring dwelling at a moment's notice. In
some cases, for instance, the roofs were continuous; in others the
cellars communicated, so that if ever anyone of the inhabitants were
suddenly pursued, he could, with the assistance of the roofs, passages,
and cellars, vanish without leaving a trace behind him.

Halil Patrona's
house was of wood like the rest. It consisted of a single room, yet
this was a room which could be made to hold a good deal. It had a
fire-place also, and if perhaps a chance guest were a little fastidious,
he could at any rate always make sure of a good bed on the roof, which
was embowered in vine leaves. There was certainly no extravagant display
of furniture inside. A rush-mat in the middle of the room, a bench
covered with a carpet in the corner, a few wooden plates and dishes,
a jug on a wooden shelf, and a couple of very simple cooking-utensils
in the fire-place--that was all. From the roof of the chamber hung
an earthenware lamp, which Patrona kindled with an old-fashioned flint
and steel. Then he brought water in a round-bellied trough for his
guest to wash his hands, fetched drinking-water from the well in a
long jug, whereupon he drew forward his rush-woven market-basket,
emptied its contents on to the rush-mat, sat him down opposite honest
Janaki, and forthwith invited his guest to fall to.

There was nothing
indeed but a few small fish and a few beautiful rosy-red onions, but
Halil had so much to say in praise of the repast, telling his guest
where and how these fish were caught, and in what manner they ought
to be fried so as to bring out the taste; how you could find out which
of them had hard roes and which soft; what different sorts of flavours
there are in the onion tribe, far more, indeed, than in the pine-apple;
and then the pure fresh water too--why the Koran from end to end is
full of the praises of fresh pure water, and Halil knew all these
passages by heart, and had no need to look in the holy book for them. We want 5,000 Cooper Institutes and
churches innumerable, and just one spiritual awakening, but that reaching from the St. Lawrence
to Key West, and from Barnegat Light-house to the Golden Gate. We can all somewhere be felt
in the undertaking. I like the sentiment and the rhythm of some anonymous poet, who wrote:

    "When I am dead and gone,
    And the mold upon my breast,
    Say not that he did well or ill,
    Only 'He did his best.'"
        --DR. TALMAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

GOODNESS.

    Goodness needs no lure:
    All compensations are in her enshrined,
    Whatever things are right and fair and pure,
    Wealth of the heart and mind.

    Failure and Success,
    The Day and Night of every life below,
    Are but the servants of her blessedness,
    That come and spend and go.

    Life is her reward,
    A life brim-full, in every day's employ,
    Of sunshine, inspiration, every word
    And syllable of joy.

    Heaven to thee is known,
    If Goodness in the robes of common earth
    Becomes a presence thou canst call thine own,
    To warm thy heart and hearth.

    Clothed in flesh and blood,
    She flits about me every blessed day,
    The incarnation of sweet womanhood;
    And age brings no decay.

This curious sentence of Longfellow's deserves reading again. He is an earnest man, and does
not mean to cheat us; he has done good work in the world by his poems and writings; he has
backed up many, and lifted the hearts of many, by pure thought; he means what he says. Yet,
what is altogether lighter than vanity? The human heart, answers the religionist. What is altogether
deceitful upon the scales? The human heart. What is a Vanity Fair, a mob, a hubbub and babel
of noises, to be avoided, shunned, hated? The world. And, lastly, what are our thoughts and
struggles, vain ideas, and wishes? Vain, empty illusions, shadows, and lies. And yet this man,
with the inspiration which God gives every true poet, tells us to trust to our hearts, and
what the world calls illusions. And he is right.

Now there are, of course, various sorts of illusions. The world is itself illusive. None of
us are exactly what we seem; and many of those things that we have the firmest faith in really
do not exist. When the first philosopher declared that the world was round, and not a plane
as flat and circular as a dinner-plate or a halfpenny, people laughed at him, and would have
shut him up in a lunatic asylum. They said he had an "illusion;" but it was they who had it.
He was so bold as to start the idea that we had people under us, and that the sun went to light
them, and that they walked with their feet to our feet. So they do, we know well now; but the
pope and cardinals would not have it, and so they met in solemn conclave, and ordered the philosopher's
book to be burnt, and they would have burnt him, too, in their hardly logical way of saving
souls, only he recanted, and, sorely against his will, said that it was all an "illusion."
But the pope and his advisers had an illusion, too, which was, that dressing up men who did
not believe in their faith, in garments on which flames and devils were represented--such a
garment they called a san benito--and then burning them, was really something done for the
glory of God. They called it with admirable satire an auto da fé (an "act of faith"), and they
really did believe--for many of the inquisitors were mistaken but tender men--that they did
good by this; but surely now they have outgrown this illusion. How many of these have we yet
to outgrow; how far are we off the true and liberal Christianity which is the ideal of the
saint and sage; how ready are we still to persecute those who happen, by mere circumstances
attending their birth and education, to differ from us!

The inner world of man, no less than the external world, is full of illusions. They arise from
distorted vision, from a disorder of the senses, or from an error of judgment upon data correctly
derived from their evidence. Under the influence of a predominant train of thought, an absorbing
emotion, a person ready charged with an uncontrolled imagination will see, as Shakspeare has it--

    "More devils than vast hell can hold."

Half, if not all, of the ghost stories, which are equally dangerous and absorbing to youth,
arise from illusion--there they have their foundation; but believers in them obstinately refuse
to believe anything but that which their overcharged and predisposed imagination leads them
to. Some of us walk about this world of ours--as if it were not of itself full enough of mystery--as
ready to swallow any thing wonderful or horrible, as the country clown whom a conjurer will
get upon his stage to play tricks with. Fooled by a redundant imagination, delighted to be
tricked by her potency, we dream away, flattered by the idea that a supernatural messenger
is sent to us, and to us alone. We all have our family ghosts, in whom we more than half believe.
Each one of us has a mother or a wise aunt, or some female relation, who, at one period of
her life, had a dream, difficult to be interpreted, and foreboding good or evil to a child
of the house.

We are so grand, we men, "noble animals, great in our deaths and splendid even in our ashes,"
that we can not yield to a common fate without some overstrained and bombast conceit that the
elements themselves give warning. Casca, in "Julius Caesar," rehearses some few of the prodigies
which predicted Caesar's death:

    "A common slave (you know him well by sight)
    Held up his left hand, which did flame, and burn
    Like twenty torches join'd; and yet his hand,
    Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched....
    And, yesterday, the bird of night did sit,
    Even at noon-day, upon the market-place,
    Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
    Do so conjointly meet, let not men say,
    'These are their reasons--they are natural;
    For, I believe, they are portentous things."

A great many others besides our good Casca believe in these portents and signs, and their dignity
would be much hurt if they were persuaded that the world would go on just the same if they
and their family were utterly extinct, and that no eclipse would happen to portend that calamity.
In Ireland, in certain great families, a Banshee, or a Benshee, for they differ who spell it,
sits and wails all night when the head of the family is about to stretch his feet towards the
dim portals of the dead; and in England are many families who, by some unknown means, retain
a ghost which walks up and down a terrace, as it did in that fanciful habitation of Sir Leicester
Dedlock. In Scotland, they have amongst them prophetic shepherds, who, on the cold, misty mountain
top, at eventide, shade their shaggy eyebrows with their hands, and, peering into the twilight,
see funerals pass by, and the decease of some neighbor portended by all the paraphernalia of death.

With us all these portents "live no longer in the faith of Reason;" we assert, in Casca's words,
that "they are natural;" but we offend the credulous when we do so. "Illusions of the senses,"
says an acute writer, "are common in our appreciation of form, distance, color, and motion;
and also from a lack of comprehension of the physical powers of Nature, in the production of
images of distinct objects. A stick in the water appears bent or broken; the square tower at
the distance looks round; distant objects appear to move when we are in motion; the heavenly
bodies appear to revolve round the earth." And yet we know that all these appearances are mere
illusions. At the top of a mountain in Ireland, with our back to the sun, we, two travelers,
were looking at the smiling landscape gilded by the sunshine; suddenly a white cloud descended
between us and the valley, and there upon it were our two shadows, distorted, gigantic, threatening
or supplicatory, as we chose to move and make them. Here was an exactly similar apparition
to the Specter of the Brocken. The untaught German taxed his wits to make the thing a ghost;
but the philosopher took off his hat and bowed to it, and the shadow returned the salute; and
so with the Fata Morgana, and the mirage. We now know that these things had no supernatural
origin, but are simply due to the ordinary laws of atmospheric influence and light; so all
our modern illusions are easily rectified by the judgment, and are fleeting and transitory
in the minds of the sane.

But, beyond these, there are the illusions of which we first spoke, from which we would not
willingly be awakened. The sick man in Horace, who fancied that he was always sitting at a
play, and laughed and joked, or was amazed and wept as they do in a theater, rightly complained
to his friends that they had killed him, not cured him, when they roused him from his state
of hallucination. There are some illusions so beautiful, so healthful, and so pleasant, that
we would that no harshness of this world's ways, no bitter experience, no sad reality, could
awaken us from them. It is these, we fancy, that the poet tells us to trust to; such are the
illusions--so-called by the world--to which we are always to give our faith. It will be well
if we do so. Faith in man or woman is a comfortable creed; but you will scarcely find a man
of thirty, or a woman either, who retains it. They will tell you bitterly "they have been so
deceived!" One old gentleman we know, deceived, and ever again to be deceived, who is a prey
to false friends, who lends his money without surety and gets robbed, who fell in love and
was jilted, who has done much good and has been repaid with much evil. This man is much to
be envied. He can, indeed, "trust in his heart and what the world calls illusions." To him
the earth is yet green and fresh, the world smiling and good-humored, friends are fast and
loving, woman a very well-spring of innocent and unbought love. The world thinks him an old
simpleton; but he is wiser than the world. He is not to be scared by sad proverbs, nor frightened
by dark sayings. An enviable man, he sits, in the evening of life, loving and trusting his
fellow-men, and, from the mere freshness of his character, having many gathered round him whom
he can still love and trust.

With another sort of philosophers all around is mere illusion, and the mind of man shall in
no way be separated from it; from the beginning to the end it is all the same. Our organization,
they would have us believe, creates most of our pleasure and our pain. Life is in itself an
ecstasy. "Life is as sweet as nitrous oxide; and the fisherman, dripping all day over a cold
pond, the switchman at the railway intersection, the farmer in the field, the negro in the
rice-swamp, the fop in the street, the hunter in the woods, the barrister with the jury, the
belle at the ball--all ascribe a certain pleasure to their employment which they themselves
give to it. Health and appetite impart the sweetness to sugar, bread, and meat." So fancy plays
with us; but, while she tricks us, she blesses us. The mere prosaic man, who strips the tinsel
from every thing, who sneers at a bridal and gladdens at a funeral; who tests every coin and
every pleasure, and tells you that it has not the true ring; who checks capering Fancy and
stops her caracoling by the whip of reality, is not to be envied. "In the life of the dreariest
alderman, Fancy enters into all details, and colors them with a rosy hue," says Emerson. "He
imitates the air and action of people whom he admires, and is raised in his own eyes.... In
London, in Paris, in Boston, in San Francisco, the masquerade is at its height. Nobody drops
his domino. The chapter of fascinations is very long. Great is paint; nay, God is the painter;
and we rightly accuse the critic who destroys too many illusions."

Happy are they with whom this domino is never completely dropped! Happy, thrice happy, they
who believe, and still maintain that belief, like champion knights, against all comers, in
honor, chastity, friendship, goodness, virtue, gratitude. It is a long odds that the men who
do not believe in these virtues have none themselves; for we speak from our hearts, and we
tell of others that which we think of ourselves. The French, a mournful, sad, and unhappy nation--even
at the bottom of all their external gaiety--have a sad word, a participle, désillusionné, disillusioned;
and by it they mean one who has worn out all his youthful ideas, who has been behind the scenes,
and has seen the bare walls of the theater, without the light and paint, and has watched the
ugly actors and gaunt actresses by daylight. The taste of life is very bitter in the mouth
of such a man; his joys are Dead Sea apples--dust and ashes in the mouths of those who bite
them. No flowers spring up about his path; he is very melancholy and suspicious, very hard
and incredulous; he has faith neither in the honesty of man nor in the purity of woman. He
is désillusionné--by far too wise to be taken in with painted toys. Every one acts with self-interest!
His doctor, his friend, or his valet will be sorry for his death merely from the amount of
money interest that they have in his life. Bare and grim unto tears, even if he had any, is
the life of such a man. With him, sadder than Lethe or the Styx, the river of time runs between
stony banks, and, often a calm suicide, it bears him to the Morgue. Happier by far is he who,
with whitened hair and wrinkled brow, sits crowned with the flowers of illusion; and who, with
the ear of age, still remains a charmed listener to the songs which pleased his youth, trusting
"his heart and what the world calls illusions."

       *       *       *       *       *

XL.

PHILLIPS BROOKS

AT HOME.

Phillips Brooks at home, of course, means Phillips Brooks in Trinity Church, Boston. Other
than his church, home proper he has none, for he abides a bachelor.

And somehow it seems almost fit that a man like Mr. Brooks, a man so ample, so overflowing;
a man, as it were, more than sufficient to himself, sufficient also to a multitude of others,
should have his home large and public; such a home, in fact, as Trinity Church. Here Phillips
Brooks shines like a sun--diffusing warmth and light and life. What a blessing to what a number!
To what a number of souls, it would have been natural to say; but, almost as natural, to what
a number of bodies! For the physical man is a source of comfort, in its kind, hardly less so
than the intellectual and the spiritual. How that massive, majestic manhood makes temperature
where it is, and what temperature! Broad, equable, temperate, calm; yet tonic, withal, and
inspiring. You rejoice in it. You have an irrational feeling that it would be a wrong to shut
up so much opulence of personal vitality in any home less wide and open than a great basilica
like Trinity Church. At least, you are not pained with sympathy for homelessness in the case
of a man so richly endowed. To be so pained would be like shivering on behalf of the sun, because,
forsooth, the sun had nothing to make him warm and bright. Phillips Brooks in Trinity Church
is like the sun in its sphere. Still, and were it not impertinent, I could even wish for Phillips
Brooks an every-day home, such as would be worthy of him. What a home it should be! And with
thus much of loyal, if of doubtfully appropriate tribute, irresistibly prompted, and therefore
not to be repressed, let me go on to speak of Phillips Brooks as he is to be seen and heard
Sunday after Sunday at home in Trinity Church.

Every body knows how magnificent an edifice, with its arrested tower yet waiting and probably
long to wait completion, Trinity Church is. The interior is decorated almost to the point of
gorgeousness. The effect, however, is imposing for "the height, the glow, the glory." Good
taste reigning over lavish expenditure has prevented chromatic richness from seeming to approach
tawdriness. It is much to say for any man preaching here that the building does not make him
look disproportionate, inadequate. This may strongly be said for Phillips Brooks. But even
for him it can not be said that the form and construction of the interior do not oppose a serious
embarrassment to the proper effect of oratory. I could not help feeling it to be a great wrong
to the truth, or, to put it personally, a great wrong to the preacher and to his hearers, that
an audience-room should be so broken up with pillars, angles, recesses, so sown with contrasts
of light and shade, as necessarily, inevitably, to disperse and waste an immense fraction of
the power exerted by the preacher, whatever the measure, great or small, of that power might
be. The reaction of this audience-room upon the oratorical instinct and habit of the man who
should customarily speak in it could not but be mischievous in a very high degree. The sense,
which ought to live in every public speaker, of his being fast bound in a grapple of mind to
mind, and heart to heart, and soul to soul, with his audience, must be oppressed, if not extinguished,
amid such architectural conditions as those which surround Phillips Brooks when he stands to
preach. That in him this needful sense is not extinguished is a thing to be thankful for. That
it is, in fact, oppressed, I can not doubt. There is evidence of it, I think, in his manner
of preaching. For Mr. Brooks is not an orator such as Mr. Beecher is. He does not speak to
people with people, as Mr. Beecher does; rather he speaks before them, in their presence. He
soliloquizes. There is almost a minimum of mutual relation between speaker and hearer. Undoubtedly
the swift, urgent monologue is quickened, reinforced, by the consciousness of an audience present.
That consciousness, of course, penetrates to the mind of the speaker. But it does not dominate
the speaker's mind; it does not turn monologue into dialogue; the speech is monologue still.

This is not invariably the case; for, occasionally, the preacher turns his noble face toward
you, and for that instant you feel the aim of his discourse leveled full at your personality.
Now there is a glimpse of true oratorical power. But the glimpse passes quickly. The countenance
is again directed forward toward a horizon, or even lifted toward a quarter of the sky above
the horizon, and the but momentarily interrupted rapt soliloquy proceeds.

Such I understand to have been the style of Robert Hall's pulpit speech. It is a rare gift
to be a speaker of this sort. The speaker must be a thinker as well as a speaker. The speech
is, in truth, a process of thinking aloud--thinking accelerated, exhilarated, by the vocal
exercise accompanying, and then, too, by the blindfold sense of a listening audience near.
This is the preaching of Mr. Brooks.

It is, perhaps, not generally known that Mr. Brooks practices two distinct methods of preaching:
one, that with the manuscript; the other, that without. The last time that I had the chance
of a Sunday in Trinity Church was Luther's day. The morning discourse was a luminous and generous
appreciation of the great reformer's character and work. This was read in that rapid, vehement,
incessant manner which description has made sufficiently familiar to the public. The precipitation
of utterance is like the flowing forth of the liquid contents of a bottle suddenly inverted;
every word seems hurrying to be foremost. Crockford himself was examined by the committee of the
House of Commons on the Gaming Houses; but in spite of his assurance by the members that were
indemnified witnesses in respect of pending actions, he resolutely declined to 'tell the secrets
of his prison-house.' When asked whether a good deal of play was carried on at his club, he
said:--'There may have been so; but I do not feel myself at liberty to answer that question--to
DIVULGE THE PURSUITS OF PRIVATE GENTLEMEN. Situated as I was, I do not feel myself at liberty to do so. I
do not feel myself at liberty to answer that question.'

When asked to whom he had given up the house, he fenced in like manner, saying that he had
given it up to a 'committee' of about 200 gentlemen,--concerning which committee he professed to
'know absolutely nothing'--he could not even say to whom he had given up the house--he gave it
up to the gentlemen of the club four years before--he could not even
say (upon his word) whether he signed any paper in giving it up--he
believed he did not--adding--'I said I grew too old, and I could not
continue in the club any longer, and I wished to give up the club
to the gentlemen, who made their own arrangement.'

Being asked, 'Do
you think that a person is just as honourably bound to pay a debt
which he loses upon a game of Hazard, as he would be to pay a bet
which he loses on a horse-race?' Crockford replied--'I think most
certainly he would honourably be bound to pay it.'--'Do you think
that if the loser of a bet on a game at Hazard had no charge to make
of any kind of unfairness, and he were to commence an action to recover
that money back again, he would lay himself open to a charge in the
world of having acted dishonourably?' The old gambler's reply was
most emphatic, overwhelming, indignant--'I should take all the pains
I could to avoid such a man.'

If this evidence was not satisfactory,
it was, at any rate, very characteristic.

A few interesting facts came out before the parliamentary committee on Gaming, in 1844, respecting
Crockford's.

It was said that Crockford gave up the business in 1840, because there were no more very high players
visiting his house.

'A number of persons,' according to the admission of the Honourable Frederick Byng, 'who were
born to very large properties, were very nearly ruined at Crockford's.'

The sums won on the turf were certainly larger than those won by players at Crockford's; a man might
lose L20,000 in one or more bets, to one or more persons; but against this he might have won an equivalent
amount in small sums from 200 or more persons.(40)

(40) This is
not very clearly put, but the meaning is that much more money was
lost at Crockford's than on the turf.

       

Some years previously to Crockford's retirement, it is said that he
found the debts so bad that he was obliged to leave off his custom
of paying cheques; and said he would cancel all previous debts, but
that in future gentlemen would have to pay with money.

    
     He made them play for money instead
    of with counters, in consequence
     of the large sums that were owing to him upon those counters.

    
     
    8. THE TRAVELLERS' CLUB,
     

    next the Athenaeum in Pall Mall, originated
     soon after the peace of 1814,
    in a suggestion of the late Lord Londonderry,
     then Lord Castlereagh, for the resort of gentlemen who had resided
or travelled abroad, as well as with a view to the accommodation of
foreigners, who, when properly recommended, receive an invitation
for the period of their stay.(41) Here Prince Talleyrand was fond
of a game at Whist.

    With all the advantage of his great imperturbability
     of face, he is said to have
    been an indifferent player.
     

    (41) Quarterly Review, No. cx. p.
     481.
    
     Rule 10 of the club directs, 'that no dice and no game of hazard be
allowed in the rooms of the club, nor any higher stake than guinea
points, and that no cards be introduced before dinner.'

CHAPTER VII.

    DOINGS IN GAMING HOUSES.
     
    Besides the aristocratic establishments
     just described, there were numerous houses or places of resort for
gambling, genteel and ungenteel.

    In vain did the officers of
     the law seem to exert their utmost
    vigilance; if they drove the
     serpent out of one hole it soon glided into another; never was the
proverb--'Where there's a will there's a way'--more strikingly fulfilled.

    

    At once he turned to the bishop,
     And said with a love unpriced,
    "To thee, to thee I commit him
     Before the Church and Christ."

    He then returned to the city,
     The beloved disciple, John,
    Where the strong unceasing current
     Of his deathless love flowed on.

    The bishop discharged his duty
     To the youth so graceful and fair;
    With restraining hand he held him,
     And trained him with loving care.

    At last, when his preparation
     Was made for the holy rite,
    He was cleansed in the sanctified water,
     And pronounced a child of light.

    For a time he adorned the doctrine
     Which Christ in the Church has set.
    But, alas! for a passionate nature
     When Satan has spread his net!

    Through comrades base and abandoned
     He was lured from day to day,
    Until, like a steed unbridled,
     He struck from the rightful way;

    And a wild consuming passion
     Raised him unto the head
    Of a mighty band of robbers,
     Of all the country the dread.

    Time passed. Again a message
     Unto the Apostle was sent,
    To set their affairs in order,
     And tell them the Lord's intent.

    And when he had come and attended
     To all that needed his care,
    He turned him and said, "Come, Bishop,
     Give back my deposit so rare."

    "What deposit?" was the answer,
     Which could not confusion hide.
    "I demand the soul of a brother,"
     Plainly the Apostle replied,

    "Which Christ and I committed
     Before the Church to thee."
    Trembling and even weeping,
     "The young man is dead," groaned he.

    "How dead? What death?" John demanded.
     "He the way of the tempter trod,
    Forgetting the Master's weapon,
     And now he is dead unto God.

    Yonder he roves a robber."
     "A fine keeper," said John, "indeed,
    Of a brother's soul. Get ready
     A guide and a saddled steed."

    And all as he was the Apostle
     Into the region rode
    Where the robber youth and captain
     Had fixed his strong abode.

    When hardly over the border,
     He a prisoner was made,
    And into their leader's presence
     Demanded to be conveyed.

    And he who could brave a thousand
     When each was an enemy,
    Beholding John approaching,
     Turned him in shame to flee.

    But John, of his age forgetful,
     Pursued him with all his might.
    "Why from thy defenseless father,"
     He cried, "dost thou turn in flight?

    Fear not; there is hope and a refuge,
     And life shall yet be thine.
    I will intercede with the Master
     And task His love divine."

    Subdued by love that is stronger
     Than was ever an arméd band,
    He became once more to the Father
     A child to feel for His hand.

    Subdued by a love that is stronger
     Than a world full of terrors and fears,
    He returned to the House of the Father
     Athrough the baptism of tears.

    Such is the beautiful legend
     Come down from ancient days,
    Of love that is young forever;
     And is he not blind who says

    That charity ever faileth,
     Or doth for a moment despair,
    Or that there is any danger
     Too great for her to dare;

    When John, the beloved disciple,
     With the faith of the Gospel shod,
    Went forth in pursuit of the robber,
     And brought him back to God?

    O Church, whose strength is the doctrine
     Of the blessed Evangelist,
    This doctrine of love undying
     Which the world can not resist!

    Put on thy beautiful garments
     In this sordid and selfish day,
    And be as of old a glory
     To turn us from Mammon away;

    Until to the prayer of thy children,
     The sweetly simple prayer,
    That bathed in the light of Heaven
     Thy courts may grow more fair,

    There comes the eternal answer
     Of works that are loving and grand,
    To remain for the generations
     The praises of God in the land.

    Go forth to the highways and hedges
     To gather the sheep that are lost,
    Conveying the joyful tidings,
     Their redemption at infinite cost.

    Proclaim there is hope and a refuge
     For every wanderer there;
    For every sin there is mercy--
     Yea, even the sin of despair!

    O, then will thy beautiful garments,
     As once in the prime of thy youth,
    Appear in celestial splendor,
     Thou pillar and ground of the Truth!

       *       *       *       *       *

XLII.

JOHN PLOUGHMAN AGAIN

THE PITH AND MARROW OF CERTAIN OLD PROVERBS.

The Rev. C.H. Spurgeon, of London, who has furnished our readers with several specimens of
"John Ploughman's Talk," has also published "John Ploughman's Pictures," some of which we present
in pen and ink, without any help from the engraver. John thus introduces himself:

IF THE CAP FITS, WEAR IT.

Friendly Readers: Last time I made a book I trod on some people's corns and bunions, and they
wrote me angry letters, asking, "Did you mean me?" This time, to save them the expense of a
halfpenny card, I will begin my book by saying--

    Whether I please or whether I tease,
     I'll give you my honest mind;
    If the cap should fit, pray wear it a bit;
     If not, you can leave it behind.

No offense is meant; but if any thing in these pages should come home to a man, let him not
send it next door, but get a coop for his own chickens. What is the use of reading or hearing
for other people? We do not eat and drink for them: why should we lend them our ears and not
our mouths? Please then, good friend, if you find a hoe on these premises, weed your own garden
with it.

I was speaking with Will Shepherd the other day about our master's old donkey, and I said,
"He is so old and stubborn, he really is not worth his keep." "No," said Will, "and worse still,
he is so vicious that I feel sure he'll do somebody a mischief one of these days." You know
they say that walls have ears; we were talking rather loud, but we did not know that there
were ears to haystacks. We stared, I tell you, when we saw Joe Scroggs come from behind the
stack, looking as red as a turkey-cock, and raving like mad. He burst out swearing at Will
and me, like a cat spitting at a dog. His monkey was up and no mistake. He'd let us know that
he was as good a man as either of us, or the two put together, for the matter of that. Talk
about him in that way; he'd do--I don't know what. I told old Joe we had never thought of him
nor said a word about him, and he might just as well save his breath to cool his porridge,
for nobody meant him any harm. This only made him call me a liar and roar the louder. My friend
Will was walking away, holding his sides; but when he saw that Scroggs was still in a fume,
he laughed outright, and turned round on him and said, "Why, Joe, we were talking about master's
old donkey, and not about you; but, upon my word, I shall never see that donkey again without
thinking of Joe Scroggs." Joe puffed and blowed, but perhaps he thought it an awkward job,
for he backed out of it, and Will and I went off to our work in rather a merry cue, for old
Joe had blundered on the truth about himself for once in his life.

The aforesaid Will Shepherd has sometimes come down rather heavy upon me in his remarks, but
it has done me good. It is partly through his home-thrusts that I have come to write this new
book, for he thought I was idle; perhaps I am, and perhaps I am not. Will forgets that I have
other fish to fry and tails to butter; and he does not recollect that a ploughman's mind wants
to lie fallow a little, and can't give a crop every year. It is hard to make rope when your
hemp is all used up, or pancakes without batter, or rook pie without the birds; and so I found
it hard to write more when I had said just about all I knew. Giving much to the poor doth increase
a man's store, but it is not the same with writing; at least, I am such a poor scribe that
I don't find it come because I pull. If your thoughts only flow by drops, you can't pour them
out in bucketfuls.

However, Will has ferreted me out, and I am obliged to him so far. I told him the other day
what the winkle said to the pin: "Thank you for drawing me out, but you are rather sharp about
it." Still, Master Will is not far from the mark: after three hundred thousand people had bought
my book it certainly was time to write another. So, though I am not a hatter, I will again
turn capmaker, and those who have heads may try on my wares; those who have none won't touch
them. So, friends, I am,

    Yours, rough and ready, JOHN PLOUGHMAN.

BURN A CANDLE AT BOTH ENDS, AND IT WILL SOON BE GONE.

Well may he scratch his head who burns his candle at both ends; but do what he may, his light
will soon be gone and he will be all in the dark. Young Jack Careless squandered his property,
and now he is without a shoe to his foot. His was a case of "easy come, easy go; soon gotten,
soon spent." He that earns an estate will keep it better than he that inherits it. As the Scotchman
says, "He that gets gear before he gets wit is but a short time master of it," and so it was
with Jack. His money burned holes in his pocket. He could not get rid of it fast enough himself,
and so he got a pretty set to help him, which they did by helping themselves. His fortune went
like a pound of meat in a kennel of hounds. All but one had thrown, and shouts of applause greeted
the lucky caster, when the last who was to throw exclaimed--'Hold!

I'll try and beat that.' . . .

Rattling the dice, he turned down the box on the table, and on lifting it up displayed the two
dice ONE UPON THE TOP OF THE OTHER, and both aces! He was therefore declared the winner.(34)

(34)
Menageana.

A TENDER MOTHER.

A French lady had an only child, a handsome young man, much addicted to gaming. He lost at one
sitting L40,000, and being destitute of other resources, he joined a company of strolling players.
They chanced some time afterwards to pass a short time at Worcester, near which his mother,
who was considerably advanced in years, resided. The lady, though highly displeased with her
son's life, yet, hearing of his performance, could not resist a wish to see him; and for this
purpose she went thither incog. He supported the principal character in 'The Gamester.'

The feelings of the mother were so excited at the passages which closely
applied to her son's conduct, that she exclaimed aloud, 'Ay, there
he is--the--the beggar--the scoundrel!

Always the same--no change in him!' The delusion so increased at the fifth act, when Beverley
lifts his hand to kill the child, that the lady in a most distressing tone cried out--'Wretch that
thou art, don't kill the child--I'll take it home with me!'

TWO MASTERS OF THE ART.

A Frenchman who had become notorious for the unerring certainty with which he won from all who
ventured to play with him, at length found himself unable to induce persons to sit down to the
table with him, there being not the slightest chance of winning against his play. After being
thus idle for some time, an Englishman, who had heard of his triumphs, expressed his readiness
to enter the lists against him. They sat down, and played for three hours without intermission,
and at the end of that time were exactly in the same position as when they begun. They at length
paused to take some refreshment.

'Sare,' said the Frenchman, in a sort of whisper, to a party who
accompanied his antagonist, 'your friend is a very clever man at de
cards--deuced clever, sare.' 'He is a very clever fellow,' observed
the Englishman.

'I shall try him again,' said Monsieur; and as he made the observation he proceeded to the
room in which they had been playing, and which was fixed on as the scene of their continued contest.
He had scarcely quitted the place when the other made his appearance, and observed that the
Frenchman was the most skilful player he had ever met with. The parties again met, and the cards
were again produced. The game was renewed at eleven o'clock, and continued without intermission
till six o'clock on the following morning, at which time they found, to the surprise of each other,
that they were still as they began. 'Sare,' said the Frenchman, 'you are the best player I
ever met with.' 'And you, Monsieur,' returned the other, 'are the only gentleman I ever played
with, from whom I could win nothing.' 'Indeed, sare!' said Monsieur, hesitatingly. 'It is a fact,
I assure you.' 'Sare, I am quite astonished at your skill.' 'And I'm not less so at yours,
Monsieur.' 'You're de most skilfullest man at de cards in England.' 'Not while you are in it,
Monsieur,' replied the Englishman, with a smile.

'Sare, I CHEATED, and yet could not win from you!' remarked the Frenchman,
hurriedly and with much emphasis, feeling it impossible any longer
to conceal his surprise at the circumstance of being unable to play
a winning game with the Englishman.

'And, Monsieur, I did the same thing with you, and yet you are no loser!' remarked the other,
with corresponding energy of tone.

The problem was thus solved: both had been cheating during the whole night, and were exactly
equal in dexterity, both being unconscious of the dishonest practices of each other; and the
result was that each got up from the table with the same amount of money as he had when he sat
down. The cheats cordially shook hands, apparently much gratified that they had at length ascertained
how it had happened that neither could pluck the other.

CHAPTER VI. THE GAMING CLUBS.

On the subject of Clubs Mr Cunningham in his 'Clubs of London,' and Mr Timbs in his 'Club Life
in London,' have said pretty well everything that we want to know, and by their help, and that
of other writers, I shall endeavour to give an account of the gambling carried on in such places.

1.
ALMACK'S.

'The gaming at Almack's,' writes Walpole to Horace Mann, 'which has
taken the pas of White's, is worthy of the decline of our empire,
or commonwealth, which you please.

The young men of the age lose ten, fifteen, twenty thousand pounds
in an evening there.

Lord Stavordale, not one-and-twenty, lost L11,000 there last Tuesday, but recovered it by one
great hand at Hazard. He swore a great oath--"Now, if I had been playing DEEP I might have
won millions!" His cousin, Charles Fox, shines equally here and in the House of Commons.'

Among the rules of the establishment, it was ordered 'that every person playing at the twenty-guinea
table do not keep less than twenty guineas before him,' and 'that every person playing at
the new guinea table do keep fifty guineas before him.' That the play ran high may be inferred
from a note against the name of Mr Thynne, in the Club-books:--'Mr Thynne having won ONLY 12,000
guineas during the last two months, retired in disgust, March 21st,
1772.' Indeed, the play was unusually high--for rouleaus of L50 each,
and generally there was L10,000 in specie on the table.

    The gamesters began by pulling off their
    embroidered clothes, and putting on frieze great coats, or turned
their coats inside out for luck!

They put on pieces of leather (such as are worn by footmen when they clean knives) to save
their laced ruffles; and to guard their eyes from the light, and to keep their hair in order,
wore high-crowned straw hats with broad brims adorned with flowers and ribbons; they also wore
masks to conceal their emotions when they played at quinz.(35) Each gamester had a small neat
stand by him, to hold his tea, or a wooden bowl with an edge of ormolu,
to hold the rouleaus of guineas.

(35) Quinze, the French for fifteen. This is a game at cards, in which the winner is he who counts
fifteen, or nearest to that number, in all the points of his hand. Three, five, or six might
play at it. Two entire packs of cards are used, so disposed that the spades and clubs are
on one side, and the hearts and diamonds on the other. The entire art of the game consists
in making fifteen; below that number the party loses.

2. THE COCOA-TREE CLUB.

This club was remarkable for high if not for foul play. GRAHAM'S CLUB.

This gaming club is remarkable for a scandal which made some noise at the time of its occurrence,
and one version of which a writer in the Times has been at some pains to rectify. In Mr Duncombe's
'Life' of his father occurs the following account of this curious transaction.

'In Graham's Club there was also a good deal of play, and large sums were lost and won among the
noblemen and gentlemen who were its members. An unpleasant rumour circulated in town in the
winter of 1836, to the effect that a noble lord had been detected
in cheating by means of marked cards.

The presumed offender was well known in society as a skilful card-player,
but by those who had been most intimate with him was considered incapable
of any unfair practice.

He was abroad when the scandal was set afloat, but returned to England directly he heard of
it, and having traced the accusation to its source, defied his traducers. Thus challenged,
they had no alternative but to support their allegation, and it took this shape:--They accused
Henry William Lord de Ros of marking the edges of the court cards with his thumb-nail, as well
as of performing a certain trick by which he unfairly secured an ace as the turn-up card.
His accusers were ---- ----, who had formerly kept a gaming table; Mr ---- ----, also a professional
gambler; Lord Henry Bentinck, and Mr F. Cumming. Lord Henry appears to have taken no very active
part in the proceedings; the other three had lost money in play with Lord de Ros, and, as
unsuccessful gamblers have done before and since, considered that they had lost it unfairly.

'Lord de Ros, instead of prosecuting the four for a libel, brought an action only against Cumming,
which permitted the others to come forward as witnesses against him. The cause came on in
the Court of King's Bench before Lord Denman.

The plaintiff's witnesses were Lord Wharncliffe, Lord Robert Grosvenor,
the Earl of Clare, and Sir Charles Dalbiac, who had known and played
with him from between 20 to 30 years, as a very skilful but honourable
Whist player.

The evidence of Mr Lawrence, the eminent surgeon, proved that Lord de Ros had long suffered
under a stiffness of the joints of the fingers that made holding a pack of cards difficult, and the
performance of the imputed trick of legerdemain impossible. For the defence appeared the keeper
of the house and his son; two or three gamblers who had lived by
their winnings; one acknowledged to have won L35,000 in 15 years.

Mr Baring Wall, one of the witnesses, swore that he had never witnessed anything improper in
the play of Lord de Ros, though he had played with and against him many years; another witness,
the Hon. Colonel Anson, had observed nothing suspicious; but the testimony of others went to prove
that the aces and kings had been marked inside their edges; and one averred that he had seen
Lord de Ros perform sauter la coupe a hundred times. The whole case wore much the look of
a combination among a little coterie who lived by gambling to drive from the field a player
whose skill had diminished their income; nevertheless, the incidents
sworn to by some of them wore a suspicious significance, and a verdict
was given against Lord de Ros, which he only survived a short time.'

On
this statement the Times' reviewer comments as follows:--

'If many
old scandals may be revived with impunity, there are some that cannot.

Mr Duncombe the younger has hit on one which affects several gentlemen
still living, and his injurious version of it cannot be neutralized
or atoned for by an apology to one.

We call attention to it in the hope that any more serious notice will be rendered needless by
the simple exposure of its inaccuracies.

'It is difficult to conceive a more inexcusable misstatement, for the case was fully reported,(36)
and the public judgment perfectly coincided with the verdict. Lord de Ros was not abroad when
the scandal was set afloat. He went abroad after the scene at Graham's had set all London talking,
and he returned in consequence of a peremptory call from his friends. He was most reluctantly
induced to take the required steps for the vindication of his character; and it is preposterous
to suppose that any little coterie would have dreamt of accusing a man of his rank and position
with the view of driving a skilful player from the field.

His accusers were not challenged. Neither were they volunteers. They became his accusers, because
they formed the Whist party at which he was first openly denounced. They signed a paper particularizing
their charge, and offered to refer the question to a tribunal of gentlemen, with the Duke of Wellington
or Lord Wharncliffe to preside. Would a little coterie, who lived by gambling, have made this
offer? Or would Lord de Ros have refused it if he had been the intended victim of a conspiracy?
Lord Henry Bentinck signed the paper, appeared as a witness, and took quite as active a part in
the proceedings as any of the four, except Mr Cumming, who undertook the sole legal liability
by admitting the publication of the paper.

(36) The Times of February 11 and 13, 1837.

'The evidence was overwhelming.

Suspicions had long been rife; and on no less than ten or twelve occasions the marked packs had been
examined in the presence of unimpeachable witnesses, and sealed up. These packs were produced
at the trial. Several witnesses swore to the trick called sauter la coupe. It was the late
Sir William Ingilby who swore that he had seen Lord de Ros perform it from 50 to 100 times;
and when asked why he did not at once denounce him, he replied that if he had done so before his
Lordship began to get blown upon, he should have had no alternative
between the window and the door.

Of course, every one who had been in the habit of playing with Lord
de Ros prior to the exposure would have said the same as Sir Charles
Dalbiac and Mr Baring Wall.

With regard to the gentlemen whose names we have omitted we take it for granted that the author
is not aware of the position they held, and continue to hold, or he would hardly have ventured
to describe them so offensively. He has apologized to one, and he had better apologize to
the other without delay.

'The case was complete without the evidence of either of the original accusers, and the few friends
of Lord de Ros who tried to bear him up against the resulting obloquy were obliged to go with
the stream. When Lord Alvanley was asked whether he meant to leave his card, he replied, "No,
he will stick it in his chimney-piece and count it among his honours.'"

Having read through the long case as reported in the Times, I must declare that I do not find
that the evidence against Lord de Ros was, after all, so 'overwhelming' as the reviewer declares;
indeed, the 'leader' in the Times on the trial emphatically raises a doubt on the subject.
Among other passages in it there is the following:--

'In the process of the trial it appeared that the most material part of the evidence against Lord
de Ros, that called sauter la coupe,--which, for the sake of our English readers we shall translate
into CHANGING THE TURN-UP CARD,--the times and places at which it
was said to have been done could not be specified.

Some of the witnesses had seen the trick done 50 or 100 times by
Lord de Ros, but could neither say on what day, in what week, month,
or even year, they had so seen it done.

People were excessively struck at this deviation from the extreme punctuality required in criminal
cases by the British courts of law.'

'The disclosures,' says Mr Grant,(27) 'which took place in the Court
of Queen's Bench, on the occasion of the trial of Lord de Ros, for
cheating at cards, furnished the strongest demonstration that he was
not the only person who was in the habit of cheating in certain clubs;
while there were others who, if they could not be charged with direct
cheating, or cheating in their own persons, did cheat indirectly,
and by proxy, inasmuch as they, by their own admission, were, on frequent
occasions, partners with Lord de Ros, long after they knew that he
habitually or systematically cheated.

    The noble lord, by the confession
    of the titled parties to whom
    I allude, thus cheated for himself and them at the same time.'

(37)
Sketches in London.

Lord de Ros was at the head of the barons of England. He was the son of Lord Henry Fitzgerald,
and Lady de Ros, who inherited in her own right that ancient title, which dates from the reign
of Henry III.

    He had studied at Eton and Oxford,
    and afterwards on the Continent, and there was not a more accomplished
man in Europe.

He possessed an ample fortune, was a member of several of the clubs--White's, Boodle's, Brookes',
and Graham's, and one of the best Whist players in England.

       It appears that at Graham's Club, at the commencement of the season,
and before Lord de Ros came to town, whispers were circulated of unfair
play, and various persons were supposed guilty.

A determination was therefore formed that the club should be dissolved
and reconstructed, leaving out the names of certain persons to whom
suspicion attached.

The main object of the master of the club, and of some of those who
attended it for the purpose of professional gain, was that its character
should be cleared.

Not long after Lord de Ros came to town he received an anonymous
letter, cautioning him against continuing to play at Graham's, and
intimating to him, if he did so, that measures would be taken which
he would have reason to regret.

Of course his Lordship disregarded the threat; he attended the club
for several days more assiduously than before, and continued to play
until the end of the season, in the beginning of July.

In September the Satirist newspaper published a distinct charge of unfair play against Lord de
Ros, whilst the latter was at Baden, and he returned to England and commenced an action for libel
against the newspaper.

He was charged with being in the habit of marking the cards, the effect being to create a very slight
and almost imperceptible indentation, and to make a ridge or wave on the back, so that a practised
eye would be able, on looking at the right place, knowing where to expect a mark, to discern whether
the ace was there or not.
 Not knowing he had put it in that position, I removed it twice. Then he whispered to me,
saying: "Why do you remove that chair? I want it to lean on." The fact was, his physical strength
was gone. When he arose his bands and knees trembled with excitement, and the more so as the
entire audience arose and cheered him. One hand on the top of the chair, he stood for half
an hour, saying useful things, and, among others, these words: "I hear men sometimes say, when
a man writes his name on the records of a visible Church, that he had better let other things
alone, especially public affairs. I am not a believer in that Christianity which hides itself
away. I believe in that robust Christianity that goes right out in God's world and works. If
there ever was a time in our country, that time is now, when the young men of this country
should reflect and act according to the teachings of God's holy Word, and attempt to purify,
lift up, and carry our country onward and forward, so that it shall be in practice what it
is in theory--the great leading Christian nation of the globe. You will be disappointed in
many of your hopes and aspirations. The friends near and dear to you will turn sometimes coldly
from you; the wives of your bosom and the children of your love will be taken from you; your
high hopes may be blasted; but, gentlemen, when friends turn their backs upon you, when you
lay your dear ones away, when disappointments come to you on the right hand and on the left,
there is one source for a true and brave heart, and that is an abiding faith in God, and a
trust in the Lord Jesus Christ."

Having concluded his address he sat down, physically exhausted. When we helped him into his
carriage we never expected to see him again. The telegram from Washington announcing his prostration
and certain death was no surprise. But there and then ended as remarkable a life as was ever
lived in America.

It is no great thing if a man who has been carefully nurtured by intelligent parents, and then
passed through school, college, and those additional years of professional study, go directly
to the front. But start a man amid every possible disadvantage, and pile in his way all possible
obstacles, and then if he take his position among those whose path was smooth, he must have
the elements of power. Henry Wilson was great in the mastering and overcoming all disadvantageous
circumstances. He began at the bottom, and without any help fought his own way to the top.
If there ever was a man who had a right at the start to give up his earthly existence as a
failure, that man was Henry Wilson. Born of a dissolute father, so that the son took another
name in order to escape the disgrace; never having a dollar of his own before he was twenty-one
years of age; toiling industriously in a shoemaker's shop, that he might get the means of schooling
and culture; then loaning his money to a man who swamped it all and returned none of it; but
still toiling on and up until he came to the State Legislature, and on and up until he reached
the American Senate, and on and up till he became Vice-president. In all this there ought to
be great encouragement to those who wake up late in life to find themselves unequipped. Henry
Wilson did not begin his education until most of our young men think they have finished theirs.
If you are twenty-five or thirty, or forty or fifty, it is not too late to begin. Isaac Walton
at ninety years of age wrote his valuable book; Benjamin Franklin, almost an octogenarian,
went into philosophic discoveries; Fontenelle's mind blossomed even in the Winter of old age;
Arnauld made valuable translations at eighty years of age; Christopher Wren added to the astronomical
and religious knowledge of the world at eighty-six years of age.

Do not let any one, in the light of Henry Wilson's career, be discouraged. Rittenhouse conquered
his poverty; John Milton overcame his blindness; Robert Hall overleaped his sickness; and plane
and hammer, and adze and pickax, and crowbar and yardstick, and shoe-last have routed many
an army of opposition and oppression. Let every disheartened man look at two pictures--Henry
Wilson teaching fifteen hours a day at five dollars a week to get his education, and Henry
Wilson under the admiring gaze of Christendom at the national capital. He was one of the few
men who maintained his integrity against violent temptations. The tides of political life all
set toward dissipation. The congressional burying-ground at Washington holds the bones of many
congressional drunkards. Henry Wilson seated at a banquet with senators and presidents and
foreign ministers, the nearest he ever came to taking their expensive brandies and wines was
to say, "No, sir, I thank you; I never indulge." He never drank the health of other people
in any thing that hurt his own. He never was more vehement than in flinging his thunderbolts
of scorn against the decanter and the dram-shop. What a rebuke it is for men in high and exposed
positions in this country who say, "We can not be in our positions without drinking." If Henry
Wilson, under the gaze of senators and presidents, could say No, certainly you under the jeers
of your commercial associates ought to be able to say No. Henry Wilson also conquered all temptations
to political corruption. He died comparatively a poor man, when he might have filled his own
pockets and the pockets of his friends if he had only consented to go into some of the infamous
opportunities which tempted our public men. Credit Mobilier, which took down so many senators
and representatives, touched him, but glanced off, leaving him uncontaminated in the opinion
of all fair-minded men. He steered clear of the "Lobby," that maelstrom which has swallowed
up so many strong political crafts. The bribing railroad schemes that ran over half of our
public men always left him on the right side of the track. With opportunities to have made
millions of dollars by the surrender of good principles, he never made a cent. Along by the
coasts strewn with the hulks of political adventurers he voyaged without loss of rudder or
spar. We were not surprised at his funeral honors. If there ever was a man after death fit
to lie on Abraham Lincoln's catafalque, and near the marble representation of Alexander Hamilton,
and under Crawford's splendid statue of Freedom, with a sheathed sword in her hand and a wreath
of stars on her brow, and to be carried out amid the acclamation and conclamation of a grateful
people, that man was Henry Wilson.

The ministers did not at his obsequies have a hard time to make out a good case as to his future
destiny, as in one case where a clergyman in offering consolation as to the departure of a
man who had been very eminent, but went down through intemperance till he died in a snow-bank,
his rum-jug beside him. At the obsequies of that unfortunate, the officiating pastor declared
that the departed was a good Greek and Latin scholar. We have had United States senators who
used the name of God rhetorically, and talked grandly about virtue and religion, when at that
moment they were so drunk they could scarcely stand up. But Henry Wilson was an old-fashioned
Christian, who had repented of his sins and put his trust in Christ. By profession he was a
Congregationalist; but years ago he stood up in a Methodist meeting-house and told how he had
found the Lord, and recommending all the people to choose Christ as their portion--the same
Christ about whom he was reading the very night before he died, in that little book called
"The Changed Cross," the more tender passages marked with his own lead-pencil; and amid these
poems of Christ Henry Wilson had placed the pictures of his departed wife and departed son,
for I suppose he thought as these were with Christ in heaven their dear faces might as well
be next to His name in the book.

It was appropriate that our Vice-president expire in the Capitol buildings, the scene of so
many years of his patriotic work. At the door of that marbled and pictured Vice-president's
room many a man has been obliged to wait because of the necessities of business, and to wait
a great while before he could get in; but that morning, while the Vice-president was talking
about taking a ride, a sable messenger arrived at the door, not halting a moment, not even
knocking to see if he might get in, but passed up and smote the lips into silence forever.
The sable messenger moving that morning through the splendid Capitol stopped not to look at
the mosaics, or the fresco, or the panels of Tennessee and Italian marble, but darted in and
darted out in an instant, and his work was done. It is said that Charles Sumner was more scholarly,
and that Stephen A. Douglas was a better organizer, and that John J. Crittenden was more eloquent;
but calling up my memory of Henry Wilson, I have come to the conclusion that that life is grandly
eloquent whose peroration is heaven.--DR. TALMADGE, in The Sunday Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

XLIV.

JOAN OF ARC

(BORN 1412--DIED 1431.)

THE PEASANT MAIDEN WHO DELIVERED HER COUNTRY AND BECAME A MARTYR IN ITS CAUSE.

No story of heroism has greater attractions for youthful readers than that of Joan of Arc,
the Maid of Orleans. It would be long to tell how for hundreds of years the greatest jealousy
and mistrust existed between England and France, and how constant disputes between their several
sovereigns led to wars and tumults; how, in the time of Henry the Fifth, of England, a state
of wild confusion existed on the continent, and how that king also claimed to be king of France;
how this fifth Henry was married to Catherine, daughter of King Charles, and how they were
crowned king and queen of France; how, in the midst of his triumphs, Henry died, and his son,
an infant less than a year old, was declared king in his stead; how wars broke out, and how,
at last, a simple maiden saved her country from the grasp of ambitious men. Hardly anything
in history is more wonderful than, the way in which she was raised up to serve her country's
need, and, having served it, died a martyr in its cause.

Joan of Arc, Maid of Orleans, was born in the forest of Greux, upon the Meuse, in the village
of Domremy, in Lorraine, in the year 1412. At this time France was divided into two factions--the
Burgundians and the Armagnacs--the former of whom favored the English cause, and the latter
pledged to the cause of their country.

Joan was the daughter of simple villagers. She was brought up religiously, and from her earliest
youth is said to have seen visions and dreamed dreams; the one great dream of her life was,
however, the deliverance of her country from foreign invasions and domestic broils. When only
about thirteen years of age, she announced to the astonished townspeople that she had a mission,
and that she meant to fulfill it.

The disasters of the war reached Joan's home; a party of Burgundians dashed into Domremy, and
the Armagnacs fled before them. Joan's family took refuge in the town of Neufchateau, and she
paid for their lodging at an inn by helping the mistress of the house.

Here, in a more public place, it was soon seen and wondered at that such a young girl was so
much interested in the war. Her parents were already angry that she would not marry. They began
to be frightened now. Jacques D'Arc told one of his sons that sooner than let Joan go to the
camp he would drown her with his own hands. She could not, however, be kept back. Very cautiously,
and as though afraid to speak of such high things, she began to let fall hints of what she
saw. Half-frightened herself at what she said, she exclaimed to a neighbor, "There is now,
between Colombey and Vaucouleurs, a maid who will cause the king of France to be crowned!"

Now came the turn in the war, when all the strength of both sides was to be gathered up into
one great struggle, and it was to be shown whether the king was to have his right, or the usurper
triumph. The real leaders of the war were the Duke of Bedford, regent of England, and the captains
of the French army. Bedford gathered a vast force, chiefly from Burgundy, and gave its command
to the Earl of Salisbury. The army went on; they gained, without a struggle, the towns of Rambouillet,
Pithwier, Jargean, and others. Then they encamped before the city of Orleans. To this point
they drew their whole strength. Orleans taken, the whole country beyond was theirs, as it commanded
the entrance to the River Loire and the southern provinces; and the only stronghold left to
King Charles was the mountain country of Auvergne and Dauphine.

The men of Orleans well knew how much depended upon their city. All that could be done they
did to prepare for a resolute defense. The siege of Orleans was one of the first in which cannon
were used. Salisbury visiting the works, a cannon broke a splinter from a casement, which struck
him and gave him his death wound. The Earl of Suffolk, who was appointed to succeed him, never
had his full power.

Suffolk could not tame the spirit of the men of Orleans by regular attack, so he tried other
means. He resolved to block it up by surrounding it with forts, and starve the people out.
But for some time, before the works were finished, food was brought into the city; while the
French troops, scouring the plains, as often stopped the supplies coming to the English. Faster,
however, than they were brought in, the provisions in Orleans wasted away. And through the
dreary Winter the citizens watched one fort after another rise around them. The enemy was growing
stronger, they were growing weaker; they had no prospect before them but defeat; when the Spring
came would come the famine; their city would be lost, and then their country.

The eyes of all France were upon Orleans. News of the siege and of the distress came to Domremy,
and Joan of Arc rose to action. Her mind was fixed to go and raise the siege of Orleans and
crown Charles king. Not for one moment did she think it impossible or even unlikely. What God
had called her to do, that she would carry out. She made no secret of her call, but went to
Vaucouleurs and told De Briancourt that she meant to save France. At first the governor treated
her lightly, and told her to go home and dream about a sweetheart; but such was her earnestness
that at last not only he, but thousands of other people, believed in the mission of Joan of
Arc. And so, before many days, she set out, with many noble attendants, to visit Charles at
the castle of Chinon.

On all who saw her, Joan's earnestness, singleness of heart, and deep piety made but one impression.
Only the king remained undecided; he could hardly be roused to see her, but at last he named
a day, and Joan of Arc had her desire and stood before him in the great hall of Chinon. Fifty
torches lighted the hall, which was crowded with knights and nobles. Joan, too self-forgetful
to feel abashed, walked forward firmly. Charles had placed himself among his courtiers, so
that she should not know him. Not by inspiration, as they thought, but because with her enthusiasm
she must have heard him described often and often, she at once singled him out and clasped
his knees. Charles denied that he was the king. "In the name of God," Joan answered, "it no
other but yourself. Most noble Lord Dauphin, I am Joan, the maid sent on the part of God to
aid you and your kingdom; and by his command I announce to you that you shall be crowned in
the city of Rheims, and shall become his lieutenant in the realm of France." Charles led her
aside, and told his courtiers afterward that in their private conversation she had revealed
to him secrets. But all that she said appears to have been, "I tell thee from my Lord that
thou art the true heir of France." A few days before the king had offered a prayer for help
only on condition that he was the rightful sovereign, and it has been well said that "such
a coincidence of idea on so obvious a topic seems very far from supernatural or even surprising."
It is but one out of many proofs how ready every one in those days was to believe in signs
and wonders.

Her fame spread wide; there went abroad all kinds of reports about her miraculous powers. Already
the French began to hope and the English to wonder.

The king still doubted, and so did his council. People in our own day, who admire the wisdom
of the Dark Ages, would do well to study the story of Joan of Arc. She was taken before the
University of Poictiers. Six weeks did the learned doctors employ in determining whether Joan
was sent by God or in league with the devil. She never made any claim to supernatural help
beyond what she needed to fulfill her mission. She refused to give them a sign, saying that
her sign would be at Orleans--the leading of brave men to battle. She boasted no attainments,
declaring that she knew neither A nor B; only, she must raise the siege of Orleans and crown
the Dauphin. The friars sent to her old home to inquire about her, and brought back a spotless
report of her life. So, after the tedious examination, the judgment of the learned and wise
men of Poictiers was that Charles might accept her services without peril to his soul.

The vexatious delays over, Joan of Arc set out for Orleans. In the church of Fierbois she had
seen, among other old weapons, a sword marked with five crosses. For this she sent. When she
left Vaucouleurs she had put on a man's dress; now she was clad in white armor. A banner was
prepared under her directions; this also was white, strewn with the lilies of France.

So much time had been lost that Joan was not at Blois till the middle of April. She entered
the town on horseback; her head was uncovered. All men admired her skillful riding and the
poise of her lance. Joan carried all before her now; she brought spirit to the troops; the
armor laid down was buckled on afresh when she appeared; the hearts of the people were lifted
up--they would have died for her. Charles, who had been with the army, slipped back to Chinon;
but he left behind him better and braver men--his five bravest leaders. Joan began her work
gloriously by clearing the camp of all bad characters. Father Pasquerel bore her banner through
the streets, while Joan, with the priests who followed, sang the Litany and exhorted men to
prepare for battle by repentance and prayer. In this, as in all else, she succeeded.

When the English heard that Joan was really coming, they pretended to scorn her. Common report
made Joan a prophet and a worker of miracles. Hearts beat higher in Orleans than they had done
for months. More terror was in the English camp than it had ever known before.

The English took no heed of Joan's order to submit. They little thought that in a fortnight
they would flee before a woman.

She entered the city at midnight. LaHire and two hundred men, with lances, were her escort.
Though she had embarked close under an English fort, she was not molested. Untouched by the
enemy, coming in the midst of the storm, bringing plenty, and the lights of her procession
shining in the black night, we can not wonder that the men of Orleans looked on her as in very
truth the messenger of God. They flocked round her, and he who could touch but her horse was
counted happy.

Joan went straight to the cathedral, where she had the Te Deum chanted. The people thought
that already they were singing their thanksgivings for victory. Despair was changed to hope;
fear to courage. She was known as "the Maid of Orleans." From the cathedral she went to the
house of one of the most esteemed ladies of the town, with whom she had chosen to live. A great
supper had been prepared for her, but she took only a bit of bread sopped in wine before she
went to sleep. By her orders, the next day an archer fastened to his arrow a letter of warning,
and shot it into the English lines. She went herself along the bridge and exhorted the enemy
to depart. Sir William Gladsdale tried to conceal his fright by answering her with such rude
words as made her weep. Four days afterwards the real terror of the English was shown. The
Maid of Orleans and LaHire went to meet the second load of provisions. As it passed close under
the English lines not an arrow was shot against it; not a man appeared.

Joan of Arc was now to win as much glory by her courage as before her very name had brought.
While she was lying down to rest, that same afternoon, the townspeople went out to attack the
Bastile of St. Loup. They had sent her no word of the fight. But Joan started suddenly from
her bed, declaring that her voices told her to go against the English. She put on her armor,
mounted her horse, and, with her banner in her hand, galloped through the streets. The French
were retreating, but they gathered again round her white banner, and Joan led them on once
more. Her spirit rose with the thickness of the fight. She dashed right into the midst. The
battle raged for three hours round the Bastile of St. Loup, then Joan led on the French to
storm it. Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orleans, had gained her first victory.

The day after there was no fighting, for it was the Feast of the Ascension. Joan had been first
in the fight yesterday; she was first in prayer to-day. She brought many of the soldiers to
their knees for the first time in their lives.

All along the captains had doubted the military skill of "the simplest girl they had ever seen,"
and they did not call her to the council they held that day. They resolved to attack the English
forts on the southern and weakest side. After a little difficulty Joan consented, when she
was told of it. The next day, before daybreak, she took her place with LaHire on a small island
in the Loire, from whence they crossed in boats to the southern bank. Their hard day's work
was set about early. Joan would not wait for more troops, but began the fight at once. The
English joined two garrisons together, and thus for a time overpowered the French as they attacked
the Bastile of the Augustins.

Carried on for a little while with the flying, Joan soon turned round again upon the enemy.
The sight of the witch, as they thought her, was enough. The English screened themselves from
her and her charms behind their walls. Help was coming up for the French. They made a fresh
attack; the bastile was taken and set on fire. Joan returned to the city slightly wounded in
the foot.

The only fort left to the English was their first-made and strongest, the Bastile de Tournelles.
It was held by the picked men of their army, Gladsdale and his company. The French leaders
wished to delay its attack until they had fresh soldiers. This suited Joan little. "You have
been to your council," she said, "and I have been to mine. Be assured that the council of my
Lord will hold good, and that the council of men will perish." The hearts of the people were
with her; the leaders thought it best to give in. Victory followed wherever she led, and, after
several actions, at which she took active part, the siege was raised. It began on the 12th
of October, 1428, and was raised on the 14th of May, 1429.

Even now, in Orleans, the 14th of May is held sacred, that day on which, in 1429, the citizens
watched the English lines growing less and less in the distance.

Joan of Arc had even yet done but half her work. Neither Charles nor Henry had been crowned.
That the crown should be placed on Charles's head was what she still had to accomplish. Though
we have always spoken of him as "King," he was not so in reality until this had been done.
He was strictly but the Dauphin. Bedford wished much that young Henry should be crowned; for
let Charles once have the holy crown on his brow, and the oil of anointing on his head, and
let him stand where for hundreds of years his fathers had stood to be consecrated kings of
France, in the Cathedral of Rheims, before his people as their king, any crowning afterwards
would be a mockery. Charles was now with the Court of Tours. Rheims was a long way off in the
north, and to get there would be a work of some difficulty; yet get there he must, for the
coronation could not take place anywhere else. Joan went to Tours, and, falling before him,
she begged him to go and receive his crown, saying, that when her voices gave her this message
she was marvelously rejoiced. Charles did not seem much rejoiced to receive it. He said a great
deal about the dangers of the way, and preferred that the other English posts on the Loire
should be taken first. It must have been very trying to one so quick and eager as Joan to deal
with such a person, but, good or bad, he was her king. She was not idle because she could not
do exactly as she wished; she set out with the army at once.

The news flew onwards. The inhabitants of Chalons and of Rheims rose and turned out the Burgundian
garrisons. The king's way to Rheims was one triumph, and, amidst the shouts of the people,
he entered Rheims on the 16th of July. The next day Charles VII was crowned. The visions of
the Maid had been fulfilled. By her arm Orleans had been saved, through her means the king
stood there. She was beside the king at the high altar, with her banner displayed; and when
the service was over, she knelt before him with streaming eyes, saying, "Gentle king, now is
done the pleasure of God, who willed that you should come to Rheims and be anointed, showing
that you are the true king, and he to whom the kingdom should belong."

All eyes were upon her as the savior of her country. She might have secured every thing for
herself; but she asked no reward, she was content to have done her duty. And of all that was
offered her, the only thing she would accept was that Domremy should be free forever from any
kind of tax. So, until the time of the first French Revolution, the collectors wrote against
the name of the village, as it stood in their books, "Nothing, for the Maid's sake."

Joan of Arc said that her work was done. She had seen her father and her uncle in the crowd,
and, with many tears, she begged the king to let her go back with them, and keep her flocks
and herds, and do all as she had been used to do. Never had man or woman done so much with
so simple a heart. But the king and his advisers knew her power over the people, and their
entreaties that she would stay with them prevailed. So she let her father and her uncle depart
without her. They must have had enough to tell when they reached home.

We have little heart to tell the rest of the story. At length the king reached Paris, and the
Duke of Bedford was away in Normandy. Joan wished to attack the city, and it was done. Many
of the soldiers were jealous of her, and they fought only feebly. They crossed the first ditch
round the city, but found the second full of water. Joan was trying its depth with her lance,
when she was seriously wounded. She lay on the ground cheering the troops, calling for fagots
and bundles of wood to fill the trench, nor would she withdraw until the evening, when the
Duke of Alencon persuaded her to give up the attempt, as it had prospered so ill.

Were it not so wicked and so shameful, it might be laughable to think of the king's idleness.
It is really true that he longed for his lovely Chinon, and a quiet life, as a tired child
longs to go to sleep. He made his misfortune at Paris, which would have stirred up almost any
one else to greater exertions, an excuse for getting away. The troops were sent to winter quarters;
he went back across the Loire now, when the English leader was away, and the chief towns in
the north ready to submit. Had he but shown himself a man, he might have gained his capital,
and the whole of the north of France. The spirit lately roused for him was down again. It seemed
really not worth while to fight for a king who would not attend to business for more than two
months together.

We know little more of the Maid of Orleans in the Winter, than that she continued with the
army. After her defeat at Paris, she hung her armor up in the church at St. Denis, and made
up her mind to go home. The entreaties of the French leaders prevailed again; for, though they
were jealous of her, and slighted her on every occasion, they knew her power, and were glad
to get all out of her that they could. In December, Joan and all her family were made nobles
by the king. They changed their name from Arc to Du Lys, "Lys" being French for lily, the flower
of France, as the rose is of England; and they were given the lily of France for their coat
of arms.

With the return of Spring the king's troops marched into the northern provinces. Charles would
not leave Chinon. The army was utterly disorderly, and had no idea what to set about. Joan
showed herself as brave as ever in such fighting as there was. But, doubting whether she was
in her right place or her wrong one, in the midst of fierce and lawless men, nothing pointed
out for her to do, her situation was most miserable. The Duke of Gloucester sent out a proclamation
to strengthen the hearts of the English troops against her. The title was "against the feeble-minded
captains and soldiers who are terrified by the incantations of the Maid."

A long and troublesome passage had Joan of Arc from this bad world to her home in heaven, where
dwelt those whom she called "her brothers of Paradise." Her faith was to be tried in the fire--purified
seven times. All the French army were jealous of her. The governor of the fortress of Compiègne
was cruel and tyrannical beyond all others, even in that age. Compiègne was besieged by the
English; Joan threw herself bravely into the place. She arrived there on the 24th of May, and
that same evening she headed a party who went out of the gates to attack the enemy. Twice they
were driven back by her; but, seeing more coming up, she made the sign to go back. She kept
herself the last; the city gate was partly closed, so that but few could pass in at once. In
the confusion she was separated from her friends; but she still fought bravely, until an archer
from Picardy seized her and dragged her from her horse. She struggled, but was obliged to give
up; and so the Maid of Orleans was taken prisoner.

Joan was first taken to the quarters of John of Luxembourg. Her prison was changed many times,
but the English were eager to have her in their own power. In November John of Luxemburg sold
her to them for a large sum of money. When she was in his prison she had tried twice to escape.
She could not try now; she was put in the great tower of the castle of Rouen, confined between
iron gratings, with irons upon her feet. Her guards offered her all kinds of rudeness, and
even John of Luxembourg was so mean as to go and rejoice over her in her prison.

It would have been a cruel thing to put her to death as a prisoner of war; but those were dark
days, and such things were often done. The desire of the English was to hold Joan up to public
scorn as a witch, and to prove that she had dealings with the devil. With this wicked object,
they put her on her trial. They found Frenchmen ready enough to help them. One Canchon, bishop
of Beauvais, even petitioned that the trial might be under his guidance. He had his desire;
he was appointed the first judge, and a hundred and two other learned Frenchmen were found
ready to join him.

Before these false judges Joan of Arc was called--as simple a girl as she was when, just two
years before, she left Domremy. All that malice and rage could do was done against her. She
was alone before her enemies. Day after day they tried hard to find new and puzzling questions
for her; to make her false on her own showing; to make her deny her visions or deny her God.
They could not. Clearheaded, simple-hearted, she had been always, and she was so still. She
showed the faith of a Christian, the patience of a saint, in all her answers. Piety and wisdom
were with her, wickedness and folly with her enemies. They tried to make evil out of two things
in particular: her banner, with which it was declared she worked charms, and the tree she used
to dance around when she was a child, where they said she went to consult the fairies. Concerning
her banner, Joan said that she carried it on purpose to spare the sword, so she might not kill
any one with her own hand; of the tree, she denied that she knew any thing about fairies, or
was acquainted with any one who had seen them there. She was tormented with questions as to
whether the saints spoke English when she saw them, what they wore, how they smelt, whether
she helped the banner or the banner her, whether she was in mortal sin when she rode the horse
belonging to the bishop of Senlis, whether she could commit mortal sin, whether the saints
hated the English. Every trap they could lay for her they laid. She answered all clearly; when
she had forgotten any thing she said so; her patience never gave way; she was never confused.
When asked whether she was in a state of grace, she said: "If I am not, I pray to God to bring
me to it; and, if I am, may he keep me in it."

After all, they did not dare condemn her. Try as they could, they could draw nothing from her
that was wrong. They teased her to give the matter into the hands of the Church. She put the
Church in heaven, and its head, above the Church on earth and the pope. The English were afraid
that after all she might escape, and pressed on the judgment. The lawyers at Rouen would say
nothing, neither would the chapter. The only way to take was to send the report of the trial
to the University of Paris, and wait the answer.

On the 19th of May arrived the answer from Paris. It was this: that the Maid of Orleans was
either a liar or in alliance with Satan and with Behemoth; that she was given to superstition,
most likely an idolater; that she lowered the angels, and vainly boasted and exalted herself;
that she was a blasphemer and a traitor thirsting for blood, a heretic and an apostate. Yet
they would not burn her at once; they would first disgrace her in the eyes of people. This
was done on the 23d of May. A scaffold was put up behind the Cathedral of St. Onen; here in
solemn state sat the cardinal of Winchester, two judges, and thirty-three helpers. On another
scaffold was Joan of Arc, in the midst of guards, notaries to take reports, and the most famous
preacher of France to admonish her. Below was seen the rack upon a cart.

The preacher began his discourse. Joan let him speak against herself, but she stopped him when
he spoke against the king, that king for whom she had risked every thing, but who was dreaming
at Chinon, and had not stretched out a finger to save her. Their labor was nearly lost; her
enemies became furious. Persuading was of no use; she refused to go back from any thing she
had said or done. Her instant death was threatened if she continued obstinate, but if she would
recant she was promised deliverance from the English. "I will sign," she said at last. The
cardinal drew a paper from his sleeve with a short denial. She put her mark to it. They kept
their promise of mercy by passing this sentence upon her: "Joan, we condemn you, through our
grace and moderation, to pass the rest of your days in prison, to eat the bread of grief and
drink the water of anguish, and to bewail your sins."

When she went back to prison there was published through Rouen, not the short denial she had
signed, but one six pages long.

Joan was taken back to the prison from whence she came. The next few days were the darkest
and saddest of all her life, yet they were the darkest before the dawn. She had, in the paper
which she had signed, promised to wear a woman's dress again, and she did so. Her enemies had
now a sure hold on her. They could make her break her own oath. In the night her woman's dress
was taken away, and man's clothes put in their place. She had no choice in the morning what to do.

As soon as it was day Canchon and the rest made haste to the prison to see the success of their
plot. Canchon laughed, and said, "She is taken." No more hope for her on earth; no friend with
her, save that in the fiery furnace was "One like unto the Son of God."

Brought before her judges, Joan only said why she had put on her old dress. They could not
hide their delight, and joked and laughed among themselves. God sent her hope and comfort;
she knew that the time of her deliverance was near. She was to be set free by fire. They appointed
the day after the morrow for her burning. But a few hours' notice was given her. She wept when
she heard that she was to be burnt alive, but after awhile she exclaimed: "I shall be to-night
in Paradise!"

Eight hundred Englishmen conducted her to the market-place! On her way, the wretched priest
L'Oiseleur threw himself on the ground before her, and begged her to forgive him. Three scaffolds
had been set up. On one sat the cardinal with all his train. Joan and her enemies were on another.
The third, a great, towering pile, built up so high that what happened on it should be in the
sight of all the town, had upon it the stake to which she was to be tied. Canchon began to
preach to her. Her faith never wavered; her Saviour, her best friend, was with her. To him
she prayed aloud before the gathered multitude. She declared that she forgave her enemies,
and begged her friends to pray for her. Even Canchon and the cardinal shed tears. But they
hastened to dry their eyes, and read the condemnation. All the false charges were named, and
she was given over to death.

They put her on the scaffold and bound her fast to the stake. Looking round on the crowd of
her countrymen, who stood looking over, she exclaimed: "O Rouen! I fear thou wilt suffer for
my death!" A miter was placed on her head, with the words: "Relapsed Heretic, Apostate, Idolater."
Canchon drew near, to listen whether even now she would not say something to condemn herself.
Her only words were, "Bishop, I die through your means." Of the worthless king she said: "That
which I have well or ill done I did it of myself; the king did not advise me." These were her
last words about earthly matters. The flames burnt from the foot of the pile, but the monk
who held the cross before her did not move. He heard her from the midst of the fire call upon
her Saviour. Soon she bowed her head and cried aloud "Jesus!" And she went to be with him forever.

We have little to add of the character of the Maid of Orleans. She was simple amid triumph
and splendor; unselfish, when she might have had whatever she had asked; humane and gentle,
even on the battlefield; patient in the midst of the greatest provocation; brave in the midst
of suffering; firm in faith and hope when all beside were cast down; blameless and holy in
her life, when all beside were wicked and corrupt.

The English never recovered from the blow struck by the Maid. Their power in France gradually
weakened. In 1435 peace was made between Charles VII and the Duke of Burgundy. One by one the
ill-gotten gains were given up, and the English king lost even the French provinces he inherited.
In the year 1451 the only English possession in France was the town of Calais. This, too, was
lost about a hundred years after, in the reign of Queen Mary. Yet the kings of England kept
the empty title of kings of France, and put the lilies of France in their coat of arms until
the middle of the reign of George III.

The last incident in the strange story of Joan of Arc remains to be told. Ten years after her
execution, to the amazement of all who knew him, Charles VII suddenly shook off his idleness
and blazed forth a wise king, an energetic ruler. Probably in this, his better state of mind,
he thought with shame and sorrow of Joan of Arc. In the year 1456 he ordered a fresh inquiry
to be made. At this every one was examined who had known or seen her at any period of her short
life. The judgment passed on her before was contradicted, and she was declared a good and innocent
woman. They would have given the whole world then to have had her back and to have made amends
to her for their foul injustice. But the opinions of men no longer mattered to her. The twenty-five
years since she had been burnt at Rouen had been the first twenty-five of her uncounted eternity
of joy.

"The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come."

       *       *       *       *       *

XLV.

THE SONG OF WORK

MANY PHASES AND MANY EXAMPLES.

Music.

    In every leaf and flower
     The pulse of music beats,
    And works the changes hour by hour,
     In those divine retreats.

    Alike in star and clod
     One melody resides,
    Which is the working will of God,
     Beyond all power besides.

    It is by angels heard,
     By all of lower birth,
    The silent music of the Word
     Who works in heaven and earth.

    For music order is
     To which all work belongs,
    And in this wondrous world of His
     Work is the song of songs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Divine Workers.

    The Father hitherto,
     And his Eternal Son
    Work, work, and still have work to do
     With each successive sun.

    O bow the heart in awe,
     And work as with the Lord,
    Who, with his everlasting law,
     Works on in sweet accord.

    Work is the law of love
     Which rules the world below,
    Which rules the brighter world above,
     Through which, like God, we grow.

    And this and every day
     The work of love is rest
    In which our sorrows steal away,
     Which cares may not infest.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Will of God.

    With heart as strong as fate,
     Brave worker, girt and shod,
    Adore! and know that naught is great
     Except the will of God.

    O sweet, sweet light of day,
     Through which such wonders run,
    Thou ownest, in thy glorious sway,
     Allegiance to the sun.

    And thou, O human will,
     As wondrous as the light,
    Cans't thou thy little trust fulfill
     Save through Another's might?

    With heart to conquer fate,
     Brave worker, girt and shod,
    Work on! and know that he is great
     Who does the will of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Laborare est Orare."

    To labor is to pray,
     As some dear saint has said,
    And with this truth for many a day
     Have I been comforted.

    The Lord has made me bold
     When I have labored most,
    And with his gifts so manifold,
     Has given the Holy Ghost

    When I have idle been
     Until the sun went down,
    Mine eyes, so dim, have never seen
     His bright, prophetic crown.

    O, praise the Lord for work
     Which maketh time so fleet,
    In which accusers never lurk,
     Whose end is very sweet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Birds of Grace.

    O little birds of grace,
     To-day ye sweetly sing,
    Yea, make my heart your nesting-place,
     And all your gladness bring.

    When ye are in my heart,
     How swiftly pass the days!
    The fears and doubts of life depart,
     And leave their room to praise.

    My work I find as play,
     And all day long rejoice;
    But, if I linger on my way,
     I hear this warning voice:

    With fervor work and pray,
     And let not coldness come,
    Or birds of grace will fly away
     To seek a warmer home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Duty.

    O work that Duty shows
     Through her revealing light!
    It is in thee my bosom glows
     With infinite delight!

    The shadows flee away
     Like mist before the sun;
    And thy achievement seems to say,
     The will of God is done!

    Ah, what if Duty seem
     A mistress cold and stern!
    Can he who owns her rule supreme
     From her caresses turn?

    O work that Duty shows
     In light so fair and clear,
    Whoever thy completion knows
     Is 'minded heaven is near!

       *       *       *       *       *

Moses.

    In Pharaoh's dazzling court
     No work did Moses find
    That could heroic life support
     And fill his heart and mind.

    Beneath their grievous task
     Did not his kindred groan?
    And a great voice above him ask,
     "Dost thou thy brethren own?"

    The work which Duty meant
     At length he found and did,
    And built a grander monument
     Than any pyramid.

    Sometimes his eyes were dim,
     All signs he could not spell;
    Yet he endured as seeing Him
     Who is invisible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Discoverers.

    In search of greener shores
     The Northmen braved the seas
    And reached, those faith-illumined rowers,
     Our dear Hesperides.

    And when Oblivion
     Swept all their work away,
    And left for faith to feed upon
     But shadows lean and gray,

    Columbus dreamed the dream
     Which fired a southern clime
    And hailed a world--O toil supreme!--
     As from the womb of Time.

    God's dauntless witnesses
     For toil invincible,
    They gazed across uncharted seas
     On the invisible.

       *       *       *       *       *

God's Order.

    In gazing into heaven
     In idle ecstacy,
    What progress make ye to the haven
     Where ye at length would be?

    In heaven-appointed work
     The sure ascension lies.
    O, never yet did drone or shirk
     Make headway to the skies.

    Who in his heart rebels
     Has never ears to hear
    The morning and the evening bells
     On yonder shores so clear.

    For work communion is
     With God's one order here,
    And all the secret melodies
     Which fill our lives with cheer.

       *       *       *       *       *

David.

    In action day by day
     King David's manhood grew,
    A character to live for aye,
     It was so strong and true.

    Hordes of misrule became
     As stubble to the fire,
    Till songs of praise like leaping flame
     Burst from his sacred lyre.

    He grappled with all rude
     And unpropitious things:
    A garden from the solitude
     Smiled to the King of kings.

    And fiercer yet the strife
     With mighty foes within,
    Who stormed the fortress of his life
     And triumphed in his sin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Good out of Evil.

    True David halted not
     When sin had cast him down,
    Upon his royal life a blot,
     Death reaching for his crown.

    His work was but half done;
    A man of action still,
     He struggled in the gloaming sun
    To do his Maker's will;

    Till in the golden light
     Great words began to shine:
    In sorrow is exalting might,
     Repentance is divine.

    And now the shepherd king
     We count the human sire
    Of One who turns our hungering
     Into achieved desire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elijah.

    Elijah, through the night
     Which shrouded Israel
    In toiling, groping for the light,
     Foretold Immanuel.

    And in heroic trust
     That night would yield to day--
    His imperfections thick as dust
     Along the desert way;

    His bold, rebuking cry
     Heard in the wilderness.
    Till from the chariot of the sky
     His mantle fell to bless--

    The stern, half-savage seer
     Became a prophecy
    Of gladness and the Golden Year,
     In all high minstrelsy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Aelemaehus the Monk.

    How well he wrought who stood
     Against an ancient wrong,
    And left the spangles of his blood
     To light the sky of song!

    A gladiatorial show,
     And eighty thousand men
    For savage pastime all aglow--
     O marvel there and then!

    An unknown monk, his life
     Defenseless, interposed,
    Forbade the old barbaric strife--
     The red arena closed!

    That unrecovered rout!
     Those fire-shafts from the Sun!
    O Telemaque! who, who shall doubt
     Thy Master's will was done?

       *       *       *       *       *

Washington.

    The deeds of Washington
     Were lit with patriot flame;
    A crown for Liberty he won,
     And won undying fame.

    He heard his country's cry,
     He heard her bugle-call,
    'Twas sweet to live for her, or die;
    Her cause was all in all.

    He heard the psalm of peace,
     He sought again the plow;
    O civic toil, canst thou increase
     The laurels for his brow?

    As with a father's hand
     He led the infant state;
    Colossus of his native land,
     He still is growing great.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lincoln.

    God placed on Lincoln's brow
     A sad, majestic crown;
    All enmity is friendship now,
     And martyrdom renown.

    A mighty-hearted man,
     He toiled at Freedom's side,
    And lived, as only heroes can,
     The truth in which he died.

    Like Moses, eyes so dim,
     All signs he could not spell;
    Yet he endured, as seeing Him
     Who is invisible.

    His life was under One
     "Who made and loveth all;"
    And when his mighty work was done,
     How grand his coronal!

       *       *       *       *       *

Garfield.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not Too Near.

    O workers brave and true,
     Whose lives are full of song,
    I dare not take too near a view,
     Lest I should do you wrong.

    I only look to see
     The marks of sacrifice,
    The heraldry of sympathy,
     Which can alone suffice.

    For nothing else is great,
     However proudly won,
    Or has the light to indicate
     The will of God is done.

    Ah, who would judge what fire
     Will surely burn away!
    And ask not, What doth God require
     At the Eternal Day?

       *       *       *       *       *

"Stonewall" Jackson.

    God somehow owns the creeds
     That seem so much amiss,
    What time they bear heroic deeds
     Above analysis.

    How, in his burning zeal,
     Did Stonewall breast his fate,
    Converted to his country's weal
     With fame beyond debate!

    Sincere and strong of heart,
     In very truth he thought
    His ensign signaled duty's part;
     And as he thought he fought.

    And truth baptized in blood,
     As many a time before,
    Gave honor to his soldierhood,
    Though trailed the flag he bore.

Work Its Own Reward

      O worker with the Lord,
      To crown thee with success,
    Believe thy work its own reward,
      Let self be less and less.

      In all things be sincere,
      Afraid not of the light,
    A prophet of the Golden Year
      In simply doing right.

      And be content to serve,
      A little one of God,
    In loyalty without reserve,
      A hero armored, shod.

      Or this dear life of thine,
      Of every charm bereft,
    Will crumble in the fire divine,
      Naught, naught but ashes left.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now and Here

      O not to-morrow or afar,
      Thy work is now and here;
    Thy bosom holds the fairest star--
      Dost see it shining clear?

      The nearest things are great,
      Remotest very small,
    To him with eyes to penetrate
      The silent coronal.

      So deep the basis lies
      Of life's great pyramid,
    That out of reach of common eyes
      Prophetic work is hid.

    His reign for which we pray,
      His kingdom undefiled,
    Whose scepter shall not pass away,
      Is in a little child.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Little Child

      Come hither, little child,
      And bring thy heart to me;
    Thou art the true and unbeguiled,
      So full of melody.

      The presence of a child
      Has taught me more of heaven,
    And more my heart has reconciled
      Than Greece's immortal Seven.

      For when I sometimes think
      That life is void of song,
    Before a little child I sink
      And own that I am wrong.

      And lo my heart grows bright
      That was so dark and drear,
    Till in the tender morning light
      I find the Lord is near.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Divine Presence

      O, when the Lord is near,
      The rainbow banners wave;
    The star I follow shineth clear,
      I am no more a slave.

      As if to honor Him,
      My work is true and free;
    And flowing to the shining brim,
      The cup of heaven I see.

      I marvel not that song
      Should be employment there
    In which the innumerable throng
      Their palms of triumph bear;

      Or that the choral strife
      And golden harps express
    The stirring labors of the life
      Of peace and righteousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Death in Life

      The song of work, I know,
      Has here its minor tone;
    And in its ever-changing flow,
      Death, death in life is known.

      Discordant notes, alas!
      So often cleave the air
    And smite the music as they pass,
      And leave their poison there.

      And oft, ah me! from some
      Wild region of the heart
    Will startling intimations come,
      And peace at once depart.

      With open foes without,
      And secret foes within,
    His heart must needs be brave and stout
      That would life's battle win.

Evil

      In the great wilderness
      Through which I hold my way,
    Is there no refuge from distress,
      Where foes are kept at bay?

      Saint Anthony of old
      Could not from evil flee;
    The desert cave was found to hold
      His mortal enemy.

      And knew untiring Paul
      The world's relentless scorn;
    While in his flesh, amid it all,
      He bore another thorn.

      Our common lot is cast
      In a great camp of pain!
    Until the night be over-past,
      Some foe will yet remain. 

       The robber carried the maiden he had stolen to Stambul.

He took her straight to the Kizlar-Aga whose office it is to purchase
slave-girls for the harem of the Padishah.

      The bargaining did not take long.
      The Kizlar-Aga paid down
    at once the price which the slave-merchant
      demanded, and forthwith handed Irene over to the slave-women of the
Seraglio, who immediately conducted her to a bath fragrant with perfumes.

      Her face, her figure, her
      charms, amazed them exceedingly,
    and they lifted up their voices and praised
      her loudly.

      But when Irene heard their praises
      she shuddered, and her
    heart died away within her.
      Surely God never gave her beauty in order that she might be sacrificed
to it?

      At that moment she would
      have much preferred to have been
    born humpbacked, squinting, swarthy; she
      would have liked her face to be all seamed and scarred like half-frozen
water, and her body all diseased so that everyone who saw her would
shrink from her with disgust--better that than the feeling which now
made her shrink from the contemplation of herself."

       

      Then they put upon her
      a splendid robe, hung diamond
    ear-rings in her ears, tied a beautiful
      shawl round her loins, encircled her arms and feet with rings of
gold, and so led her into the secret apartment where the damsels of
the Padishah were all gathered together.

      This, of course, was
      long, long ago. Who can tell
    what Sultan was reigning then? Why,
      even our fathers did not know his name.

      
      
    "Pomp and splendour, flowers and
      curtains adorned the immense saloon, the ceiling whereof was inlaid
with precious stones, while the floor was fashioned entirely of mother-o'-pearl--he
who set his foot thereon might fancy he was walking on rainbows.

      Moreover, cunning artificers
      had wrought upon this
    mother-o'-pearl floor flowers
      and birds and other most wondrous fantastical figures, so that it
was a joy to look thereon, for no carpet, however precious, was suffered
to cover all this splendour.

       Yet lest the cold surface of the pavement should chill the feet of
the damsels, rows of tiny sandals stood ready there that they might
bind them upon their feet and so walk from one end of the room to
the other at their ease.

And these sandals they called kobkobs."

      
      
    "Aye, aye!" cried the anxious Janaki, "you
      describe the interior of the Seraglio so vividly that I almost feel
frightened.

      If a man listened long enough
      to such a tale he might easily
    get to feel as guilty as if he had actually
      cast an eye into the Sultan's harem, and 'twere best for him to die
rather than do that."

      
      
    "Is it not a tale that I am telling
      you? is not the room I have just described to you but a creature
of the imagination?--In the centre of this saloon, then, was a large
fountain, whence fragrant rose-water ascended into the air sporting
with the golden balls.

      Along the whole length
      of the walls were immense
    Venetian mirrors, in which splendid
      odalisks admired their own shapely limbs.

       Hundreds and hundreds of lamps shone upon the pillars which supported
the room--lamps of manifold colours--which gave to the vast chamber
the magic hues of a fairy palace, and in the midst thereof seemed
to float a transparent blue cloud--it was the light smoke of ambergris
and spices which the damsels blew forth from their long narghilis.

But what impressed Irene far more than all this magnificence, was
the figure of the Sultana Asseki, to whom she was now conducted.

      A tall, muscular lady was
      sitting at the end of
    the room on a raised divan. Her figure
      was slender round the waist but broad and round about the shoulders.

      Her snow-white arms and neck
      were encircled by rows of real
    pearls with diamond clasps. A lofty
      heron's plume nodded on her bejewelled turban, and lent a still haughtier
aspect to that majestic form.

      With her large black eyes
      she seemed to be in
    the habit of ruling the whole world."

"Yes,
      yes!" exclaimed Janaki, "you describe it all so vividly, that I am
half afraid of sitting down here and listening to you.

      You might at least have
      let a little bit of a veil
    hang in front of her face."
      

"But this happened long, long ago, remember!

    Who can even say under what Sultan
    it took place?... So they
    led the slave-girl into the presence of
    the Sultana, who was surrounded by two hundred other slave-girls,
and was playing with a tiny dwarf.

    They were singing and dancing
    all around her and swinging censers.
    Above her head was a large fruit-tree
    made entirely of sugar, and covered with sugar-fruit of every shape
and hue, and from time to time the Sultana would pluck off one of
these fruits and taste a little bit of it and give the remainder to
the tiny dwarf, who ate up everything greedily.

    Here Irene was seized
    by a black eunuch--a horrid,
    pockmarked man, whose upper
    lip was split right down so that all his teeth could be seen."

    
    
    "Just like the present Kizlar-Aga!" cried
    Musli laughing, "I fancy I can see him standing before me now!"

       

    "The Moor commanded Irene
    to fall on her face before
    the Sultana. Irene fell on her face
    accordingly, and while her forehead beat the ground before the Sultana
she muttered to herself the words: 'Holy Mother of God! protectress
of virgins, thou seest me in this place, when I call upon thee, deliver
me!' The Sultana, meanwhile, had commanded her handmaidens to let
down Irene's tresses, and as she stood before her there covered by
her own hair from head to heel, she bade them paint her face red because
it was so pale, and her eyelashes brown.

    She commanded them also to
    salve her hair with fragrant
    unguents, and to hang chains of real
    pearls about her arms and neck.

    Irene knew not the meaning
    of these things. She knew
    not what they meant to do with her
    till the Kizlar-Aga approached her, and said these words to her in
a reassuring tone: 'Rejoice, fortunate damsel! for a great felicity
awaits thee.

      In a week's time it will be
      the Feast of Bairam, and the
    favourite Sultana has chosen thee from
      among the other odalisks as a gift for the Padishah.

       Rejoice, therefore, I say.' But Irene at these words would fain have
died.

And in the meantime the Sultana had placed a large fan in her hand
made entirely of pea-cocks' feathers, and permitted her to sit down
by her side and hold the little dwarf in her lap.

      At a later day Irene
      discovered that this
    was a mark of supreme condescension.
      During the next six days the damsel lived amidst mortal terrors.

      Her companions envied her.
      The damsels of the harem
    do not love each other, they can
      only hate.

      Every day she beheld the
      Sultan, whose gentle face inspired
    involuntary respect, but the very
      idea of loving him filled her soul with horror.

      The Sultan spent the greater
      part of his time with his
    favourite wife, but it happened
      sometimes that he cast a handkerchief
       towards this or that odalisk, which was a great piece of good fortune
for her, or the reverse--it all depends upon the point of view.

The damsel whom the Grand Seignior seemed to favour the most was
a beautiful blonde Italian girl; on one occasion this beautiful blonde
damsel neglected to cast her eyes down as they chanced to encounter
the eyes of the Sultana.

      The following day Irene could
      not see this damsel anywhere,
    and on inquiring after her was told
      by her bedfellow in a whisper that she had been strangled during
the night.

      And oftentimes at dead of
      night the silence would be
    broken by a shriek from the secret
      dungeon of the Seraglio, followed by the sound of something splashing
into the water, and regularly, on the day following every such occurrence,
a familiar face would be missing from the Seraglio.

     All these victims were self-confident
     slave-girls, who had
    been unable to conceal their joy at
     the Sultan's favours, and therefore had been cast into the water.

     Nobody ever inquired about
     them any more."
    
     Janaki shivered all over.

       

"It is well that this is all a tale," he observed.

      
      
    But Gül-Bejáze only continued her
      story.

      
      "At last the Feast of Bairam
    arrived, and throughout the
      day all the cannons on the Bosphorus sent forth their thunders.

      In the evening the Sultan came
      to the Seraglio weary and inclined
    to relaxation, and then the Sultana
      Asseki took Irene by the hand and conducted her to the Padishah,
and presented her to him, together with gold-embroidered garments,
preserved fruits, and other gifts intended for his delectation.

      The Grand Seignior regarded
      the girl tenderly, while
    she, like a kid of the flocks offered
      to a lion in a cage, stood trembling before him.

       But when the Sultan seized her hand to draw her towards him she sighed:
'Blessed Virgin!'--and lo! at these words her face grew pale, her
eyes closed, and she fell to the ground as one dead.

This was not the first time that such a spectacle had been seen in
the harem.

Everyone of the damsels brought thither generally commenced with
a fainting-fit.

The slave-girls immediately came running up to her, rubbed her body
with fragrant unguents, applied penetrating essences to her face,
let icy-cold water trickle down upon her bosom--and all was useless!

The damsel did not awaken, and lay there like a corpse till the following morning--in fact,
she never stirred from the spot where they laid her down. Next day the Padishah again summoned
her to his presence.

He spoke to her in the most tender manner. He gave her all manner of beautiful gifts, glittering
raiment, necklaces, bracelets, and diamond aigrettes. The slave-girls, too, censed her all
around with stupefying perfumes, bathed her in warm baths fragrant with ambergris and spikenard,
and gave her fiery potions to drink. But it was all in vain. At the name of the Blessed Virgin,
the blood ceased to flow to her heart, she fell down, died away, and every resource of ingenuity
failed to arouse her. The same thing happened on the third day likewise. Then the Sultana Asseki's
wrath was kindled greatly against her. She declared that this was no doing of Allah's as they might
suppose. No, it was the damsel's own evil temper which made her pretend to be dead, and she immediately
commanded that the damsel should be tortured. First of all they extended her stark naked on the icy-cold
marble pavement--not a sign of life, not a shiver did she give. Then they held her over a slow
fire on a gridiron--she never moved a muscle. Then they sent and sought for red ants in the
garden among the puspáng-trees and scattered them all over her body. Yet the girl never once quaked
beneath the stings of the poisonous insects. Finally they thrust sharp needles down to the very quicks
of her nails, and still the damsel did not stir. Then the Sultana Asseki, full of fury, seized
a whip, and lashed away at the damsel's body till she could lash no more, yet she could not
thrash a soul into the lifeless body."

"By Allah!" cried Halil, smiting the table with his heavy fist at this point of the narration,
"that Sultana deserves to be sewn up in a leather sack and cast into the Bosphorus."

"Why, 'tis only a tale, you know," said Gül-Bejáze, stroking mockingly the chin of worthy Halil
Patrona, and then she resumed her story. "The Sultan commanded that Irene should be expelled
from the harem, for he had no desire to see this living corpse anywhere near him, and the Sultana
gave her as a present to the Padishah's nephew, the son of his own brother.

"The prince was a pale, handsome youth, as those whom women love much are generally wont to
be. He was kept in a remote part of the Seraglio, for although every joy of life was his, and
he was surrounded by wealth, pomp, and slave-girls, he was never permitted to quit the Seraglio.
The Sultana herself led Irene to him, thinking that the fine eyes of the handsome youth would
be the best talisman against the enchantment obsessing the charms of the strange damsel. The
pale prince was charmed with the looks of the girl. He coaxed and flattered. He begged and implored
her not to die away beneath his kisses and embraces. In vain. The girl swooned at the very first
touch, and he who touched her lips might just as well have touched the lips of a corpse. The
prince knelt down beside her, and implored her with tears to come to herself again. She heard
not and she answered not. At last the fair Sultana Asseki herself had compassion on his tears
and lamentations which produced no impression on the dead. Her heart
bled for him.

She bent over the pale prince, embraced him tenderly, and comforted him with her caresses.
And the prince allowed himself to be comforted, and they rejoiced greatly together; for of
course there was nobody present to see them, for the senseless damsel on the floor might have been
a corpse so far as they were concerned."

"Hum!" murmured the Berber-Bashi to himself, "this is a thing well worth remembering."

"On the following day the pale prince made a present of Irene to the Grand Vizier. The Grand Vizier
also rejoiced greatly at the sight of the damsel; took her into his
cellar, showed her there three great vats full of gold and precious
stones, and told her that all these things should be hers if only
she would love him.

Then he took and showed her the multitude of precious ornaments that he had concealed beneath
the flooring of his palace, and promised these to her also. For every kiss she should give him,
he offered her one of his palaces on the shores of the Sweet Waters, yes, for every kiss a
palace."

"I would burn all these palaces to the ground!" cried Halil impetuously.

"Nay, nay, my son, be sensible!" said Janaki. He himself now began to feel that there was something
more than a mere tale in all this.

But the Berber-Bashi pricked up his ears and grew terribly attentive when mention was made of the
hidden treasures of the Grand Vizier.

"The sight of the treasures," resumed the girl, "had no effect upon Irene. She never failed to invoke
the name of the Blessed Virgin whenever the face of a man drew near to her face, and the Blessed
Virgin always wrought a miracle in her behalf."

"'Tis my belief," said Halil, "that there were no miracles at all in the matter; but that the
girl had so strong a will that by an effort she made herself dead to all tortures."

"At last they came to a definite decision concerning this slave-girl, it was resolved to sell
her by public auction in the bazaars--to sell her as a common slave to the highest bidder. And so
Irene fell to a poor hawker who gave his all for her. For a whole month this man left his slave-girl
untouched, and the girl who could not be subdued by torture, nor the blandishments of great men,
nor by treasures, nor by ardent desire, became very fond of the poor costermonger, and no longer
became as one dead when his burning lips were impressed upon her face."

And with that Gül-Bejáze embraced her husband and kissed him again and again, and smiled upon
him with her large radiant eyes.

"A very pretty story truly!" observed Musli, smacking his lips; "what a pity there is not more
of it!"

"Oh, no regrets, worthy Mussulman, there is more of it!" cried the
Berber-Bashi, rising from his place; "just listen to the sequel of it!

Having had the girl sold by auction in the bazaar, the Padishah bade Ali Kermesh, his trusty
Berber-Bashi, make inquiries and see what happened to the damsel after the sale. Now the Berber-Bashi
knew that the girl had only pretended to faint, and the Berber-Bashi brought the girl back to the Seraglio
before she had spent a single night alone with her husband. For I am the Berber-Bashi and thou art
Gül-Bejáze, that same slave-girl going by the name of Irene who feigned to be dead."

Everyone present leaped in terror to his feet except Janaki, who fell down on his knees before the
Berber-Bashi, embraced his knees, and implored him to treat all that the girl had said as if
he had not heard it.

"We are lost!" whispered the bloodless Gül-Bejáze. The intoxication of joy and wine had suddenly
left her and she was sober once more.

Janaki implored, Musli cursed and swore, but Halil spake never a word. He held his wife tightly
embraced in his arms and he thought within himself, I would rather
allow my hand to be chopped off than let her go.

Janaki promised money and loads of treasure to Ali Kermesh if only he would hold his tongue,
say nothing of what had happened, and let the girl remain with her husband.

But the Berber-Bashi was inexorable.

"No," said he, "I will take away the girl, and your treasures also shall be mine. Ye are the
children of Death; yea, all of you who are now drawing the breath of life in this house, for
to have heard the secret that this slave-girl has blabbed out is sufficient to kill anyone thrice
over. I command you, Irene, to take up your veil and follow me, and you others must remain here
till the Debedzik with the cord comes to fetch you also."

With these words he cast Janaki from him, approached the damsel and seized her hand. Halil never
once relaxed his embrace.

"Come with me!"

"Blessed Mary! Blessed Mary!" moaned the girl.

"Your guardian saints are powerless to help you now, for your husband's lips have touched you; come
with me!"

       

Then only did Halil speak.

His voice was so deep, gruff, and stern, that those who heard it
scarce recognised it for his:

"Leave go of my wife, Ali Kermesh!"
cried he.

"Silence thou dog! in another hour thou wilt be hanging up before thine own gate."

"Once more I ask you--leave go of my wife, Ali Kermesh!"

Instead of answering, the Berber-Bashi would, with one hand, have torn the wife from her husband's
bosom while he clutched hold of Halil with the other, whereupon Halil brought down his fist so
heavily on the skull of the Berber-Bashi that he instantly collapsed without uttering a single
word.

"What have you done?" cried Janaki in terror. "You have killed the chief barber of the Sultan!"

"Yes,
I rather fancy I have," replied Halil coolly.

Musli rushed towards the prostrate form of Ali Kermesh, felt him all over very carefully, and
then turned towards the hearth where the others were sitting.

"Dead he is, there is no doubt about it. He's as dead as a door-nail. Well, Halil, that was
a fine blow of yours I must say. By the Prophet! one does not see a blow like that every day.
With your bare hand too! To kill a man with nothing but your empty fist! If a cannon-ball had
knocked him over he could not be deader than he is."

"But what shall we do now?" cried Janaki, looking around him with tremulous terror. "The Sultan
is sure to send and make inquiries about his lost Berber-Bashi. It is known that he came here in disguise.
The affair cannot long remain hidden."

"There is no occasion to fear anything," said Musli reassuringly. "Good counsel is cheap. We
can easily find a way out of it. Before the business comes to light, we will go to the Etmeidan
and join the Janissaries. There let them send and fetch us if they dare, for we shall be in a perfectly
safe place anyhow. Why, don't you remember that only last year the rebel, Esref Khan, whom the Padishah
had been pursuing to the death, even in foreign lands, hit, at last, upon the idea of resorting
to the Janissaries, and was safer against the fatal silken cord here, in the very midst of
Stambul, than if he had fled all the way to the Isle of Rhodes for refuge. Let us all become Janissaries,
I and you and Janaki also."

But Janaki kicked vigorously against the proposition.

"You two may go over to the Janissaries if you like, but in the meantime my daughter and I will
make our escape to the Isle of Tenedos and there await tidings of you. One jar of dates I will
take with me, the other you may divide among the Janissaries; it
will put them in a good humour and make them receive you more amicably."

Halil

embraced his wife, kissed her, and wept over her. There was not much time for leave-taking. The
Debedjis who had accompanied the Berber-Bashi were beginning to grow impatient at the prolonged
absence of their master; they could be heard stamping about around the door.

"Hasten, hasten! we can have too much of this hugging and kissing,"
whispered Musli, lifting one of the jars on to his shoulders.

Yet Halil pressed one more long, long kiss on Gül-Bejáze's trembling
cheek.

"By Allah!" said he, "it shall not be long before we see each other
again."

And thus their ways parted right and left.

Musli conducted Janaki away in one direction, through a subterranean cellar, whilst Halil fled
away across the house-tops, and within a quarter of an hour the pair of them arrived at the Etmeidan.

FOOTNOTE:

[1]
Woodcutter.

CHAPTER V.

THE CAMP.

What a noise, what a commotion in the streets of Stambul! The multitude pours like a stream
towards the harbour of the Golden Horn. Young and old stimulate each other with looks of excitement
and enthusiasm. They stand together at the corners of the streets in tens and twenties, and
tell each other of the great event that has happened. On the Etmeidan, in front of the Seraglio,
in the doors of the mosques, the people are swarming, and from street to street they accompany
the banner-bearing Dülbendar, who proclaims to the faithful amidst the flourish of trumpets
that Sultan Achmed III. has declared war against Tamasip, Shah of Persia.

Everywhere faces radiant with enthusiasm, everywhere shouts of martial fervour.

From time to time a regiment of Janissaries or a band of Albanian
horsemen passes across the street, or escorts the buffaloes that drag
after them the long heavy guns on wheeled carriages.

The mob in its thousands follows them along the road leading to Scutari, where the camp has already
been pitched. For at last, at any rate, the Padishah is surfeited with so many feasts and illuminations,
and after having postponed the raising of the banner of the Prophet, under all sorts of frivolous
excuses, from the 18th day of Safer (2nd of September) to the 1st
day of Rebusler, and from that day again to the Prophet's birthday
ten days later still, the expected, the appointed day is at length
drawing near, and the whole host is assembling beneath the walls of
Scutari, only awaiting the arrival of the Sultan to take ship at once--the
transports are all ready--and hasten to the assistance of the heroic
Küprilizade on the battlefield.

The whole Bosphorus was a living forest planted with a maze of huge masts and spreading sails,
and a thousand variegated flags flew and flapped in the morning breeze.
The huge line of battle-ships, with their triple decks and their long
rows of oars, looked like hundred-eyed sea-monsters swimming with
hundreds of legs on the surface of the water, and the booming reverberation
of the thunder of their guns was re-echoed from the broad foreheads
of the palaces looking into the Bosphorus.

Everywhere along the sea-front
was to be seen an armed multitude; sparkling swords and lances in
thousands flash back the rays of the sun. The whole of the grass plain
round about was planted with tents of every hue; white tents for the
chief muftis, bright green tents for the viziers, scarlet tents for
the kiayaks, dark blue tents for the great officers of state, the
Emirs, the Mecca, Medina, and Stambul justiciaries, the Defterdars,
and the Nishandji; lilac-coloured tents for the Ulemas, bright blue
tents for the Müderesseks, azure-blue tents for the Ciaus-Agas, and
dark green designates the tent of the Emir Alem, the bearer of the
sacred standard.

Therefore, if you are not the enviable possessor of one of those "merry hearts that doeth good
like a medicine," both to yourself and to those with whom you come in contact, at least avoid
wounding these by dwelling upon their infirmities. Even should you see your friends in the
last stages of a long illness; though their cheeks are terrifying in their hollowness, and
their eyes resemble dark caverns with faint lights at the far ends, and all their other features
prove them soon to be embraced by the king of terrors, not only in sweet mercy's name do not
speak of it, but, unless compelled to do so, except by your softened tones, make no sign that
you notice it; remember you can not smooth their way to the tomb by descanting upon their poor
emaciated bodies, and there is just a chance that they may recollect you a trifle more kindly
when they have cast them off, like worn-out garments, if you now talk on pleasanter themes--themes
with which they are not already so grievously familiar.--GALE FOREST, in The Christian Union.

    COURTESY.

    The savor of our household talk,
      Which earneth silent thanks;
    The glory of our daily walk
      Among the busy ranks.

    Life's cleanly, lubricating oil,
      In which a help is found
    To make the wheels of common toil
      Go lightly, swiftly round.

    Benevolence and grace of heart
      That gives no needless pain,
    And pours a balm on every smart
      Till smiles appear again.

       *       *       *       *       *

XLVIII.

IDA LEWIS WILSON.

THE GRACE DARLING OF AMERICA.

About forty-six years ago a story of English heroism stirred the heart of the world. Grace
Darling was born at Bamborough, on the coast of Northumberland, in 1815, and died in 1842.
Her father was the keeper of the Long-stone Light-house, on one of the most exposed of the
Farne islands. On the night of September 6, 1838, the Forfarshire steamer, proceeding from
Hull to Dundee, was wrecked on one of the crags of the Farne group. Of fifty-three persons
on board, thirty-eight perished, including the captain and his wife. On the morning of the
7th the survivors were discovered by Grace clinging to the rocks and remnants of the vessel,
in imminent danger of being washed off by the returning tide. Grace, with the assistance of
her parents, but against their remonstrance, immediately launched a boat and, with her father,
succeeded in rescuing nine of them, and six escaped by other means. Presents and admiration
were showered upon her from all parts of the United Kingdom, and a public subscription to the
amount of £700 was raised for her. Among the many poets who sang her praises was Wordsworth,
in a poem of considerable length, of which the following is a passage:

    "Among the dwellers in the silent fields
    The natural heart is touched, and public way
    And crowded street resound with ballad strains,
    Inspired by one whose very name bespeaks
    Favor divine, exalting, human love;
    Whom, since her birth on bleak Northumbrian coast,
    Known unto few, but prized as far as known,
    A single act endears to high and low
    Through the whole land--to manhood, moved in spite
    Of the world's freezing cares; to generous youth;
    To infancy, that lisps her praise; to age,
    Whose eye reflects it, glistening through tears
    Of generous admiration. Such true fame
    Awaits her now; but, verily, good deeds
    Do no imperishable record find
    Save in the roll of heaven, where hers may live
    A theme for angels, when they celebrate
    The high-souled virtues which forgetful earth
    Has witnessed."

These lines describe equally well Ida Lewis, the heroine of our own country, whose brave deeds
have passed into the habit of a life.

Ida Lewis Wilson, for she is now married, is the daughter of Hosea Lewis, who was formerly
of the revenue service, became keeper of Lime Rock Lighthouse, in the inner harbor of Newport,
R.I. The lighthouse is situated on one of the small rocks of limestone in that harbor, and
is entirely surrounded by water.

From her thirteenth year Ida has resided on the rock. As the only means of connection with
the city of Newport is by water, she early learned the use of oars. When she was about fifteen
years of age she rescued from drowning four boys who had been thrown into the water by the
upsetting of their boat near the lighthouse. During the Winter of 1865-66, on one of the coldest
days of that season, she rescued a soldier belonging to Fort Adams, who was clinging to a skiff,
which had upset with him and become full of water. She lifted him out of the water into her
own boat and carried him to the lighthouse.

About this time the duty of looking after the light depended on Ida and her mother, her father
having become a hopeless cripple from paralysis. This charge they fulfilled in the most perfect
manner, no light on the coast being more regularly or more perfectly attended to. It is a singular
life to imagine, these two women living thus isolated from the rest of the world. The freedom
of the life, however, and the constant abundance of stimulating sea air, together with the
exercise of rowing to and from the city, gave Ida a physical strength and a health which makes
her richer in all the valuable part of life than many of her sex whose lives are passed in
constant repining for something to live for, while surrounded with all the appliances of luxury.
That Miss Lewis has also developed an independence of courage is shown by her deeds, which
prove also that the isolation of her life has not in any way prevented the development of the
tenderness of sympathy with suffering which is supposed to be peculiar to only the helplessness
of women.

It was owing to the efforts of the late Senator Burnside that Ida became the recognized keeper
of the lighthouse, a promotion as graceful as it was deserved. The matter was arranged in January,
1879, by Senator Burnside and Collector Pratt.

The keeper of Lime Rock Light then was Mrs. Zoradia Lewis, Ida's mother, who had been in charge
for a number of years. Mrs. Lewis's second daughter, who was very sick, required all the mother's
attention, and accordingly it was suggested to her that by her resignation the heroine could
receive the appointment. She gladly accepted the suggestion, and on January 24th Ida received
her appointment, with a salary of $750 a year, an increase of $250 over her mother's pay. In
communicating the appointment Secretary Sherman said: "This appointment is conferred upon you
as a mark of my appreciation for your noble and heroic efforts in saving human lives." Ida
Lewis had given up all hope that her claims would ever be recognized, and the news was joyfully
received.

In July, 1881, the Secretary of the Treasury awarded the gold life-saving medal to her in recognition
of her services in rescuing a number of persons from drowning since the passage of the act
authorizing such awards. Most of the rescues made were under circumstances which called for
heroic daring, and involved the risk of her life. The following summary of her achievements
in life-saving is taken from the records of the Treasury Department:

"The total number of lives Mrs. Ida Lewis Wilson has saved since 1854, so far as known, is
thirteen. In all these cases except two she has relied wholly on herself. Her latest achievement
was the rescue in February, 1881, of two bandsmen from Fort Adams, near Newport, R.I. The men
were passing over the ice near Lime Rock Light-house, where Mrs. Lewis Wilson resides, when
the ice gave way and they fell in. Hearing their cries, Mrs. Wilson ran out with a clothes-line
which she threw to them, successively hauling them out at a great risk to herself from the
double peril of the ice giving way beneath her and of being pulled in. Her heroism on various
occasions has won her the tribute of her State's Legislature expressed in an official resolution;
the public presentation to her of a boat by the citizens of Newport; a testimonial in money
from the officers and soldiers of Fort Adams for saving their comrades; and medals from the
Massachusetts Humane Society and the New York Life-saving Benevolent Association. To these
offerings is now fitly added the gold medal of the United States Life-saving Service."

The presentation took place at the Custom House at Newport, on October 11, 1881, in the presence
of many of the leading residents of the State, who met there upon invitation of Collector Cozzors.
Mrs. Wilson was introduced to the company by Ex-Collector Macy. The collector introduced Lieutenant-commander
F.E. Chadwick, U.S.N., who, in a happy speech, made the presentation of the highest token of
merit of the kind which can be given in this country, the life-saving medal of the first class,
conferred by the United States Government "for extreme heroic daring involving eminent personal
danger." After a simple and eloquent recital of the circumstances in which Mrs. Wilson had,
at the risk of her own life and in circumstances requiring the utmost skill and daring, saved
from a watery grave on six occasions thirteen persons, Commander Chadwick paid a glowing tribute
to the heroism of Mrs. Wilson, and concluded by reading the letter of Secretary of the Treasury
Windom, conferring the medal awarded to her under the law of June 20th, 1874. Lieutenant-governor
Fay responded on behalf of Mrs. Wilson, and an appropriate address was made by Ex-Governor
Van Zant on behalf of Newport and Rhode Island.

After the addresses the public were invited to inspect the gold medal, and were greatly impressed
with its beauty. It bears upon its obverse side a tablet with the following inscription:

    TO

    Ida Lewis Wilson,

    For Signal Heroism in Saving Two Men from Drowning,

    FEBRUARY 4, 1881.

Surrounding the tablet is the inscription:

    In Testimony of Heroic Deeds in Saving Life
      from the Peril of the Seas.

       *       *       *       *       *

XLIX.

RACHEL JACKSON

(BORN 1767--DIED 1828.)

THE WIFE OF OUR SEVENTH PRESIDENT.

Rachel Donelson was the maiden name of General Jackson's wife. She was born in Virginia, in
the year 1767, and lived there until she was eleven years of age. Her father, Colonel John
Donelson, was a planter and land surveyor, who possessed considerable wealth in land, cattle,
and slaves. He was one of those hardy pioneers who were never content unless they were living
away out in the woods, beyond the verge of civilization. Accordingly, in 1779, we find him
near the head-waters of the Tennessee River, with all his family, bound for the western part
of Tennessee, with a river voyage of two thousand miles before them.

Seldom has a little girl of eleven years shared in so perilous an adventure. The party started
in the depth of a severe Winter, and battled for two months with the ice before it had fairly
begun the descent of the Tennessee. But, in the Spring, accompanied by a considerable fleet
of boats, the craft occupied by John Donelson and his family floated down the winding stream
more rapidly. Many misfortunes befell them. Sometimes a boat would get aground and remain immovable
till its whole cargo was landed. Sometimes a boat was dashed against a projecting point and
sunk. One man died of his frozen feet; two children were born. On board one boat, containing
twenty-eight persons, the small-pox raged. As this boat always sailed at a certain distance
behind the rest, it was attacked by Indians, who captured it, killed all the men, and carried
off the women and children. The Indians caught the small-pox, of which some hundreds died in
the course of the season.

But during this voyage, which lasted several months, no misfortune befell the boat of Colonel
Donelson; and he and his family, including his daughter Rachel, arrived safely at the site
of the present city of Nashville, near which he selected his land, built his log house, and
established himself. Never has a settlement been so infested by hostile Indians as this. When
Rachel Donelson, with her sisters and young friends, went blackberrying, a guard of young men,
with their rifles loaded and cocked, stood guard over the surrounding thickets while the girls
picked the fruit. It was not safe for a man to stoop over a spring to drink unless some one
else was on the watch with his rifle in his arms; and when half a dozen men stood together,
in conversation, they turned their backs to each other, all facing different ways, to watch
for a lurking savage.

So the Donelsons lived for eight years, and gathered about them more negroes, more cattle,
and more horses than any other household in the settlement. During one of the long Winters,
when a great tide of emigration had reduced the stock of corn, and threatened the neighborhood
with famine, Colonel Donelson moved to Kentucky with all his family and dependents, and there
lived until the corn crop at Nashville was gathered. Rachel, by this time, had grown to be
a beautiful and vigorous young lady, well skilled in all the arts of the backwoods, and a remarkably
bold and graceful rider. She was a plump little damsel, with the blackest hair and eyes, and
of a very cheerful and friendly disposition. During the temporary residence of her father in
Kentucky, she gave her hand and heart to one Lewis Robards, and her father returned to Nashville
without her.

Colonel Donelson soon after, while in the woods surveying far from his home, fell by the hand
of an assassin. He was found pierced by bullets; but whether they were fired by red savages
or by white was never known. To comfort her mother in her loneliness, Rachel and her husband
came to Nashville and lived with her, intending, as soon as the Indians were subdued, to occupy
a farm of their own.

In the year 1788 Andrew Jackson, a young lawyer from North Carolina, arrived at Nashville to
enter upon the practice of his profession, and went to board with Mrs. Donelson. He soon discovered
that Mrs. Rachel Robards lived most unhappily with her husband, who was a man of violent temper
and most jealous disposition. Young Jackson had not long resided in the family before Mr. Robards
began to be jealous of him, and many violent scenes took place between them. The jealous Robards
at length abandoned his wife and went off to his old home in Kentucky, leaving Jackson master
of the field.

A rumor soon after reached the place that Robards Had procured a divorce from his wife in the
Legislature of Virginia; soon after which Andrew Jackson and Rachel Donelson were married.
The rumor proved to be false, and they lived together for two years before a divorce was really
granted, at the end of which time they were married again. This marriage, though so inauspiciously
begun, was an eminently happy one, although, out of doors, it caused the irrascible Jackson
a great deal of trouble. The peculiar circumstances attending the marriage caused many calumnies
to be uttered and printed respecting Mrs. Jackson, and some of the bitterest quarrels which
the general ever had had their origin in them.

At home, however, he was one of the happiest of men. His wife was an excellent manager of a
household and a kind mistress of slaves. She had a remarkable memory, and delighted to relate
anecdotes and tales of the early settlement of the country. Daniel Boone had been one of her
father's friends, and she used to recount his adventures and escapes. Her abode was a seat
of hospitality, and she well knew how to make her guests feel at home. It used to be said in
Tennessee that she could not write; but, "as I have had the pleasure of reading nine letters
in her own handwriting," says Parton, "one of which was eight pages long, I presume I have
a right to deny the imputation. It must be confessed, however, that the spelling was exceedingly
bad, and that the writing was so much worse as to be nearly illegible. If she was ignorant
of books, she was most learned in the lore of the forest, the dairy, the kitchen, and the farm.
I remember walking about a remarkably fine spring that gushed from the earth near where her
dairy stood, and hearing one of her colored servants say that there was nothing upon the estate
which she valued so much as that spring." She grew to be a stout woman, Which made her appear
shorter than she really was. Her husband, on the contrary, was remarkably tall and slender;
so that when they danced a reel together, which they often did, with all the vigor of the olden
time, the spectacle was extremely curious.

It was a great grief to both husband and wife that they had no children, and it was to supply
this want in the household that they adopted one of Mrs. Donelson's nephews, and named him
Andrew Jackson. This boy was the delight of them both as long as they lived.

Colonel Benton, so long in the United States Senate, himself a pioneer of the still remoter
West, who knew Mrs. Jackson well and long, recorded his opinion of her in the following forcible
language:

"A more exemplary woman in all the relations of life--wife, friend, neighbor, mistress of slaves--never
lived, and never presented a more quiet, cheerful, and admirable management of her household.
She had the general's own warm heart, frank manners, and admirable temper; and no two persons
could have been better suited to each other, lived more happily together, or made a house more
attractive to visitors. No bashful youth or plain old man, whose modesty sat them down at the
lower end of the table, could escape her cordial attention, any more than the titled gentlemen
at her right and left. Young persons were her delight, and she always had her house filled
with them, all calling her affectionately 'Aunt Rachel.'"

In the homely fashion of the time, she used to join her husband and guests in smoking a pipe
after dinner and in the evening. There are now living many persons who well remember seeing
her smoking by her fireside a long reed pipe.

When General Jackson went forth to fight in the war of 1812, he was still living in a log house
of four rooms. "And this house," says Parton, in a sketch written years ago, from which this
is chiefly drawn, "is still standing on his beautiful farm ten miles from Nashville. I used
to wonder, when walking about it, how it was possible for Mrs. Jackson to accommodate so many
guests as we know she did. But a hospitable house, like a Third Avenue car, in never full;
and in that mild climate the young men could sleep on the piazza or in the corn-crib, content
if their mothers and sisters had the shelter of the house. It was not until long after the
general's return from the wars that he built, or could afford to build, the large brick mansion
which he named the 'Hermitage,' The visitor may still see in that commodious house the bed
on which this happy pair slept and died, the furniture they used, and the pictures on which
they were accustomed to look. In the hall of the second story there is still preserved the
huge chest in which Mrs. Jackson used to stow away the woolen clothes of the family in the
Summer, to keep them from the moths. Around the house are the remains of the fine garden of
which she used to be proud, and a little beyond are the cabins of the hundred and fifty slaves,
to whom she was more a mother than a mistress."

A few weeks after the battle of New Orleans, when Jackson was in the first flush of his triumph,
this plain planter's wife floated down the Mississippi to New Orleans to visit her husband
and accompany him home. She had never seen a city before; for Nashville, at that day, was little
more than a village. The elegant ladies of New Orleans were exceedingly pleased to observe
that General Jackson, though he was himself one of the most graceful and polite of gentlemen,
seemed totally unconscious of the homely bearing, the country manners, and awkward dress of
his wife. In all companies and on all occasions he showed her every possible mark of respect.
The ladies gathered about her and presented her with all sorts of showy knick-knacks and jewelry,
and one of them undertook the task of selecting suitable clothes for her. She frankly confessed
that she knew nothing at all about such things, and was willing to wear any thing the ladies
thought proper. Much as she enjoyed her visit, she was glad enough to return to her old home
on the banks of the Cumberland, and resume her oversight of the dairy and the plantation.

Soon after the peace, a remarkable change came over the spirit of this excellent woman. Parson
Blackburn, as the general always called him, was a favorite preacher in that part of Tennessee,
and his sermons made so powerful an impression on Mrs. Jackson that she joined the Presbyterian
Church, and was ever after devotedly religious. The general himself was almost persuaded to
follow her example. He did not, however; but he testified his sympathy with his wife's feelings
by building a church for her--a curious little brick edifice--on his own farm; the smallest
church, perhaps, in the United States. It looks like a very small school-house; it has no steeple,
no portico, and but one door; and the interior, which contains forty little pews, is unpainted,
and the floor is of brick. On Sundays, the congregation consisted chiefly of the general, his
family, and half a dozen neighbors, with as many negroes as the house would hold, and could
see through the windows. It was just after the completion of this church that General Jackson
made his famous reply to a young man who objected to the doctrine of future punishment.

"I thank God," said this youth, "I have too much good sense to believe there is such a place
as hell."

"Well, sir," said General Jackson, "I thank God there is such a place."

"Why, general," asked the young man, "what do you want with such a place of torment as hell?"

To which the general replied, as quick as lightning: "To put such rascals as you are in, that
oppose and vilify the Christian religion."'

The young man said no more, and soon after found it convenient to take his leave.

Mrs. Jackson did not live to see her husband President of the United States, though she lived
long enough to know that he was elected to that office. When the news was brought to her of
her husband's election, in December, 1828, she quietly said: "Well, for Mr. Jackson's sake"
(she always called him Mr. Jackson) "I am glad; for my own part, I never wished it."

The people of Nashville, proud of the success of their favorite, resolved to celebrate the
event by a great banquet on the 22d of December, the anniversary of the day on which the general
had first defeated the British below New Orleans; and some of the ladies of Nashville were
secretly preparing a magnificent wardrobe for the future mistress of the White House. Six days
before the day appointed for the celebration, Mrs. Jackson, while busied about her household
affairs in the kitchen of the hermitage, suddenly shrieked, placed her hands upon her heart,
sank upon a chair, and fell forward into the arms of one of her servants. She was carried to
her bed, where, for the space of sixty hours, she suffered extreme agony, during the whole
of which her husband never left her side for ten minutes. Then she appeared much better, and
recovered the use of her tongue. This was only two days before the day of the festival, and
the first use she made of her recovered speech was to implore her husband to go to another
room and sleep, so as to recruit his strength for the banquet. He would not leave her, however,
but lay down upon a sofa and slept a little. The evening of the 22d she appeared to be so much
better that the general consented, after much persuasion, to sleep in the next room, and leave
his wife in the care of the doctor and two of his most trusted servants.

At nine o'clock he bade her good-night, went to the next room, and took off his coat, preparatory
to lying down. When he had been gone five minutes from her room, Mrs. Jackson, who was sitting
up, suddenly gave a long, loud, inarticulate cry, which was immediately followed by the death
rattle in her throat. By the time her husband had reached her side, she had breathed her last.

"Bleed her," cried the general.

But no blood flowed from her arm.

"Try the temple," doctor.

A drop or two of blood stained her cap, but no more followed. Still, it was long before he
would believe her dead, and when there could no longer be any doubt, and they were preparing
a table upon which to lay her out, he cried, with a choking voice:

"Spread four blankets upon it; for if she does come to she will lie so hard upon the table."

All night long he sat in the room, occasionally looking into her face, and feeling if there
was any pulsation in her heart. The next morning when one of his friends arrived, just before
daylight, he was nearly speechless and utterly unconsolable, looking twenty years older.

There was no banquet that day in Nashville. On the morning of the funeral, the grounds were
crowded with people, who saw, with emotion, the poor old general supported to the grave between
two of his old friends, scarcely able to stand. The remains were interred in the garden of
the Hermitage, in a tomb which the general had recently completed. The tablet which covers
her dust contains the following inscription:

"Here lie the remains of Mrs. Rachel Jackson, wife of President Jackson, who died the 22nd
of December, 1828, aged 61. Her face was fair, her person pleasing, her temper amiable, her
heart kind; she delighted in relieving the wants of her fellow-creatures, and cultivated that
divine pleasure by the most liberal and unpretending methods; to the poor she was a benefactor;
to the rich an example; to the wretched a comforter; to the prosperous an ornament; her piety
went hand in hand with her benevolence, and she thanked her Creator for being permitted to
do good. A being so gentle and so virtuous, slander might wound but not dishonor. Even death,
when he tore her from the arms of husband, could but transport to the bosom of her God."

Andrew Jackson was never the same man again. During his presidency he never used the phrase,
"By the Eternal," nor any other language which could be considered profane. He mourned his
wife until he himself rejoined her in the tomb he had prepared for them both.

    Of all the blessed things below
      To hint the joys above,
    There is not one our hearts may know
      So dear as mated love.

    It walks the garden of the Lord,
      It gives itself away;
    To give, and think not of reward,
      Is glory day by day.

    And though sometimes the shadows fall,
      And day is dark as night,
    It bows and drinks the cup of gall,
      But gives not up the fight.

    For One is in the union where
      The mine is ever thine,
    Whose presence keeps it brave and fair,
      A melody divine.

       *       *       *       *       *

L.

DISCONTENTED GIRLS.

ONE PANACEA FOR THEM--AND ONE REFUGE.

Not every girl is discontented, nor are any wretched all the time. If they were, our homes
would lose much sunshine. Certainly no class in the community is so constantly written about,
talked at, and preached to as our girls. And still there always seems to be room left for one
word more. I am persuaded that the leaven of discontent pervades girls of the several social
ranks, from the fair daughter of a cultured home to her who has grown up in a crowded tenement,
her highest ambition to dress like the young ladies she sees on the fashionable avenue. City
girls and country girls alike know the meaning of this discontent, which sometimes amounts
to morbidness, and again only to nervous irritability.

I once knew and marveled at a young person who spent her languid existence idly lounging in
a rocking-chair, eating candy, and reading novels, whilst her mother bustled about, provoking
by her activity an occasional remonstrance from her indolent daughter. "Do, ma, keep still,"
she would say, with amiable wonder at ma's notable ways. This incarnation of sweet selfishness
was hateful in my eyes, and I have often queried, in the twenty years which have passed since
I saw her, what sort of woman she made. As a girl she was vexatious, though no ripple of annoyance
crossed the white brow, no frown obscured it, and no flurry of impatience ever tossed the yellow
curls. She had no aspirations which candy and a rocking-chair could not gratify. It is not
so with girls of a larger mind and greater vitality--the girls, for instance, in our own neighborhood,
whom we have known since they were babies. Many of them feel very much dissatisfied with life,
and do not hesitate to say so; and, strangely enough, the accident of a collegiate or common-school
education makes little difference in their conclusions.

"To what end," says the former, "have I studied hard, and widened my resources? I might have
been a society girl, and had a good time, and been married and settled sometime, without going
just far enough to find out what pleasure there is in study, and then stopping short."

I am quoting from what girls have said to me--girls who have been graduated with distinction,
and whose parents preferred that they should neither teach, nor paint, nor enter upon a profession,
nor engage in any paid work. Polished after the similitude of a palace, what should the daughters
do except stay at home to cheer father and mother, play and sing in the twilight, read, shop,
sew, visit, receive their friends, and be young women of elegant leisure? If love, and love's
climax, the wedding march, follow soon upon a girl's leaving school, she is taken out of the
ranks of girlhood, and in accepting woman's highest vocation, queenship in the kingdom of home,
foregoes the ease of her girlish life and its peril of ennui and unhappiness together. This,
however, is the fate of the minority, and while young people continue, as thousands do, to
dread beginning home life upon small means, it must so remain.

Education is not a fetich, though some who ought to know better regard it in that superstitious
light. No amount of school training, dissevered from religious culture and from that development
of the heart and of the conscience without which intellectual wealth is poverty, will lift
anybody, make anybody happier or better, or fit anybody for blithe living in this shadowy world.
I have no doubt that there are numbers of girls whose education, having made them objects of
deep respect to their simple fathers and mothers, has also gone far to make the old home intolerable,
the home ways distasteful, and the old people, alas! subjects of secret, deprecating scorn.
A girl has, indeed, eaten of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil when her eyes are opened
in such wise that she is ashamed of her plain, honorable, old-fashioned parents, or, if not
ashamed, is still willing to let them retire to the background while she shines in the front.

I did not write this article for the purpose of saying what I hold to be the bounden duty of
every father and mother in the land; viz., to educate the daughter as they educate the son,
to some practical, bread-winning pursuit. That should be the rule, and not the exception. A
girl should be trained so that with either head or hands, as artist or artisan, in some way
or other, she will be able to go into the world's market with something for which the world,
being shrewd and knowing what it wants, will pay in cash. Rich or poor, the American father
who fails to give his daughter this special training is a short-sighted and cruel man.

My thought was rather of the girls themselves. Some of them will read this. So will some of
their mothers-Mothers and daughters often, not invariably, are so truly en rapport that their
mutual comprehension is without a flaw. There are homes in which, with the profoundest regard
and the truest tenderness on both sides, they do not understand each other. The mother either
sees the daughter's discontent, recognizes and resents it, or fails to see it, would laugh
at its possibility, and pity the sentimentalist who imagined it. And there are dear, blooming,
merry-hearted, clear-eyed young women who are as gay and as elastic as bird on bough or flower
in field.

To discontented girls I would say, there is for you one panacea--Work; and there is one refuge--Christ.
Have you been told this before? Do you say that you can find no work worth the doing? Believe
me, if not in your own home, you need go no further than your own set, your own street, your
own town, to discover it waiting for you. No one else can do it so well. Perhaps no one else
can do it at all. The girl can not be unhappy who, without reserve and with full surrender,
consecrates herself to Christ, for then will she have work enough.--MARGARET E. SANGSTER.

    God giveth his beloved rest through action
      Which reacheth for the dream of joy on earth;
    Inertness brings the heart no satisfaction,
      But condemnation and the sense of dearth.

    And shall the dream of life, the quenchless yearning
      For something which is yet beyond control,
    The flame within the breast forever burning,
      Not leap to action and exalt the soul?--

    Surmount all barriers to brave endeavor,
      Make for itself a way where it would go,
    And flash the crown of ecstacy forever,
      Which only laborers with God may know?

    In action there is joy which is no fiction,
      The hope of something as in faith begun,
    God's sweet and everlasting benediction,
      The flush of victory and labor done!

    Labor puts on the livery of greatness,
      While genius idle withers from the sight,
    And in its triumph takes no note of lateness,
      For time exists not in Eternal Light.

       *       *       *       *       *

LI.

THE VOICE IN RAMAH.

"RACHEL WEEPING FOR HER CHILDREN, AND WOULD NOT HE COMFORTED, BECAUSE THEY WERE NOT."

    We have heard the voice in Ramah,
     The grief in the days of yore,
    When the beautiful "flowers of the martyrs"
     Went to bloom on another shore.

    The light of our life is darkness,
     And with sorrow we are not done;
    For thine is the bitterest mourning,
     Mourning for an only son!

    And what shall I utter to comfort
     The heart that is dearest of all?
    Too young for the losses and crosses,
     Too young for the rise and the fall?

    O, yes; we own it, we own it;
     But not too young for the grace
    That was so nameless and blameless,
     For the yearning and tender embrace!

    He hung, he hung on thy bosom
     In that happiest, weariest hour,
    A dear little bird to its blossom,
     The beautiful, dutiful flower.

    And thus he grew by its sweetness,
     He grew by its sweetness so
    That smile unto smile responded--
    But a little while ago!

    And you and I were happy
     In many a vision fair
    Of a ripe and glorious manhood
     Which the world and we should share.

    In a little while the patter
     Of two little feet was heard;
    And many a look it cheered us,
     A look that was more than a word.

    In a little while he uttered
     The words we longed to hear;
    And mamma and papa blessed him
     With a blessing of hope and fear.

    In a little while he budded,
     A bud of the promising Spring,
    And O for the beautiful blossom,
     And O for the fruit it will bring!

    The joy, they never may know it
     Who never have parents been,
    The joy of a swelling bosom,
     With a growing light within:

    A light that is soft and tender,
     And growing in strength and grace,
    Which wreathes a form that is slender
     And glows in a dear little face!

    But life it knoweth the shadow,
     The shadow as well as the shine;
    For the one it follows the other,
     And both together are thine.

    For the bud it never unfolded,
     The light it flickered away,
    And whose is the power to utter
     The grief of that bitterest day?

    His form is yet before me,
      With the fair and lofty brow,
    And the day since last we kissed it--
      Is it long since then and now?

    Dearest, it seems but a minute,
      Though Winter has spread the snow,
    Meek purity's mantle to cover
      The one that is resting below.

    In the acre of God, that is yonder,
      And unto the west his head,
    He sleepeth the sleep untroubled,
      With one to watch at his bed.

    For the bright and guardian angel
      Who beholdeth the Father's face,
    Doth stand as a sentinel watching
      O'er the dear one's resting-place;

    Doth stand as a sentinel guarding
      The dust of the precious dead,
    Till at length the trumpet soundeth,
      When the years of the world are sped;

    And the throng which can not be numbered
      Put on their garments of white,
    And gird themselves for the glory
      Of a realm that hath no night.

    And so he is gone, the darling,
      And the dream so fair and vain,
    Whose light has faded to darkness,
      We shall never dream again!

    Never? Is the earth the limit
      To bright and beautiful hope?
    If the world brings not fruition,
      Must we in darkness grope?

    O no! There is expectation
      Which the grave can not control;
    There is boundless infinite promise
      For the living and deathless soul.

    And the darling who left us early
      May yonder grow a man;
    In deeds of the great hereafter
      He may take his place in the van.

    O, if thine is the bitterest mourning,
      Mourning for an only son,
    Believe that in God, the Giver,
      Our darling his course begun;

    Believe that in God, the Taker,
      His course forever will be;
    For this is the blessed comfort,
      The comfort for thee and me.

    Yea, this is the blessed comfort
      In sorrow like that of yore,
    When the beautiful "flowers of the martyrs"
      Went to bloom on another shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

LII.

LA FAYETTE.

(BORN 1757--DIED 1834.)

THE FRIEND AND DEFENDER OF LIBERTY ON TWO CONTINENTS.

In the year 1730 there appeared in Paris a little volume entitled "Philosophic Letters," which
proved to be one of the most influential books produced in modern times.

It was written by Voltaire, who was then thirty-six years of age, and contained the results
of his observations upon the English nation, in which he had resided for two years. Paris was
then as far from London, for all practical purposes, as New York now is from Calcutta, so that
when Voltaire told his countrymen of the freedom that prevailed in England, of the tolerance
given to religious sects, of the honors paid to untitled merit, of Newton, buried in Westminster
Abbey with almost regal pomp, of Addison, secretary of state, and Swift, familiar with prime
ministers, and of the general liberty, happiness, and abundance of the kingdom, France listened
in wonder, as to a new revelation The work was, of course, immediately placed under the ban
by the French Government, and the author exiled, which only gave it increased currency and
deeper influence.

This was the beginning of the movement which produced at length, the French Revolution of 1787,
and which has continued until France is now blessed with a free and constitutional government.
It began among the higher classes of the people, for, at that day, not more than one-third
of the French could read at all, and a much smaller fraction could read such a book as the
"Philosophic Letters" and the books which it called forth. Republicanism was fashionable in
the drawing-rooms of Paris for many years before the mass of the people knew what the word meant.

Among the young noblemen who were early smitten in the midst of despotism with the love of
liberty, was the Marquis de La Fayette, born in 1757. Few families in Europe could boast a
greater antiquity than his. A century before the discovery of America we find the La Fayettes
spoken of as an "ancient house," and in every generation at least one member of the family
had distinguished himself by his services to his king. This young man, coming upon the stage
of life when republican ideas were teeming in every cultivated mind, embraced them with all
the ardor of youth and intelligence. At sixteen he refused a high post in the household of
one of the princes of the blood and accepted a commission in the army. At the age of seventeen
he was married to the daughter of a duke, whose dowry added a considerable fortune to his own
ample possessions. She was an exceedingly lovely woman, and tenderly attached to her husband,
and he was as fond of her as such a boy could be.

The American Revolution broke out. In common with all the high-born republicans of his time,
his heart warmly espoused the cause of the revolted colonies, and he immediately conceived
the project of going to America and fighting under her banner. He was scarcely nineteen years
of age when he sought an interview with Silas Deane, the American envoy, and offered his services
to the Congress. Mr, Deane, it appears, objected to his youth.

"When," says he, "I presented to the envoy my boyish face, I spoke more of my ardor in the
cause than of my experience; but I dwelt much upon the effect my departure would have in France,
and he signed our mutual agreement."

His intention was concealed from all his family and from all his friends, except two or three
confidants. While he was making preparation for his departure, most distressing and alarming
news came from America--the retreat from Long Island, the loss of New York, the battle of White
Plains, and the retreat through New Jersey. The American forces, it was said, reduced to a
disheartened band of three thousand militia, were pursued by a triumphant army of thirty-three
thousand English and Hessians. The credit of the colonies at Paris sank to the lowest ebb,
and some of the Americans themselves confessed to La Fayette that they were discouraged, and
tried to persuade him to abandon his project. He said to Mr. Deane:

"Until now, sir, you have only seen my ardor in your cause, and that may not at present prove
wholly useless. I shall purchase a ship to carry out your officers. We must feel confidence
in the future, and it is especially in the hour of danger that I wish to share your fortune."

He proceeded at once with all possible secrecy to raise the money and to purchase and arm a
ship. While the ship was getting ready, in order the better to conceal his intention, he made
a journey to England, which had previously been arranged by his family. He was presented to
the British king, against whom he was going to fight; he dined at the house of the minister
who had the department of the colonies; he visited Lord Rawdon, afterwards distinguished in
the Revolutionary struggle; he saw at the opera Sir Henry Clinton, whom he next saw on the
battlefield of Monmouth, and he breakfasted with Lord Shelburne, a friend of the colonies.

"While I concealed my intentions," he tells us, "I openly avowed my sentiments. I often defended
the Americans. I rejoiced at their success at Trenton, and it was my spirit of opposition that
obtained for me an invitation to breakfast with Lord Shelburne."

On his return to France his project was discovered, and his departure forbidden by the king.
He sailed, however, in May, 1777, cheered by his countrymen, and secretly approved by the government
itself. On arriving at Philadelphia, he sent to Congress a remarkably brief epistle to the
following effect: "After my sacrifices, I have the right to ask two favors. One is, to serve
at my own expense; the other, to begin to serve as a volunteer."

Congress immediately named him a major-general of the American army, and he at once reported
himself to General Washington. His services at the Brandywine, where he was badly wounded;
in Virginia, where he held an important command; at Monmouth, where he led the attack--are
sufficiently well known. When he had been in America about fifteen months, the news came of
the impending declaration of war between France and England. He then wrote to Congress that,
as long as he had believed himself free, he had gladly fought under the American flag; but
that his own country being at war, he owed it the homage of his service, and he desired their
permission to return home. He hoped, however, to come back to America; and asserted then that,
wherever he went, he should be a zealous friend of the United States. Congress gave him leave
of absence, voted him a sword, and wrote a letter on his behalf to the king of France. "We
recommend this noble young man," said the letter of Congress, "to the favor of your majesty,
because we have seen him wise in council, brave in battle, and patient under the fatigues of
war." He was received in France with great distinction, which he amusingly describes:

"When I went to court, which had hitherto only written for me orders for my arrest, I was presented
to the ministers. I was interrogated, complimented, and exiled--to the hotel where my wife
was residing: Some days after, I wrote to the king to acknowledge my fault. I received in reply
a light reprimand and the colonelcy of the Royal Dragoons. Consulted by all the ministers,
and, what was much better, embraced by all the women, I had at Versailles the favor of the
king and celebrity of Paris."

In the midst of his popularity he thought always of America, and often wished that the cost
of the banquets bestowed upon him could be poured into the treasury of Congress. His favorite
project at that time was the invasion of England--Paul Jones to command the fleet, and he himself
the army. When this scheme was given up, he joined all his influence with that of Franklin
to induce the French Government to send to America a powerful fleet and a considerable army.
When he had secured the promise of this valuable aid, he returned to America and served again
in the armies of the young republic.

The success of the United States so confirmed him in his attachment to republican institutions,
that he remained their devoted adherent and advocate as long as he lived.

"May this revolution," said he once to Congress, "serve as a lesson to oppressors, and as an
example to the oppressed."

And, in one of his letters from the United States occurs this sentence: "I have always thought
that a king was at least a useless being; viewed from this side of the ocean, a king cuts a
poor figure indeed."

By the time he had left America, at the close of the war, he had expended in the service of
Congress seven hundred thousand francs--a free gift to the cause of liberty.

One of the most pleasing circumstances of La Fayette's residence in America was the affectionate
friendship which existed between himself and General Washington. He looked up to Washington
as to a father as well as a chief; and Washington regarded him with a tenderness truly paternal.
La Fayette named his eldest son George Washington, and never omitted any opportunity to testify
his love and admiration for the illustrious American. Franklin, too, was much attached to the
youthful enthusiast, and privately wrote to General Washington, asking him, for the sake of
the young and anxious wife of the marquis, not to expose his life except in an important and
decisive engagement.

In the diary of the celebrated William Wilberforce, who visited Paris soon after the peace,
there is an interesting passage descriptive of La Fayette's demeanor at the French court:

"He seemed to be the representative of the democracy in the very presence of the monarch--the
tribune intruding with his veto within the chamber of the patrician order. His own establishment
was formed upon the English model, and amidst the gayety and ease of Fontainebleau he assumed
an air of republican austerity. When the fine ladies of the court would attempt to drag him
to the card-table, he shrugged his shoulders with an air of affected contempt for the customs
and amusements of the old regime. Meanwhile, the deference which this champion of the new state
of things received, above all from the ladies of the court, intimated clearly the disturbance
of the social atmosphere, and presaged the coming tempest."

From the close of the American war for independence to the beginning of the French Revolution
a period of six years elapsed, during which France suffered much from the exhaustion of her
resources in aiding the Americans. La Fayette lived at Paris, openly professing republicanism,
which was then the surest passport to the favor both of the people and the court. The queen
of France herself favored the republican party, though without understanding its object or
tendencies. La Fayette naturally became the organ and spokesman of those who desired a reform
in the government. He recommended, even in the palace of the king, a restoration of civil rights
to the Protestants; the suppression of the heavy and odious tax on salt; the reform of the
criminal courts; and he denounced the waste of public money on princes and court favorites.

The Assembly of the Notables convened in 1787 to consider the state of the kingdom. La Fayette
was its most distinguished and trusted member, and it was he who demanded a convocation of
the representatives of all the departments of France, for the purpose of devising a permanent
remedy for the evils under which France was suffering.

"What, sir," said one of the royal princes to La Fayette, "do you really demand the assembling
of a general congress of France?"

"Yes, my Lord," replied La Fayette, "and more than that."

Despite the opposition of the court, this memorable congress met in Paris in 1789, and La Fayette
represented in it the nobility of his province. It was he who presented the "Declaration of
Rights," drawn upon the model of those with which he had been familiar in America, and it was
finally adopted. It was he, also, who made the ministers of the crown responsible for their
acts, and for the consequences of their acts.

When this National Assembly was declared permanent, La Fayette was elected its vice-president,
and it was in that character that, after the taking of the Bastile, he went to the scene, at
the head of a deputation of sixty members, to congratulate the people upon their triumph. The
next day, a city guard was organized to preserve the peace of Paris, and the question arose
in the assembly who should command it. The president arose and pointed to the bust of La Fayette,
presented by the State of Virginia to the city of Paris. The hint was sufficient, and La Fayette
was elected to the post by acclamation. He called his citizen soldiers by the name of National
Guards, and he distinguished them by a tri-colored cockade, and all Paris immediately fluttered
with tri-colored ribbons and badges.

"This cockade," said La Fayette, as he presented one to the National Assembly, "will make the
tour of the world." From the time of his acceptance of the command of the National Guard, the
course of La Fayette changed its character, and the change became more and more marked as the
revolution proceded. Hitherto he had been chiefly employed in rousing the sentiment of liberty
in the minds of his countrymen; but now that the flame threatened to become a dangerous conflagration,
it devolved upon him to stay its ravages. It was a task beyond human strength, but he most
gallantly attempted it. On some occasions he rescued with his own hands the victims of the
popular fury, and arrested the cockaded assassins who would have destroyed them. But even his
great popularity was ineffectual to prevent the massacre of innocent citizens, and more than
once, overwhelmed with grief and disgust, he threatened to throw up his command.

On that celebrated day when sixty thousand of the people of Paris poured in a tumultuous flood
into the park of Versailles, and surrounded the palace of the king, La Fayette was compelled
to join the throng, in order, if possible, to control its movements. He arrived in the evening,
and spent the whole night in posting the National Guard about the palace, and taking measures
to secure the safety of the royal family. At the dawn of day he threw himself upon the bed
for a few minutes' repose. Suddenly, the alarm was sounded. Some infuriated men had broken
into the palace, killed two of the king's body-guard, and rushed into the bed-chamber of the
queen, a minute or two after she had escaped from it. La Fayette ran to the scene, followed
by some of the National Guard, and found all the royal family assembled in the king's chamber,
trembling for their lives. Beneath the window of the apartment was a roaring sea of upturned
faces, scarcely kept back by a thin line of National Guards. La Fayette stepped out upon the
balcony, and tried to address the crowd, but could not make himself heard. He then led out
upon the balcony the beautiful queen, Marie Antoinette, and kissed her hand; then seizing one
of the body-guard embraced him, and placed his own cockade on the soldier's hat. At once the
temper of the multitude was changed, and the cry burst forth:

"Long live the general! Long live the queen! Long live the body-guard!"

It was immediately announced that the king would go with the people to Paris; which had the
effect of completely allaying their passions. During the long march of ten miles, La Fayette
rode close to the door of the king's carriage, and thus conducted him, in the midst of the
tramping crowd, in safety to the Tuilleries. When the royal family was once more secure within
its walls, one of the ladies, the daughter of the late king, threw herself in the arms of La
Fayette, exclaiming:

"General, you have saved us."

From this moment dates the decline of La Fayette's popularity; and his actions, moderate and
wise, continually lessened it. He demanded, as a member of the National Assembly, that persons
accused of treason should be fairly tried by a jury, and he exerted all his power, while giving
a constitution to his country, to preserve the monarchy.

To appease the suspicions of the people that the king meditated a flight from Paris, he declared
that he would answer with his head for the king's remaining. When, therefore, in June, 1791,
the king and queen made their blundering attempt to escape, La Fayette was immediately suspected
of having secretly aided it. Danton cried out at the Jacobin club:

"We must have the person of the king, or the head of the commanding general!"

It was in vain that, after the king's return, he ceased to pay him royal honors; nothing could
remove the suspicions of the people. Indeed, he still openly advised the preservation of the
monarchy, and, when a mob demanded the suppression of the royal power, and threatened violence
to the National Guard, the general, after warning them to disperse, ordered the troops to fire--an
action which totally destroyed his popularity and influence. Soon after, he resigned his commission
and his seat in the Assembly, and withdrew to one of his country seats.

He was not long allowed to remain in seclusion. The allied dynasties of Europe, justly alarmed
at the course of events in Paris, threatened the new republic with war. La Fayette was appointed
to command one of the three armies gathered to defend the frontiers. While he was disciplining
his troops, and preparing to defend the country, he kept an anxious eye upon Paris, and saw
with ever-increasing alarm the prevalence of the savage element in the national politics. In
1792 he had the boldness to write a letter to the National Assembly, demanding the suppression
of the clubs, and the restoration of the king to the place and power assigned him by the constitution.

Learning, soon after, the new outrages put upon the king, he suddenly left his army and appeared
before the bar of the Assembly, accompanied by a single aide-de-camp; there he renewed his
demands, amid the applause of the moderate members; but a member of the opposite party adroitly
asked:

"Is the enemy conquered? Is the country delivered, since General La Fayette is in Paris?"

"No," replied he, "the country is not delivered; the situation is unchanged; and, nevertheless,
the general of one of our armies is in Paris."

After a stormy debate, the Assembly declared that he had violated the constitution in making
himself the organ of an army legally incapable of deliberating, and had rendered himself amenable
to the minister of war for leaving his post without permission. Repulsed thus by the Assembly,
coldly received at court, and rejected by the National Guard, he returned to his army despairing
of the country. There he made one more attempt to save the king by inducing him to come to
his camp and fight for his throne. This project being rejected, and the author of it denounced
by Robespierre, his bust publicly burned in Paris, and the medal formerly voted him broken
by the hand of the executioner, he deemed it necessary to seek an asylum in a neutral country.
Having provided for the safety of his army, he crossed the frontiers in August, 1792, accompanied
by twenty-one persons, all of whom, on passing an Austrian post, were taken prisoners, and
La Fayette was thrown into a dungeon. The friend of liberty and order was looked upon as a
common enemy. His noble wife, who had been for fifteen months a prisoner in Paris, hastened,
after her release, to share her husband's captivity.

For five years, in spite of the remonstrances of England, America, and the friends of liberty
everywhere, La Fayette remained a prisoner. To every demand for his liberation the Austrian
Government replied, with its usual stupidity, that the liberty of La Fayette was incompatible
with the safety of the governments of Europe. He owed his liberation, at length, to General
Bonaparte, and it required all his great authority to procure it. When La Fayette was presented
to Napoleon to thank him for his interference, the first consul said to him:

"I don't know what the devil you have done to the Austrians; but it cost them a mighty struggle
to let you go."

La Fayette voted publicly against making Napoleon consul for life, against the establishment
of the empire. Notwithstanding this, Napoleon and he remained very good friends. The emperor
said of him one day:

"Everybody in France is corrected of his extreme ideas of liberty except one man, and that
man is La Fayette. You see him now tranquil: very well; if he had an opportunity to serve his
chimeras, he would reappear on the scene more ardent than ever."

Upon his return to France, he was granted the pension belonging to the military rank he had
held under the republic, and he recovered a competent estate from the property of his wife.
Napoleon also gave a military commission to his son, George Washington; and, when the Bourbons
were restored, La Fayette received an indemnity of four hundred and fifty thousand francs.

Napoleon's remark proved correct. La Fayette, though he spent most of the evening of his life
in directing the cultivation of his estate, was always present at every crisis in the affairs
of France to plead the cause of constitutional liberty. He made a fine remark once in its defense,
when taunted with the horrors of the French Revolution: "The tyranny of 1793," he said, "was
no more a republic than the massacre of St. Bartholomew was a religion."

His visit to America in 1824 is well remembered. He was the guest of the nation; and Congress,
in recompense of his expenditures during the Revolutionary War, made him a grant of two hundred
thousand dollars and an extensive tract of land. It was La Fayette who, in 1830, was chiefly
instrumental in placing a constitutional monarch on the throne of France. The last words, he
ever spoke in public were uttered in behalf of the French refugees who had fled from France
for offenses merely political; and the last words he ever wrote recommended the abolition of
slavery. He died May 19, 1834, aged seventy-seven. His son, George Washington, always the friend
of liberty, like his father, died in 1849, leaving two sons--inheritors of a name so full of
inspiration to the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIII.

LYDIA SIGOURNEY

(BORN 1791--DIED 1865.)

THE LESSON OF A USEFUL AND BEAUTIFUL LIFE.

"A beautiful life I have had. Not more trial than was for my good. Countless blessings beyond
expectation or desert.... Behind me stretch the green pastures and still waters by which I
have been led all my days. Around is the lingering of hardy flowers and fruits that bide the
Winter. Before stretches the shining shore."

These are the words of Mrs. Sigourney, written near the close of a life of seventy-four years.
All who have much observed human life will agree that the rarest achievement of man or woman
on this earth is a solid and continuous happiness. There are very few persons past seventy
who can look back upon their lives, and sincerely say that they would willingly live their
lives over again. Mrs. Sigourney, however, was one of the happy few.

Lydia Huntley, for that was her maiden name, was born at Norwich, Connecticut, on the first
of September, 1791. Her father was Ezekiel Huntley, an exceedingly gentle, affectionate man,
of Scotch parentage, who had as little of a Yankee in him as any man in Connecticut. Unlike
a Yankee, he never attempted to set up in business for himself, but spent the whole of the
active part of his life in the service of the man to whom he was apprenticed in his youth.
His employer was a druggist of great note in his day, who made a large fortune in his business,
and built one of the most elegant houses in the State. On his retirement from business his
old clerk continued to reside under his roof, and to assist in the management of his estate;
and, even when he died, Mr. Huntley did not change his abode, but remained to conduct the affairs
of the widow. In the service of this family he saved a competence for his old age, and he lived
to eighty-seven, a most happy, serene old man, delighting chiefly in his garden and his only
child. He survived as late as 1839.

Owing to the peculiar relations sustained by her father to a wealthy family--living, too, in
a wing of their stately mansion, and having the free range of its extensive gardens--Lydia
Huntley enjoyed in her youth all the substantial advantages of wealth, without encountering
its perils. She was surrounded by objects pleasing or beautiful, but no menial pampered her
pride or robbed her of her rightful share of household labor. As soon as she was old enough
to toddle about the grounds, her father delighted to have her hold the trees which he was planting,
and drop the seed into the little furrows prepared for it, and never was she better pleased
than when giving him the aid of her tiny fingers. Her parents never kept a servant, and she
was brought up to do her part in the house. Living on plain, substantial fare, inured to labor,
and dressed so as to allow free play to every limb and muscle, she laid in a stock of health,
strength, and good temper that lasted her down to the last year of her life. She never knew
what dyspepsia was. She never possessed a costly toy, nor a doll that was not made at home,
but she passed a childhood that was scarcely anything but joy. She was an only child, and she
was the pet of two families, yet she was not spoiled.

She was one of those children who take naturally to all kinds of culture. Without ever having
had a child's book, she sought out, in the old-fashioned library of the house, everything which
a child could understand. Chance threw a novel in her way ("Mysteries of Udolpho"), which she
devoured with rapture, and soon after, when she was but eight years of age, she began to write
a novel. Poetry, too, she read with singular pleasure, never weary of repeating her favorite
pieces. But the passion of her childhood was painting pictures. Almost in her infancy she began
to draw with a pin and lilac-leaf, and advanced from that to slate and pencil, and, by and
by, to a lead-pencil and backs of letters. When she had learned to draw pretty well, she was
on fire to paint her pictures, but was long puzzled to procure the colors. Having obtained
in some way a cake of gamboge, she begged of a washerwoman a piece of indigo, and by combining
these two ingredients she could make different shades of yellow, blue, and green. The trunks
of her trees she painted with coffee-grounds, and a mixture of India ink and indigo answered
tolerably well for sky and water. She afterwards discovered that the pink juice of chokeberry
did very well for lips, cheeks, and gay dresses. Mixed with a little indigo it made a very
bad purple, which the young artist, for the want of a better, was obliged to use for her royal
robes. In sore distress for a better purple she squeezed the purple flowers of the garden and
the field for the desired tint, but nothing answered the purpose, until, at dinner, one day,
she found the very hue for which she longed in the juice of a currant and whortleberry tart.
She hastened to try it, and it made a truly gorgeous purple, but the sugar in it caused it
to come off in flakes from her kings and emperors, leaving them in a sorry plight. At length,
to her boundless, inexpressible, and lasting joy, all her difficulties were removed by her
father giving her a complete box of colors.

At school she was fortunate in her teachers. One of them was the late Pelatiah Perit, who afterward
won high distinction as a New York merchant and universal philanthropist. Her first serious
attempts at practical composition were translations from Virgil, when she was fourteen years
of age. After leaving school she studied Latin with much zeal under an aged tutor, and, later
in life, she advanced far enough in Hebrew to read the Old Testament, with the aid of grammar
and dictionary. To these grave studies her parents added a thorough drill in dancing. Often,
when her excellent mother observed that she had sat too long over her books, she would get
her out upon the floor of their large kitchen, and then, striking up a lively song, set her
dancing until her cheeks were all aglow.

This studious and happy girl, like other young people, had her day-dream of the future. It
was to keep a school. This strange ambition, she tells us in her autobiography, she feared
to impart to her companions, lest they should laugh at her; and she thought even her parents
would think her arrogant if she mentioned it to them. The long-cherished secret was revealed
to her parents at length. Her mother had guessed it before, but her father was exceedingly
surprised. Neither of them, however, made any objection, and one of the pleasantest apartments
of their house was fitted up for the reception of pupils. She was then a delicate-looking girl
of about eighteen, and rather undersized. As soon as her desks were brought home by the carpenter,
the ambitious little lady went around to the families of the place, informed them of her intention,
and solicited their patronage at the established rate of three dollars a quarter for each pupil.
She was puzzled and disappointed at the coolness with which her project was received. Day after
day she tramped the streets of Norwich, only to return at night without a name upon her catalogue.
She surmised, after a time, that parents hesitated to intrust their children to her because
of her extreme youth, which was the fact. At length, however, she began her school with two
children, nine and eleven years of age, and not only did she go through all the formalities
of school with them, working six hours a day for five days, and three hours on Saturday, but
at the end of the term she held an examination in the presence of a large circle of her pupils'
admiring relations.

Afterwards, associating herself with another young lady, to whom she was tenderly attached,
she succeeded better. A large and populous school gathered about these zealous and admirable
girls, several of their pupils being older than themselves. Compelled to hold the school in
a larger room, Lydia Huntley walked two miles every morning, and two more every night, besides
working hard all day; and she was as happy as the weeks were long. Her experience confirms
that of every genuine teacher--from Dr. Arnold downward--that, of all employments of man or
woman on this earth, the one that is capable of giving the most constant and intense happiness
is teaching in a rationally conducted school. So fond was she of teaching, that when the severity
of the Winter obliged her to suspend the school for many weeks, she opened a free school for
poor children, one of her favorite classes in which was composed of colored girls. In the course
of time, the well-known Daniel Wadsworth, the great man of Hartford sixty or seventy years
ago, lured her away to that city, where he personally organized a school of thirty young ladies,
the daughters of his friends, and gave her a home in his own house. There she spent five happy
years, cherished as a daughter by her venerable patron and his wife, and held in high honor
by her pupils and their parents.

It was in 1815, while residing in Hartford, that her fame was born. Good old Mrs. Wadsworth,
having obtained sight of her journals and manuscripts in prose and verse, the secret accumulation
of many years, inflamed her husband's curiosity so that he, too, asked to see them. The blushing
poetess consented. Mr. Wadsworth pronounced some of them worthy of publication, and, under
his auspices, a volume was printed in Hartford, entitled "Moral Pieces in Prose and Verse."
The public gave it a generous welcome, and its success led to a career of authorship which
lasted forty-nine years, and gave to the world fifty-six volumes of poetry, tales, travels,
biography, and letters.

So passed her life till she was past twenty-eight. She had received many offers of marriage
from clergymen and others, but none of her suitors tempted her to forsake her pupils, and she
supposed herself destined to spend her days as an old maid. But another destiny was in store
for her. On her way to and from her school, "a pair of deep-set and most expressive black eyes"
sometimes encountered hers and spoke "unutterable things." Those eyes belonged to a widower,
with three children, named Charles Sigourney, a thriving hardware merchant, of French descent,
and those "unutterable things" were uttered at length through the unromantic medium of a letter.
The marriage occurred a few months after, in the year 1819.

For the next fifteen years she resided in the most elegant mansion in Hartford, surrounded
by delightful grounds, after Mr. Sigourney's own design; and even now, though the Sigourney
place is eclipsed in splendor and costliness by many of more recent date, there is no abode
in the beautiful city of Hartford more attractive than this. Mr. Sigourney was a man of considerable
learning, and exceedingly interested in the study of languages. When he was past fifty he began
the study of modern Greek. Mrs. Sigourney became the mother of several children, all of whom,
but two, died in infancy. One son lived to enter college, but died at the age of nineteen,
of consumption. A daughter grew to womanhood, and became the wife of a clergyman.

After many years of very great prosperity in business, Mr. Sigourney experienced heavy losses,
which compelled them to leave their pleasant residence, and gave a new activity to her pen.
He died at the age of seventy-six. During the last seven years of Mrs. Sigourney's life, her
chief literary employment was contributing to the columns of the New York Ledger. Mr. Bonner,
having while an apprentice in the Hartford Current office "set up" some of her poems, had particular
pleasure in being the medium of her last communications with the public, and she must have
rejoiced in the vast audience to which he gave her access--the largest she ever addressed.

Mrs. Sigourney enjoyed excellent health to within a few weeks of her death. After a short illness,
which she bore with much patience, she died in June, 1865, with her daughter at her side, and
affectionate friends around her. Nothing could exceed her tranquility and resignation at the
approach of death. Her long life had been spent in honorable labor for the good of her species,
and she died in the fullest certainty that death would but introduce her to a larger and better
sphere.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIV.

OLD AGE AND USEFULNESS

THE GLORY OF BRAVE MEN AND WOMEN.

    Dear Lord! I thank thee for a life of use;
    Dear Lord! I do not pine for any truce.
    Peace, peace has always come from duty done;
    Peace, peace will so until the end be won.
    Thanks, thanks! a thankful heart is my reward;
    Thanks, thanks befit the children of the Lord.
    Wind, wind! the peaceful reel must still go round;
    Wind, wind! the thread of life will soon be wound.
    The worker has no dread of growing old;
    First, years of toil, and then the age of gold! About
    two o'clock on a subsequent night, which happened
    to be Saturday, he sought admittance, and was refused.

A warm altercation ensued in the passage between him and the porters, which brought down some
of the proprietors. One of them--a powerful man--a bankrupt butcher--struck him a tremendous blow,
which broke the bridge of his nose, covered his face with blood, and knocked him down. On getting
up he was knocked down again. He arose once more, and instantly received another blow, which
would have laid him upon his back, but one of the porters by this time had got behind him,
and as he was falling struck him at the back of his head, which sent him upon his face. The
watch had now arrived, into whose hands the keeper of the "hell" and the porter were given. At
the watch-house they were ordered to find bail. The gentleman was then about quitting, when
he was suddenly called back. A certain little lawyer, who alternately prosecutes and defends
keepers of gaming houses, was sent for. He whispered to the ex-butcher to charge the gentleman
with stealing his handkerchief and hat, which, it was alleged, had been lost in the affray. Though
nothing was found upon the gentleman, who desired to be searched, this preposterous and groundless
charge was taken, and the hellites admitted to bail; but the gentleman who had been so cruelly
beaten, being charged with a felony on purpose to cause his detention, and the power held by
magistrates to take bail in doubtful cases not extending to night-constables, he was locked up below
with two wretches who had stolen lead, and five disorderlies--his face a mass of blood and bruises--and
there detained till Monday morning, in a most pitiable condition. The magistrate before whom
the party appeared on that day, understanding that the affair took place at a gaming house, dismissed
both complaints, leaving the parties to their remedy at the sessions.'

GAFFING.

Gaffing is or was one of the ten thousand modes of swindling practised in London. Formerly it
was a game in very great vogue among the macers, who congregated nightly at the 'flash houses.'
One of these is described as follows:--This gaffer laughed a great deal and whistled Moore's
melodies, and extracted music from a deal table with his elbow and wrist. When he hid a half-penny,
and a flat cried 'head' for L10, a 'tail' was sure to turn up. One of his modes of commanding
the turn-up was this: he had a half-penny with two heads, and a half-penny with two tails.

When
he gaffed, he contrived to have both half-pence under his hand, and long practice enabled him
to catch up in the wrinkles or muscles of it the half-penny which it was his interest to conceal.
If 'tail' was called a 'head' appeared, and the 'tail' half-penny ran down his wrist with astonishing
fidelity.

This ingenious fellow often won 200 or 300 sovereigns a night by gaffing; but the landlord and
other men, who were privy to the robbery, and 'pitched the baby card' (that is, encouraged the
loser by sham betting), always came in for the 'regulars,' that is, their share of the plunder.

This
gaffer contrived to 'bilk' all the turnpikes in the kingdom.

In going to a fight or to a race-course, when he reached a turnpike he held a shilling between
his fingers, and said to the gatekeeper--'Here, catch,' and made a movement of the hand towards
the man, who endeavoured to catch what he saw. The shilling, however, by a backward jerk, ran
down the sleeve of the coat, as if it had life in it, and the gate-keeper turned round to look
in the dust, when the tall gaffer drove on, saying--'Keep the change.'

A young fellow, who previously was a marker at a billiard-table, and who had the appearance of a
soft, inexperienced country-lad, was another great hand at gaffing. There was a strong adhesive
power in his hand, and such exquisite sensibility about it, that he could ascertain by dropping
his palm, even upon a worn-out half-penny or shilling, what side was turned up. Indeed, so perfect
a master was he of the science that Breslaw could never have done more upon cards than he could
do with a pair of 'grays' (gaffing-coins).

A well-known macer, who was celebrated for slipping an 'old gentleman' (a long card) into the
pack, and was the inheritor by birth of all the propensities of this description, although the
inheritance was equally divided between his brother and himself,
got hold of a young fellow who had L170 in his pocket, and introduced
him to one of the 'cock-and-hen' houses near Drury Lane Theatre, well-primed
with wine.

           Gaffing began, and the billiard-marker
    before described was pitched upon to 'do'
    the stranger. The macer 'pitched the baby card,'
    and of course lost, as well as the unfortunate victim.

He had borrowed L10 of the landlord, who was to come in for the 'regulars;' but when all was
over, the billiard-marker refused to make any division of the spoil, or even to return the L10 which
had been lost to him in 'bearing up' the cull. The landlord pressed his demand upon the macer,
who, in fact, was privately reimbursed by the marker; but he was coolly told that he ought not
to allow such improper practices in his house, and that the sum was not recoverable, the transaction
being illegal.

How these spurious coins are procured is a question; but I am assured that they are still in use
and often made to do service at public-houses and other places.

    
       
    TOMMY DODD.
       

This is a mode of gambling very much in vogue at the present time. It is often played at public-houses
among parties to decide who is to pay the reckoning. Each party turns down a half-penny, and,
on uncovering it, the matter is decided as in 'heads or tails.' Of course this expeditious method
is also used in gambling for money. Not long ago a retired tradesman, happening to be in a
public-house, where such things were connived at, allowed himself to be induced to play at
Tommy Dodd with two low sharpers. They soon eased him of all the cash he had about him. A bright
idea, however, occurred to him. 'Stop a bit,' he said, 'I must have my revenge. Just wait till
I go home for more money.' The sharpers were rejoiced at the idea, and rubbed their hands with
delight, whilst the tradesman went, as they felt sure, only to bring more money into their
'till.' The man made all haste, for he was determined to have his revenge, and soon returned
with a large bag of money, which he clinked on the table.

He first pulled out some coppers, telling them to choose from the lot the coins they would play with.
They assented, although they did not seem 'much to like it.' 'And now,' said the tradesman,
'let's set to business.'

The game proceeded with alternate success on both sides; but the tradesman went on DOUBLING
THE STAKES EVERY TIME, WHETHER HE LOST OR WON, and, of course, at length completely broke their
bank, and went off with their money.

GAMBLING AT THE WINE AND OYSTER ROOMS, OR 'SALOONS.'

The gambling which was carried on in the private rooms of the wine and oyster houses, about thirty
years ago, and perhaps later, was just such as that which had so long flourished in the low
vicinity of St James's. Indeed, the constant frequenters of the former had attained the most profound
knowledge of the art of robbing at the West End gaming houses. The blacklegs visited the saloons
every night, in order to pick up new acquaintances among the young and inexperienced. They were
polite, well-dressed, gentlemanlike persons; and if they could trace anything 'soft' in the
countenance of a new visitor, their wits went to work at once to establish an acquaintance with
him. Wine was set a-going, and cards were proposed. The master of the concern soon provided
a room, and play advanced, accompanied by the certainty of loss to the unfortunate stranger.
But if the invitation to play was rejected, they made another plant upon him. The ruffians attacked
him through a passion of a different kind. They gave the word to one of their female 'pals,' who
threw herself in his way, and prevailed upon him to accompany her to HER establishment. In
the morning the 'gentleman,' who in vain had solicited him to play at the saloon the night before,
would call--just to pay 'a friendly visit.' Cards were again spoken of, and again proposed,
with the additional recommendation of the 'lady,' who offered to be the partner of her friend
in the game. The consequence was inevitable. Many young noblemen and gentlemen were plundered
by this scheme, of hundreds, nay, of thousands of pounds. To escape without loss was impossible.
They packed and distributed the cards with such amazing dexterity, that they could give a man,
as it were, whatever cards they pleased.

CARDS THAT WOULD BEAT THE D--L HIMSELF!

A number of sharpers were detected in a trick by which they had won enormous sums. An Ecarte
party, consisting of a nobleman, a captain in the army, an Armenian gentleman, and an Irish gentleman,
sat down in one of the private chambers attached to one of the large wine and shell-fish rooms. The
Armenian and the Irishman were partners, and were wonderfully successful; indeed, so extraordinary
was their luck in turning up cards, that the captain, who had been in the town for some time,
suspected the integrity of his competitors, and, accordingly, handled the cards very minutely.
He soon discovered that there was an 'old gentleman' (a card somewhat larger and thicker than the rest
of the pack, and in considerable use among the LEGS) in the midst of them. The captain and his
partner exclaimed that they were robbed, and the cards were sealed up, and referred to a card-maker
for his opinion.

'The old saying,' said the referee, 'that THE CARDS WOULD BEAT THE CARD-MAKER, was never more true
than it is in this instance, for this pack would beat not only me, but the very d--l himself;
there is not only an OLD GENTLEMAN, but an OLD LADY (a card broader than the rest) amongst them.'

The
two 'gentlemen' were immediately accused of the imposition, but they feigned ignorance of the
fraud, refused to return a farthing of the 'swag,' and, in their turn, charged the losers with
having got up the story in order to recover what they had fairly lost.

GENEROSITY (?) OF A GAMING HOUSE KEEPER.

A young West Indian chanced one night to enter one of the gaming houses in London, and began
trying his chance at Roulette. Fortune favoured him at first, and he won about a hundred pounds.

Instead
of leaving off he only became the more excited by his success, when his luck began to change,
and he lost and lost until he staked the last coin he had in his pocket. He then pawned to the
master of the table successively every ring and trinket he had, for money to continue the stakes.
All in vain.

    His luck never returned; and he
    made his way down-stairs in a
    mood which may well be imagined.
    But what was his surprise when the master of the table came running
after him, saying--'Sir, these things may be valuable to you--do me
the favour to take them with you.

    Next time I hope you will be more
    lucky,' and returned all his rings and trinkets.

The
    moon was shining brightly at the
    time, and the young man swore by it, that he would never again enter
a gaming house, and he kept his oath.

    Of course the generosity was but
    a decoy to entice the youth to further
    ruin.
    

    HOSPITALITY OF GAMING HOUSES,
    AND POPULARITY OF CITY MEN AT THEM.

Joseph
    Atkinson and his wife, who for many
    years kept a gaming house at No. 15 under the Piazza, Covent Garden,
gave daily magnificent play dinners,--cards of invitation for which
were sent to the clerks of merchants, bankers, and brokers in the
city.

       Atkinson used to say that he liked CITIZENS--whom he called FLATS--better
than any one else, for when they had DINED they played freely, and
after they had lost all their money they had credit to borrow more.

When he had CLEANED THEM OUT, when THE PIGEONS WERE COMPLETELY PLUCKED,
they were sent to some of their solvent friends.

After dinner play was introduced, and, till dinner time the nest
day, different games at cards, dice, and E O were continually going
on.

    THE TRAFFIC IN HUSH MONEY.
    
    Theophilus Bellasis, an infamous
    character, was well known at Bow Street, where he had been charged
with breaking into the counting-house of Sir James Sanderson, Bart.

Bellasis was sometimes clerk and sometimes client to John Shepherd,
an attorney of Bow Street; while at other times Shepherd was prosecutor
of those who kept gaming houses, and Bellasis attorney.

      Sir William Addington,
      the magistrate,
    was so well aware that these two
      men commenced prosecutions
      solely for
    the purpose of HUSH MONEY, that
      he refused to act.
      The Joseph
    Atkinson just mentioned at one
      time gave them L100,
      at another
    L80; and in this way they
      had amassed an
      immense
    sum, and undertook, for a specific amount, to defend keepers of gaming
houses against all prosecutions!

      
    WALKING OFF WITH A L200 BANK-NOTE.

The
      runaway son of an extensive
    linen-draper went to a
      gaming house in King Street,
    and pocketed a L200 bank-note from the table.

He was not kicked out, because it would not be safe for the proprietors
of these houses to run the risk of getting involved in law; but he
was civilly walked down-stairs by the master of the establishment,
who forbad him the house evermore.

      The dashing youth, however,
    put both the money and the affront
      in his pocket, and was only
    too thankful to get away in so good a plight.

    
      PERQUISITES OF GAMBLING HOUSE
    WAITERS.
      
    A waiter in one of the gambling
      houses in St James's Street
    received in Christmas boxes
      above L500.

A nobleman, who had in the course of a week won L80,000, gave him
L100 of his winnings.

    He was said to have actually borrowed
      of the waiter the money
    which led to his extraordinary
      success!
    
      PAUL ROUBEL.
    
      Paul Roubel was a gaming house keeper, who seems to have been an exception
to his class, according to the following account:--'A foreigner once
applied for the situation of croupier at old Paul Roubel's, stating
as his qualification that he could cut or turn up whatever card he
pleased.

The old man (for he was nearly eighty, and a very good hearty fellow
in his way) declined the offer, saying--"You are too clever for me;
my customers must have some chance!"

    It is true Roubel kept
    a gambling house; but it is
    also true that few men in
        higher walks of
        life possessed a kinder
    heart, or a hand which opened more freely or more liberally to the
calls of humanity!

Peace be to his manes!'

TITLED GREEKS, OR 'DECOYS.'

In all the
gaming houses of any note there were unprincipled and reckless persons
paid by the hellites, employed in various capacities, and for various
purposes.

    Sometimes they played for
      the proprietors against
    any one who chose to put down his
      money; at other times, when there were no other individuals playing
at all, they pretended to be strangers themselves, and got up sham
games with the proprietors, with the view of practising a deception
on any strangers who might be in the room, and by that means inducing
them to put down their money.

They were dressed in the most fashionable manner, always exhibiting
a profusion of jewellery, and living in great splendour when they
have any particular person in their eye, in the various hotels throughout
town.(50)

(50) Grant, Sketches in London.

    
    
    In some cases, in the higher class of
    gaming establishments, the Greeks, or decoys, being men of title
or considerable standing in society, did not receive a fixed salary
for seducing young men of fortune, but being in every case very needy
men, they nominally borrowed, from time to time, large sums of money
from the hell-keepers.

It was, however, perfectly understood on both sides that the amount
so borrowed was never to be repaid.(51)

(51) Grant, Ubi supra.

      
      
        WHY CHEATS WERE CALLED GREEKS.

M.
        Robert-Houdin says that
      this application of the term
        'Greek' originated from a certain
      modern Greek, named Apoulos,
        who in the reign of Louis
      XIV. was caught cheating
      at court, and was condemned to 20 years at the galleys.

I think this a very improbable derivation, and unnecessary withal.

        Aristotle of old, as before
        stated, ranked gamesters
        'with thieves and plunderers,
        who for the sake of gain
        do not scruple to despoil
        their best friends.' We afterwards
        find them bearing just
        as bad a character among
        the Romans. Says Juvenal--

Graeculus
        esuriens in coelum jusseris,
        ibit. 'Bid the hungry Greek
        to heaven, to heaven he goes.'

Dr Johnson translated the words,
'Bid him to h--l, to h--l he goes'--which is wrong.

A DIFFICULTY is implied, and everybody knows that it is easier to
go to the latter place than the former.

      It means that a needy Greek
        was capable of doing anything.
      Lord Byron protested that he
        saw no difference between Greeks and Jews--of course, meaning 'Jews'
in the offensive sense of the word.

Among gamblers the term was chiefly applied to 'decoys.'

GAMING
TABLE SLANG AND MANOEUVRES.

        
        
        Captain Sharp. A cheating
        bully, whose office it was to bully any 'Pigeon,' who, suspecting
roguery, refused to pay what he had lost.

        
      St Hugh's bones. Dice. A bale of
        bard cinque deuces; a bale
      of flat cinque deuces; a bale of flat size aces; a bale of bard cater
treys; a bale of flat cater treys; a bale of Fulhams; a bale of light
graniers; a bale of gordes, with as many highmen and lowmen for passage;
a bale of demies; a bale of long dice for even or odd; a bale of bristles;
a bale of direct contraries,--names of false dice.

        
      Do. To cheat.
      
        Done up. Ruined.
      
      Down-hills. False dice which run low.

      
        Elbow-shaker. A gamester.

Fulhams.
      Loaded dice.
        
      Fuzz. To shuffle cards closely:
        to change the pack.
      
        Game. Bubbles, Flats, Pigeons.

    
    Gull Gropers. Usurers who lend
    money to gamesters.
    
    Greeks. Cheats at play.
    

Hedge.

    To secure a bet by betting
      on the other side.
    
      High Jinks. A gambler who
    drinks to intoxicate his
    Pigeon.
    
    Hunting. Drawing in the unwary.

Main.
    Any number on the dice
    from five to nine.

    Paum. To hide a card or die.
      
    Pigeons. Dupes of sharpers
      at play.
      
      Vincent's Law. The
      art of cheating at cards,
      by the banker, who plays booty, Gripe, who bets, and the Vincent,
who is cheated.

The gain is called termage.

    
    
    Vowel. To give an I. O.
    U. in payment.
    
    Up-hills. False dice which
    run high.
    

SPECIMEN OF A QUASI GAMING HOUSE CIRCULAR.

    
    
    'SIR,--I hope
    you will join
    with the rest
    of the parishioners
    in recommending
    what friends you
    can to my shops.
    They shall have
    good candles and
    fair play.
    Sir, we are a
    not gang of swindlers,

Like
    other Gaming
    Houses, We are men of character.

Our Party is, Tom Carlos--alias Pistol, Ned Mogg,--from Charing Cross,
Union Clarke, ------------

{The best in the world at A Frenchman,{
{sleight of hand.

      My poor Brother,
        and Melting Billy,
      Your humble Servant.
        To the Church-Wardens,
    Overseers, and each respectable
    inhabitant in the Parish.'

A
    card was enclosed, as follows:--
    '**** Gaming House Keeper, and **** **** to The Honourable House
of Commons No. 7 and 8 **** St, St James's.'

This circular was sent
to Stockdale, the publisher, in 1820, who published it with the names
in asterisks suppressed.

It was evidently intended to expose some doings in high places.

    
    
    CHAPTER VIII. THE DOCTRINE OF PROBABILITIES
    APPLIED TO GAMBLING.

    A distinction must be made
    between games of skill and
    games of chance. The former
    require application, attention,
    and a certain degree of ability
    to insure success in them;
    while the latter are devoid
     of all that is rational,
     and are equally within the
    reach of the highest and lowest capacity.

To be successful in throwing the dice is one of the most fickle achievements
of fickle fortune; and therefore the principal game played with them
is very properly and emphatically called 'Hazard.' It requires, indeed,
some exertion of the mental powers, of memory, at least, and a turn
for such diversions, to play well many games at cards.

    
     
    Nevertheless, it is often found
     that those who do so give no further proofs of superior memory and
judgment, whilst persons of superior memory and judgment not unfrequently
fail egregiously at the card-table.

    
     The gamester of skill,
    in games of skill, may at
     first sight seem to have
    more advantage than the gamester
     of chance, in games of chance; and
    while cards are played merely
     as an amusement, there is no
    doubt that a recreation
     is more rational when it
    requires some degree of skill
     than one, like dice, totally
    devoid of all meaning whatever.
     But when the pleasure becomes
    a business, and a matter
    of mere gain, there is more
    innocence, perhaps, in
    a perfect equality of antagonists--which games of chance, fairly
played, always secure--than where one party is likely to be an overmatch
for the other by his superior knowledge or ability.

     
     Nevertheless, even games
     of chance may be artfully
     managed; and the most
    apparently casual throw of the
    dice be made subservient to the purposes of chicanery and fraud,
as will be shown in the sequel.

    
    In the matter of skill and
    chance the nature of cards is
    mixed,--most games having in them both elements of interest,--since
the success of the player must depend as much on the chance of the
'deal' as on his skill in playing the game.

But even the chance of the deal is liable to be perverted by all
the tricks of shuffling and cutting--not to mention how the honourable
player may be deceived in a thousand ways by the craft of the sharper,
during the playing, of the cards themselves; consequently professed
gamblers of all denominations, whether their games be of apparent
skill or mere chance, may be confounded together or considered in
the same category, as being equally meritorious and equally infamous.

    
    
    Under the name of the Doctrine
    of Chances or Probabilities,
    a very learned science,--much
    in vogue when lotteries were prevalent,--has been applied to gambling
purposes; and in spite of the obvious abstruseness of the science,
it is not impossible to give the general reader an idea of its processes
and conclusions.

    
     The probability
    of an event is greater or
     less according to
    the number of chances
     by which it may happen,
    compared with the whole
     number of chances by which it may either happen or fail.

Wherefore, if we constitute a fraction whereof the numerator be the
number of chances whereby an event may happen, and the denominator
the number of all the chances whereby it may either happen or fail,
that fraction will be a proper designation of the probability of happening.

    Thus, if an event has 3 chances
    to happen, and 2
    to fail, then the fraction
    3/5 will fairly represent
    the probability of its happening,
    and may be taken to be
    the measure of it.
     
     The same may be said of the
    probability of failing, which will likewise be measured by a fraction
whose numerator is the number of chances whereby it may fail, and
the denominator the whole number of chances both for its happening
and failing; thus the probability of the failing of that event which
has 2 chances to fail and 3 to happen will be measured by the fraction
2/5.

     
    The fractions which represent the probabilities
     of happening and failing,
    being added together, their sum
    will always be equal to unity,
      since the sum of their numerators
    will be equal to their common
      denominator.

Now, it being a certainty that an event will either happen or fail,
it follows that certainty, which may be conceived under the notion
of an infinitely great degree of probability, is fitly represented
by unity.

    

XLVIII.

    Maidens passing into naught,
    What a work by them is wrought!
     Not prefixes,
     But affixes
    On the better side of men--
    See! they multiply by ten.

XLIX.

    The golden key of life,
    True maiden crowned a wife.
    What then are toil and trouble,
    With strength to meet them, double?

L.

    True Heaven begins on earth
    Around a common hearth,
    Or in a humble heart--
    Thy faith means what thou art,
    And that which thou wouldst be;
    Thou makest it, it thee.

LI.

    No Heaven in Truth and Love?
    Then do not look above.

     Yet Truth and Love have wings,
     Although the highest things;
    Therewith to mount, dear friend,
     Is life that has no end.

LII.

    Art thou a mourner here?
    But One can give thee cheer:
    Affliction turns to grace
    Before the Master's face.

LIII.

    My friend, my troubled friend,
     If true, Love has not found you,
    Then I can comprehend
     That Duty has not bound you.

LIV.

    Love is the source of duty,
     The parent of all life,
    Which Heaven pronounces beauty,
     The crown of man and wife,
    Beginning and the end
    To hero, saint, and friend;
    An inspiration which
    Is so abundant, rich,
    That from the finger-tips
    And from the blooming lips,
    Yea, from the voiceful eyes,
    In questions and replies--
    From every simple action
    And hourly benefaction
    It pours itself away,
    A gladness day by day,
    Exhaustless as the sun,
    Work done and never done.
    And I have painted you,
    O maiden fair and true!

LV.

    The voice of God is love,
    As all who listen prove.
    Be thou assured of this,
    Or life's chief comfort miss.

LVI.

    "O is not love a marvel
    Which one can not unravel?
    Behold its bitter fruit!
    Ah, that kind does not suit."
    My friend, I'm not uncivil--
    Self makes of love a devil,
    And it is love no more;
    His guise love never wore,
    But Satan steals the guise
    Of love for foolish eyes--
    Therein the danger lies,
    But do not be too wise.
    Dost wait for perfect good
    In man or womanhood?
    Then thou must onward press
    In single blessedness,
    And find, perhaps too late,
    Love dies without a mate--
    Perhaps this better fate
    When love a banquet makes
    Which all the world partakes,
    Proved never out of date.

LVII.

    Prove all things--even love
    Thou must needs prove.
    But let the touch be fine
    That tests a thing divine.
    Yea, let the touch be tender;
    True love will answer render.

LVIII.

    'Tis Give-and-take,
     Not Take-and-give,
    That seeks to make
     Folk blessed live.
    Where is he now?
     Invisible.
    Yet on thy brow
     His name I spell.

LIX.

    Bear-and-forbear,
      To make folk blest,
    Seeks everywhere
      To be a guest.
    Angelic one,
      Who art so near,
    Thy will be done,
      Both now and here.

LX.

    Comes knowledge
    At college;
    Wisdom comes later,
    And is the greater.
    Art thou of both possessed?
    Then art thou richly blest.

LXI.

    What can I wish thee better
    Than that through all thy days,
    The spirit, not the letter,
    Invite thy blame or praise?
    Seek ever to unroll
    The substance or the soul;
    If that be fair and pure,
    It will, and must endure;
    And lo! the homely dress
    Grows into loveliness.

LXII.

    Into the heart of man
    The things that bless or ban;
    Out of the life he lives,
    The boon or curse he gives.
    Guard well thy open heart,
    What enters must depart.

LXIII.

    Is this--is this thine album?
    'Tis nothing but a sign
    Of something more divine.
    Thou art the real album,
    And on its wondrous pages
    Is writ thy daily wages.
    Thou canst not blot a word,
    Much less tear out a leaf.
    But all thy prayers are heard,
    And every pain and grief
    May be to thee as stairs
    To better things, until
    Thou reachest, unawares,
    The Master's mind and will.

LXIV.

    Seek thou for true friends,
    Aim thou at true ends,
    With God above them all;
    Then, as the shadows lengthen,
    Will thy endurance strengthen,
    With heaven thy coronal.

LXV.

    Ten thousand eyes of night,
    One Sovereign Eye above;
    Ten thousand rays of light,
    One central fire of Love.
    No eyes of night appear,
    God's Eye is never closed;
    No rays of light to cheer,
    For self hath interposed.
    Yet Love's great fire is bright
    By day as well as night.

LXVI.

    O we remember
      In leafy June,
    And white December
      Love's gentle tune;
    For nevermore,
    On any shore,
    Is life the same
    As ere love came.

LXVII.

     And this is the day
    My child came down from heaven,
     And this is the way
    The sweetest kiss is given.

LXVIII.

    Thy natal day, my dear!
    Good heart, good words for cheer,
    And kisses now and here,
    With love through many a year!

LXIX.

    Earthly duty,
    Heavenly beauty.

LXX.

    Truth! her story
    Is God's glory;
    Her triumph on the earth,
    Man's heavenly birth.

LXXI.

    What's in a name?
     A symbol of reality,
    All human fame,
     And God's originality.

LXXII.

    Thou art so neat and trim,
     So modest and so wise,
     Such gladness in thine eyes,
    Thou art a prize--for him,
    And for the world, I think;
    So here thy health I drink,
    O mother Eve's fair daughter,
    In this good cup of water.

LXXIII.

     All, all thou art
     Is in thy heart;
    Thy mind is but a feeder,
    Thy heart alone the leader,

LXXIV.

    If you want a fellow.
    Not too ripe and mellow,
    Just a little green,
    Courteous, never mean,
    One who has a will
    For the steepest hill,
    And can rule a wife,
    Love her as his life,
    And from fortune's frown
    Weave a blessed crown,
    Then you want the best;
    Win him, and be blest.

LXXV.

    If you wish a dandy,
    Moustache curled and sandy,
    Just the thing for parties,
    Who, so trim and handy,
    Knows not where his heart is,
    Whether with your banker,
    Or for you it hanker,
    Why, then take the dude;
    Naught is void of good.

LXXVI.

    His faults are many--
    Hast thou not any?
    But how will the bundles mix?
    Is a question for Doctor Dix,
    For both were picked up at Ann Arbor.

LXXVII.

    I can not wish thee better
    In a world of many a sorrow,
    Than that thou be a debtor
    To only love and to-morrow.
    Then pain has little anguish,
    And life no time to languish,
    When debts are paid to Heaven,
    And grace sufficient for thee
    Thy daily strength has given;
    For all is bright before thee.

LXXVIII.

    Seek not for happiness,
      But just to do thy duty;
    And then will blessedness
      Impart her heavenly beauty.

LXXIX. 

    Spools are used to advantage
      where knitters cannot be
    obtained.
      
    Pins, staples, or wire nails are
    used as posts.

These are driven into the wood and then curved outward a little at
the top with pliers, to prevent the work from slipping off.

    One, two, three or four posts
    may be used.
    
    A number of forms of web can
    be made, but the simplest
    and quickest are those made on the knitters having but two posts.

The four-post knitters are also simple and are used where a thick
cord is needed.

    
      
    Except otherwise specified
      two-post knitters are used
    for these models.
      
    Round Web
      
    Drop worsted through the hole in
      the center of the knitter and draw it out at the other end, three
inches.

This end is used to draw the work through the knitter.

    Carry the worsted leading
    from the ball, around the
      post to the right, across
      the center of the hole in
      the knitter and around
      the post to the left; then
    back across the center
    to the post at the right, thus making two stitches on this post.

Lift the lower or first stitch with a large pin or knitting needle,
carry it over the second stitch and drop it over the post; then across
the center to the post at the left and repeat.

    So continue until the
      desired length is obtained.

It
    will require seven yards
      of yarn to make one yard of
    web on the two-post knitter.
    
    Flat Web
    

Begin in the same way as for round web, but after carrying the first
or lower stitch over the second stitch on each post, bring the worsted
back around the same post, and over to the post on the opposite side
and repeat.

    This will leave two stitches
      on each post. In knitting
    flat webs, two stitches must always be
      left on the end posts, and these two are carried over the third stitch
and dropped over the post in working back and forth.

    
      It requires eleven
    yards of yarn
      to make one yard
    of flat web on the
      two-post knitter.
    
      Circular Mat
    
      A mat five inches
    in diameter requires
      two and one-half
    yards of round web.
      Start sewing with
    the piece of worsted
      hanging from
    the end of the web.
      Coil and sew in
    place by taking up the
      underhalf of
    a stitch on the
      right, then the underhalf
    of a stitch on the
      left side usually
    called "ball stitch."
      Continue alternating
    from right to left,
      taking up one
    stitch at a time
      except when it is
    necessary to widen;
      then sew two stitches of the web into one in the mat.

    
      Run the end
      of sewing thread
    back in the sewing to fasten
    it. When starting with
      a new sewing
      thread, put
    the needle in one inch
    back from where sewing
      ended and run
      it through
    the work to where the last
    stitch was taken.

Ball
      for Baby
      
    Use round web. Start
    with end of web and sew and
      coil as for
      round mat. Widen
    only when necessary to keep it from drawing in too quickly.

When desired width or center of ball is reached, fill with tissue
paper or a ball of soft cotton.

    The sewing is then
      continued
      and each row
    narrowed off by
    taking two stitches
      in part already
      sewed and one in
    the web.

When the same number of rows is narrowed the filling should be entirely
covered.

    The end left over
      will serve as a cord for
    the ball.
      
    Flat web may be used
      by taking twelve pieces three
    inches long and
      sewing them together--alternating color and white, if desired.

Run a draw-thread around the bottom and fill with paper or cotton;
then run a draw-thread around the top.

    Finish with a cord
    made of a piece of
      round web.
    
    Doll's Muff
    
    This will require
      three yards of round web.

Sew the web into a rectangular piece three inches wide and five inches
long.

    

    Sometimes our failures here
      Are God's successes;
    And things that seemed so drear
      His sweet caresses.
    It is our Father's hand
      That gives our wages,
    Before us many a land
      And all the ages.
    And shall we forfeit hope
     Because the fountains
    Are up the mighty slope
     Of yonder mountains?

XCII.

    The storm is raging.
     The sun is shining,
    And both presaging
     Some true refining;
    Through them are passing
     The hosts forever,
    All wealth amassing
     Through brave endeavor.

XCIII.

    O trees, rejoicing trees,
     Along my path to-day
    I hear your quiet melodies,
     And care all charmed away,
      I catch your mood,
      Dear forest brotherhood.

    O trees, rejoicing trees,
     Arrayed in springtide dress,
    How full ye are of prophecies
     Of everlastingness!
      I find a balm
      In your rejoicing psalm.

    O trees, rejoicing trees,
     In living green so grand,
    Like saints with grateful memories,
     Ye bless the Father's hand;
      Which stripped you bare
      To make you now so fair.

    O trees, rejoicing trees,
     Who have another birth,
    Through you my bounding spirit sees
     The day beyond the earth,
      Eternity
      So calm, so fair, so free.

    O trees, rejoicing trees,
     Dear children of the Lord,
    I thank you for the ministries
     Which ye to me accord;
      New life and light
      Burst from my wintry night!

    O friend, rejoicing friend,
     A better poem thou
    To hint the joys that have no end
     Through gladness here and now.
      Be thou to me
      Perpetual prophecy!

XCIV.

    The battle is set,
     The field to be won;
    What foes have you met,
     What work have you done?
    To courage alone
     Does victory come;
    To coward and drone
     Nor country nor home!

XCV.

    For thee, of blessed name,
    I ask not wealth or fame,
    Nor that thy path may be
    From toil and trouble free;
    For toil is everywhere,
    Some trouble all must bear,
    And wealth and fame are naught,
    With better stuff unwrought--
    I crave for thy dear heart
    Eternal Duty's part.
    For then indeed I know
    Thy pathway here below
    Will bloom with roses fair,
    And beauty everywhere;
    And this will be enough
    When winds are wild and rough,
    To keep thy heart in peace.

XCVI

    All things to-day have voices,
    To tell the joy of heaven,
    Which unto earth is given;
    This Winter flower rejoices,
    This snowy hellebore
    Which blooms for evermore
    On merry Christmas Day,
    Reminding us of One
    Here born a Virgin's Son,
    To take our sins away.
    The death its leaves within
    Is but the death of sin;
    Which death to die was born
    The pure and guiltless Child
    Who Justice reconciled
    And oped the gates of morn,
    What time a crimson flame
    Throughout a word of shame
    Did purge away the dross,
    And leave the blood-red gold,
    Whose worth can not be told,
    He purchased on the cross! Further,
    we are beginning to
    learn, as a company
    of Christ's witnesses, that
    the rivers of life to the world
    do not flow out in their fulness
    through one man, but through the body, the team.

Our brokenness and openness must be two-way, horizontal as well as
vertical, with one another as with God.

    We are just beginning to experience
      in our own ranks that
    team work in the Spirit is one
      of the keys to revival, and that we have to learn and practice the
laws of a living fellowship.

    
      I need not say more, as Roy
    Hession and his wife expound the whole
      matter.

    But we have seen God at work in our
      midst. I could name half-a-dozen
    of our workers, several of them
      leaders, in whose lives there has been a new spiritual revolution.

    

    But when through sin the happy seat
      Was lost to wretched man,
    Our Lord, redeeming love to meet,
      Redeeming work began:

    The flowers, which have a language now,
      Shall deck the weary earth,
    And, while men 'neath their burdens bow,
      Remind them of their birth;

    And, with their vernal beauty rife,
      To all the Gospel preach,
    The Resurrection and the Life,
      In sweet, persuasive speech.

XCIX.

    Reader! if thou hast found
    Thy life to reach and sound,
    Some thought among these rhymes,
    My school of rhymes and chimes,
    Then this, I pray thee, con:
    Somewhat to feed upon
    It has--a kind of lunch,
    Served with Olympian punch,
    To brace thee every night,
    And make thy mornings bright--
    Complines at even-song
    To make thee brave and strong:

SUNDAY NIGHT.

    Thou, Father, givest sleep
    So calm, so sweet, so deep;
    And all Thy children share
    Thy goodness everywhere,
    And to Thy likeness grow
    Who love to others show.
    Grant me more love, I pray,
    Than I have shown to-day.
    O Father, Son, and Dove,
    Dear Trinity of Love,
    Hear Thou my even-song
    And keep me brave and strong.

MONDAY NIGHT. 

    The illustrations here
    given are merely suggestive
    of many more that can be
    worked out along these lines.
    They are not simply to momentarily
    attract the child, but to
    permit of individual growth,
    and to have him participate in the joy of its ultimate use.

    
    Toy Knitters
    
    Toy knitters are made of a cylindrical
    piece of wood two and one-half
    or three inches long and at least
    one inch in diameter. This
    size enables the child to grasp it easily and work without cramping
the fingers.

WEDNESDAY NIGHT.

    Night is for prayer and sleep!
    Behind the western steep
    Now has the sun gone down
    With his great golden crown.
    O Sun of Righteousness,
    Arise! Thy children bless;
    With healing in thy wings
    Cure all our evil things.

THURSDAY NIGHT.

    While I am safe asleep,
    Good Shepherd of the sheep,
    If some poor lamb of Thine
    Stray from the Fold Divine
    Into the desert night,
    In the sweet morning light,
    Choose me to bring it thence
    Through Thy dear providence.

FRIDAY NIGHT.

    That I may sweetly sleep,
    Thy child, O Father, keep
    To wake and love thee more
    Than I have done before.
    And do Thou prosper all
    Who on Thy goodness call,
    And take their sins away
    Who have not learned to pray.

SATURDAY NIGHT.

    If death upon me creep
    While I in darkness sleep,
    Dear Lord! whose time is best,
    Be Thou my bed and rest!
    Then at Thy smile of light
    Will my dark cell grow bright,
    And angel-sentinels
    Ring the sweet morning bells.

C.

    There is no bitterness
     Without some lump of sweet;
    Without some blessedness
     There is no sad defeat. 

    It continued throughout the
     night, but not in vain,
    for the artillerymen
     were out there all night carrying the wounded off the field and rendering
valuable aid to the surgeons.

    These men worked like heroes
     every one, and deserve
    the greatest credit
     for the magnificent gallantry shown during that terrible night's
work while under a constant fire from the enemy.

    
     
    THE DEFIANT SULTAN'S DOWNFALL.

It
     seemed that a difficult problem lay before the Americans that night.

    

    Brave men and women all,
     How are we comforted
    With honey out of gall,
     Served with our daily bread!

FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnote 1: The way of the cross the way of light.

Footnote 2: O Liberty! how they have counterfeited thee!

It is generally understood, however, that her last words were: O Liberté! que de crimes on
commet en ton nom! (O Liberty! what crimes are committed in thy name!)

