"Why shouldn't he,--and we that have known each other all our lives? But, Barbara, pray, pray
never say a word of this to any one!"

"Is it I? Wouldn't I cut out my tongue first?"

"I don't know why I let you talk to me in this way. There has never been anything between me
and Phineas,--your brother I mean."

"I know whom you mean very well."

"And I feel quite sure that there never will be. Why should there? He'll go out among great
people and be a great man; and I've already found out that there's a certain Lady Laura Standish
whom he admires very much."

"Lady Laura Fiddlestick!"

"A man in Parliament, you know, may look up to anybody," said Miss Mary Flood Jones.

"I want Phin to look up to you, my dear."

"That wouldn't be looking up. Placed as he is now, that would be looking down; and he is so
proud that he'll never do that. But come down, dear, else they'll wonder where we are."

Mary Flood Jones was a little girl about twenty years of age, with the softest hair in the
world, of a colour varying between brown and auburn,--for sometimes you would swear it was
the one and sometimes the other; and she was as pretty as ever she could be. She was one of
those girls, so common in Ireland, whom men, with tastes that way given, feel inclined to take
up and devour on the spur of the moment; and when she liked her lion, she had a look about
her which seemed to ask to be devoured. There are girls so cold-looking,--pretty girls, too,
ladylike, discreet, and armed with all accomplishments,--whom to attack seems to require the
same sort of courage, and the same sort of preparation, as a journey in quest of the north-west
passage. One thinks of a pedestal near the Athenaeum as the most appropriate and most honourable
reward of such courage. But, again, there are other girls to abstain from attacking whom is,
to a man of any warmth of temperament, quite impossible. They are like water when one is athirst,
like plovers' eggs in March, like cigars when one is out in the autumn. No one ever dreams
of denying himself when such temptation comes in the way. It often happens, however, that in
spite of appearances, the water will not come from the well, nor the egg from its shell, nor
will the cigar allow itself to be lit. A girl of such appearance, so charming, was Mary Flood
Jones of Killaloe, and our hero Phineas was not allowed to thirst in vain for a drop from the
cool spring.

When the girls went down into the drawing-room Mary was careful to go to a part of the room
quite remote from Phineas, so as to seat herself between Mrs. Finn and Dr. Finn's young partner,
Mr. Elias Bodkin, from Ballinasloe. But Mrs. Finn and the Miss Finns and all Killaloe knew
that Mary had no love for Mr. Bodkin, and when Mr. Bodkin handed her the hot cake she hardly
so much as smiled at him. But in two minutes Phineas was behind her chair, and then she smiled;
and in five minutes more she had got herself so twisted round that she was sitting in a corner
with Phineas and his sister Barbara; and in two more minutes Barbara had returned to Mr. Elias
Bodkin, so that Phineas and Mary were uninterrupted. They manage these things very quickly
and very cleverly in Killaloe.

"I shall be off to-morrow morning by the early train," said Phineas.

"So soon;--and when will you have to begin,--in Parliament, I mean?"

"I shall have to take my seat on Friday. I'm going back just in time."

"But when shall we hear of your saying something?"

"Never, probably. Not one in ten who go into Parliament ever do say anything."

"But you will; won't you? I hope you will. I do so hope you will distinguish yourself;--because
of your sister, and for the sake of the town, you know."

"And is that all, Mary?"

"Isn't that enough?"

"You don't care a bit about myself, then?"

"You know that I do. Haven't we been friends ever since we were children? Of course it will
be a great pride to me that a person whom I have known so intimately should come to be talked
about as a great man."

"I shall never be talked about as a great man."

"You're a great man to me already, being in Parliament. Only think;--I never saw a member of
Parliament in my life before."

"You've seen the bishop scores of times."

"Is he in Parliament? Ah, but not like you. He couldn't come to be a Cabinet Minister, and
one never reads anything about him in the newspapers. I shall expect to see your name, very
often, and I shall always look for it. 'Mr. Phineas Finn paired off with Mr. Mildmay.' What
is the meaning of pairing off?"

"I'll explain it all to you when I come back, after learning my lesson."

"Mind you do come back. But I don't suppose you ever will. You will be going somewhere to see
Lady Laura Standish when you are not wanted in Parliament."

"Lady Laura Standish!"

"And why shouldn't you? Of course, with your prospects, you should go as much as possible among
people of that sort. Is Lady Laura very pretty?"

"She's about six feet high."

"Nonsense. I don't believe that."

"She would look as though she were, standing by you."

"Because I am so insignificant and small."

"Because your figure is perfect, and because she is straggling. She is as unlike you as possible
in everything. She has thick lumpy red hair, while yours is all silk and softness. She has
large hands and feet, and--"

"Why, Phineas, you are making her out to be an ogress, and yet I know that you admire her."

"So I do, because she possesses such an appearance of power. And after all, in spite of the
lumpy hair, and in spite of large hands and straggling figure, she is handsome. One can't tell
what it is. One can see that she is quite contented with herself, and intends to make others
contented with her. And so she does."

"I see you are in love with her, Phineas."

"No; not in love,--not with her at least. Of all men in the world, I suppose that I am the
last that has a right to be in love. I daresay I shall marry some day."

"I'm sure I hope you will."

"But not till I'm forty or perhaps fifty years old. If I was not fool enough to have what men
call a high ambition I might venture to be in love now."

"I'm sure I'm very glad that you've got a high ambition. It is what every man ought to have;
and I've no doubt that we shall hear of your marriage soon,--very soon. And then,--if she can
help you in your ambition, we--shall--all--be so--glad."

Phineas did not say a word further then. Perhaps some commotion among the party broke up the
little private conversation in the corner. And he was not alone with Mary again till there
came a moment for him to put her cloak over her shoulders in the back parlour, while Mrs. Flood
Jones was finishing some important narrative to his mother. It was Barbara, I think, who stood
in some doorway, and prevented people from passing, and so gave him the opportunity which he
abused.

"Mary," said he, taking her in his arms, without a single word of love-making beyond what the
reader has heard,--"one kiss before we part."

"No, Phineas, no!" But the kiss had been taken and given before she had even answered him.
"Oh, Phineas, you shouldn't!"

"I should. Why shouldn't I? And, Mary, I will have one morsel of your hair."

"You shall not; indeed you shall not!" But the scissors were at hand, and the ringlet was cut
and in his pocket before she was ready with her resistance. There was nothing further;--not
a word more, and Mary went away with her veil down, under her mother's wing, weeping sweet
silent tears which no one saw.

"You do love her; don't you, Phineas?" asked Barbara.

"Bother! Do you go to bed, and don't trouble yourself about such trifles. But mind you're up,
old girl, to see me off in the morning."

Everybody was up to see him off in the morning, to give him coffee and good advice, and kisses,
and to throw all manner of old shoes after him as he started on his great expedition to Parliament.
His father gave him an extra twenty-pound note, and begged him for God's sake to be careful
about his money. His mother told him always to have an orange in his pocket when he intended
to speak longer than usual. And Barbara in a last whisper begged him never to forget dear Mary
Flood Jones.

CHAPTER III

Phineas Finn Takes His Seat

Phineas had many serious, almost solemn thoughts on his journey towards London. I am sorry
I must assure my female readers that very few of them had reference to Mary Flood Jones. He
had, however, very carefully packed up the tress, and could bring that out for proper acts
of erotic worship at seasons in which his mind might be less engaged with affairs of state
than it was at present. Would he make a failure of this great matter which he had taken in
hand? He could not but tell himself that the chances were twenty to one against him. Now that
he looked nearer at it all, the difficulties loomed larger than ever, and the rewards seemed
to be less, more difficult of approach, and more evanescent. How many members were there who
could never get a hearing! How many who only spoke to fail! How many, who spoke well, who could
speak to no effect as far as their own worldly prospects were concerned! He had already known
many members of Parliament to whom no outward respect or sign of honour was ever given by any
one; and it seemed to him, as he thought over it, that Irish members of Parliament were generally
treated with more indifference than any others. There were O'B---- and O'C---- and O'D----,
for whom no one cared a straw, who could hardly get men to dine with them at the club, and
yet they were genuine members of Parliament. Why should he ever be better than O'B----, or
O'C----, or O'D----? And in what way should he begin to be better? He had an idea of the fashion
after which it would be his duty to strive that he might excel those gentlemen. He did not
give any of them credit for much earnestness in their country's behalf, and he was minded to
be very earnest. He would go to his work honestly and conscientiously, determined to do his
duty as best he might, let the results to himself be what they would. This was a noble resolution,
and might have been pleasant to him,--had he not remembered that smile of derision which had
come over his friend Erle's face when he declared his intention of doing his duty to his country
as a Liberal, and not of supporting a party. O'B---- and O'C---- and O'D---- were keen enough
to support their party, only they were sometimes a little astray at knowing which was their
party for the nonce. He knew that Erle and such men would despise him if he did not fall into
the regular groove,--and if the Barrington Erles despised him, what would then be left for him?

His moody thoughts were somewhat dissipated when he found one Laurence Fitzgibbon,--the Honourable
Laurence Fitzgibbon,--a special friend of his own, and a very clever fellow, on board the boat
as it steamed out of Kingston harbour. Laurence Fitzgibbon had also just been over about his
election, and had been returned as a matter of course for his father's county. Laurence Fitzgibbon
had sat in the House for the last fifteen years, and was yet well-nigh as young a man as any
in it. And he was a man altogether different from the O'B----s, O'C----s, and O'D----s. Laurence
Fitzgibbon could always get the ear of the House if he chose to speak, and his friends declared
that he might have been high up in office long since if he would have taken the trouble to
work. He was a welcome guest at the houses of the very best people, and was a friend of whom
any one might be proud. It had for two years been a feather in the cap of Phineas that he knew
Laurence Fitzgibbon. And yet people said that Laurence Fitzgibbon had nothing of his own, and
men wondered how he lived. He was the youngest son of Lord Claddagh, an Irish peer with a large
family, who could do nothing for Laurence, his favourite child, beyond finding him a seat in
Parliament.

"Well, Finn, my boy," said Laurence, shaking hands with the young member on board the steamer,
"so you've made it all right at Loughshane." Then Phineas was beginning to tell all the story,
the wonderful story, of George Morris and the Earl of Tulla,--how the men of Loughshane had
elected him without opposition; how he had been supported by Conservatives as well as Liberals;--how
unanimous Loughshane had been in electing him, Phineas Finn, as its representative. But Mr.
Fitzgibbon seemed to care very little about all this, and went so far as to declare that those
things were accidents which fell out sometimes one way and sometimes another, and were altogether
independent of any merit or demerit on the part of the candidate himself. And it was marvellous
and almost painful to Phineas that his friend Fitzgibbon should accept the fact of his membership
with so little of congratulation,--with absolutely no blowing of trumpets whatever. Had he
been elected a member of the municipal corporation of Loughshane, instead of its representative
in the British Parliament, Laurence Fitzgibbon could not have made less fuss about it. Phineas
was disappointed, but he took the cue from his friend too quickly to show his disappointment.
And when, half an hour after their meeting, Fitzgibbon had to be reminded that his companion
was not in the House during the last session, Phineas was able to make the remark as though
he thought as little about the House as did the old-accustomed member himself.

"As far as I can see as yet," said Fitzgibbon, "we are sure to have seventeen."

"Seventeen?" said Phineas, not quite understanding the meaning of the number quoted.

"A majority of seventeen. There are four Irish counties and three Scotch which haven't returned
as yet; but we know pretty well what they'll do. There's a doubt about Tipperary, of course,
but whichever gets in of the seven who are standing, it will be a vote on our side. Now the
Government can't live against that. The uphill strain is too much for them."

"According to my idea, nothing can justify them in trying to live against a majority."

"That's gammon. When the thing is so equal, anything is fair. But you see they don't like it.
Of course there are some among them as hungry as we are; and Dubby would give his toes and
fingers to remain in." Dubby was the ordinary name by which, among friends and foes, Mr. Daubeny
was known: Mr. Daubeny, who at that time was the leader of the Conservative party in the House
of Commons. "But most of them," continued Mr. Fitzgibbon, "prefer the other game, and if you
don't care about money, upon my word it's the pleasanter game of the two."

"But the country gets nothing done by a Tory Government."

"As to that, it's six of one and half a dozen of the other. I never knew a government yet that
wanted to do anything. Give a government a real strong majority, as the Tories used to have
half a century since, and as a matter of course it will do nothing. Why should it? Doing things,
as you call it, is only bidding for power,--for patronage and pay."

"And is the country to have no service done?"

"The country gets quite as much service as it pays for,--and perhaps a little more. The clerks
in the offices work for the country. And the Ministers work too, if they've got anything to
manage. There is plenty of work done;--but of work in Parliament, the less the better, according
to my ideas. It's very little that ever is done, and that little is generally too much."

"But the people--"

"Come down and have a glass of brandy-and-water, and leave the people alone for the present.
The people can take care of themselves a great deal better than we can take care of them."
Mr. Fitzgibbon's doctrine as to the commonwealth was very different from that of Barrington
Erle, and was still less to the taste of the new member. Barrington Erle considered that his
leader, Mr. Mildmay, should be intrusted to make all necessary changes in the laws, and that
an obedient House of Commons should implicitly obey that leader in authorising all changes
proposed by him;--but according to Barrington Erle, such changes should be numerous and of
great importance, and would, if duly passed into law at his lord's behest, gradually produce
such a Whig Utopia in England as has never yet been seen on the face of the earth. Now, according
to Mr. Fitzgibbon, the present Utopia would be good enough,--if only he himself might be once
more put into possession of a certain semi-political place about the Court, from which he had
heretofore drawn £1,000 per annum, without any work, much to his comfort. He made no secret
of his ambition, and was chagrined simply at the prospect of having to return to his electors
before he could enjoy those good things which he expected to receive from the undoubted majority
of seventeen, which had been, or would be, achieved.

"I hate all change as a rule," said Fitzgibbon; "but, upon my word, we ought to alter that.
When a fellow has got a crumb of comfort, after waiting for it years and years, and perhaps
spending thousands in elections, he has to go back and try his hand again at the last moment,
merely in obedience to some antiquated prejudice. Look at poor Jack Bond,--the best friend
I ever had in the world. He was wrecked upon that rock for ever. He spent every shilling he
had in contesting Romford three times running,--and three times running he got in. Then they
made him Vice-Comptroller of the Granaries, and I'm shot if he didn't get spilt at Romford
on standing for his re-election!"

"And what became of him?"

"God knows. I think I heard that he married an old woman and settled down somewhere. I know
he never came up again. Now, I call that a confounded shame. I suppose I'm safe down in Mayo,
but there's no knowing what may happen in these days."

As they parted at Euston Square, Phineas asked his friend some little nervous question as to
the best mode of making a first entrance into the House. Would Laurence Fitzgibbon see him
through the difficulties of the oath-taking? But Laurence Fitzgibbon made very little of the
difficulty. "Oh;--you just come down, and there'll be a rush of fellows, and you'll know everybody.
You'll have to hang about for an hour or so, and then you'll get pushed through. There isn't
time for much ceremony after a general election."

Phineas reached London early in the morning, and went home to bed for an hour or so. The House
was to meet on that very day, and he intended to begin his parliamentary duties at once if
he should find it possible to get some one to accompany him; He felt that he should lack courage
to go down to Westminster Hall alone, and explain to the policeman and door-keepers that he
was the man who had just been elected member for Loughshane. So about noon he went into the
Reform Club, and there he found a great crowd of men, among whom there was a plentiful sprinkling
of members. Erle saw him in a moment, and came to him with congratulations.

"So you're all right, Finn," said he.

"Yes; I'm all right,--I didn't have much doubt about it when I went over."

"I never heard of a fellow with such a run of luck," said Erle. "It's just one of those flukes
that occur once in a dozen elections. Any one on earth might have got in without spending a
shilling."

Phineas didn't at all like this. "I don't think any one could have got in," said he, "without
knowing Lord Tulla."

"Lord Tulla was nowhere, my dear boy, and could have nothing to say to it. But never mind that.
You meet me in the lobby at two. There'll be a lot of us there, and we'll go in together. Have
you seen Fitzgibbon?" Then Barrington Erle went off to other business, and Finn was congratulated
by other men. But it seemed to him that the congratulations of his friends were not hearty.
He spoke to some men, of whom he thought that he knew they would have given their eyes to be
in Parliament;--and yet they spoke of his success as being a very ordinary thing. "Well, my
boy, I hope you like it," said one middle-aged gentleman whom he had known ever since he came
up to London. "The difference is between working for nothing and working for money. You'll
have to work for nothing now."

"That's about it, I suppose," said Phineas.

"They say the House is a comfortable club," said the middle-aged friend, "but I confess that
I shouldn't like being rung away from my dinner myself."

At two punctually Phineas was in the lobby at Westminster, and then he found himself taken
into the House with a crowd of other men. The old and young, and they who were neither old
nor young, were mingled together, and there seemed to be very little respect of persons. On
three or four occasions there was some cheering when a popular man or a great leader came in;
but the work of the day left but little clear impression on the mind of the young member. He
was confused, half elated, half disappointed, and had not his wits about him. He found himself
constantly regretting that he was there; and as constantly telling himself that he, hardly
yet twenty-five, without a shilling of his own, had achieved an entrance into that assembly
which by the consent of all men is the greatest in the world, and which many of the rich magnates
of the country had in vain spent heaps of treasure in their endeavours to open to their own
footsteps. He tried hard to realise what he had gained, but the dust and the noise and the
crowds and the want of something august to the eye were almost too strong for him. He managed,
however, to take the oath early among those who took it, and heard the Queen s speech read
and the Address moved and seconded. He was seated very uncomfortably, high up on a back seat,
between two men whom he did not know; and he found the speeches to be very long. He had been
in the habit of seeing such speeches reported in about a column, and he thought that these
speeches must take at least four columns each. He sat out the debate on the Address till the
House was adjourned, and then he went away to dine at his club. He did go into the dining-room
of the House, but there was a crowd there, and he found himself alone,--and to tell the truth,
he was afraid to order his dinner.

The nearest approach to a triumph which he had in London came to him from the glory which his
election reflected upon his landlady. She was a kindly good motherly soul, whose husband was
a journeyman law-stationer, and who kept a very decent house in Great Marlborough Street. Here
Phineas had lodged since he had been in London, and was a great favourite. "God bless my soul,
Mr. Phineas," said she, "only think of your being a member of Parliament!"

"Yes, I'm a member of Parliament, Mrs. Bunce."

"And you'll go on with the rooms the same as ever? Well, I never thought to have a member of
Parliament in 'em."

Mrs. Bunce really had realised the magnitude of the step which her lodger had taken, and Phineas
was grateful to her.

CHAPTER IV

Lady Laura Standish

Phineas, in describing Lady Laura Standish to Mary Flood Jones at Killaloe, had not painted
her in very glowing colours. Nevertheless he admired Lady Laura very much, and she was worthy
of admiration. It was probably the greatest pride of our hero's life that Lady Laura Standish
was his friend, and that she had instigated him to undertake the risk of parliamentary life.
Lady Laura was intimate also with Barrington Erle, who was, in some distant degree, her cousin;
and Phineas was not without a suspicion that his selection for Loughshane, from out of all
the young liberal candidates, may have been in some degree owing to Lady Laura's influence
with Barrington Erle. He was not unwilling that it should be so; for though, as he had repeatedly
told himself, he was by no means in love with Lady Laura,--who was, as he imagined, somewhat
older than himself,--nevertheless, he would feel gratified at accepting anything from her hands,
and he felt a keen desire for some increase to those ties of friendship which bound them together.
No;--he was not in love with Lady Laura Standish. He had not the remotest idea of asking her
to be his wife. So he told himself, both before he went over for his election, and after his
return. When he had found himself in a corner with poor little Mary Flood Jones, he had kissed
her as a matter of course; but he did not think that he could, in any circumstances, be tempted
to kiss Lady Laura. He supposed that he was in love with his darling little Mary,--after a
fashion. Of course, it could never come to anything, because of the circumstances of his life,
which were so imperious to him. He was not in love with Lady Laura, and yet he hoped that his
intimacy with her might come to much. He had more than once asked himself how he would feel
when somebody else came to be really in love with Lady Laura,--for she was by no means a woman
to lack lovers,--when some one else should be in love with her, and be received by her as a
lover; but this question he had never been able to answer. There were many questions about
himself which he usually answered by telling himself that it was his fate to walk over volcanoes.
"Of course, I shall be blown into atoms some fine day," he would say; "but after all, that
is better than being slowly boiled down into pulp."

The House had met on a Friday, again on the Saturday morning, and the debate on the Address
had been adjourned till the Monday. On the Sunday, Phineas determined that he would see Lady
Laura. She professed to be always at home on Sunday, and from three to four in the afternoon
her drawing-room would probably be half full of people. There would, at any rate, be comers
and goers, who would prevent anything like real conversation between himself and her. But for
a few minutes before that he might probably find her alone, and he was most anxious to see
whether her reception of him, as a member of Parliament, would be in any degree warmer than
that of his other friends. Hitherto he had found no such warmth since he came to London, excepting
that which had glowed in the bosom of Mrs. Bunce.

Lady Laura Standish was the daughter of the Earl of Brentford, and was the only remaining lady
of the Earl's family. The Countess had been long dead; and Lady Emily, the younger daughter,
who had been the great beauty of her day, was now the wife of a Russian nobleman whom she had
persisted in preferring to any of her English suitors, and lived at St. Petersburg. There was
an aunt, old Lady Laura, who came up to town about the middle of May; but she was always in
the country except for some six weeks in the season. There was a certain Lord Chiltern, the
Earl's son and heir, who did indeed live at the family town house in Portman Square; but Lord
Chiltern was a man of whom Lady Laura's set did not often speak, and Phineas, frequently as
he had been at the house, had never seen Lord Chiltern there. He was a young nobleman of whom
various accounts were given by various people; but I fear that the account most readily accepted
in London attributed to him a great intimacy with the affairs at Newmarket, and a partiality
for convivial pleasures. Respecting Lord Chiltern Phineas had never as yet exchanged a word
with Lady Laura. With her father he was acquainted, as he had dined perhaps half a dozen times
at the house. The point in Lord Brentford's character which had more than any other struck
our hero, was the unlimited confidence which he seemed to place in his daughter. Lady Laura
seemed to have perfect power of doing what she pleased. She was much more mistress of herself
than if she had been the wife instead of the daughter of the Earl of Brentford,--and she seemed
to be quite as much mistress of the house.

Phineas had declared at Killaloe that Lady Laura was six feet high, that she had red hair,
that her figure was straggling, and that her hands and feet were large. She was in fact about
five feet seven in height, and she carried her height well. There was something of nobility
in her gait, and she seemed thus to be taller than her inches. Her hair was in truth red,--of
a deep thorough redness. Her brother's hair was the same; and so had been that of her father,
before it had become sandy with age. Her sister's had been of a soft auburn hue, and hers had
been said to be the prettiest head of hair in Europe at the time of her marriage. But in these
days we have got to like red hair, and Lady Laura's was not supposed to stand in the way of
her being considered a beauty. Her face was very fair, though it lacked that softness which
we all love in women. Her eyes, which were large and bright, and very clear, never seemed to
quail, never rose and sunk or showed themselves to be afraid of their own power. Indeed, Lady
Laura Standish had nothing of fear about her. Her nose was perfectly cut, but was rather large,
having the slightest possible tendency to be aquiline. Her mouth also was large, but was full
of expression, and her teeth were perfect. Her complexion was very bright, but in spite of
its brightness she never blushed. The shades of her complexion were set and steady. Those who
knew her said that her heart was so fully under command that nothing could stir her blood to
any sudden motion. As to that accusation of straggling which had been made against her, it
had sprung from ill-natured observation of her modes of sitting. She never straggled when she
stood or walked; but she would lean forward when sitting, as a man does, and would use her
arms in talking, and would put her hand over her face, and pass her fingers through her hair,--after
the fashion of men rather than of women;--and she seemed to despise that soft quiescence of
her sex in which are generally found so many charms. Her hands and feet were large,--as was
her whole frame. Such was Lady Laura Standish; and Phineas Finn had been untrue to himself
and to his own appreciation of the lady when he had described her in disparaging terms to Mary
Flood Jones. But, though he had spoken of Lady Laura in disparaging terms, he had so spoken
of her as to make Miss Flood Jones quite understand that he thought a great deal about Lady Laura.

And now, early on the Sunday, he made his way to Portman Square in order that he might learn
whether there might be any sympathy for him there. Hitherto he had found none. Everything had
been terribly dry and hard, and he had gathered as yet none of the fruit which he had expected
that his good fortune would bear for him. It is true that he had not as yet gone among any
friends, except those of his club, and men who were in the House along with him;--and at the
club it might be that there were some who envied him his good fortune, and others who thought
nothing of it because it had been theirs for years. Now he would try a friend who, he hoped,
could sympathise; and therefore he called in Portman Square at about half-past two on the Sunday
morning. Yes,--Lady Laura was in the drawing-room. The hall-porter admitted as much, but evidently
seemed to think that he had been disturbed from his dinner before his time. Phineas did not
care a straw for the hall-porter. If Lady Laura were not kind to him, he would never trouble
that hall-porter again. He was especially sore at this moment because a valued friend, the
barrister with whom he had been reading for the last three years, had spent the best part of
an hour that Sunday morning in proving to him that he had as good as ruined himself. "When
I first heard it, of course I thought you had inherited a fortune," said Mr. Low. "I have inherited
nothing," Phineas replied;--"not a penny; and I never shall." Then Mr. Low had opened his eyes
very wide, and shaken his head very sadly, and had whistled.

"I am so glad you have come, Mr. Finn," said Lady Laura, meeting Phineas half-way across the
large room.

"Thanks," said he, as he took her hand.

"I thought that perhaps you would manage to see me before any one else was here."

"Well;--to tell the truth, I have wished it; though I can hardly tell why."

"I can tell you why, Mr. Finn. But never mind;--come and sit down. I am so very glad that you
have been successful;--so very glad. You know I told you that I should never think much of
you if you did not at least try it."

"And therefore I did try."

"And have succeeded. Faint heart, you know, never did any good. I think it is a man's duty
to make his way into the House;--that is, if he ever means to be anybody. Of course it is not
every man who can get there by the time that he is five-and-twenty."

"Every friend that I have in the world says that I have ruined myself."

"No;--I don't say so," said Lady Laura.

"And you are worth all the others put together. It is such a comfort to have some one to say
a cheery word to one."

"You shall hear nothing but cheery words here. Papa shall say cheery words to you that shall
be better than mine, because they shall be weighted with the wisdom of age. I have heard him
say twenty times that the earlier a man goes into the House the better. There is much to learn."

"But your father was thinking of men of fortune."

"Not at all;--of younger brothers, and barristers, and of men who have their way to make, as
you have. Let me see,--can you dine here on Wednesday? There will be no party, of course, but
papa will want to shake hands with you; and you legislators of the Lower House are more easily
reached on Wednesdays than on any other day."

"I shall be delighted," said Phineas, feeling, however, that he did not expect much sympathy
from Lord Brentford.

"Mr. Kennedy dines here;--you know Mr. Kennedy, of Loughlinter; and we will ask your friend
Mr. Fitzgibbon. There will be nobody else. As for catching Barrington Erle, that is out of
the question at such a time as this."

"But going back to my being ruined--" said Phineas, after a pause.

"Don't think of anything so disagreeable."

"You must not suppose that I am afraid of it. I was going to say that there are worse things
than ruin,--or, at any rate, than the chance of ruin. Supposing that I have to emigrate and
skin sheep, what does it matter? I myself, being unencumbered, have myself as my own property
to do what I like with. With Nelson it was Westminster Abbey or a peerage. With me it is parliamentary
success or sheep-skinning."

"There shall be no sheep-skinning, Mr. Finn. I will guarantee you."

"Then I shall be safe."

At that moment the door of the room was opened, and a man entered with quick steps, came a
few yards in, and then retreated, slamming the door after him. He was a man with thick short
red hair, and an abundance of very red beard. And his face was red,--and, as it seemed to Phineas,
his very eyes. There was something in the countenance of the man which struck him almost with
dread,--something approaching to ferocity.

There was a pause a moment after the door was closed, and then Lady Laura spoke. "It was my
brother Chiltern. I do not think that you have ever met him."

CHAPTER V

Mr. and Mrs. Low

That terrible apparition of the red Lord Chiltern had disturbed Phineas in the moment of his
happiness as he sat listening to the kind flatteries of Lady Laura; and though Lord Chiltern
had vanished as quickly as he had appeared, there had come no return of his joy. Lady Laura
had said some word about her brother, and Phineas had replied that he had never chanced to
see Lord Chiltern. Then there had been an awkward silence, and almost immediately other persons
had come in. After greeting one or two old acquaintances, among whom an elder sister of Laurence
Fitzgibbon was one, he took his leave and escaped out into the square. "Miss Fitzgibbon is
going to dine with us on Wednesday," said Lady Laura. "She says she won't answer for her brother,
but she will bring him if she can."

"And you're a member of Parliament now too, they tell me," said Miss Fitzgibbon, holding up
her hands. "I think everybody will be in Parliament before long. I wish I knew some man who
wasn't, that I might think of changing my condition."

But Phineas cared very little what Miss Fitzgibbon said to him. Everybody knew Aspasia Fitzgibbon,
and all who knew her were accustomed to put up with the violence of her jokes and the bitterness
of her remarks. She was an old maid, over forty, very plain, who, having reconciled herself
to the fact that she was an old maid, chose to take advantage of such poor privileges as the
position gave her. Within the last few years a considerable fortune had fallen into her hands,
some twenty-five thousand pounds, which had come to her unexpectedly,--a wonderful windfall.
And now she was the only one of her family who had money at command. She lived in a small house
by herself, in one of the smallest streets of May Fair, and walked about sturdily by herself,
and spoke her mind about everything. She was greatly devoted to her brother Laurence,--so devoted
that there was nothing she would not do for him, short of lending him money.

But Phineas when he found himself out in the square thought nothing of Aspasia Fitzgibbon.
He had gone to Lady Laura Standish for sympathy, and she had given it to him in full measure.
She understood him and his aspirations if no one else did so on the face of the earth. She
rejoiced in his triumph, and was not too hard to tell him that she looked forward to his success.
And in what delightful language she had done so! "Faint heart never won fair lady." It was
thus, or almost thus, that she had encouraged him. He knew well that she had in truth meant
nothing more than her words had seemed to signify. He did not for a moment attribute to her
aught else. But might not he get another lesson from them? He had often told himself that he
was not in love with Laura Standish;--but why should he not how tell himself that he was in
love with her? Of course there would be difficulty. But was it not the business of his life
to overcome difficulties? Had he not already overcome one difficulty almost as great; and why
should he be afraid of this other? Faint heart never won fair lady! And this fair lady,--for
at this moment he was ready to swear that she was very fair,--was already half won. She could
not have taken him by the hand so warmly, and looked into his face so keenly, had she not felt
for him something stronger than common friendship.

