The poor beasts were soon floundering through another drift. Suddenly there came a sharp crack,
as if something had broken, and one of the horses appeared to have fallen.  Worse still, the
lower runner of the sleigh seemed sinking in the snow to that degree that a moment later they
would be overturned into the darkness that yawned in the direction of the steep mountain slope.

Hemstead instantly sprang out on the lower side, with the purpose of preventing the accident.
Lottie as quickly sprang out on the upper side, and cried: "You push, and I will hold"; and
so it happened that she did quite as much as he in saving the party from disaster. Indeed,
if the sleigh had gone over, it would have carried him who was on the lower side down with it.

The horses, in their wise instinct, keeping still, Hemstead first came round to where Lottie stood.

"Why, Miss Marsden!" he exclaimed, "you are up to your waist in the snow."

"Well, it won't drown me. This is a great deal better than rolling down the mountain."

"I could kneel at your feet," said the student, fervently.

"Ha, ha, ha," laughed Lottie. "You couldn't find them." 

He had then no one to tell his tale to but Mr. Sandars, of Liverpool, who did listen to him,
and kept his spirits up; and his schemes had at length been carried
out only by dint of sheer perseverance.”

George Stephenson’s idea
was at that time regarded as but the dream of a chimerical projector.

It stood before the public friendless, struggling hard to gain a footing, scarcely daring to
lift itself into notice for fear of ridicule.

The civil engineers generally rejected the notion of a Locomotive Railway; and when no leading
man of the day could be found to stand forward in support of the Killingworth mechanic, its chances
of success must indeed have been pronounced but small.

When such was the hostility of the civil engineers, no wonder the
reviewers were puzzled.

The ‘Quarterly,’ in an able article in support of the projected Liverpool and Manchester Railway,—while
admitting its absolute necessity, and insisting that there was no choice left but a railroad,
on which the journey between Liverpool and Manchester, whether performed by horses or engines,
would always be accomplished “within the day,”—nevertheless scouted the idea of travelling at
a greater speed than eight or nine miles an hour.

We would as soon expect the people of Woolwich to suffer themselves to be fired off upon one
of Congreve’s ricochet rockets, as trust themselves to the mercy of such a machine going at such
a rate. We will back old Father Thames against the Woolwich Railway
for any sum.



"You can do nothing pleasing to me that will bring harm to yourself," she said. "We must get
out of the wind, and if nothing better offers, must bury ourselves in the snow be-side the
horses. I remember reading of such things. The sleigh robes and the warmth of their bodies
would keep us from freezing; I'm not so very cold."

Addie and Bel were crying bitterly, while De Forrest was groaning and cursing from where he
stood, behind the sleigh.

"Come," he shouted, "what's to be done?"

"I will go straight up the bank. I may find a ledge, or some rocks, under which we may cower,"
said Hemstead.

"Don't go far," said Lottie, eagerly. "I should, indeed, lose hope, if you became separated
from us."

He soon returned with the joyful news that a little way up the bank was a high ledge, where
they would be completely sheltered from the wind.

Soon he had them all under it, and the respite from the driving gale was welcomed by none more
than by Lottie, who, in spite of her courage and sustaining excitement, was beginning to suffer
greatly.

De Forrest, being a smoker, had matches; but, in his impatience to light a fire, destroyed
most of them.

"Here, Julian, give them to me," said Lottie, most decisively.

Then, after all the dry material which could be collected, by groping round in the dark, was
gathered in the most sheltered nook, she took from her pocket a delicate lace handkerchief,
and, by means of that, lighted the sticks and leaves. Soon they were warming their numb hands
and chilled bodies beside a cheerful blaze.

Hemstead watched Lottie with wondering and increasing admiration. In securing a fire, they
escaped all immediate danger, and she became as cheery as if the disaster, which had threatened
even a fatal termination, were only an episode, and the long, wintry bivouac, in that desolate
place, but a picnic in the woods.

"You are the queerest girl I ever knew, Lottie," said Bel.

"She means by that, you are the best," Hemstead added.

"Come, this is no time for compliments, but for work," said Lottie, energetically, and she
set De Forrest at it also.

The robes were brought from the sleigh, and after the snow had been trampled down and cleared
away between the fire and the ledge, here they were spread. Addie and Bel were, at first, terror-stricken
at the thought of spending the night in the mountains, but were made so comfortable that, at
last, their tears ceased.

"Our best hope is this brandy," said De Forrest, drawing a flask from his pocket.

"Nonsense!" said Lottie. "Our best hope is keeping our senses and a good fire."

But Bel and Addie were ready enough to take the brandy, and were soon sleeping heavily from
its effects, combined with their exposure to the cold wind. Lottie could not be prevailed upon
to take any.

"I want the use of my senses to-night, if ever," she said.  "We must take turns in keeping
awake, and you shall have the first watch, Julian."

Hemstead, at this time, was down getting the horses out of the drift, that he might tie them
near the fire and also under the ledge. De Forrest set to work very zealously under the stimulus
of Lottie's words and the brandy combined, and gathered the brush-wood that lay near, and piled
it on the fire. Everything seemed to promise well, and the wearied girl laid herself down by
the side of Bel and Addie, and was soon sleeping as naturally and peacefully as if in her luxurious
apartment at home.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

IN EARNEST.

When Lottie awoke the storm had passed away. The moon, in her last quarter, was rising in pale,
unclouded light over eastern mountains, and bringing into dusky outline many intervening hills.

At first, bewildered, and not knowing where she was, she rose up hastily, but after a moment
the events of the preceding evening came to her, and she remembered, with gratitude, how they
had found partial shelter from the storm.

With something of a child's wonder and pleasure, she looked around upon a scene more wild and
strange than any she had ever seen, even in pictures of gypsy encampments.  Bel and Addie were
sleeping by her side as soundly as if such a nightly bivouac were an ordinary experience. In
like heavy stupor De Forrest lay near the fire, though the music of his dreams was by no means
sweet. He had made his watch a very brief one, and, having piled the fire high with light brush-wood
that would soon be consumed, and leaving no supply on hand, he had succumbed to the combined
influence of the cold and the brandy; and now, with the flames lighting up his face, he looked
like a handsome bandit.

The patient horses stood motionless and shadowy, a little at one side. Above her head rose
high, rocky crags, from whose crevices clung bushes and stunted trees with their crest of snow.
And snow, bright and gleaming near the fire, but growing pale and ghostly, dull and leaden,
in the distance, stretched away before her, as far as she could see, while from this white
surface rose shrubs, evergreens, and the gaunt outline of trees, in the hap-hazard grouping
of the wilderness. Where, before, the storm had rushed, with moan and shriek, now brooded a
quiet which only the crackling of the flames and De Forrest's resonant nasal organ disturbed.

But Hemstead was nowhere to be seen. She was becoming very solicitous, fearing that he had
straggled off alone, in order to bring them relief, when a sound caught her attention, and
she saw him coming with a load of cord-wood upon his shoulder.

She reclined again, that she might watch him a few moments unperceived. He threw his burden
down, and put a stick or two of the heavy wood on the fire. Then Lottie noticed that the genial
heat no longer came from the quickly-consumed brush, but from solid wood, of which there was
a goodly store on hand.

The student stood a few moments looking at the fire; then his eyes drooped, and he swayed back
and forth as if nearly overpowered by sleep and weariness. Then he would straighten himself
up in a way that made Lottie feel like laughing and crying at the same time, so great was his
effort to patiently maintain his watch. At last he tried the expedient of going to the horses
and petting them, but, before he knew it, he was leaning on the neck of one of them half asleep.
Then Lottie saw him come directly toward her, and half closed her eyes. The student looked
long and fixedly at her face, as the firelight shone upon it; then drew himself up straight
as a soldier, and marched back and forth like a sentinel on duty. But after a little while
his steps grew irregular, and he was evidently almost asleep, even while he walked. Then she
saw him turn off abruptly and disappear in the shadowy forest.

She sprang up, and, secreting herself behind an adjacent evergreen, waited for his return. The
clauses were next considered, and on a division the first clause,
empowering the Company to make the railway, was lost by a majority
of 19 to 13.

In like manner, the next clause, empowering the Company to take land, was lost; on which the
bill was withdrawn.


"Don't you hit me with that," she said, advancing to the fire.

"I thank you very cordially for waking me up so thoroughly," he said, delighted at finding
her so bright and well, and in such good spirits, after all her exposure. "I admit, to my shame,
that I was almost asleep two or three times."

"Here is another assertion of your masculine superiority," she replied, in mock severity. "I
may sleep, as a matter of course; but you, as a man, are to rise superior, even to nature herself,
and remain awake as long as your imperious will dictates."

"I am much afraid," he said, ruefully, "if you had not spoken to me, my imperious will would
soon have tumbled helplessly off its throne, and you would have found your watchman and protector
little better than one of these logs here."

"Who has decreed that you must watch all night, while the rest of us sleep? Come, it's my turn
now, and I will watch and protect you for a little while."

"Do you mean for me to sleep while you sit here alone and watch?"

"Certainly."

"I'll put my hand in the fire first, if in no other way I can keep awake."

"Didn't you call me 'captain'? You will have to obey your orders."

"I'll mutiny in this case, rest assured. Besides, I'm not sleepy any more."

"Why, what's the matter?"

"Do you think I could sleep while you were awake and willing to talk to me?"

"I slept a long time while you were awake." She pulled out her watch, and exclaimed: "Mr. Hemstead!
in ten minutes more we enter on a new year."

"How much may happen within a year, and even a few days of a year," he said, musingly. "It
seems an age since I tossed my books aside, and yet, it was within this month.  The whole world
has changed to me since that day."

"I hope for the better," said Lottie, gently.

"Yes, for the better, whatever may be the future. That Sabbath afternoon, when you led me to
the One whom I was misrepresenting and wronging, cannot fail to make me, and that little bit
of the world which I can reach, the better.  I feel that I shall owe to you my best Christian
experience and usefulness."

"And I feel that I should never have been a Christian at all if I had not met you," she said,
looking gratefully up.  "Whatever may be the future, as you cay, I trust God will never permit
me to be again the false, selfish creature that I was when I first took your hand in seeming
kindness."

"I trust that God has been leading us both," said Hemstead, gravely and thoughtfully.

Lottie again took out her watch, and said, in the low tone which we use in the presence of
the dying, "Mr. Hemstead, the old year is passing; there is but a moment left."

He uncovered his head, and, bowing reverently, said, "May God forgive us all the folly and
evil of the past year, for the sake of His dear Son."

Lottie's head bowed as low and reverently as his and for several moments neither spoke. 

It had been spoken about years before, and nothing had come of it then: it would be the same now.

In
order to form a better opinion as to the practicability of the railroad, a deputation of gentlemen
interested in the project proceeded to Killingworth, to inspect the engines which had been so
long in use there. They first went to Darlington, where they found the works of the Stockton
line in progress, though still unfinished. Proceeding next to Killingworth with Mr. Stephenson,
they there witnessed the performances of his locomotive engines. The result of their visit was,
on the whole, so satisfactory, that on their report being delivered
to the committee at Liverpool, it was finally determined to form a
company of proprietors for the construction of a double line of railway
between Liverpool and Manchester.



"No," he said, after a moment.

"What then?"

"Usefulness, I trust,--the doing faithfully the work that God gives me."

"And must I of necessity differ from you in this respect?"

"Miss Lottie, forgive me. I am not worthy of you. But can it be possible that you are willing
to share in my humble, toilsome life? I fear you have no idea of the hardships and privations
involved."

"I stood by you faithfully last night in the storm, did I not?" she said, with a shy, half-mischievous
glance.

"It seems too good to be true," he said, in a low tone.

"Was there ever such a diffident, modest creature!" she said, brusquely. "Mr. Hemstead, you
will never ENTER Heaven. The angels will have to pull you in."

"One angel has made a heaven of this dreary place already," he answered, seeking to draw her
to him.

"Wait a moment; what do you mean, sir? I have made you no promises and given you no rights."

"But I have made you no end of promises, and given you absolute right over me. My every glance
has said, 'Lottie Marsden, I am yours, body and soul, so far as a man with a conscience can be.'"

"All this counts for nothing," said Lottie, with a little impatient stamp of her foot. "I promised
that dear old meddler, Uncle Dimmerly, that you, in deep humility and penitence for having
arrogantly assumed that you could be a missionary and I couldn't, should ask me to be a home
missionary; and you have wasted lots of precious time."

He caught her quaint humor, and, taking her hand and dropping on one knee, said: "Lottie Marsden,
child of luxury, the prize which the proudest covet, will you leave your elegant home,--will
you turn your back upon the world which is at your feet,--and go with me away to the far West,
that you may become a poor, forlorn home missionary?"

"Yes, Frank, in your home; but never forlorn while I have you to laugh at, and never poor while
I possess your big, unworldly heart."

"Have I any rights now?" he exclaimed; and, springing up, he exercised them to a degree that
almost took away her breath.

"Here, behave yourself," she said. "The idea of one who had plumed himself on his heroic self-sacrifice
acting so like an ordinary mortal! You have had more kisses now than you ought in a week. If
we are to be so poor, we ought to begin practising economy at once."

"You are the most beautiful and spicy compound that nature ever fashioned," he exultingly replied,
holding her off, devouring her with his eyes. "I plainly foresee that you can fill the poorest
little home with light and music."

"Yes, I warn you, before it's too late, that I can never become a solemn, ghostly sort of a
missionary."

"O, it's too late now, I assure you," he said: "my mind is made up."

"So is mine,--that you shall take a long nap, while I mount guard."

"Nap, indeed!" he said, indignantly. "When the gates of pearl bang after one with their musical
clangor, and shut out forever the misery of earth, will one's first impulse on the threshold
of heaven be to take a nap?"

"What extravagant language! You ministers talk much too familiarly of heaven, and such things." 

The learned serjeant (Spankie) says he should like to have 7, but he would be content to go 6.
I will show he cannot go 6; and probably, for any practical purposes, I may be able to show
that I can keep up with him by the canal. . . .

  I don't believe you felt half
so badly as I did."

"But when the hard and prosaic life comes, with its daily cares and weary burdens, are you
sure that you will not regret your action?--are you sure that you will not wish yourself again
the queenly belle, with the world at your feet?"

