    I have rejected nothing you offer'd me--whom you adopted I have
          adopted,
    Good or bad I never question you--I love all--I do not condemn
          anything,
    I chant and celebrate all that is yours--yet peace no more,
    In peace I chanted peace, but now the drum of war is mine,
    War, red war is my song through your streets, O city!

A MARCH IN THE RANKS HARD-PREST, AND THE ROAD UNKNOWN

    A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,
    A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,
    Our army foil'd with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,
    Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted
          building,
    We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted
          building,
    'Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu
          hospital,
    Entering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and
          poems ever made,
    Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and
          lamps,
    And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and
          clouds of smoke,
    By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some
          in the pews laid down,
    At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of
          bleeding to death (he is shot in the abdomen),
    I stanch the blood temporarily (the youngster's face is white as a
          lily),
    Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o'er the scene fain to absorb
          it all,
    Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity,
          some of them dead,
    Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether, the
          odour of blood,
    The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also
           fill'd,
    Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the
          death-spasm sweating,
    An occasional scream or cry, the doctor's shouted orders or calls,
    The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of the
          torches,
    These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odour,
    Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;
    But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives
          he me,
    Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,
    Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,
    The unknown road still marching.

COME UP FROM THE FIELDS FATHER

    Come up from the fields father, here's a letter from our Pete,
    And come to the front door mother, here's a letter from thy dear son.

    Lo, 'tis autumn,
    Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,
    Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages with leaves fluttering in the moderate
          wind,
    Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis'd
          vines
    (Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?
    Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?),
    Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and with
          wondrous clouds,
    Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers
          well.

    Down in the fields all prospers well,
    But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter's call,
    And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.

    Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,
    She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.

    Open the envelope quickly,
    O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd,
    O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother's soul!
    All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main
          words only,
    Sentences broken, gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish, taken
          to hospital,
    At present low, but will soon be better.

    Ah now the single figure to me,
    Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,
    Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,
    By the jamb of a door leans.

    Grieve not so, dear mother (the just-grown daughter speaks through
          her sobs,
    The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay'd),
    See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.

    Alas poor boy, he will never be better (nor may be needs to be
          better, that brave and simple soul),
    While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,
    The only son is dead.

    But the mother needs to be better,
    She with thin form presently drest in black,
    By day her meals untouch'd, then at night fitfully sleeping, often
          waking,
    In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,
    O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and
          withdraw,
    To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.

A TWILIGHT SONG

    As I sit in twilight late alone by the flickering oak-flame,
    Musing on long-pass'd war-scenes--of the countless buried unknown
          soldiers,
    Of the vacant names, as unindented air's and sea's--the unreturn'd,
    The brief truce after battle, with grim burial-squads, and the
          deep-fill'd trenches
    Of gather'd dead from all America, North, South, East, West, whence
          they came up,
    From wooded Maine, New-England's farms, from fertile Pennsylvania,
          Illinois, Ohio,
    From the measureless West, Virginia, the South, the Carolinas, Texas
    (Even here in my room-shadows and half-lights in the noiseless
          flickering flames,
    Again I see the stalwart ranks on-filing, rising--I hear the rhythmic
          tramp of the armies);
    You million unwrit names all, all--you dark bequest from all the war,
    A special verse for you--a flash of duty long neglected--your mystic
          roll strangely gather'd here,
    Each name recall'd by me from out the darkness and death's ashes,
    Henceforth to be, deep, deep within my heart recording, for many a
          future year,
    Your mystic roll entire of unknown names, or North or South,
    Embalm'd with love in this twilight song.

A SIGHT IN CAMP IN THE DAYBREAK GRAY AND DIM

    A sight in camp in the daybreak gray and dim,
    As from my tent I emerge so early sleepless,
    As slow I walk in the cool fresh air the path near by the hospital
         tent,
    Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there untended
          lying,
    Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woollen blanket,
    Gray and heavy blanket, folding, covering all.

    Curious I halt and silent stand,
    Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest the first
          just lift the blanket;
    Who are you elderly man so gaunt and grim, with well-gray'd hair,
          and flesh all sunken about the eyes?
    Who are you my dear comrade?

    Then to the second I step--and who are you my child and darling?
    Who are you sweet boy with cheeks yet blooming?

    Then to the third--a face nor child nor old, very calm, as of beautiful
          yellow-white ivory;
    Young man I think I know you--I think this face is the face of the
          Christ himself,
    Dead and divine and brother of all, and here again he lies.

YEAR THAT TREMBLED AND REEL'D BENEATH ME

    Year that trembled and reel'd beneath me!
    Your summer wind was warm enough, yet the air I breathed froze me,
    A thick gloom fell through the sunshine and darken'd me,
    Must I change my triumphant songs? said I to myself,
    Must I indeed learn to chant the cold dirges of the baffled,
    And sullen hymns of defeat?

FIRST O SONGS FOR A PRELUDE

    First O songs for a prelude,
    Lightly strike on the stretch'd tympanum pride and joy in my city,
    How she led the rest to arms, how she gave the cue,
    How at once with lithe limbs unwaiting a moment she sprang,
    (O superb! O Manhattan, my own, my peerless.
    O strongest you in the hour of danger, in crisis! O truer than steel!)
    How you sprang--how you threw off the costumes of peace with
          indifferent hand,
    How your soft opera-music changed, and the drum and fife were heard in
          their stead,
    How you led to the war (that shall serve for our prelude, songs of
          soldiers),
    How Manhattan drum-taps led.

    Forty years had I in my city seen soldiers parading,
    Forty years as a pageant, till unawares the lady of this teeming and
          turbulent city,
    Sleepless amid her ships, her houses, her incalculable wealth,
    With her million children around her, suddenly,
    At dead of night, at news from the south,
    Incens'd struck with clinch'd hand the pavement.

    A shock electric, the night sustain'd it,
    Till with ominous hum our hive at daybreak pour'd out its myriads.
    From the houses then and the workshops, and through all the doorways,
    Leapt they tumultuous, and lo! Manhattan arming.

    To the drum-taps prompt,
    The young men falling in and arming,
    The mechanics arming (the trowel, the jack-plane, the blacksmith's
          hammer, tost aside with precipitation),
    The lawyer leaving his office and arming, the judge leaving the court,
    The driver deserting his wagon in the street, jumping down, throwing
          the reins abruptly down on the horses' backs,
    The salesman leaving the store, the boss, book-keeper, porter, all
          leaving;
    Squads gather everywhere by common consent and arm,
    The new recruits, even boys, the old men show them how to wear their
          accoutrements, they buckle the straps carefully,
    Outdoors arming, indoors arming, the flash of the musket-barrels,
    The white tents cluster in camps, the arm'd sentries around, the
          sunrise cannon and again at sunset,
    Arm'd regiments arrive every day, pass through the city, and embark
          from the wharves
    (How good they look as they tramp down to the river, sweaty, with their
          guns on their shoulders!
    How I love them! how I could hug them, with their brown faces and their
          clothes and knapsacks cover'd with dust!)
    The blood of the city up--arm'd! arm'd! the cry everywhere,
    The flags flung out from the steeples of churches and from all the
          public buildings and stores,
    The tearful parting, the mother kisses her son, the son kisses his
          mother
    (Loth is the mother to part, yet not a word does she speak to detain
          him),
    The tumultuous escort, the ranks of policemen preceding, clearing
          the way,
    The unpent enthusiasm, the wild cheers of the crowd for their
          favourites,
    The artillery, the silent cannons bright as gold, drawn along, rumble
          lightly over the stones
    (Silent cannons, soon to cease your silence,
    Soon unlimber'd to begin the red business);
    All the mutter of preparation, all the determin'd arming,
    The hospital service, the lint, bandages, and medicines,
    The women volunteering for nurses, the work begun for in earnest, no
          mere parade now;
    War! an arm'd race is advancing, the welcome for battle, no turning
          away;
    War! be it weeks, months, or years, an arm'd race is advancing to
          welcome it.

    Mannahatta a-march--and it's O to sing it well!
    It's O for a manly life in the camp.

    And the sturdy artillery
    The guns bright as gold, the work for giants, to serve well the guns,
    Unlimber them! (No more as the past forty years for salutes for
          courtesies merely,
    Put in something now besides powder and wadding.)

    And you lady of ships, you Mannahatta,
    Old matron of this proud, friendly, turbulent city,
    Often in peace and wealth you were pensive or covertly frown'd amid all
          your children,
    But now you smile with joy exulting old Mannahatta.

SONG OF THE BANNER AT DAYBREAK

    Poet

    O a new song, a free song,
    Flapping, flapping, flapping, flapping, by sounds, by voices clearer,
    By the wind's voice and that of the drum,
    By the banner's voice and the child's voice and sea's voice and
         father's voice,
    Low on the ground and high in the air,
    On the ground where father and child stand,
    In the upward air where their eyes turn,
    Where the banner at daybreak is flapping.

    Words! book-words! what are you?
    Words no more, for hearken and see,
    My song is there in the open air, and I must sing,
    With the banner and pennant a-flapping.

    I'll weave the chord and twine in,
    Man's desire and babe's desire, I'll twine them in, I'll put in life,
    I'll put the bayonet's flashing point, I'll let bullets and slugs whizz
    (As one carrying a symbol and menace far into the future,
    Crying with trumpet voice, Arouse and beware! Beware and arouse!)
    I'll pour the verse with streams of blood, full of volition, full of
          joy,
    Then loosen, launch forth, to go and compete,
    With the banner and pennant a-flapping.

    Pennant

    Come up here, bard, bard,
    Come up here, soul, soul,
    Come up here, dear little child,
    To fly in the clouds and winds with me, and play with the measureless
          light.

    Child

    Father what is that in the sky beckoning to me with long finger?
    And what does it say to me all the while?

    Father

    Nothing my babe you see in the sky,
    And nothing at all to you it says--but look you my babe,
    Look at these dazzling things in the houses, and see you the
          money-shops opening,
    And see you the vehicles preparing to crawl along the streets with
          goods;
    These, ah these, how valued and toil'd for these!
    How envied by all the earth!

    Poet

    Fresh and rosy red the sun is mounting high,
    On floats the sea in distant blue careering through its channels,
    On floats the wind over the breast of the sea setting in toward land,
    The great steady wind from west to west-by-south.
    Floating so buoyant with milk-white foam on the waters.
    But I am not the sea nor the red sun,
    I am not the wind with girlish laughter,
    Not the immense wind which strengthens, not the wind which lashes,
    Not the spirit that ever lashes its own body to terror and death,
    But I am that which unseen comes and sings, sings, sings,
    Which babbles in brooks and scoots in showers on the land,
    Which the birds know in the woods mornings and evenings,
    And the shore-sands know and the hissing wave, and that banner and
          pennant,
    Aloft there flapping and flapping.

    Child

    O father it is alive--it is full of people--it has children,
    O now it seems to me it is talking to its children,
    I hear it--it talks to me--O it is wonderful!
    O it stretches--it spreads and runs so fast--O my father,
    It is so broad it covers the whole sky.

    Father

    Cease, cease, my foolish babe,
    What you are saying is sorrowful to me, much it displeases me;
    Behold with the rest again I say, behold not banners and pennants
          aloft,
    But the well-prepared pavements behold, and mark the solid-wall'd
          houses.

    Banner and Pennant

    Speak to the child O bard out of Manhattan,
    To our children all, or north or south of Manhattan,
    Point this day, leaving all the rest, to us over all--and yet we
          know not why,
    For what are we, mere strips of cloth profiting nothing,
    Only flapping in the wind?

    Poet

    I hear and see not strips of cloth alone,
    I hear the tramp of armies, I hear the challenging sentry,
    I hear the jubilant shouts of millions of men, I hear Liberty!
    I hear the drums beat and the trumpets blowing,
    I myself move abroad swift-rising flying then,
    I use the wings of the land-bird and use the wings of the sea-bird, and
          look down as from a height,
    I do not deny the precious results of peace, I see populous cities with
          wealth incalculable,
    I see numberless farms, I see the farmers working in their fields or
          barns,
    I see mechanics working, I see buildings everywhere founded, going
          up, or finish'd,
    I see trains of cars swiftly speeding along railroad tracks drawn by
          the locomotives,
    I see the stores, depots, of Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, New
          Orleans,
    I see far in the West the immense area of grain, I dwell awhile
          hovering,
    I pass to the lumber forests of the North, and again to the Southern
          plantation, and again to California;
    Sweeping the whole I see the countless profit, the busy gatherings,
          earn'd wages,
    See the Identity formed out of thirty-eight spacious and haughty States
          (and many more to come),
    See forts on the shores of harbours, see ships sailing in and out;
    Then over all (aye! aye!) my little and lengthen'd pennant shaped
          like a sword,
    Runs swiftly up indicating war and defiance--and now the halyards have
          rais'd it,
    Side of my banner broad and blue, side of my starry banner,
    Discarding peace over all the sea and land.

    Banner and Pennant

    Yet louder, higher, stronger, bard! yet farther, wider cleave!
    No longer let our children deem us riches and peace alone,
    We may be terror and carnage, and are so now,
    Not now are we any one of these spacious and haughty States (nor any
          five, nor ten),
    Nor market nor depot we, nor money-bank in the city,
    But these and all, and the brown and spreading land, and the mines
          below, are ours,
    And the shores of the sea are ours, and the rivers great and small,
    And the fields they moisten, and the crops and the fruits are ours,
    Bays and channels and ships sailing in and out are ours--while we
          over all,
    Over the area spread below, the three or four millions of square
          miles, the capitals,
    The forty millions of people--O bard! in life and death supreme,
    We, even we, henceforth flaunt out masterful, high up above,
    Not for the present alone, for a thousand years chanting through you,
    This song to the soul of one poor little child.

    Child

    O my father I like not the houses,
    They will never to me be anything, nor do I like money,
    But to mount up there I would like, O father dear, that banner I like,
    That pennant I would be and must be.

    Father

    Child of mine you fill me with anguish,
    To be that pennant would be too fearful,
    Little you know what it is this day, and after this day, forever,
    It is to gain nothing, but risk and defy everything,
    Forward to stand in front of wars--and O, such wars!--what have you
          to do with them?
    With passions of demons, slaughter, premature death?

    Banner

    Demons and death then I sing,
    Put in all, aye all will I, sword-shaped pennant for war,
    And a pleasure new and ecstatic, and the prattled yearning of children,
    Blent with the sounds of the peaceful land and the liquid wash of
          the sea,
    And the black ships fighting on the sea envelop'd in smoke,
    And the icy cool of the far, far north, with rustling cedars and pines,
    And the whirr of drums and the sound of soldiers marching, and the
          hot sun shining south,
    And the beach-waves combing over the beach on my Eastern shore, and my
          Western shore the same,
    And all between those shores, and my ever running Mississippi with
          bends and chutes,
    And my Illinois fields, and my Kansas fields, and my fields of
          Missouri,
    The Continent, devoting the whole identity without reserving an atom,
    Pour in! whelm that which asks, which sings, with all and the yield
          of all,
    Fusing and holding, claiming, devouring the whole,
    No more with tender lip, nor musical labial sound,
    But out of the night emerging for food, our voice persuasive no more,
    Croaking like crows here in the wind.

    Poet

    My limbs, my veins dilate, my theme is clear at last,
    Banner so broad advancing out of the night, I sing you haughty and
          resolute,
    I burst through where I waited long, too long, deafen'd and blinded,
    My hearing and tongue are come to me (a little child taught me),
    I hear from above O pennant of war your ironical call and demand,
    Insensate! insensate (yet I at any rate chant you), O banner!
    Not houses of peace indeed are you, nor any nor all their prosperity
          (if need be, you shall again have every one of those houses to
          destroy them.
    You thought not to destroy those valuable houses, standing fast,
          full of comfort, built with money,
    May they stand fast, then? not an hour except you above them and all
          stand fast);
    O banner, not money so precious are you, not farm produce you, nor the
          material good nutriment,
    Nor excellent stores, nor landed on wharves from the ships,
    Not the superb ships with sail-power or steam-power, fetching and
          carrying cargoes,
    Nor machinery, vehicles, trade, nor revenues--but you as henceforth
          I see you,
    Running up out of the night, bringing your cluster of stars
          (ever-enlarging stars),
    Divider of daybreak you, cutting the air, touch'd by the sun,
          measuring the sky,
    (Passionately seen and yearn'd for by one poor little child,
    While others remain busy or smartly talking, forever teaching thrift,
          thrift);
    O you up there! Just as free as I am. Here I have raised you all to work
          for me,
    and now you are going to leave me. I am an old man, and I cant get along
          without you. I dont
    know what I am going to do." Well sir, it killed him. He was dead
          in less
    than ten months."
          
    "Everybody left right now, but me and my brother and another fellow.
          Old Marster fooled us to believe we was
    duty-bound to stay with him till we was all twenty-one. But my brother,
          that boy was stubborn.
    Soon he say he aint going to stay there.

And he left.

In about a year, maybe less, he come back and he told me I didnt
have to work for Old Goforth, I was free, sure enough free, and I
went with him and he got me a job railroading.

    But the work was too hard for me. I couldnt
    stand it. So I left there and went to my mother.
    I had to walk. It was forty-five miles. I made it
    in a day. She got me work there where she worked."
    
    "I remember so well, how the roads was full of folks walking and walking
    along when the niggers were freed. Didnt know where they was going.
          Just going to see about
    something else somewhere else. Meet a body in the road and they ask,
    'Where you going'? 'Dont know.' 'What you going to do'? 'Dont know.'
          And then
    sometimes we would meet a white man
    and he would say, 'How you like to come work on my farm'?
    And we say, 'I dont know.' And then
    maybe he say, "If you come work for
    me on my farm, when the crops is in I give
    you five bushels of corn, five gallons of molasses,
    some ham-meat, and all your clothes and vittals whils
    you works for me." Alright! That's what I do. And
    then something begins to work up here, (touching his forehead with
his fingers) I begins to think and to know things.

And I knowed then I could make a living for my own self, and I never
had to be a slave no more."

    

    
    "Now, Old Marster Goforth, had four sisters what owned
    slaves, and they wasnt mean to them like our Old Marster and Mistress.
    Some of the old slaves and their folks are still living on their places
          right
    to this day. But they never dispute none with their brother about how
    mean he treat his slaves. And him claiming to be such a Christian!
    Well, I reckon he's found out something about slave driving by now. The
    good Lord has to get his work in some time. And he'll take care of
          them low
    down Pattyroolers and slave speculators and mean Marsters
    and Mistress's. He's took good care of me in the years since I was
free'd, only now, we needs Him again now and then. I just stand up
on my two feet, raise my arms to heaven, and say, 'Lord, help me!'
He never fails me.
    What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,
    Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?

    2

    O maidens and young men I love and that love me,
    What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking
          recalls,
    Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover'd with sweat and dust,
    In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the
          rush of successful charge,
    Enter the captur'd works--yet lo, like a swift-running river they fade,
    Pass and are gone they fade--I dwell not on soldiers' perils or
          soldiers' joys
    (Both I remember well--many the hardships, few the joys, yet I was
          content).

    But in silence, in dreams' projections,
    While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,
    So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the
          sand,
    With hinged knees returning I enter the doors (while for you up there,
    Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart).

    Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,
    Straight and swift to my wounded I go,
    Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,
    Where their priceless blood reddens the grass, the ground,
    Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd hospital,
    To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,
    To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,
    An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,
    Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill'd
          again.

    I onward go, I stop,
    With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,
    I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,
    One turns to me his appealing eyes--poor boy! I never knew you,
    Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that
          would save you.

    3

    On, on I go (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)
    The crush'd head I dress (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away),
    The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through I
          examine,
    Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life
          struggles hard,
    (Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!
    In mercy come quickly).

    From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,
    I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and
          blood,
    Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv'd neck and side-falling
          head,
    His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the bloody
          stump,
    And has not yet look'd on it.

    I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,
    But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,
    And the yellow-blue countenance see.

