The scene of the ball was impressed upon Lord Nelville's memory, associated with bitter resentment;
for he feared that the enthusiasm of the Italians had, at least for a moment, robbed him of
the affection of Corinne. This rendered him very unhappy; but pride whispered him to conceal
it, or discover it only by expressing contempt for the suffrages of those who had flattered
the dazzling accomplishments of his mistress. He was invited by the company to make one at
play, but he refused. Corinne did the same, and motioned him to come and sit down by her. Oswald
expressed himself uneasy, lest he should expose Corinne to observation by thus passing the
whole evening with her in company. "Make yourself easy on that score," said she, "nobody will
trouble their heads with us: it is the custom here for people to do as they please in company;
we have no established, ceremonious forms to lay one another under an unpleasant restraint,
nor do we exact any formal attention; a general polite disposition is all that is expected.
This is not, certainly, a country where liberty exists such as you understand the term in England;
but we enjoy here a perfect independence in society." "That is to say," replied Oswald, "you
show a complete disregard for manners." "At least," interrupted Corinne, "we show no hypocrisy.
M. de la Rochefoucault has said, 'coquetry is the least of a woman's defects': in truth, whatever
may be the faults of women in Italy, they do not seek to hide them by dissimulation. And if
the sacredness of marriage be not here sufficiently respected, it is at least with the consent
of both parties."

"It is not from sincerity that this kind of frankness proceeds," replied Oswald, "but from
indifference to public opinion. When I arrived here, I had a letter of recommendation to a
princess, which I gave to my Italian servant to deliver; he said to me, 'Sir, it will be of
no use to deliver this letter now, for the princess sees nobody; she is INAMORATA;' and this
state of being in love, is announced with as much indifference as any other situation incidental
to our existence. This publicity cannot be palliated by the plea of extraordinary vehemence
of passion; several attachments of this sort succeed each other, and are of equal notoriety.
So little are women given to mystery in this respect, that they avow their connections with
less embarrassment than those of our country would feel in speaking of their husbands. It is
easy to believe that no profound or delicate sentiment is mixed with this sensibility of passion,
divested of modesty. Hence it happens that in this nation, where nothing is thought of but
love, there is not a single romance; because love is here so rapid and so public that it affords
no interesting developments; and to give a true picture of general manners in this respect,
it would be necessary to begin and terminate it in the first page. Pardon me, Corinne," cried
Lord Nelville, observing the pain that he gave her; "you are an Italian, and that thought ought
to disarm me; but one of the causes of that incomparable grace which distinguishes you, is
the union of all the characteristic charms of different nations. I know not in what country
you have been brought up; but it appears to me certain, that you have not passed your whole
life in Italy--perhaps in England itself--Ah, Corinne! if that were so, how could you have
quitted that sanctuary of modesty and delicacy, for these regions, where not only virtue, but
love itself, is so badly understood? It is breathed in the air; but does it penetrate the heart?
Your poetry, in which love performs so principal a part, possesses considerable grace, and
much imagination; it is ornamented with brilliant pictures, whose colours are lively and voluptuous.
But where will you find that tender, melancholy sentiment, which animates our poetry? What
have you that can be put in comparison with the scene between Belvidera and her husband, in
OTWAY; or with that in SHAKESPEARE, between Romeo and Juliet? But above all, what have you
to compare with those admirable lines of THOMSON, in his 'Spring,' where he paints in such
noble and affecting traits, the happiness of love, when sanctioned by marriage? Have you any
such marriage in Italy? And can love exist where there is no domestic felicity? Is it not this
happiness which the heart seeks, as possession is the object of sensual passion? Do not all
young and beautiful women resemble each other, unless the qualities of the mind and soul determine
a preference? And what desire is excited by all these qualities? Marriage. That is to say,
the association of every thought, and of every sentiment. Illicit love, when unfortunately
it exists amongst us, is, if it may be so expressed, only a reflection of marriage. By early
daylight the rag-pickers came in platoons to gather up all these waifs. The hats, the bonnets, and
the clothing were quickly appropriated by women and children who
had come out of the narrow courts and hovels of the city in search
of what they knew was an every-day harvest.

These small gatherings of the rag-pickers amounted to hundreds of dollars daily. Then there was
another class of searchers after abandoned treasure, in the persons of other women and children,
who, with pronged or pointed sticks, worked their way into the piles of ashes, and picked out
basketfuls of coal as heavy as they could carry, and in this laborious way provided themselves
with summer and winter fuel.

There was living near us a man who made a business of gathering up the offal of several hundred
kitchens in the city, as food for pigs. I know that he grew rich at this vocation. He lived in a
much better house than ours, and his wife and daughters dressed as
expensively as the wealthiest women.

They had a piano, and music in abundance. He had several carts which were sent on their daily
rounds through the city, collecting the kitchen-waste of boarding-houses, hotels, and private families.
The quantity of good, wholesome food which these carts brought away to be fed to pigs was
incredible. It was a common thing to see whole loaves of bread taken out of the family swill-tub,
with joints of meat not half eaten, sound vegetables, and fragments of other food, as palatable
and valuable as the portion that had been consumed on the table. It seemed as if there were
hundreds of families who made it a point never to have food served up a second time. The waste
by this thriftlessness was great. I doubt not that some men must have been kept poor by such
want of proper oversight on the part of their wives, as I know that it enriched the individual
who gathered up the fat crumbs which fell from their tables. I think it must be quite true
that "fat kitchens make lean wills."

These slight incidental confirmations of the theory of national wastefulness came under my daily
notice.

I had heretofore overlooked them, but now they attracted my attention. Then I had only to
direct my eye to other and higher fields of observation to be sure that it had some foundation.
The streets, the shop-windows, were eloquent witnesses for it. The waste of clothing material
consequent on the introduction of hoop-skirts was seen to be prodigious.

It was not only the poor thin body that was now to be covered with finery, but the huge balloon
in which fashion required that that body should be enveloped. I thought, now that the subject was
one for study, that I could see it running through almost every thing.

This wastefulness, then, was to be the ground on which the sewing-woman was to rest her hopes of
continued employment. It might be good holding-ground in times of high general prosperity,
when money was abundant and circulation active; but how would it be when reverses of any kind
overtook the nation?

As extravagance was the rule now, it occurred to me that so would
a stringent economy be the rule then, The old hats that were usually
thrown away upon the commons would be rejuvenated and worn again,--the
parsimony of one crisis seeking to make up for the wastefulness of
another; for when a sharp turn of hard times comes round, everybody
takes to economizing.

There are older heads and more observant minds than my own, that
must remember how these things have worked in bygone years.

                                                     These have had the experience of a whole lifetime to enable them
to judge: I was a mere inquirer on the threshold of a very brief one.

* * * * *

Our employment at the factory kept us comfortable. In time we were able to earn something more
than when we began. Our good pastor had lent us the money with which to pay the reward for recovering
my dear father's body; and as my mother had a great dread of being in debt, we had practised a most
rigid economy at home in order to save enough to repay him. This we did, a few dollars at a
time, until we had finally paid the whole. Though he frequently came down to see my mother in
her loneliness, yet he never alluded to the matter of the loan, and actually declined taking
any part of it until it was almost forced upon him. He even offered, on one occasion, to increase
the loan to any extent that my mother might think necessary for her comfort, and in various ways
manifested a strong disposition to do everything far us that he could. We had all been favorite
pupils in his Sunday school, where I had soon been promoted to the position of a teacher. Finding,
also, that we were fond of reading, he had lent us books from his own library, and even invited
me to come and select for myself. I sometimes accepted these invitations, and occasionally chose
books on subjects that seemed to surprise him very much But, after all, are not a few books
well chosen better than a great library? Lastly, and it is this that principally destroys love, the men of Italy
are incapable of inspiring the women with any kind of respect: the latter do not feel obliged
by the submission of the former, because their character is not dignified with firmness, nor
their life with serious occupation. In order that nature and social order may appear in all
their beauty, man must be the protector, and woman the protected; but the protector must adore
that weakness which he defends, and reverence the helpless deity, who, like the household gods
of the ancients, brings happiness to his home. So it might almost be said, that every woman
is a Sultan, having at her command a seraglio of men.

The men are here distinguished by that softness and pliability of character, which properly
belongs to women. An Italian proverb says: 'who knows not how to feign, knows not how to live.'
Is not that a woman's proverb? In truth, how can the manly character be formed upon true principles
of dignity and strength, in a country which affords no military career of glory, which contains
no free institutions? Hence it is, that they direct their minds to all the little arts of cunning;
they treat life like a game of chess, in which success is everything. All that remains to them
from antiquity, is something gigantic in their expressions and in their external magnificence;
but this baseless grandeur is frequently accompanied by all that is vulgar in taste, and miserably
negligent in domestic life. Is this, Corinne, the nation which you would be expected to prefer
to every other? Is this the nation whose roaring applauses are so necessary to you, that every
other destiny would appear dull and congenial compared with their noisy 'bravos?' Who could
flatter himself with being able to render you happy away from these dear scenes of tumult?
What an inconceivable character is that of Corinne! profound in sentiment, but frivolous in
taste; independent from innate pride, yet servile from the need of distraction! She is a sorceress
whose spells alternately alarm and then allay the fears which they have created; who dazzles
our view in native sublimity, and then, all of a sudden disappears from that region where she
is without her like, to lose herself in an indiscriminate crowd. Corinne, Corinne, he who is
your adorer cannot help feeling his love disturbed by fear!

                                                              "OSWALD."

Corinne, on reading this letter, was much incensed at the inveterate prejudices which Oswald
appeared to entertain of her country. But she was happy enough in her conjectures, to discover
that she owed this to the dissatisfaction he experienced at the fête, and to her refusing to
see him ever since after his final conversation on that evening; and this reflection softened
a little the painful impression which the letter produced upon her. She hesitated for some
time, or at least, fancied she hesitated, as to the conduct which she should observe towards
him. The tenderness she cherished for this eccentric lover, induced a wish to see him; but
it was extremely painful to her that he should imagine her to be desirous of marrying him,
although their fortunes were at least equal, and although in revealing her name, it would be
easy to show that it was by no means inferior to that of Lord Nelville. Nevertheless, the independence
and singularity of that mode of life which she had adopted, ought to have inspired her with
a disinclination for marriage; and most assuredly she would have repulsed the idea, had not
her passion blinded her to the sufferings she would have to undergo in espousing an Englishman
and renouncing Italy.

We willingly make an offering of pride upon the altar of the heart; but when social prosperity
and worldly interests oppose obstacles in any shape, when we can suppose that the object of
our love makes any sort of sacrifice in uniting himself to us, it is no longer possible to
show him any alteration of sentiment. Corinne not being equal to a determination to break off
with Oswald, wished to persuade herself of the possibility of seeing him in future, and yet
concealing the passion which she felt for him. It was in this intention that she came to a
determination to confine herself, in the answer she should send to his letter, merely to his
unjust accusations against the Italian nation, and to reason with him upon this subject as
if it were the only one that interested her. Perhaps the best way in which a woman of intellect
can resume her coldness and dignity, is by seeking an asylum in her own mind.

                   Corinne to Lord Nelville.

                                                       Jan. 15, 1795.

"Did your letter, my lord, concern only me, I should not have attempted the task of self-justification:
my character is so easy to know, that he who might not be able to comprehend it by himself,
would derive little aid in his scrutiny by any explanation that I could give him on the subject.
The virtuous reserve of the English women, and the graceful art of the French, take my word
for it, often serve to conceal one half of what is passing in their souls: that which you are
pleased to distinguish in me by the name of magic, is nothing but a sort of transparency of
mind, which allows its different sentiments and opposing thoughts to be seen without labouring
to harmonize them; for that harmony, when it exists, is almost always assumed--most genuine
characters being by nature inconsequent--but it is not of myself I wish to speak, it is of
that unfortunate nation you so cruelly attack. Can it be my affection for my friends which
has inspired you with this bitter malevolence? You know me too well to be jealous of me; indeed
I have not the vanity to believe that a sentiment of this description could have sufficient
power to transport you to such a degree of injustice. You repeat the opinion of every other
foreigner upon the Italian character, when drawn from first impressions; but it requires deeper
penetration, and a more patient scrutiny, to be able to form a correct judgment upon this country,
which at different epochs has been so great. Whence comes it that this nation, under the Romans,
has attained the highest military character in the world? that it has been the most jealous
of its liberties, in the republics of the middle ages, and in the sixteenth century, the most
illustrious in literature, and the arts and sciences? Has she not pursued glory under every
form? And if now, alas! she can boast of none, why do you not rather accuse her political situation,
since in other circumstances she has shown herself different?

"I know not whether I deceive myself; but the wrongs of the Italians inspire me with no other
sentiment than pity for their lot. Foreigners have in every age conquered and torn asunder
this beautiful country, the perpetual object of their ambition; and yet foreigners bitterly
reproach this nation, with the wrongs of a conquered and dismembered country? Europe is indebted
to the Italians for the arts and sciences, and shall Europe, turning their own benefits against
them, dispute with her benefactors the only species of renown which can distinguish a nation
without either military strength or political liberty?

"It is so true that nations derive their character from the nature of their government, that
in this same Italy, we behold a remarkable difference of manners in the different states that
compose it. The Piedmontese, who formed a little national body, have a more martial spirit
than all the rest of Italy; the Florentines, who have had the good fortune either to enjoy
their liberty, or to be governed by liberal princes, are mild and enlightened; the Venetians
and the Genoese, discover a genius for politics, because their government is a republican Aristocracy;
the Milanese are remarkable for their sincerity, which character they have long since derived
from the nations of the north; the Neapolitans might easily become a warlike people, because
during several centuries they have been united under a government, very imperfect it is true,
but yet a government of their own. The Roman nobility being totally unoccupied with either
military or political pursuits, must in consequence become indolent and uninformed; but the
ecclesiastics, having a career of emulation open before them, are much more enlightened and
cultivated than the nobles, and as the papal government admits of no distinction of birth,
and is purely elective in the clerical body, it begets a sort of liberality, not in ideas,
but in habits, which renders Rome a most agreeable abode for those who have neither the prospect,
nor the ambition of worldly eminence.

"The nations of the south more easily receive the impression of their political establishment
than those of the north; they possess an indolence which soon softens into resignation, and
nature offers them so many enjoyments, that they are easily consoled for the loss of those
which society refuses them. There is certainly much depravity in Italy, and nevertheless civilisation
is here in a much lower stage of development than that of other countries. There is something
almost savage in the character of the Italians, notwithstanding their intellectual acuteness,
which too much resembles that of the hunter in the art of surprising his prey. And indolent
people easily acquire a cunning character; they possess a habit of gentleness which serves
them, upon occasion, to dissimulate even their wrath: it is always by our usual manners that
we succeed in concealing an unexpected situation.

"The Italians are sincere and faithful in the private intercourse of life. Interest and ambition
exercise considerable sway among them; but pride and vanity none: the distinctions of rank
produce little impression. They have no society, no salons, no fashions, no little daily methods
of giving effect to minute circumstances. These habitual sources of dissimulation and envy
exist not among them. When they deceive their enemies and their rivals, it is because they
consider themselves in a state of warfare with them; but in other circumstances they are frank
and ingenuous. It is this ingenuousness alone that has scandalised you respecting our women,
who, hearing love constantly spoken of, and surrounded by its seductions and examples, conceal
not their sentiments, and if it may be so expressed, give even, to gallantry a character of
innocence; besides, they have no ridicule to dread from that society in which they live. Some
of them are so ignorant that they cannot write; this they publicly avow, and answer a billet
by means of their agent (il paglietto) in a formal style on official paper. But to make amends
for this, among those who are well educated, you will find academy professors who give public
lessons in a black scarf; and should this excite a smile, you would be answered, 'Is there
any harm in knowing Greek? Is there any harm in earning one's living by one's own exertions?
Why should so simple a matter provoke your mirth?'

"But now my lord, allow me to touch upon a more delicate subject; allow me to enquire the cause
why our men display so little military ardour. They expose their lives freely when impelled
by love and hatred; and a stab from a stiletto given or received in such a cause, excites neither
astonishment nor dread. They fear not death when natural passions bid them brave its terrors;
but often, it must be owned, they prefer life to political interests, which seldom affect them
because they possess no national independence. Often too, that notion of honour which descends
to us from the age of chivalry, has little power in a nation where opinion, and society by
which opinion is formed, do not exist; it is a natural consequence of this disorganisation
of every public authority, that women should attain that ascendancy which they here possess
over the men, perhaps in too high a degree to respect and admire them. Nevertheless, the conduct
of men towards women is full of delicacy and attention. The domestic virtues in England constitute
female glory and happiness; but if there are countries where love exists outside the sacred
ties of marriage; that one among these countries where female happiness excites the greatest
attention and care, is Italy. Here men have invented moral duties for relations outside the
bounds of morality itself; but at least in the division of these duties, they have been both
just and generous: they considered themselves more guilty than women, when they broke the ties
of love; because the latter had made the greater sacrifice and lost more. They conceive that
before the tribunal of the heart, he is the most guilty who does the most injury. Men do wrong
for want of feeling; but women through weakness of character. Society, which is at once rigorous
and depraved--that is to say, without pity for errors when they entail misfortunes,--must be
very severe upon women; but in a country which has no society, natural goodness of heart has
freer exercise.

"Ideas of consideration and dignity are, I agree, less powerful and even less known in Italy
than any where else: the want of society and of public opinion is the cause of it: but notwithstanding
all that may be said of the perfidy of the Italians, I maintain that there is not a country
in the world where more sincerity is to be found. So far is this sincerity from being checked
by vanity, that although that country be one of which foreigners speak most ill, there is no
country where they meet with a more kindly reception. The Italians are reproached with being
too much inclined to flattery; but it must be allowed in their favour, that generally, they
lavish their soft expressions, not from design, but a real desire to please; nor can it be
alleged that these expressions are ever falsified by their conduct. But it may be asked, would
they be faithful to their friends in extraordinary circumstances, in which it might be necessary
to brave for them the perils of adversity? A very small number, I must own, would be capable
of such friendship; but this observation will not apply to Italy alone.

"The Italians are remarkable for that lassitude which distinguishes the eastern nations; but
there are no men more active and persevering when once their passions are excited. These very
women, too, whom you behold as indolent as the odalisks of a seraglio, upon some occasions
give most striking proofs of attachment. There is something mysterious in the character and
the imagination of the Italians, in whom you will find by turns, either unexpected traits of
generosity and friendship, or gloomy and formidable proofs of hatred and revenge. The sight-seers
having satisfied their curiosity with regard to the mine, and having paid a short visit to
the donkeys, were quietly resuming their walk, when out from the abode of the miners poured a tumultuous
crowd of men, women, and children, who surrounded the little party in a menacing manner, while their
leader, a stalwart fellow, called Brennan, seized John by the arm, and, shaking a sledge-hammer
fist in his face, inquired what he meant by coming to "spy round an honest man's house, and make
game of his betters?"

It was in vain that John attempted to disabuse the mind of his assailant
of this view of his visit to the old mine; and indeed his argument
could not even have been heard, as Brennan was now violently reiterating,--

"Tak'
yer coorse, thin!

Why don't ye tak' yer coorse?"

The advice was sensible, and the party left to themselves would undoubtedly have followed it; in
fact, the females of the party had already taken their "coorse" along the homeward path as fast
as their feet would carry them, excepting Miselle, who contented herself with stepping behind a great
pine-tree, and watching thence this new development of human nature.

From angry words the miners were not long in proceeding to blows, and a short joust ensued,
in which Williams and John gallantly held the lists against six or eight assailants, who would
have been more dangerous, had they not been all day celebrating the wedding of one of their number.
Suddenly, however, the leader of the colliers darted by John, who was opposing him, and pounced
upon poor Belle Miller, who with her companions had paused at a little distance to give vent
to their feelings in a chorus of dismal shrieks. Whether these irritated Mr. Brennan's weakened
nerves, or whether he had merely the savage instinct of reaching the strong through the weak,
cannot be certainly known; but the fact of her forcible capture was rendered sufficiently obvious
by the cries that rent the air, and the heart of the young man John, who, neglecting his own
safety in an attempt at rescue, received a stunning blow from his opponent, and fell bleeding
to the earth.

Satisfied with the result of his experiment, Brennan, leaving his captive in custody of his own
party, attempted another raid upon the defenceless flock; but this time Friend Williams, summoned
by the voice of his wife, darted to her rescue, and, with a happy blow, laid the giant upon his
back, where he lay for some moments admiring the evening sky.

                                                              Brave as were the two knights, however, and manifest as was the right,
Victory would probably have "perched upon the banners of the strongest
battalions," had not an unexpected diversion put a sudden end to the
combat.

This came from the side of the assailants, in the pleasing shape of a pretty young woman, who,
rushing forward, flung her arms about the neck of one of the leaders of the mob, crying,--

"Patrick Maloney, didn't you stand before the altar with me this day,
and vow to God to be a true and faithful husband?

And is this all the respect you show me on my wedding-day?"

The appeal was not without its force, and Patrick, pausing to consider of it, was surrounded by the more
pacific of his own party, among whom now appeared "Big Tommy" from the Refinery, who loudly
vouched for the character of the visitors, claiming them indeed as warm and dear friends of
his own.

During the stormy council of war ensuing among the attacking party, the womankind of the attacked
ventured to approach near enough to implore their champions to withdraw, while yet there was
time. This pacific counsel they finally consented to follow, and were led away breathing vengeance
and discontent, when John suddenly paused, exclaiming,--

"Where's Belle? They've got her. Come on, Williams! we aren't going to leave the girl among
'em, surely!"

At this Maggie and Mrs. Williams uplifted their voices in deprecation of further hostilities, protesting
that they should die at once, if their protectors were to desert
them, and using many other feminine and magnanimous arguments in favor
of a speedy retreat.

But while yet the question of her rescue was undecided, Belle appeared, flushed, tearful, and voluble
in reproach against the friends who had deserted her. She attributed her final escape to a
free use of her tongue, and repeated certain pointed remarks which she had addressed to her
custodian, who finally shook her, boxed her ears, and bade her begone.

On hearing this recital, John was for returning at once and avenging the insult; but the rest of the
party, remembering the golden maxim of Hudibras,

"He who fights and runs away May live to fight another day,"

prevailed on him to wait for retaliation until a more favorable opportunity.

It may be satisfactory to the reader to hear, that, after Miselle had left Oil Creek, she was
informed that Mr. Williams, John, and a body of men, equal in number to the colliers, paid them a
visit, with authority from the owner of the mine to pull down their house and eject them from
the premises. They also contemplated, it is supposed, a more direct and personal vengeance;
but, on making known their intentions, the pretty bride again appeared, and, assaulting poor
Williams with a whole battery of tearful eyes, trembling lips, and eloquent appeals, vindicated
once more the superiority of woman's wiles to man's determination. An abject apology from the
colliers, and a decided intimation from the "Regulators" of the consequences sure to follow
any future incivility to visitors, closed the affair, and the parties separated without further
hostilities.

The evening was so far advanced when the little party of fugitives
were once more en route, that a proposed visit to a working mine at
some little distance was given up, and at the door of the farm-house
the party dispersed to their respective homes.

The next day had been appointed for a visit to Oil City, the farthest and most important station
upon the Creek; and one object in visiting the house was to engage Jamie, with his "team,"
for the expedition. It fortunately happened that the old Scotchman and his wife were going to Oil City
on the same day, and it was arranged that the two parties should unite.

At an early hour in the morning, therefore, Mr. and Mrs. Williams, with Miselle, once more climbed
the mountain to the little log-house, and found Jamie just harnessing a pair of fine black horses
to a wagon, similar to the "hack-carriage" of Schaeffer's Farm. In the bottom was a quantity
of clean hay, and across the sides were fastened two planks, covered with bedquilts. Upon one
of these were seated Mr. and Mrs. Williams, while Miselle was invited to the post of honor beside
Mrs. Miller, and the old Scotchman shared the driver's seat with his son.

"Dinna ye be feared now, dearie. Our Jamie's a car'fu' driver, wi' all his wild ways," said the old
woman kindly, as the wagon, with a premonitory lurch and twist, turned into the forest road.

Road!
Let the reader call to mind the most precipitous wooded mountain of his acquaintance, and fancy a road
formed over it by the simple process of cutting off the trees, leaving the stumps and rocks undisturbed,
and then fancy himself dragged over it in a springless wagon behind two fast horses.

"Eh, then! It maks an auld body's banes ache sair, siccan a road, as yon!" said the Scotchwoman,
with a significant grimace, as the wagon paused a moment at the foot
of a perpendicular ascent.

"I reckon ye wad nae ken whatten the Auld Country roads were med for, gin ye suld see them.
They're nae like this, ony way."

The dear old creature had entered the United States through the St. Lawrence and the Lakes, and supposed
Tarr Farm to be America. Miselle was so weak as to try to describe the aspect of things about
her native city, and was evidently suspected of patriotic romancing for her pains.

But such magnificent views! Such glimpses of far mountain-peaks, seen through vistas of rounded
hills! Such flashing streams, tumbling heels over head across the forest road in their haste to
mingle with the blue waters of the Alleghany! Such wide stretches of country, as the road crept
along the mountain-brow, or curved sinuously down to the far valley!

Pictures were there, as yet uncopied, that should hold Church breathless,
with the pencil of the Andes and Niagara quivering in his fingers,--pictures
that Turner might well cross the seas to look upon; but Miselle remembers
them through a distracting mist of bodily terror and discomfort,--as
some painter showed a dance of demons encircling a maiden's couch,
while above it hung her first love-dream.

"Yon in the valley, where the wood looks so yaller, is a sulphur spring; an' here in the road's
the place where I'm going to tip you all over," suddenly remarked Jamie, twisting himself
round on the box to enjoy the consternation of his female passengers, while the wagon paused
on the verge of a long gully, some six feet in depth, occupying the whole middle of the road.

"Wull
ye get out?" continued he, addressing Miselle for the first time.

"Had we better?" asked she, tremulously.

"If you're easy scared. But I'm no going to upset, I'll promise you."

"Then I'll stay in," said Miselle, in the desperate courage of extreme cowardice; and the wagon
went on, two wheels deep in the gully, crumbling down the clayey mud, two wheels high on the
mountain-side, crashing through brush and over stones. And yet there was no upset.

"Didn't I tell ye?" inquired Jamie, again twisting himself to look in Miselle's white face,
with a broad smile of delight at her evident terror.

"Be done, you bold bairn! Isn't he a sturdy, stirring lad, Ma'am?" said the proud mother, as
Jamie, addressing himself again to his work, shouted to the black nags, and put them along
the bit of level road in the valley at a pace precluding all further conversation.

Another precipitous ascent, where the road had been mended by felling
a large tree across it, over whose trunk the horses were obliged to
pull the heavy wagon, and then an equally precipitous descent, gave
a view of the Alleghany River and Oil Creek, with Oil City at their
confluence, and a background of bluffs and mountains cutting sharp
against the clear blue sky.

This view Miselle contemplated with one eye; but the other remained rigidly fixed upon the road before
her.

Even Jamie paused, and finally suggested,--

"Reckon, men, you'd best get out and walk alongside. The women can stay in; and if she's going
over, you can shore up."

Under these cheerful auspices the descent was accomplished, and, by some miracle, without accident.

At
the foot of the bluff commences the slough in which Oil City is set; and as it deepened, the horses
gradually sank from view, until only their backs were visible, floundering through a sea of oily
mud of a peculiarly tenacious character.

Miselle has the warning of Munchausen before her eyes; but, in all sadness, she avers that
in the principal street of Oil City, and at the door of the principal hotel, the mud was on
that day above the hubs of the wagon-wheels.

Having refreshed themselves in body and mind at the Petroleum House, where a lady in a soiled
print dress and much jewelry kindly played at them upon a gorgeous
piano, the party went forth to view the city.

The same mingling of urgent civilization and unsubdued Nature observable in Corry characterizes
Oil City to a greater extent. On one side of the street, crowded with oil-wagons, the freight
of each worth thousands of dollars, stand long rows of dwellings, shops, and warehouses, all
built within two years, and on the other impinges a bluff still covered with its forest growth
of shrubs and wood-plants,--while upon the frowning front of a cliff that has for centuries
faced nothing meaner than the Alleghany, with its mountain background, some Vandal has daubed
the advertisement of a quack nostrum.

Farther on, where the bluff is less precipitous, it has been graded after a fashion; and the
houses built at the upper side of the new street seem to be sliding rapidly across it to join their
opposite neighbors, which, in their turn, are sinking modestly into the mud.

A plank sidewalk renders it possible to walk through the principal streets of this city; but
temptation to do so is of the slightest.

Monotonous lines of frail houses, shops whose scanty assortment of goods must be sold at enormous prices
to pay the expense of transportation from New York or Philadelphia, crowds of oil-speculators,
oil-dealers, oil-teamsters, a clumsy bridge across the Creek, a prevailing atmosphere of petroleum,--such
is Oil City.

At the water-side the view is somewhat more interesting.

No wharves have yet been built; and the swarming flatboats "tie up" all along the bank, just
as they used to do three years ago, when, with a freight of lumber instead of oil, they stopped
for the night at the solitary little Dutch tavern then monopolizing the site of the present
city.

A rakish little stern-wheel steamer lay in the stream, bound for Pittsburg, and sorely was
Miselle tempted to take passage down the Alleghany in her; but lingering
memories of home and the long-suffering Caleb at last prevailed, and,
with a sigh, she turned her back upon the beautiful river, and retraced
her steps through yards crowded with barrels of oil waiting for shipment,--oil
in rows, oil in stacks, oil in columns, and oil in pyramids wellnigh
as tall and as costly as that of Cheops himself.

Returned to the Petroleum House, Miselle bade a reluctant good-bye
to the kindly Scots, who here took stage for Franklin, and watched
them float away, as it appeared, upon the sea of mud in a wagon-body
whose wheels and horses were too nearly submerged to make any noticeable
feature in the arrangement.

Soon after, Jamie appeared at the door of the parlor nominally to announce himself ready to return;
but, after a fierce struggle with his natural modesty of disposition, he advanced into the room,
and silently laid two of the biggest apples that ever grew in the
laps of Mrs. Williams and Miselle. Putting aside all acknowledgments
with "Ho! what's an apple or two?" the woodsman next proceeded on
a tour of inspection round the room, serenely unconscious of the magnificent
scorn withering him from the eyes of the jewelled lady, who now reclined
upon a broken-backed sofa, taking a leisurely survey of the strangers.

Jamie
paused some time at the piano.

"And what might such a thing as that
cost noo?" asked he, at length, giving the case a little back-handed
blow.

"About eight hundred dollars," ventured Miselle, to whom the
inquiry was addressed.

Jamie opened his wide black eyes.

"Hoot!
Feyther could ha' bought Jim Tarr's whole farm for that, three year
ago," said he; and, with one more contemptuous stare at the piano,
he left the room, and was presently seen in the stable-yard, shouldering
from his path a wagon laden with coals.

Soon after, Miselle and her
friends gladly bade farewell to Oil City, leaving the scornful lady
seated at the piano executing the charming melody of "We're a band
of brothers from the old Granite State."

Having entered the city
by the hill-road, it was proposed to return along the Creek, although,
as Jamie candidly stated, the road "might, like enough, be a thought
worser than the other."

And it was.

Before the oil fever swept through
this region, a man might have travelled from the mouth of the Creek
to its head-waters, and seen no more buildings than he could have
numbered on his ten fingers. Now the line of derricks, shanties, engine-houses,
and oil-tanks is continuous through the whole distance; and thousands
of men may be seen to-day accumulating millions of dollars where three
years ago the squirrel and his wife, hoarding their winter stores,
were the only creatures that took thought for the morrow.

After its
incongruous mixture of society, the social peculiarity of Oil Creek
is a total disregard of truth.

A mechanic, a tradesman, or a boatman
makes the most solemn promise of service at a certain time. Terms
are settled, a definite hour appointed for the fulfilment of the contract;
the man departs, and is seen no more. His employer is neither disappointed
nor angry; he expects nothing else.

A cart laden with country produce
enters the settlement from the farms behind it. Every housewife drops
her broom, and rushes out to waylay the huckster, and induce him to
sell her the provisions already engaged to her neighbor. Happy she,
if stout enough of arm to convey her booty home with her; for if she
trust the vendor to leave it at her house, even after paying him his
price, she may bid good-bye to the green delights, as eagerly craved
here as on a long sea-voyage.

This "peculiar institution" is all
very well, doubtless, for those who understand it, but is somewhat
inconvenient to a stranger, as Miselle discovered during the three
days she was trying to leave Tarr Farm.

On the third morning, after
waiting two hours upon the bank of the Creek for a perjured boatman,
Mr. Williams rushed desperately into a crowd of teamsters and captured
the youth whose first impressions of a railway have been chronicled
on a preceding page. Probably even he, had time been allowed to consider
the proposition at length, would have declined the journey; but, overborne
by the vehemence of his employer, he found himself well upon the road
to Schaeffer's Farm before he had by any means decided to go thither.

The
pleasantest part of the "carriage exercise" on this road is fording
the Creek, a course adopted wherever the bluff comes down to the bank,
and the flat reappears upon the opposite side, no one having yet spent
time to grade a continuous road on one side or the other.

"In the first place," said Corinne, "strangers are for the most part acquainted only with our
poets of the first rank--Dante, Petrarch, Ariosto, Guarini, Tasso, and Metastasio; whilst we
have several others, such as Chiabrera, Guidi, Filicaja, Parini, without reckoning Sannazarius,
Politian, &c., who have written in Latin, with as much taste as genius; and all unite in their
verses the utmost beauty of colouring and harmony; all, with more or less talent, adorn the
wonders of nature and art with the imagery of speech. Without doubt our poets cannot pretend
to that profound melancholy, that knowledge of the human heart which characterise yours; but
does not this kind of superiority belong more properly to philosophical writers than to poets?
The brilliant melody of Italian is more suitable to the splendour of external objects than
to meditation; our language is better adapted to paint fury than sadness, because sentiments
which arise from deep reflection demand more metaphysical expressions, whilst the desire of
vengeance animates the imagination to the exclusion of grief. Cesarotti has produced the best
and most elegant translation of Ossian extant; but it seems in reading it that the words possess
in themselves an air of festivity that forms a contrast with the sombre ideas of the poem.
We cannot help being charmed with our sweet expressions,--the limpid stream, the smiling plain,
the cooling shade, the same as with the murmur of the waves, and variety of colours. What more
do you expect from poetry? Why would you ask of the nightingale, the meaning of her song? She
can only answer you by resuming the strain, and you cannot comprehend it without yielding to
the impression which it produces. The measure of verse, harmonious rhymes, and those rapid
terminations composed of two short syllables whose sounds glide in the manner that their name
(Sdruccioli) indicates, sometimes imitate the light steps of a dance; at others, more sombre
tones recall the fury of the tempest and the clangour of arms. In fact, our poetry is a wonder
of the imagination--we must only seek it in the various pleasures which it affords."

"It must be allowed," replied Lord Nelville, "that you explain very clearly the beauties and
defects of your poetry; but how will you defend your prose, in which those defects are to be
found unaccompanied by the beauties? That which is only loose and indefinite in poetry will
become emptiness in prose; and the crowd of common ideas which your poets embellish with their
melody and their images, are in prose, cold and dry, while their vivacity of style renders
them more fatiguing. The language of the greater part of the prose-writers of the present day
is so declamatory, so diffuse, and so abundant in superlatives, that their work seems written
to order, in hackneyed phraseology, and for conventional natures; it does not once enter into
their heads that to write well is to express one's thoughts and character. Their style is an
artificial web, a kind of literary mosaic, every thing in fact that is foreign to their soul,
and is made with the pen as any other mechanical work is with the fingers. They possess in
the highest degree the secret of developing, commenting, inflating an idea, and, if I may use
the expression, of working a sentiment into a ferment. So much do they excel in this, that
one would be tempted to ask these writers, what the African woman asked a French lady, who
wore a large pannier under a long dress:--'Madam, is all that a part of yourself?' In short,
what real existence is there in all this pomp of words which one true expression would dissipate
like a vain prestige."

"You forget," interrupted Corinne sharply; "first, Macchiavelli and Boccacio; next Gravina,
Filangieri, and in our days, Cesarotti, Verri, Bettinelli, and so many others, in short, who
know how to write and to think[22]. But I agree with you that in the latter ages, unfortunate
circumstances having deprived Italy of its independence, its people have lost all interest
in truth and often even the possibility of speaking it: from this has resulted the habit of
sporting with words without daring to approach a single idea. As they were certain of not being
able to obtain any influence over things by their writings, they were only employed to display
their wit, which is a sure way to end in having no wit at all; for it is only in directing
the mind towards some noble object that ideas are acquired. When prose writers can no longer
in any way influence the happiness of a nation--when they only write to dazzle--when, in fact,
the road itself is the object of their journey, they indulge in a thousand windings without
advancing a step. The Italians, it is true, fear new thoughts; but that is an effect of indolence,
and not of literary baseness. In their character, their gaiety, and their imagination, there
is much originality; and nevertheless, as they take no pains to reflect, their general ideas
do not soar above mediocrity; their eloquence even, so animated when they speak, has no character
when they write; one would say that labour of any kind freezes their faculties; it may also
be added, that the nations of the South are fettered by prose, and that poetry alone can express
their real sentiments. It is not thus in French literature," said Corinne, addressing herself
to the Count d'Erfeuil--"your prose writers are often more eloquent, and even more poetic,
than your poets."--"It is true," answered the Count, "your assertion can be verified by truly
classical authorities:--Bossuet, La Bruyère, Montesquieu, and Buffon, cannot be excelled; more
particularly the first two, who are of the age of Louis the Fourteenth, in whose praise too
much cannot be said, for they are perfect models for imitation. They are models that foreigners
ought to be as eager to imitate as the French themselves."--"I can hardly think it desirable,"
answered Corinne, "for the whole world entirely to lose their national colouring, as well as
all originality of sentiment and genius; and I am bold enough to tell you Count, that even
in your country, this literary orthodoxy, if I may so express myself, which is opposed to every
innovation, will in time render your literature extremely barren. Genius is essentially creative;
it bears the character of the individual that possesses it. Nature, who has not formed two
leaves alike, has infused a still greater variety into the human soul; imitation is therefore
a species of death, since it robs each one of his natural existence."

"You would not wish, fair stranger," replied the Count, "that we should admit Teutonic barbarism
amongst us--that we should copy Young's Night Thoughts, and the Concetti of the Italians and
Spaniards. What would become of the taste and elegance of our French style after such a mixture?"
Prince Castel-Forte, who had not yet spoken, said--"It seems to me that we all stand in need
of each other: the literature of every country discovers to him who is acquainted with it a
new sphere of ideas. It was Charles the Fifth himself who said--that a man who knows four languages,
is worth four men. If that great political genius judged thus, in regard to the conduct of
affairs, how much more true is it with respect to literature? Foreigners all study French;
thus they command a more extended horizon than you, who do not study foreign languages. Why
do you not more often take the trouble of learning them?--You would thus preserve your own
peculiar excellence, and sometimes discover your deficiencies."

FOOTNOTE:

[22] Cesarotti, Verri, and Bettinelli, are three living authors who have introduced thought
into Italian prose; it must be confessed, that this was not the case for a long time before.

Chapter ii.

"You will at least confess," replied the Count d'Erfeuil, "that there is one part of literature
in which we have nothing to learn of any country.--Our drama is decidedly the first in Europe;
for I cannot believe that the English would presume to oppose their Shakespeare to us."--"I
beg your pardon," interrupted Mr Edgermond, "they have that presumption."--And after this observation
he was silent.--"In that case I have nothing to say," continued the Count, with a smile which
expressed a kind of civil contempt: "Each one may think as he pleases, but for my part I persist
in believing that we may affirm without presumption that we are the very first in dramatic
art. As to the Italians, if I may speak my mind freely, they do not appear even to suspect
that there is a dramatic art in the world.--With them the music is every thing, and the play
itself nothing. Should the music of the second act of a piece be better than the first, they
begin with the second act. Or, should a similar preference attach to the first acts of two
different pieces, they will perform these two acts in the same evening, introducing between,
perhaps, an act of some comedy in prose that contains irreproachable morality, but a moral
teaching entirely composed of aphorisms, that even our ancestors have already cast off to the
foreigner as too old to be of any service to them. Your poets are entirely at the disposal
of your famous musicians; one declares that he cannot sing without there is in his air the
word felicità; the tenor must have tomba; while a third singer can only quaver upon the word
catene. The poor bard must make these different whims agree with dramatic situation as well
as he can. This is not all; there are actors who will not appear immediately treading the boards
of the stage; they must first be seen in a cloud, or they must descend the lofty stairs of
a palace, in order to give more effect to their entrée. When the air is finished, whatever
may be the violent or affecting situation of his character, the singer must bow to the audience
in acknowledgment of their applause. The other day, in Semiramis, after the spectre of Ninus
had sung his air, the representative of this shadowy personage made in his ghostly costume
a low reverence to the pit, which greatly diminished the terror of the apparition.

"They are accustomed in Italy to consider the theatre merely as a large assembly room, where
there is nothing to hear but the airs, and the ballet! I am justified in saying that they listen
to nothing but the ballet; for it is only when the ballet is about to begin, that silence is
called for in the pit: and what is this ballet but a masterpiece of bad taste? There is nothing
amusing in the dancing save the comic part of it; the grotesque figures alone afford entertainment,
being indeed a good specimen of caricature. I have seen Gengis-Kan in a ballet, all covered
with ermine, and full of fine sentiments; for he ceded his crown to the child of a king whom
he had conquered, and lifted him up in the air upon one foot; a new mode of establishing a
monarch upon his throne. I have also seen the sacrifice of Curtius formed into a ballet of
three acts, with divertisements. Curtius, in the dress of an Arcadian shepherd, danced for
a considerable time with his mistress; then mounting a real horse in the middle of the stage,
he plunged into the gulf of fire, made of yellow satin and gilt paper, which looked more like
a fancy riding habit than an abyss. In fact, I have seen the whole of Roman history from Romulus
to Cæsar, compressed into a ballet."

"What you say is true," replied Prince Castel-Forte, mildly; "but you have only spoken of music
and dancing, which do not comprise what we understand by the drama of any country." "It is
much worse," interrupted the Count d'Erfeuil, "when tragedies are represented, or dramas that
are not termed dramas that end happily: they unite more horrors in the course of five acts,
than the imagination could form a picture of. In one piece of this kind, the lover kills the
brother of his mistress in the second act; in the third he blows out the brains of his mistress
herself upon the stage; her funeral occupies the fourth; in the interval, between the fourth
and fifth acts, the actor who performs the lover comes forward, and announces to the audience
with the greatest tranquillity in the world, the harlequinades which are to be performed on
the following evening; he then reappears in the fifth act, to shoot himself with a pistol.
The tragic actors are quite in harmony with the coldness and extravagance of these pieces:
they commit all these horrors with the utmost calm. When a performer uses much action, they
say he conducts himself like a preacher; for in truth, there is more acting in the pulpit than
on the stage. It is very fortunate that these actors are so moderate in their pathos; for as
there is nothing interesting, either in the piece or its situations, the more noise they made
about it, the more ridiculous they would appear: it might still be endurable, were there any
thing gay in this nonsense; but it is most stupidly dull and monotonous. There is in Italy
no more comedy than tragedy; and here again we stand foremost. The only species of comedy peculiar
to Italy is harlequinade. A valet, at once a knave, a glutton, and a coward; an old griping,
amorous dupe of a guardian, compose the whole strength of these pieces. I hope you will allow
that Tartuffe, and the Misanthrope, require a little more genius than such compositions."

This attack of the Count d' Erfeuil was sufficiently displeasing to the Italians who were his
auditors; nevertheless they laughed at it. The Count was more desirous of showing his wit than
his natural goodness of disposition; for though this latter quality influenced his actions,
self-love guided his speech. Prince Castel-Forte and the rest of his countrymen present, were
extremely impatient to refute the Count d'Erfeuil; but as they were little ambitious of shining
in conversation and believed their cause would be more ably defended by Corinne, they besought
her to reply, contenting themselves with barely citing the celebrated names of Maffei, Metastasio,
Goldoni, Alfieri, and Monti. Corinne began by granting that the Italians had no drama; but
she undertook to prove that circumstances and not want of talent, were the cause of it. Comedy,
which depends upon the observation of manners, can only exist in a country where we live in
the midst of a numerous and brilliant society. In Italy we meet with nothing but violent passions
or idle enjoyments which produce crimes of so black a hue that no shades of character can be
distinguished. But ideal comedy, if it may be so termed, that which depends upon the imagination,
and may agree with all times and all countries, owes its invention to Italy. Harlequin, punchinello,
pantaloon, &c., have the same character in every different piece. In all cases they exhibit
masks, and not faces: that is to say, their physiognomy is that of some particular species
of character, and not that of any individual. Undoubtedly, the modern authors of harlequinades,
finding every part ready carved out for them like the men of a chess-board, have not the merit
of inventing them; but their first invention is due to Italy; therefore these fantastic personages,
which from one end of Europe to the other afford amusement to every child, and to every grown-up
person whom imagination has made childlike, must certainly be considered as the creation of
Italians: this I should conceive ought to give them some claim to the art of comedy.

The observation of the human heart is an inexhaustible source of literature; but nations more
disposed to poetry than to reflection, more easily surrender themselves to the intoxication
of joy than to philosophic irony. That pleasantry which is founded upon the knowledge of mankind
has something sad at bottom. It is only the gaiety of the imagination which is truly inoffensive.
It is not that the Italians do not study deeply the men whom they have to do with; for none
discover more subtly their secret thoughts; but they employ this talent as a guide of conduct,
and have no idea of converting it to any literary purpose. Perhaps even they have no wish to
generalise their discoveries, and publish their perceptions. There is a prudent dissimulation
in their character, which teaches them not to expose in comedies that which affords rules for
private intercourse; not to reveal by the fictions of the mind what may be useful in circumstances
of real life.

Macchiavelli however, far from concealing anything, has exposed all the secrets of a criminal
polity; and through him we may learn of what a terrible knowledge of the human heart the Italians
are capable. But profound observation is not the province of comedy: the leisure of society,
properly speaking, can alone furnish matter for the comic scene. Goldoni, who lived at Venice,
where there is more society than in any other Italian city, has introduced more refinement
of observation into his pieces than is generally to be found in other authors. Nevertheless
his comedies are monotonous, and we meet with the same situations in them, because they contain
so little variety of character. His numerous pieces seem formed upon the general model of dramatic
works, and not copied from real life. The true character of Italian gaiety is not satire, but
imagination; not delineation of manners, but poetical exaggeration. It is Ariosto, and not
Molière, who can amuse Italy.

Gozzi, the rival of Goldoni, has more originality in his compositions; they bear less resemblance
to regular comedy. His determination was liberally to indulge the Italian genius; to represent
fairy tales, and mingle buffoonery and harlequinade with the marvels of poetry; to imitate
nothing in nature, but to give free scope to the gay illusions of fancy, to the chimeras of
fairy magic, and to transport the mind by every means beyond the boundaries of human action.
He was crowned with prodigious success in his time, and perhaps there never existed an author
more congenial to an Italian imagination; but to know with certainty what degree of perfection
Tragedy and Comedy can reach in Italy, it should possess a theatrical establishment. The multitude
of little cities who all wish to have a theatre, lose, by dispersing them, its dramatic resources:
that division in states, in general so favourable to liberty and happiness, is hurtful to Italy.
She must needs concentrate her light and power to resist the prejudices which are devouring
her. The authority of governments often represses individual energy. In Italy this authority
would be a benefit if it struggled against the ignorance of separate states and of men isolated
among them; if it combated by emulation that indolence so natural to the climate; and if, in
a word, it gave life to the whole of this nation which now is satisfied with a dream.

These ideas, and several others besides, were ingeniously developed by Corinne. She well understood
the rapid art of light conversation, which does not dogmatically insist upon any thing, and
also that pleasing address which gives a consideration to each of the company in turn, though
she often indulged in that kind of talent which rendered her a celebrated improvisatrice. Several
times she intreated Prince Castel-Forte to assist her with his opinion on the same subject;
but she spoke so well herself, that all the audience were delighted in listening to her, and
would not suffer her to be interrupted. Mr Edgermond, in particular, could scarcely satisfy
himself with seeing and hearing Corinne; hardly did he dare to express the admiration she inspired
him with, and he pronounced some words of panegyric in a low tone of voice hoping she would
comprehend them without obliging him to address her personally. He however possessed such a
lively desire to know her sentiments on Tragedy, that in spite of his timidity he ventured
a few words on that subject.

"Madam," said he to Corinne, "where the Italian literature appears to me most defective is
in Tragedy; methinks the distance is not so great between infancy and manhood, as between your
Tragedies and ours; for in the changeableness of children may be discovered true if not deep
sentiments, but there is something affected and extravagant in Italian Tragedy, which destroys
for me all emotion whatever. Is this not so? Lord Nelville," continued Mr Edgermond, turning
to his lordship and inviting his support by a glance, quite astonished at having found courage
to speak in such a numerous assembly.

"I am entirely of your opinion," answered Oswald; "Metastasio, who is vauntingly called the
poet of love, gives the same colouring to this passion in every country and under every circumstance.
His admirable airs are entitled to our applause as much from their grace and harmony as the
lyrical beauties which they contain, especially when detached from the drama in which they
are placed; but it is impossible for us who possess Shakespeare, who has most deeply fathomed
History and the passions of man, to suffer those amorous couples, that divide between them
almost all the pieces of Metastasio alike, under the names of Achilles, of Tircis, of Brutus,
and of Corilas, singing, in a manner that hardly touches the surface of the soul, the grief
and sufferings of love, so as almost to reduce to imbecility the noblest passion that animates
the human heart. It is with the most profound respect for the character of Alfieri that I shall
indulge in a few reflections upon his pieces. Their aim is so noble, the sentiments which the
author expresses are so much in unison with his personal conduct, that his tragedies must always
deserve praise as actions, even when they are criticised as literary performances. But I find
in the vigour of some of his tragedies as much monotony as in the tenderness of Metastasio.
There is, in the plays of Alfieri, such a profusion of energy and magnanimity, or rather such
an exaggeration of violence and crime, that it is impossible to discover in them the true characters
of men. They are never so wicked nor so generous as painted by this author. The aim of most
of his scenes is to place virtue and vice in contrast with each other; but these oppositions
are not according to the gradations of truth. If, during their life, tyrants bore with what
the oppressed are made to say to their face in the tragedies of Alfieri, one would be almost
tempted to pity them. His play of Octavia is one of those where the want of probability is
most striking. In this piece, Seneca moralises incessantly with Nero, as if the latter were
the most patient of men, and Seneca the most courageous. The master of the world permits himself
to be insulted, and his anger to be excited in every scene, for the amusement of the spectators,
as if it were not in his power to end it all with a word. Certainly these continual dialogues
give rise to some very fine replies on the part of Seneca, and one would be glad to find in
an harangue or in a moral work the noble thoughts which he expresses; but is this the way to
give us an idea of tyranny? It is not painting it in its formidable colours, but merely making
it a subject for verbal fencing. If Shakespeare had represented Nero surrounded by trembling
slaves, who hardly dared reply to the most indifferent question, himself concealing his internal
agitation and endeavouring to appear calm, with Seneca near him writing the apology for the
murder of Agrippina, would not the terror have been a thousand times greater? And for one reflection
spoken by the author, would not a thousand be generated in the soul of the spectators by the
very silence of rhetoric and the truth of the picture?"

Oswald might have spoken much longer without receiving any interruption from Corinne; so much
pleasure did she receive from the sound of his voice and the noble elegance of his language,
that she could have wished to prolong this impression for hours together. Hardly could she
remove her eyes, which were earnestly fixed upon him, even after he had ceased to speak. She
turned them reluctantly to the rest of the company, who were impatient to hear her thoughts
upon Italian tragedy, and turning to Lord Nelville:--"My Lord," said she, "it is not to combat
your sentiments that I reply, for they meet mine in almost every point: my only intention is
to offer some exceptions to your rather too general observations. It is true that Metastasio
is rather a lyrical than a dramatic poet, and that he describes love like one of the fine arts
that adorn life, not as the most important secret of our happiness and our pain. I will venture
to say, notwithstanding our language has been consecrated to the cause of love, that we have
more profoundness and sensibility in describing any other passion than this. The practice of
making amorous verses has created a kind of commonplace language amongst us for that subject;
so that not what he has felt, but what he has read, inspires the poet. Love, such as it exists
in Italy, by no means resembles that love which is described by our writers. It is only in
Boccacio's romance of Fiametta, that according to the best of my recollection, there is to
be found an idea of that passion, painted in truly national colours. Our poets subtilise and
exaggerate the sentiment, whilst agreeably to the real Italian character, it is a rapid and
profound impression, which rather expresses itself by silent and passionate actions than by
ingenious language. In general our literature is not characteristic of our national manners[23].
We are much too modest, I had almost said too humble a nation to aspire to tragedies taken
from our own history, and bearing the stamp of our own sentiments.

"Alfieri, by a singular chance, was transplanted, if I may use the expression, from ancient
to modern times; he was born for action, and his destiny only permitted him to write; this
constraint appears in the style of his tragedies. He wished to make literature subservient
to a political purpose; undoubtedly his object was noble, but nothing perverts the labours
of the imagination so much as having a purpose. In this nation, where certainly, some erudite
scholars and very enlightened men are to be met with, Alfieri was indignant at seeing literature
consecrated to no serious end, but merely engrossed with tales, novels, and madrigals. Alfieri
wished to give a more austere character to his tragedy. He has stript it of all the borrowed
appendages of theatrical effect, preserving nothing but the interest of the dialogue. It appears
to have been his wish to place the natural vivacity and imagination of the Italians in a state
of penitence; he has however been very much admired for his character and the energies of his
soul, which were truly great. The inhabitants of modern Rome are particularly given to applaud
the actions and sentiments of their ancient country; as if those actions and sentiments had
any relation to them in their present state.

They are amateurs of energy and independence, in the same manner as they are of the fine pictures
which adorn their galleries. But it is not less true that Alfieri has by no means created what
may be called an Italian theatre; that is to say, tragedies of a merit peculiar to Italy. He
has not even characterised the manners of those countries and those centuries which he has
painted. His conspiracy of the Pazzi, his Virginia, and his Philip II., are to be admired for
elevation and strength of thought; but it is always the character of Alfieri, and not that
of peculiar nations and peculiar times, which are to be discovered in them. Although there
be no analogy between the French genius and that of Alfieri, they resemble each other in this,
that both of them give their own colouring to every subject of which they treat."

The Count d' Erfeuil, hearing the French genius called in question, was induced to speak. "It
would be impossible for us," said he, "to tolerate upon the stage either the incongruities
of the Greeks or the monstrosities of Shakespeare; the French have too pure a taste for that.
Our theatre is the model of delicacy and elegance: those are its distinguishing characteristics,
and we should plunge ourselves into barbarism by introducing anything foreign amongst us."

"That would be like encompassing yourselves with the great wall of China," said Corinne, smiling.
"There are certainly many rare beauties in your tragic authors; and perhaps they would admit
of new ones, could you bring yourselves to tolerate anything not exactly French on your stage.
But as for us Italians, our dramatic genius would be greatly diminished in submitting to the
fetters of those laws which we had not the honour of inventing, and from which, consequently,
we could derive nothing but their restraint. A theatre ought to be formed upon the imagination,
the character, and the custom of a nation. The Italians are passionately fond of the fine arts,
of music, painting, and even pantomime: of every thing, in short, that strikes the senses.
How then could they be satisfied with the austerity of an eloquent dialogue, as their only
theatrical pleasure?[24] Vainly has Alfieri, with all his genius, endeavoured to reduce them
to it; he felt himself that his system was too rigorous.

"The Merope of Maffei, the Saul of Alfieri, the Aristodemus of Monti, and particularly the
poem of Dante, although this last author never composed a tragedy, seem calculated to convey
an idea of what the dramatic art might be brought to in Italy. There is in the Merope of Maffei,
a great simplicity of action, but the most brilliant poetry, adorned with the happiest images:
and why should this poetry be forbidden in dramatic works? The language of poetry is so magnificent
in Italy that we should be more censurable than any other nation in renouncing its beauties.
Alfieri, wishing to excel in every department of poetry, has, in his Saul, made a most beautiful
use of the lyric; and one might with excellent effect introduce music itself into the piece,
not so much to harmonise the words, as to calm the frenzy of Saul by the harp of David. So
delicious is our music that it may even render us indolent as to intellectual enjoyments. Far
therefore from wishing to separate music from the drama, it should be our earnest endeavour
to unite them; not in making heroes sing, which destroys all dramatic effect, but in introducing
choruses, as the ancients did, or such other musical aid, as may naturally blend with the situations
of the piece, as so often happens in real life. So far from retrenching the pleasures of the
imagination on the Italian stage, it is my opinion, that we should on the contrary augment
and multiply them in every possible manner. The exquisite taste of the Italians for music,
and for splendid ballets, is an indication of the power of their imagination, and manifests
the necessity of rendering even the most serious subjects interesting to them, instead of heightening
their severity as Alfieri has done. The nation conceive it their duty to applaud what is grave
and austere; but they soon return to their natural taste; however, tragedy might become highly
pleasing to them if it were embellished by the charm and the variety of different kinds of
poetry, and with all the divers theatrical attractions which the English and the Spaniards enjoy.

"The Aristodemus of Monti has in it something of the terrible pathos of Dante; and surely this
tragedy is very justly one of the most admired. Dante, that great master of various powers,
possessed that kind of tragic genius which would have produced the most effect in Italy, if
it could in any way be adapted to the stage; for that poet knew how to represent to the eye,
what was passing at the bottom of the soul, and his imagination could make grief seen and felt.
If Dante had written tragedies, they would have been as striking to children as to men, to
the illiterate crowd as to the polished few. Dramatic literature ought to be popular; like
some public event, the whole nation ought to judge of it."

"When Dante was living," said Oswald, "the Italians performed a distinguished part in the political
drama of Europe. Perhaps it would now be impossible for you to have a national tragic theatre:
it would be necessary for the existence of such a theatre, that great events should develop
in life those sentiments which are expressed upon the stage. Of all the masterpieces of literature,
there is not one which depends so much upon the whole people as tragedy; the spectators contribute
to it as much as the author. Dramatic genius is composed of the public mind, of History, of
government, of national customs, of everything, in fact, which each day blends itself with
thought, and forms the moral being, as the air which we breathe nourishes physical existence.
The Spaniards, with whom you have some affinity as to climate and religion, are much superior
to you in dramatic genius; their pieces are filled with their history, their chivalry, and
their religious faith, and these pieces possess life and originality; but their success, in
this respect, dates back to the epoch of their historical glory. How then could it be possible
now to establish in Italy, that which it never could boast of--a genuine tragic drama!"

"It is unfortunately possible that you may be in the right," replied Corinne; "however, I hope
for greater things from the natural impulse of mind in Italy, and from the individual emulation
of my countrymen, even when not favoured by external circumstances; but what we most want in
tragedy is actors. Affected words necessarily lead to false declamation; but there is no language
in which an actor can display so much talent as in ours; for the melody of sound gives a new
charm to truth of accent: it is a continual music which mingles with the expression of feeling
without diminishing its vigour." "If you wish," interrupted Prince Castel-Forte, "to convince
the company of what you assert, it only remains for you to prove it: yes, allow us to enjoy
the inexpressible pleasure of seeing you perform tragedy; you must grant these foreign gentlemen
the rare enjoyment of being made acquainted with a talent which you alone in Italy possess;
or rather that you alone in the world possess, since the whole of your genius is impressed
upon it."

Corinne felt a secret desire to play tragedy before Lord Nelville, and by this means show herself
to very great advantage; but she dared not accede to the proposal of Prince Castel-Forte, without
that approbation of Oswald, which the looks she cast upon him earnestly entreated. He understood
them; and as he was at the same time concerned at that timidity which had the day before prevented
the exertion of her talent for improvisation, and ambitious that she should obtain the applause
of Mr Edgermond, he joined in the solicitations of her friends. Corinne therefore no longer
hesitated. "Well, then," said she, turning to Prince Castel-Forte, "we will accomplish the
project which I have so long formed, of playing my own translation of Romeo and Juliet," "Shakespeare's
Romeo and Juliet?" cried Mr Edgermond; "you understand English, then?" "Yes," answered Corinne.
"And you are fond of Shakespeare!" added Mr Edgermond. "As a friend," replied she; "he was
so well acquainted with all the secrets of grief." "And you will perform in Italian," cried
Mr Edgermond; "and I shall hear you! And you too, my dear Nelville. Ah, how happy you will
be!" Then, repenting immediately this indiscreet word, he blushed: and a blush inspired by
delicacy and goodness may be interesting at all periods of life. "How happy we shall be," resumed
he, a little embarrassed, "to be present at such a representation!"

FOOTNOTES:

[23] Giovanni Pindemonte, has recently published a collection of Dramas, the subjects of which
are taken from Italian history, and this is a very interesting and praiseworthy enterprize.
The name of Pindemonte is also rendered illustrious by Hippolito Pindemonte, one of the sweetest
and most charming of the present Italian poets.

[24] The posthumous works of Alfieri are just published, in which are to be found many exquisite
pieces; but we may conclude from a rather singular Dramatic Essay, which he has written on
the Death of Abel, that he himself was conscious that his pieces were too austere, and that
on the stage more must be allowed to the pleasures of the imagination.

Chapter iii.

Every thing was arranged in a few days, the parts distributed, and the evening chosen for the
performance in a palace belonging to a female relation of Prince Castel-Forte, and a friend
of Corinne. Oswald felt a mixture of uneasiness and pleasure, at the approach of this new scene
of triumph for the talents of Corinne. He enjoyed the by anticipation; but he was also jealous
in the same manner, not of any man in particular, but of that whole audience in general who
were to witness the talents of her whom he loved. He wished to be the only witness of her mental
charms;--he wished that Corinne, timid and reserved, like an English woman, should possess
eloquence and genius for none but him. However distinguished a man may be, perhaps he never
enjoys, without alloy, the superiority of a woman: if he feel an affection for her, his heart
is disturbed;--if not, his self-love is wounded. Oswald, in the presence of Corinne, was more
intoxicated than happy; and the admiration which she inspired him with, increased his love
without giving more stability to his projects. He contemplated her as an admirable phenomenon,
which appeared to him anew every day; but even the transport and astonishment which she made
him feel, seemed to render the hope of a peaceful and tranquil life more distant. Corinne,
however, was of the tenderest and most easy disposition in private life; her ordinary qualities
would have made her beloved independently of her brilliant ones; but yet again, she united
in herself too much talent, and was too dazzling in every respect. Lord Nelville, with all
his accomplishments, did not believe himself equal to her, and this idea inspired him with
fears as to the duration of their mutual affection. Vainly did Corinne by force of love become
his slave; the master, often uneasy about his captive queen, did not enjoy his empire undisturbed.

Some hours before the representation, Lord Nelville conducted Corinne to the palace of Princess
Castel-Forte, where the theatre was fitted up. The sun shone most brilliantly, and from one
of the windows of the stair-case, Rome and the Campagna were discovered. Oswald stopped Corinne
a moment and said, "Behold this beautiful day, it is for your sake; it is to heighten the splendour
of your fame." "Ah, if that were so," answered she, "it is you who would bring me happiness;
it is to you that I should owe the protection of heaven." "Would the pure and gentle sentiments
which the beauty of nature inspires, be sufficient to make you happy?" replied Oswald: "there
is a great distance between the air that we breathe, the reverie which the country inspires,
and that noisy theatre which is about to resound with your name." "Oswald," said Corinne, "if
the applause which I am about to receive, have the power to affect me, will it not be because
it is witnessed by you? And should I display any talent, will it not owe its success to you,
who have animated and inspired it? Love, poetry, and religion, all that is born of enthusiasm,
is in harmony with nature; and in beholding the azure sky, in yielding to the impression which
it causes, I have a juster comprehension of the sentiments of Juliet, I am more worthy of Romeo."
"Yes, thou art worthy of him, celestial creature!" cried Lord Nelville; "'tis only a weakness
of the soul, this jealousy of thy talents, this desire to live alone with thee in the universe.
Go, receive the meed of public homage, go; but let that look of love, still more divine than
thy genius, be directed to me alone!" They then parted, and Lord Nelville went and took his
seat in theatre, awaiting the pleasure of beholding the appearance of Corinne.

Romeo and Juliet is an Italian subject; the scene is placed in Verona, where is still to be
seen the tomb of those two lovers. Shakespeare has written this piece with that Southern imagination
at once impassioned and pleasing; that imagination which triumphs in happiness, but which,
nevertheless, passes so easily from happiness to despair, and from despair to death. The impressions
are rapid; but one easily feels that these rapid impressions will be ineffaceable. It is the
force of nature, and not the frivolity of the heart, which beneath an energetic climate hastens
the development of the passions. The soil is not light, though vegetation is prompt; and Shakespeare
has seized, more happily than any other foreign writer, the national character of Italy and
that fecundity of the mind which invents a thousand ways of varying the expression of the same
sentiments--the oriental eloquence which makes use of all the images of nature to paint what
is passing in the heart. It is not as in Ossian, one same tint, one uniform sound which responds
constantly to the most sensitive chords of the heart; the multiplied colours that Shakespeare
employs in Romeo and Juliet, do not give a cold affectation to his style; it is the ray divided,
reflected, and varied, which produces these colours, in which we ever feel that fire they proceed
from. There is a life and a brilliancy in this composition which characterise the country and
the inhabitants. The play of Romeo and Juliet translated into Italian would only seem to return
to its mother tongue.

The first appearance of Juliet is at a ball, where Romeo Montague has introduced himself into
the house of the Capulets, the mortal enemies of his family. Corinne was dressed in a charming
festive habit, conformable to the costume of the times. Her hair was tastefully adorned with
precious stones and artificial flowers. Her friends did not know her on her first appearance,
till her voice discovered her: her figure then became familiar to them; but it was in a manner
deified, and preserved only a poetical expression. The theatre resounded with unanimous applause
upon her appearance. Her first looks discovered Oswald, and rested upon him--a spark of joy,
a lively and gentle hope, was painted in her countenance: on beholding her, every heart beat
with pleasure and fear: it was felt that so much felicity could not last upon earth; was it
for Juliet, or Corinne, that this presentiment was to be verified?

When Romeo approached to address to her in a low voice, the lines, so brilliant in English,
so magnificent in the Italian translation, upon her grace and beauty, the spectators, charmed
to hear their own sentiments so finely interpreted, joined in the transport of Romeo; and the
sudden passion which the first look of Juliet kindled in his soul, appeared like reality to
every eye. Oswald from this moment felt disturbed; it appeared to him that all was near to
being revealed, that Corinne was about to be proclaimed an angel among women, that he should
be forced to reveal his sentiments, that his claim would be disputed and the prize ravished
from him--a kind of dazzling cloud seemed to pass before his eyes--he feared his sight might
fail him--he was ready to faint, and retired for some moments behind a pillar. Corinne, uneasy,
sought him with anxiety, and pronounced this line,

     "Too early seen unknown, and known too late!"

with such a tone of voice, that Oswald started as he heard it, for it seemed to him to be applied
to their personal situation.

He could never feel tired of admiring the grace of her actions, the dignity of her motions,
and the expression of her countenance, in which was painted what language could not reveal,
all those mysteries of the heart which cannot be reduced to words; but which, nevertheless,
dispose of our life. The accent, the look, the least gesture of an actor, truly inspired and
influenced by genuine emotion, are a continual revelation of the human heart; and the ideal
of the fine arts is always mingled with these revelations of nature. The harmony of the verse
and the charm of the attitudes, lend to passion that grace and dignity which it often wants
in reality. Thus every sentiment of the heart, and every emotion of the soul, pass before the
imagination without losing anything of their truth.

In the second act, Juliet appears in the balcony to converse with Romeo.
Corinne had preserved, of her former ornaments, only the flowers, and
those were soon to disappear: the theatre half-lighted to represent
night, cast a milder reflection upon the countenance of Corinne. There
was now something more melodious in her voice, than when surrounded with
the splendour of a fête. Her hand lifted towards the stars, seemed to
invoke the only witnesses worthy of hearing her, and when she repeated,
"Romeo! Romeo!" although Oswald was certain that she thought of him,
he felt jealous that these delicious accents should make the air resound
with any other name than his.
            *       *       *       *       *
            *       *       *       *       *
            *       *       *       *       *  therefore pardon me."

At these words--"Pardon me! Pardon me for loving; pardon me for having let you know it!"--There
was in Corinne's look, so tender a prayer and so much respect for her lover, so much exultation
in her choice, when she said, "Noble Romeo! Fair Montague!" that Oswald felt as proud as he
was happy. He raised his head, which tenderness had bowed down, and fancied himself the king
of the world, since he reigned over a heart which contained all the treasures of life.

Corinne, perceiving the effect which she produced upon Oswald, became more and more animated
by that emotion of the heart which alone produces miracles; and when at the approach of day,
Juliet thought she heard the song of the lark--a signal for the departure of Romeo, the accents
of Corinne possessed a supernatural charm: they described love, and nevertheless one might
perceive that there was something of religious mystery in them, some recollections of heaven,
with a presage that she was shortly to return thither; a kind of celestial melancholy, as of
a soul exiled upon earth, but which was soon to be called to its divine home. Ah! how happy
was Corinne the day that she represented the part of a noble character in a beautiful tragedy
before the lover of her choice; how many years, how many lives would appear dull, compared
to such a day!

If Lord Nelville could have performed, with Corinne, the part of Romeo, the pleasure which
she would have tasted would not have been so complete. She would have desired to put aside
the verses of the greatest poet in order to speak the dictates of her own heart; perhaps even
her genius would have been confined by insurmountable timidity; she would not have dared to
look at Oswald for fear of betraying herself, and truth would have destroyed the charm of art;
but how sweet it was to know that he whom she loved was present when she experienced those
exalted sentiments which poetry alone can inspire; when she felt all the charm of tender emotions,
without their real pain; when the affection she expressed was neither personal nor abstract;
and when she seemed to say to Lord Nelville, "See how I am able to love."

It is impossible when the situation is our own to be satisfied with ourselves: passion and
timidity alternately transport and check us--inspire us either with too much bitterness or
too much submission; but to appear perfect without affectation; to unite calm to sensibility,
which too frequently destroys it; in a word, to exist for a moment in the sweetest reveries
of the heart; such was the pure enjoyment of Corinne in performing tragedy. She united to this
pleasure that of all the plaudits she received; and her look seemed to place them at the feet
of Oswald, at the feet of him whose simple approval she valued more than all her fame. Corinne
was happy, at least for a moment! for a moment, at least, she experienced at the price of her
repose, those delights of the soul which till then she had vainly wished for, and which she
would ever have to regret!

Juliet in the third act becomes privately, the wife of Romeo. In the fourth, her parents wishing
to force her to marry another, she determines to take the opiate which she receives from the
hand of a friar, and which is to give her the appearance of death. All the motions of Corinne,
her disturbed gait, her altered accent, her looks, sometimes animated and sometimes dejected,
painted the cruel conflict of fear and love, the terrible images which pursued her at the idea
of being transported alive to the tomb of her ancestors, and the enthusiasm of passion, which
enabled a soul, so young, to triumph over so natural a terror. Oswald felt an almost irresistible
impulse to fly to her aid. At one time she lifted her eyes towards heaven, with an ardour which
deeply expressed that need of divine protection, from which no human being was ever free. At
another time, Lord Nelville thought he saw her stretch her arms towards him to ask his assistance--he
rose up in a transport of delirium, and then sat down immediately, brought to his senses by
the astonished looks of those about him; but his emotion became so strong that it could no
longer be concealed.

In the fifth act, Romeo, who believes Juliet dead, lifts her from the tomb before she awakes
and presses her to his heart. Corinne was clad in white, her black hair dishevelled, and her
head inclined upon Romeo with a grace, and nevertheless an appearance of death, so affecting
and so gloomy, that Oswald felt himself shaken with the most opposite impressions. He could
not bear to see Corinne in the arms of another, and he shuddered at beholding the image of
her whom he loved, apparently deprived of life; so that in fact he felt, like Romeo, that cruel
combination of despair and love, of death and pleasure, which makes this scene the most agonising
that ever was represented on a stage. At length, when Juliet awakes in this tomb, at the foot
of which her lover has just immolated himself, when her first words in her coffin, beneath
these funeral vaults, are not inspired by the terror which they ought to cause, when she exclaims:

     "Where is my lord? Where is my Romeo?"

Lord Nelville replied by deep groans, and did not return to himself till Mr Edgermond conducted
him out of the theatre.

The piece being finished, Corinne felt indisposed from emotion and fatigue. Oswald entered
first into her apartment, where he saw her alone with her women, still in the costume of Juliet,
and, like Juliet, almost swooning in their arms. In the excess of his trouble he could not
distinguish whether it was truth or fiction, and throwing himself at the feet of Corinne, exclaimed,
in English:

     "Eyes look your last! Arms take your last embrace."

Corinne, still wandering, cried: "Good God! what do you say? are you going to leave me?"--"No;"
interrupted Oswald, "I swear--" At that instant the crowd of Corinne's friends and admirers
forced the door in order to see her. Her eyes were fixed upon Oswald, listening with anxiety
for what he was about to answer; but there was no opportunity for further conversation between
them during the whole evening, for they were not left alone a single instant.

Never had the performance of a tragedy produced such an effect in Italy. The Romans extolled
with transport the talents of Corinne, both as the representative of Juliet, and the translator
of the piece. They said that this was truly the species of tragedy which suited the Italians,
which painted their manners, moved the soul by captivating the imagination, and gave effect
to their beautiful language, in a style alternately eloquent and lyrical, inspired and natural.
Corinne received all these praises with the sweetest air imaginable; but her soul remained
suspended on the words "I swear,"--which Oswald had pronounced when he was prevented by the
entrance of the company from concluding his sentence: this word might in truth contain the
secret of her destiny.

Book viii.

THE STATUES AND THE PICTURES.

Chapter i.

After the day which had passed, Oswald could not close his eyes during the night. He had never
been so near sacrificing every thing to Corinne. He did not even desire to know her secret;
or rather, before he was acquainted with it, he wished to contract a solemn engagement, to
consecrate his life to her. For some hours uncertainty seemed banished from his mind; and he
took pleasure in composing, in his thoughts, the letter which he should write to her on the
morrow, and which would decide his fate. But this confidence in happiness, this reliance upon
resolution, was of no long duration. His thoughts soon reverted to the past, he remembered
that he had loved, much less, it is true, than he loved Corinne; and the object of his first
choice could not be compared to her; but nevertheless it was this sentiment which had hurried
him away to thoughtless actions, to actions which had torn the heart of his father.--"Ah! who
knows," cried he, "whether he would not fear equally to-day, lest his son should forget his
native country and the duties which he owes it?"

"Oh thou!" said he, addressing the portrait of his father, "thou, the best friend I shall ever
have upon earth, I can no longer hear thy voice, but teach me by that silent look which yet
retains such power over my soul, inform me what I am to do, that now at least in thy celestial
abode, thou mayest be satisfied with the conduct of thy son! Forget not, however, that need
of happiness which consumes mortal man--be indulgent in heaven, as thou wert upon earth! I
shall become better if I am allowed to taste of happiness; if I am permitted to live with this
angelic creature, to have the honour of protecting, of saving such a woman.--Of saving her?"
continued he suddenly; "and from what? From a life of homage, of fame, and of independence!"--This
reflection, which originated in himself, terrified him like an inspiration of his father.

In conflicts of sentiment, who has not felt that kind of secret superstition which makes us
take our own thoughts for presages, and our sufferings for a warning from heaven? Ah! how bitter
is the struggle between passion and conscience, in susceptible minds!

Oswald paced his chamber under the most cruel agitation, sometimes stopping to look at the
moon, which in Italy is so mild and so beautiful. The aspect of nature inspires resignation;
but it is without effect upon a mind racked with uncertainty. The next day arrived without
bringing any relief to his distracted thoughts, and when the Count d'Erfeuil and Mr Edgermond
came to visit him, they were uneasy as to the state of his health, so much was he altered by
the anxieties of the night. The Count d'Erfeuil was the first who spoke.--"It must be allowed,"
said he, "that yesterday's entertainment was charming. Corinne is a most admirable woman. I
lost half her words, but I understood everything from her voice and her countenance. What a
pity it is, that a rich lady should be possessed of this talent! For if she were in humbler
circumstances, and unrestrained as she is, she might embrace the stage as a profession; and
to have an actress like her, would be the glory of Italy."

Oswald received a painful impression from this speech, and yet could not tell how to make it
known. For there was that about the Count, that one could not be angry at what he said, even
though it were disagreeable to one's feelings. None but sensitive minds understand those delicate
precautions which they owe each other: self-love, so alive to every thing that affects itself,
hardly ever thinks of the susceptibility of others.

Mr Edgermond praised Corinne in the most becoming and flattering terms. Oswald answered him
in English, in order to relieve the conversation about Corinne from the disagreeable eulogiums
of the Count. "I see I am one too many here," said the Count; "well I will pay a visit to Corinne:
she will not be sorry I dare say to hear my observations upon her acting yesterday evening.
I have some advice to give her, too, upon details; but these details are very essential to
the effect of the whole: she is really so astonishing a woman that one should neglect nothing
to assist her in attaining perfection.--And besides," said he, inclining towards Nelville's
ear, "I wish to encourage her to play tragedy more often: 'tis a certain way to get married
by some foreigner of distinction who may pass through this city. As to you and me, my dear
Oswald, that idea does not concern us, we are too much accustomed to charming women to commit
foolish things; but who knows? a German prince, or a Spanish grandee--" At these words Oswald
rose up almost beside himself, and it is impossible to conceive what would have been the issue,
if the Count d'Erfeuil had perceived his emotion; but he was so satisfied with his last reflection,
that he tripped away lightly, not in the least suspecting that he had offended Lord Nelville:
had he known it, though he loved him as much as man could love another, he would certainly
have remained. The brilliant valour of the Count, contributed still more than his self-love
to render him blind to his defects. As he was extremely delicate in everything that regarded
honour, he did not imagine that he could be wanting with respect to sensibility; and believing
himself, not without reason, amiable and brave, he was pleased with his lot, and did not suspect
there was any more profound way of regarding life than his own.

None of the sentiments which agitated Oswald had escaped Mr Edgermond, and when the Count d'Erfeuil
was gone, he said to him--"My dear Oswald, I take my leave,--I am going to Naples."--"Why so
soon?" answered Nelville. "Because it is not good for me to stay here," continued Edgermond;
"I am fifty years of age, and nevertheless I am not sure that Corinne would not make a fool
of me."--"And even in that case," interrupted Oswald, "what would be the consequence?"--"Such
a woman is not formed to live in Wales," replied Mr Edgermond; "believe me, my dear Oswald,
only Englishwomen are fit for England: it does not become me to give you advice, I need not
assure you that I shall not mention a word of what I have seen; but with all Corinne's accomplishments,
I should say, with Thomas Walpole, of what use is all that at home? Beneath these, at a depth
of two hundred feet, lies the second sandstone, and from this all the first yield of oil was
taken; but, though good in quality, this supply was speedily exhausted, and the modern wells are
carried directly through this second sandstone, through the slate and soapstone beneath, to the
third sandstone, in whose crevices lies the largest yield yet discovered. The proprietors of
old wells are now reaming them out and sinking their shafts to the required depth, which is
about four hundred and fifty feet.

The oil announces itself in various ways: sometimes by the escape of gas; sometimes by the appearance
of oil upon the cable attached to the tools; sometimes by the dropping of the tools, showing
that a crevice has been reached; and in occasional happy instances by a rush of oil spouting
to the top of the derrick, and tossing out the heavy tools like feathers.

Such a well as this, known as a flowing well, is the best "find" possible, as the fortunate borer
has nothing more to do than to put down a tubing of cast-iron artesian pipe, lead the oil from
its mouth into a tank, and then, sitting under his own vine and fig-tree, leave his fortune
to accumulate by daily additions of thousands of dollars. A flowing well, struck while Miselle
was upon the Creek, yielded fifteen hundred barrels per day, the
oil selling at the well for ten dollars and a half the barrel.

But should the oil decline to flow, or, having flowed, cease to do so, a force-pump is introduced,
and, driven by the same engine that bored the well, brings up the oil at a rate varying from
three to three hundred barrels per day. The Phillips Well, on Tarr Farm, originally a flowing
well, producing two thousand barrels per day, now pumps about three hundred and thirty, and
is considered a first-class well.

Before reaching oil, the borer not unfrequently comes upon veins of water, either salt or fresh;
and this water is excluded from the shaft by a leathern case applied about the pipe and filled
with flax-seed. The seed, swollen by the moisture, completely fills the space remaining between
the tube and the walls of the shaft, so that no water reaches the oil. But whenever the tubing
with its seed-bags is withdrawn, the water rushing down "drowns" not only its own well, but
all such as have subterraneous communication with it. In this manner one of the most important
wells upon the Creek avenged itself some time ago upon a too successful rival by drawing its
tubing and letting down the water upon both wells.

The rival retaliated by drawing its own tubing, with a like result, and the proprietors of
each lost months of time and hundreds of thousands of dollars before the quarrel could be adjusted.

From
the mouth of the shaft, elevated some fifteen feet above the surface of the ground, the oil either
flows or is pumped into an immense vat or tank, and from this is led to another and another, until a large
well will have a series of tanks connected like the joints of a rattlesnake's tail. Into the last
one is put a faucet, and the oil drawn into barrels is either carried to the local refinery, or
in its crude condition is boated to the railway, or to Oil City, and thence down the Alleghany.

One
of the principal perils attending oil-seeking is that of fire.

Petroleum, in its crude state, is so highly impregnated with gas and with naphtha, or benzine
as to be very inflammable,--a fact proved, indeed, many years ago, when, as history informs
us,

"General Clarke kindled the vapor, Stayed about an hour, and left it a-burning,"

unconsciously turning his back upon a fortune such as probably had never entered the worthy
knight's imagination.

The petroleum once ignited, it is very hard to extinguish the flames; and Mr. Williams told of
being one of a company of men who labored twenty-four hours in vain to subdue a burning well.
They tried water, which only aggravated the trouble; they tried covering the well with earth,
but the gas permeated the whole mass and blazed up more defiantly than ever; they covered the
mound of earth with a carpet, (paid for at the value of cloth of gold,) and the carpet with wet sand,
but a bad smell of burned wool was the only result. Finally, some incipient Bonaparte hit upon
the expedient of dividing the Allies, who together defied mankind, and, bringing a huge oil-tank,
inverted it over the sand, the carpet, the earth, and the well, by this time one blazing mass.
Fire thus cut off from Air succumbed, and the battle was over.

"There was no one hurt that time," pursued Friend Williams, in a tone of airy reminiscence;
"but mostly at our fires there'll be two or three people burned up, and more women than men, I've
noticed.

Either it's their clothes, or they get scared and don't look out for themselves. Now there
was the Widow McClintock owned that farm above here. She was worth her hundreds of thousands of
dollars, but she would put kerosene on her fire to make it burn. So one day it caught, and she
caught, and in half an hour there was no such thing as Widow McClintock on Oil Creek. Still
all the women keep right on pouring kerosene into their stoves, and every little while one
of them goes after the Widow.

"Then there was a woman who sent to the refinery for a pail of alkali to clean her floor. The
man thought he'd get benzine instead; and just as he got into the
house, the fire from his pipe dropped into it, and the whole shanty
was in a blaze before the poor woman knew what had happened.

The stupid fool that was to blame got off, but the woman burned up.

"Then there was a woman whose house was afire, and she would rush back, after she had been dragged out, to look for
her pet teacups, and she was burned up. And so they go."

Sometimes also the tanks of crude oil take fire, and these conflagrations are said to present a splendid
spectacle,--the resinous parts of the oil burning with a fierce deep-red flame and sending
up volumes of smoke, through which are emitted lightning-like flashes exploding the ignited
gas.

Like some other things, including people, this unappeasable substance conceals its terrors beneath
a placid exterior, and lies in its great tanks, or in shallow pits dug for it in the earth, looking
neither volcanic nor even combustible, but more like thin green paint than anything else, except
when it has become adulterated with water, when it assumes a bilious, yellow appearance, exceedingly
uninviting to the spectator. In this case it is allowed to remain undisturbed in the tank
until the oil and water have separated, when the latter is drawn off at the bottom.

Wandering one day among groves of derricks and villages of tanks, Miselle and her guide came
upon a building containing a pair of truculent monsters in a high state of activity. These were
introduced to her as a steam force-pump and its attendant engine; and she was told that they
were at that moment sucking up whole tanks of oil from the neighboring wells, and pumping it
up the precipitous bluff, through the lonely forest, over marsh and
moor, hill and dale, to the great Humboldt Refinery, more than three
miles distant, in the town of Plummer, as it is called,--although,
in point of fact, Plummer, Tarr Farm, and several other settlements
belong to the township of Cornplanter.

There was something about this brace of monsters very fascinating to Miselle. They seemed like
subjected genii closed in these dull black cases and this narrow shed, and yet embracing miles
of territory in their invisible arms. Even the genius of Aladdin's lamp was not so powerful, for
he was obliged to betake himself to the scene of the wonders he was to enact,--and if imprisoned
as closely as these, could not have transferred enough oil from Tarr Farm to Plummer to fill
his own lamp.

Afterward, in rambling through the woods, Miselle often came upon the mound raised above the buried
pipe, and always regarded it with the same admiring awe with which the fisherman of Bagdad probably
looked at the copper vessel wherein Solomon had so cunningly "canned" the rebellious Afrit.

Leaving the shed of the monsters, Miselle followed her guide out of the throng of derricks and
tanks, and a short distance up the hill, to the picturesque site
of Messrs. Barrows and Hazleton's Refinery, the only one now in operation
on Tarr Farm.

Entering a low brick building called the still-house, she found herself in a passage between two
brick walls, pierced on either hand for five or six oven-doors, while overhead the black roof
was divided into panels by a system of iron pipes through which the crude oil was conducted to the
caldrons above the iron doors.

The presiding genius of the place was a very fat, dirty, but intelligent Irishman, known as
Tommy, who came forward with the politeness of his nation to greet the visitors, and explain
to them the mysteries under his charge.

"And give a guess, Ma'am, if ye plase, at what we've got a-burning undher our big pot here," suggested
he, with a hand upon one of the oven-doors.

"Soft coal," ventured Miselle, remembering her experience at the glassworks.

"Not a bit of it. It's the binzole intirely. We makes the ile cook itself, an' not a hape of fu'l
does it git, but what it brings along itself."

"Seething the kid in its mother's milk," remarked Miselle to herself.

"It's this pipe fetches the binzole from the tank outside, and the
mouth of it's widin the door; and this is the stop-cock as lets it
on."

So saying, Tommy threw open the oven-door, and pointed to the black
end of a pipe just within.

At the same time he turned a handle on the outside, and let on a stream of benzine or naphtha,
which blazed fiercely up with a lurid flame strongly suggestive of the pictured reward of
evil-doers in another life.

Next, Tommy proceeded to explain, after his own fashion, how the oil in the caldrons above, urged
by these fires, departed in steam and agony through long pipes called worms, the only outlet
from the otherwise air-tight stills, which worms, wriggling out at the end of the building, plunged
into a bath of cold water provided for them in a huge square tank fed by a bright mountain-stream
winding down from the bluff above in a fashion so picturesque as to be quite out of keeping
with its ultimate destination.

Emerging from their cold bath, the worms, crawling along the ground behind the still-house, arrived
at the back of another building, called the test-room; and here each one, making a sharp turn to
enable him to enter, was pierced at the angle thus formed, and a vertical pipe some ten feet
in length inserted.

The object of these pipes was to carry off the gas still mingled with the oil; and, looking attentively,
Miselle could distinguish a flickering column ascending from each pipe and forming itself so
humanly against the evening sky as to vindicate the superstition of the Saxons, who first
named this ether geist.

"What a splendid illumination, if only those ten pipes were lighted some dark night!" suggested
Miselle.

"Phe-ew! An' yer lumernation wouldn't stop there long, I can tell yer, Ma'am," retorted Tommy.
"The whole works ud be in a swither 'fore iver we'd time to ax what was comin'."

"They would? And why?"

"The binzole, Ma'am, the binzole. It's the Divil's own stuff to manage, an' there's no thrustin'
it wid so much as the light uv a pipe nigh hand. The air is full of it; and if you was so much
as to sthrike a match here where we stand, it ud be all day wid us 'fore we'd time to think uv
it. You should know that yersilf, Sir," continued he, turning to Mr. Williams.

"Yes," returned that gentleman, with a grimace. "I learned the nature of benzine pretty thoroughly
when I first came on the Creek. I had been at work over one of the wells, and got my clothes
pretty oily, but thought I would not ask my wife to meddle with them. So I sent for a pail
of benzine, and, shutting myself up in my shop, set to work to wash my clothes. I succeeded very
well for a first attempt; and when I had done, and hung them up to dry, I felt quite proud. Then,
as it was pretty cold, I thought I would put a little fire in the stove, and get them dried
to carry away before my men came in to work the next morning. So I put some kindling in the stove,
and scraped a match on my boot; but I hadn't time to touch it to the shavings before the whole
air was aflame, not catching from one point to another, but flashing through the whole place in an
instant, and snapping all around my head like a bunch of fire-crackers.

I rushed for the door; but before I could get out I was pretty well singed, and there was no
such thing as saving a single article. All went together,--shop, stock, tools, clothes, and everything
else. That's benzine."

"That's binzole," echoed Tommy. "An' now, Ma'am, come in, if yer plase, to the tistin'-room."

Miselle
complied, and, stepping into the little room, saw first two parallel troughs running its entire
length, and terminating at one end in a pipe leading through the side of the building. Into
each of these troughs half the pipes were at this moment discharging a colorless, odorless
fluid, the apotheosis, as it were, of petroleum.

Tommy, perching himself upon a high stool beside the troughs, regarded his visitors with calm superiority,
and was evidently disposed, in this his stronghold, to treat with them ex cathedra.

"There, thin, Ma'am," began he, "that's what I call iligant ile intirely. Look at it jist!"

And taking from its shelf a long tubular glass, he ladled up some of the oil, and held it to
the light for inspection.

When this had been duly admired, the professor informed his audience that the first product of
the still is the gas, which is led off as previously described. Next comes naphtha, benzine, or, as
Tommy and his comrades call it, "binzole." This dangerous substance is led from the troughs
of the testing-house to a subterraneous tank, the trap-cover of which was subsequently lifted,
that the visitors might peep, as into the den of some malignant wild creature. From this it
is again drawn, and, mixed with the heavy oil or residuum of the still, is principally used for
fuel, as before described.

"And how soon do you cut off for oil?" inquired Mr. Williams, carelessly.

The fat man gave him a look of solemn indignation, and proceeded without heeding the interruption.

"Whin
I joodge, Ma'am, that the binzole is nigh run out, I tist it with a hyder-rometer, this a-way."

And
Tommy, descending from the stool, took from the shelf first a tin pot strongly resembling a shaving-mug,
and then a little glass instrument, with a tube divided into sections by numbered lines, and
a bulb half filled with quick-silver at the base.

Filling the shaving-mug with oil, the lecturer dropped into it his hydrometer, which, after
gracefully dancing up and down for a moment, remained stationary.

"It's at 55° you'll find it. Look for yersilf, Ma'am," he resumed, with the serene confidence
of the prestidigitateur who informs the audience that the missing handkerchief will be found
in "that gentleman's pocket."

Miselle examined the figures at high-oil mark, and found that they were actually 55°.

"The binzole, you see, Ma'am, is so thin that the hyder-rometer drops right down over head an' ears
in it; but as it gits to be ile, it comes heavier an' stouter, an' kind uv buoys it up, until at lin'th
an' at last the 60° line comes crapin' up in sight. Thin I thry it by the fire tist. I puts
some in a pan over a sperit-lamp, and keep a-thryin' an' a-thryin' it wid a thermometer; an'
whin it's 'most a-bilin', I puts a lighted match to the ile, an' if it blazes, there's still
too much binzole, an' I lets it run a bit longer. But if all's right, I cuts off the binzole,
and the nixt run is ile sech as you see it. The longer it runs, the heavier it grows; and whin
it gits so that the hyder-rometer stands at 42°, I cuts off agin. Thin the next run is heavy
ile, thick and yaller, and that doesn't come in here at all, but is drawn from the still, and
mixed wid crude ile, and stilled over agin; and whin no more good's to be got uv it, it's mighty
good along wid the binzole to keep the pot a-bilin' in beyant."

"You don't use the fire test in this building, I presume, do you?"

"Indade, no, Ma'am. There's niver a light nor yit a lanthern allowed here."

"But you run all night. How do you get light in this room?" inquired Mr. Williams.

"From widout. Did niver ye mind the windys uv this house?"

And the professor, dismounting from his stool, led the way to the outside of the building, where
he pointed to two picturesque little windows near the roof, each furnished with a deep hood
and a shelf, as if Tommy had been expected to devote his leisure hours to the cultivation of
mignonette.

"See now!"

And the burly lecturer pointed impressively to a laborer at this moment approaching with a
large lighted lantern in each hand. These, placed upon the mignonette shelves, and snugly protected
from wind and rain by the deep hoods, threw a clear light into the test-room, and brought
out in grotesque distinctness the arabesque pattern wrought with dust and oil upon Tommy's broad
visage.

"And that's how we gits light, Sir," remarked the professor, in conclusion, as, with a dignified salutation
of farewell, he disappeared in the still-house.

Admonished by the lanterns and the fading glory of the west, Miselle and her host now bent their
steps homeward, deferring, like Scheherezade, "still finer and more wonderful stories until
the next morning."

At their next visit to the Refinery, the visitors were committed to a little wiry old man, called
Jimmy, who first showed them a grewsome monster, own cousin to him
who threw oil from Tarr Farm to Plummer. This one was called an air-pump,
and, with his attendant steam-engine, inhabited a house by himself.
His work will presently be explained.

The next building was the treating-house,
where stand huge tanks containing the oil as drawn from the testing-room.
From these it is conducted by pipes to the iron vats, called treating-tanks,
and there mixed with vitriol, alkali, and other chemicals, in certain
exact proportions. The monster in the next building is now set in
operation, and forces a stream of compressed air through a pipe from
top to bottom of the tank, whence, following its natural law, it loses
no time in ascending to the surface with a noisy ebullition, just
like, as Jimmy remarked, "a big pot over a sthrong fire."

This mixing
operation was formerly performed by hand in a much less effectual
manner, the steam air-pump being a recent improvement.

The work of
the chemicals accomplished, the oil is cleansed of them by the introduction
of water, and after an interval of quiet the mass separates so thoroughly
that the water and chemicals can be drawn off at the bottom of the
vat with very little disturbance to the oil.

From the treating-house
the perfected oil is drawn to the tanks of the barrelling-shed, and
filled into casks ready for exportation. A large cooper's shop upon
the premises supplies a portion of the barrels, but is principally
used in repairing the old ones.

The oil is next teamed to the Creek,
and either pumped into decked boats, to be transported in bulk, or,
still in barrels, is loaded upon the ordinary flatboats. During a
large portion of the year, however, neither of these can make the
passage of the shallow Creek without the aid of a "pond-fresh." This
occurs when the millers near the head of the Creek open their dams,
and by the sudden influx of water give a gigantic "swell" to the boats
patiently awaiting it at every "farm," from Schaeffer's to Oil City.

Sometimes,
however, the boatmen, like the necromancer's student who set the broomstick
to bringing water, but could not remember the spell to stop it, find
that it is unsafe to set great agencies at work without the power
of controlling them. Last May, for instance, occurred a pond-fresh,
long to be remembered on Oil Creek, when the stream rose with such
furious, rapidity that the loaded boats became unmanageable, crowding
and dashing together, staving in the sides of the great oil-in-bulk
boats, and grinding the floating barrels to splinters. Not even the
thousands of gallons of oil thus shed upon the stormy waters were
sufficient to assuage either their wrath or that of the boatmen, who,
as their respective craft piled one upon another, sprang to "repel
boarders" with oaths, fists, boat-hooks, or whatever other weapons
Nature or chance had provided them. This scene of anarchy lasted several
days, and some cold-blooded photographer amused himself, "after" Nero,
in taking views of it from different points. Copies of these pictures,
commemorating such destruction of property, temper, and propriety
as Oil Creek never witnessed before, are hung about the "office" of
the Refinery, with which comfortable apartment the visitors finished
their tour.

Here they were offered the compliments of the season
and locality in a collation of chestnuts; and here also they were
invited to inspect a stereoscope, which, with its accompanying views,
is considered on Tarr Farm as admirable a wonder as was, doubtless,
Columbus's watch by the aborigines of the New World. Dearer to Miselle
than chestnuts or stereoscope, however, were the information and the
anecdotes placed at her service by the gentlemen of the establishment,
albeit involuntarily; and with her friends she shortly after departed
from Barrows and Hazleton's Refinery, filled with content and gratitude.

The
noticeable point in the society of Tarr Farm, or rather in the human
scenery, for society there is none, is the absurd mingling of inharmonious
material. As in the toy called Prince Rupert's Drop, a multitude of
unassimilated particles are bound together by a master necessity.
Remove the necessity, and in the flash of an eye the particles scatter
never to reunite.

In her two days' tour of Tarr Farm, Miselle talked
with gentlemen of birth and education, gentlemen whose manners contrasted
oddly enough with their coarse clothes and knee-high boots; also with
intermittent gentlemen, who felt Tarr Farm to be no fit theatre for
the exercise of their acquired politeness; also with men like Tommy
and Jimmy, whose claims lay not so much in aristocratic connection
and gentle breeding as in a thorough appreciation of the matter in
hand; also with a less pleasing variety of mankind, men who, originally
ignorant and debased, have through lucky speculations acquired immense
wealth without the habits of body and mind fitly accompanying it.

Various
ludicrous anecdotes are told of this last class, but none droller
than that of the millionnaire, who, after the growth of his fortune,
sent his daughter, already arrived at woman's estate, to school, that
she might learn reading, writing, and other accomplishments. After
a reasonable time the father visited the school, and inquired concerning
his daughter's progress. This he was informed was but small, owing
to a "want of capacity."

"Capacity! capacity!" echoed the father,
thrusting his hands into his well-lined pockets; "well, by ginger,
if the gal's got no capacity, I've got the money to buy her one, cost
what it may!"

Another young fellow, originally employed in a very
humble position by one of the oil companies, suddenly acquired a fortune,
and removed to another part of the country. Returning for a visit
to the scene of his former labors, he stood inspecting the operations
of a cooper at work upon an oil-barrel. The two men had formerly been
comrades, but this fact the rich man now found it convenient to forget,
and the poor one was too proud to remember.

"Pray, Cooper," inquired
the former at last, tapping the barrel superciliously with his cane,
"are you able to make this thing oil-tight?"

"I believe so," retorted
Cooper, dryly. "Was you ever troubled by their leaking, when you rolled
them through the mud from the well to the Creek?"
Corinne directed the observation of Lord Nelville to those silent halls, where the images of
the gods and the heroes are assembled, and where the most perfect beauty seems to enjoy itself
in eternal repose. In contemplating these admirable features and forms, the intentions of the
Deity towards man, seems, I know not how, to be revealed by the noble figure which He has been
pleased to give him. The soul is uplifted by this contemplation to hopes full of enthusiasm
and virtue; for beauty is one and the same throughout the universe, and under whatever form
it presents itself, it always excites a religious emotion in the heart of man. What poetic
language, there is in those countenances where the most sublime expression is for ever imprinted,--where
the grandest thoughts are clad with an image so worthy of them!

In some instances, an ancient sculptor only produced one statue during his life--it was his
whole history.--He perfected it every day: if he loved, if he was beloved, if he received from
nature or the fine arts any new impression, he adorned the features of his hero with his memories
and affections: he could thus express to outward eyes all the sentiments of his soul. The grief
of our modern times, in the midst of our cold and oppressive social conditions, contains all
that is most noble in man; and in our days, he who has not suffered, can never have thought
or felt. But there was in antiquity, something more noble than grief--an heroic calm--the sense
of conscious strength, which was cherished by free and liberal institutions. The finest Grecian
statues have hardly ever indicated anything but repose. The Laocoon and Niobe are the only
ones which paint violent grief and pain; but it is the vengeance of heaven which they represent,
and not any passion born in the human heart; the moral being was of so sound an organization
among the ancients, the air circulated so freely in their deep bosoms, and the order politic
was so much in harmony with their faculties, that troubled minds hardly ever existed then,
as at the present day. This state causes the discovery of many fine ideas, but does not furnish
the arts, particularly sculpture, with those simple affections, those primitive elements of
sentiment, which can alone be expressed by eternal marble. Hardly do we find any traces of
melancholy; a head of Apollo, at the Justinian palace, another of the dying Alexander, are
the only ones in which the thoughtful and suffering dispositions of the soul are indicated;
but according to all appearances they both belong to the time when Greece was enslaved. Since
that epoch, we no longer see that boldness, nor that tranquillity of soul, which among the
ancients, has produced masterpieces of sculpture, and poetry composed in the same spirit.

That thought which has nothing to nourish it from without, turns upon itself, analyses, labours,
and dives into every inward sentiment; but it has no longer that creative power which supposes
happiness, and that plenitude of strength which happiness alone can give. Even the sarcophagi,
among the ancients, only recall warlike or pleasing ideas: in the multitude of those which
are to be found at the museum of the Vatican, are seen battles and games represented in bas-relief
on the tombs. The remembrance of living activity was thought to be the finest homage that could
be rendered to the dead; nothing relaxed, nothing diminished strength. Encouragement and emulation
were the principles of the fine arts as well as of politics; they afforded scope for every
virtue, and for every talent. The vulgar gloried in knowing how to admire, and the worship
of genius was served even by those who could not aspire to its rewards.

The religion of Greece was not, like Christianity, the consolation of misfortune, the riches
of poverty, the future hope of the dying--it sought glory and triumph;--in a manner it deified
man: in this perishable religion, beauty itself was a religious dogma. If the artists were
called to paint the base and ferocious passions, they rescued the human form from shame, by
joining to it, as in Fauns and Centaurs, some traits of the animal figure; and in order to
give to beauty its most sublime character, they alternately blended in their statues (as in
the warlike Minerva and in the Apollo Musagetus), the charms of both sexes--strength and softness,
softness and strength; a happy mixture of two opposite qualities, without which neither of
the two would be perfect.

Corinne, continuing her observations, retained Oswald some time before those sleeping statues
which are placed on the tombs, and which display the art of sculpture in the most agreeable
point of view. She pointed out to him, that whenever statues are supposed to represent an action,
the arrested movement produces a sort of astonishment which is sometimes painful. But statues
asleep, or merely in the attitude of complete repose, offer an image of eternal tranquillity
which wonderfully accords with the general effect of a southern climate upon man. The fine
arts appear there to be peaceful spectators of nature, and genius, which in the north agitates
the soul of man, seems beneath a beautiful sky, only an added harmony.

Oswald and Corinne passed on to the hall where are collected together the sculptured images
of animals and reptiles; and the statue of Tiberius is found, by chance, in the midst of this
court. This assemblage is without design. Those statues appear to have ranged themselves of
their own accord about their master. Another hall enclosed the dull and rigid monuments of
the Egyptians; of that people whose statues resembled mummies more than men, and who by their
silent, stiff, and servile institutions, seem to have assimilated as much as possible, life
to death. The Egyptians excelled much more in the art of imitating animals than in representing
men: the dominion of the soul seems to have been inaccessible to them.

After these come the porticos of the museum, where at each step is seen a new masterpiece.
Vases, altars, ornaments of every kind, encircle the Apollo, the Laocoon, and the Muses. It
is there that we learn to feel Homer and Sophocles: it is there that a knowledge of antiquity
is awakened in the soul, which cannot be acquired elsewhere. It is in vain that we trust to
the reading of history to comprehend the spirit of nations; what we see inspires us with more
ideas than what we read, and external objects cause in us a strong emotion, which gives that
living interest to the study of the past which we find in the observation of contemporary facts
and events.

In the midst of these magnificent porticos, which afford an asylum to so many wonders of art,
there are fountains, which, flowing incessantly, seem to tell us how sweetly the hours glided
away two thousand years ago, when the artists who executed these masterpieces were yet alive.
But the most melancholy impression which we experience at the Vatican, is in contemplating
the remains of statues which are collected there: the torso of Hercules, heads separated from
the trunks, and a foot of Jupiter, which indicates a greater and more perfect statue than any
that we know. We fancy a field of battle before us, where time has fought with genius; and
these mutilated limbs attest its victory, and our losses.

After leaving the Vatican, Corinne conducted him to the Colossi of Mount Cavallo; these two
statues represent, as it is said, Castor and Pollux. Each of the two heroes is taming with
one hand a fiery steed. These colossal figures, this struggle between man and the animal creation,
gives, like all the works of the ancients, an admirable idea of the physical power of human
nature. But this power has something noble in it, which is no longer found in modern society,
where all bodily exercises are for the most part left to the common people. It is not merely
the animal force of human nature, if I may use the expression, which is observable in these
masterpieces. There seems to have been a more intimate union between the physical and moral
qualities among the ancients, who lived incessantly in the midst of war, and a war almost of
man to man. Strength of body and generosity of soul, dignity of features and boldness of character,
loftiness of stature and commanding authority, were ideas almost inseparable, before a religion,
entirely intellectual, had placed the power of man in his mind. The human figure, which was
also the figure of the gods, appeared symbolical; and the nervous colossus of Hercules, as
well as every other ancient statue of this sort, do not convey vulgar ideas of common life;
but an omnipotent and divine will, which shews itself under the emblem of a supernatural physical
force.

Corinne and Lord Nelville finished the day with a visit to the studio of Canova, the greatest
modern sculptor. As it was late when they got there, they were shewn it by torch light; and
statues improve much in their effect by being seen in this manner. The ancients appear to have
been of this opinion, since they often placed them in their Thermæ, where day could not enter.
By the light of the flambeaux, the shadows being more full, the uniform lustre of the marble
was softened, and the statues appeared as so many pale figures, possessing a more touching
character of grace and life. There was, in the studio of Canova, an admirable statue destined
for a tomb, which represented the genius of grief leaning upon a lion, the emblem of strength.
Corinne, in contemplating the figure of grief, thought she discovered in it some resemblance
to Oswald, and the artist himself was struck with it; Lord Nelville turned about to avoid this
kind of notice; but he said in a low voice to his fair companion, "Corinne, I was condemned
to a fate like that which is here represented, when I met with you; but you have changed my
existence, and sometimes hope, and always an anxiety mixed with charm, fills that heart which
was to suffer nothing but regret."

Chapter iii.

The masterpieces of painting were then all collected together at Rome, whose riches in this
respect surpassed that of all the rest of the world. There could exist only one disputable
point as to the effect produced by this collection, namely, whether the nature of the subjects
chosen by the Italian artists, afford a scope for all the variety and all the originality of
passion and character which painting can express? Oswald and Corinne were of contrary opinions
in this respect; but this, like every other opposition of sentiment that existed between them,
was owing to the difference of nation, climate, and religion. Corinne affirmed that the most
favourable subjects for painting were religious ones[26]. She said that sculpture was a Pagan
art, and painting a Christian one; and that in these arts were to be found, as in poetry, the
distinguishing qualities of ancient and modern literature. The pictures of Michael Angelo,
the painter of the Bible, and of Raphael, the painter of the Gospel, suppose as much profound
thought, as much sensibility as are to be found in Shakespeare and Racine: sculpture can only
present a simple, energetic existence, whilst painting indicates the mysteries of reflection
and resignation, and makes the immortal soul speak through transient colours. Corinne maintained
also that historical or poetical facts were rarely picturesque. In order to comprehend such
subjects, it would often be necessary to preserve the practice of painters of old, and write
the speech of each personage in a ribbon proceeding out of the mouth. But religious subjects
are instantly understood by everybody, and attention is not removed from the picture to guess
what it represents. 

12.

Thanks to the careful heed they paid to dogs and things pertaining to the chase, thanks also to
the other training of their boyhood, all these greatly excelled,
and on the score of virtue were admired.

If Cephalus was caught into
the arms of one that was a goddess, (7) Asclepius (8) obtained yet
greater honour. To him it was given to raise the dead and to heal
the sick, whereby, (9) even as a god among mortal men, he has obtained
to himself imperishable glory.
She admired the artless composition of Raphael's pictures, especially those in his first manner.
All the figures are directed towards one principal object, without any contrivance on the part
of the artist to group them in various attitudes in order to produce a laboured effect. Corinne
said that this sincerity in the arts of the imagination, as well as in every other, is the
true character of genius; and that studied efforts for fame are almost always destructive of
enthusiasm. She maintained that there was rhetoric in painting as well as in poetry, and that
all those who could not embody character called every accessory ornament to their aid, uniting
rich costumes and remarkable attitudes to the attraction of a brilliant subject, whilst a single
Virgin holding a child in her arms, an attentive old man in the Mass of Bolsena, a man leaning
on his stick in the School of Athens, or Saint Cecilia with her eyes lifted up to heaven, produced
the deepest effect by the expression of the countenance alone. These natural beauties increase
every day more and more in our estimation; but on the contrary, in pictures done for effect,
the first glance is always the most striking.

Corinne added to these reflections an observation which strengthened them: which was, that
the religious sentiments of the Greeks and Romans, and the disposition of their minds, being
in every respect absolutely foreign from ours, it is impossible for us to create according
to their conceptions, or to build upon their ground. They may be imitated by dint of study;
but how can genius employ all its energies in a work where memory and erudition are so necessary?
It is not the same with subjects that belong to our own history and our own religion. Here
the painter himself may be inspired; he may feel what he paints, and paint what he has seen.
Life assists him to imagine life; but in transporting himself to the regions of antiquity,
his invention must be guided by books and statues. To conclude, Corinne found that pictures
from pious subjects, impart a comfort to the soul that nothing could replace; and that they
suppose a sacred enthusiasm in the artist which blends with genius, renovates, revives, and
can alone support him against the injustice of man and the bitterness of life.

Oswald received, in some respects, a different impression. In the first place, he was scandalized
to see the Deity represented as he is by Michael Angelo, in human form and feature. It was
his opinion that thought dare not give Him shape and figure, and that hardly at the very bottom
of the soul could be found an idea sufficiently intellectual, sufficiently ethereal to elevate
it to the Supreme Being; as to subjects taken from the Holy Scripture, it seemed to him that
the expression and the images left much to be desired. He thought, with Corinne, that religious
meditation is the most intimate sentiment that man can experience; and in this respect, it
is that which furnishes the painter with the deepest mysteries of physiognomy and expression;
but as religion represses every emotion which does not proceed immediately from the heart,
the figures of the saints and martyrs cannot admit of much variety. The sentiment of humility,
so noble in the face of heaven, weakens the energy of terrestrial passions and necessarily
gives monotony to most religious subjects. When Michael Angelo applied his terrible genius
to those subjects, he almost changed their essence by giving to his prophets a formidable expression
of power more becoming a Jupiter than a Saint. He, like Dante, often avails himself of the
images of Paganism and blends the heathen mythology with the Christian religion. One of the
most admirable circumstances attending the establishment of Christianity, is the lowly estate
of the apostles who have preached it, and the misery and debasement of the Jewish people, so
long the depositaries of the promises that announced the coming of Christ. This contrast between
the littleness of the means and the greatness of the result, is in a moral point of view, extremely
fine; but in painting, which exhibits the means alone, Christian subjects must be less dazzling
than those taken from the heroic and fabulous ages. Among the arts, music alone can be purely
religious. Painting cannot be confined to so abstract and vague an expression as that of sound.
It is true that the happy combination of colour, and of chiaro-oscuro produces, if it may be
so expressed, a musical effect in painting; but as the latter represents life, it should express
the passions in all their energy and diversity. Undoubtedly it is necessary to choose among
historical facts, those which are sufficiently known not to require study in order to comprehend
them; for the effect produced by painting ought to be immediate and rapid, like every other
pleasure derived from the fine arts; but when historical facts are as popular as religious
subjects, they have the advantage over them of the variety of situations and sentiments which
they recall.

Lord Nelville thought also, that scenes of tragedy and the most moving poetical fictions, ought
to claim a preference in painting, in order that all the pleasures of the imagination and of
the soul might be united. Corinne combated this opinion, fascinating as it was. She was convinced
that the encroachment of one art upon another was mutually injurious. Sculpture loses the advantages
which are peculiar to it when it aspires to represent a group of figures as in painting; painting
when it wishes to attain dramatic expression. The arts are limited in their means, though boundless
in their effects. Genius seeks not to combat that which is in the essence of things; on the
contrary, its superiority consists in discovering it.--"As for you, my dear Oswald," said Corinne,
"you do not love the arts in themselves, but only on account of their relation with mind and
feeling. You are only sensible to that which represents the sorrows of the heart. Music and
poetry agree with this disposition; whilst the arts which speak to the eyes, though their signification
be ideal, only please and interest us when the soul is tranquil and the imagination entirely
free; nor do we require, in order to relish them, that gaiety which society inspires, but only
the serenity which beautiful weather and a fine climate diffuse over the mind. We must be capable
of feeling the universal harmony of nature in those arts which represent external objects;
this is impossible when the soul is troubled, that harmony having been destroyed in us by calamity."--"I
know not," replied Oswald, "whether my taste in the fine arts be confined to that alone which
can recall the sufferings of the soul; but I know, at least, that I cannot endure the representation
of physical pain. My strongest objection," continued he, "against Christian subjects in painting,
is the painful sensations excited in me by the image of blood, wounds, and torture, notwithstanding
the victims may have been animated by the noblest enthusiasm. Philoctetus is perhaps the only
tragical subject in which bodily ills can be admitted. But with how many poetical circumstances
are his cruel pangs surrounded? They have been caused by the arrows of Hercules. They will
be healed by the son of Æsculapius. In short, the wound is almost confounded with the moral
resentment produced in him who is struck, and cannot excite any impression of disgust. But
the figure of the boy possessed with a devil, in Raphael's superb picture of the Transfiguration,
is a disagreeable image, and in no way possesses the dignity of the fine arts. They must discover
to us the charm of grief, as well as the melancholy of prosperity; it is the ideal part of
human destiny which they should represent in each particular circumstance. Nothing torments
the imagination more than bloody wounds and nervous convulsions. It is impossible in such pictures
not to seek, and at the same time dread, to find the exactness of the imitation. What pleasure
can we receive from that art which only consists in such an imitation; it is more horrible,
or less beautiful than nature herself, the moment it only aspires to resemble her."

"You are right, my lord," said Corinne, "to wish that Christian subjects were divested of painful
images; they do not require them. But confess, however, that genius, and the genius of the
soul, can triumph over every thing. Behold that picture of the Communion of St Jerome, by Domenichino.
The body of the dying saint is livid and gaunt: death has seized upon it; but in that look
is eternal life, and every earthly misery seems produced here only to disappear before the
pure lustre of a religious sentiment. However, dear Oswald," continued Corinne, "though I am
not of your opinion in everything, I will shew you that even in differing from one another
there is some analogy of sentiment between us. I have endeavoured to accomplish what you desire,
in the gallery of pictures which has been furnished me by those artists who were of my acquaintance,
among which are some designs of my own sketching. You will there see the defects and the advantages
of those subjects which you prefer. This gallery is at my country seat at Tivoli. The weather
is fine enough to visit it.--Shall we go thither to-morrow?" As she awaited Oswald's consent,
he said to her: "My love, have you any doubt of my answer? Have I in this world, any other
pleasure, any other thought, besides you? And is not my life, too free perhaps from any occupation,
as from every interest, solely taken up with the happiness of seeing and hearing you?"

FOOTNOTE:

[26] In a journal entitled Europe, are to be found observations full of information on subjects
relating to painting: from this journal I have extracted many of these reflections, which have
just been read; Mr Frederic Schlegel is the author of it, and this writer, as well as the German
thinkers in general, is an inexhaustible mine.

Chapter iv.

They set out therefore the next day for Tivoli. Oswald himself drove the four horses that drew
them; he took pleasure in their swiftness, which seemed to increase the vivacity of thought
and of existence; and such an impression is sweet by the side of the object we love. He performed
the office of whip with the most extreme attention, for fear the slightest accident should
happen to Corinne. He felt the duties of a protector which is the softest tie that binds man
to woman. Corinne was not, like most women, easily terrified by the possible dangers of a journey;
but it was so sweet to remark the solicitude of Oswald, that she almost wished to be frightened,
to enjoy the pleasure of, hearing him cheer and comfort her.

That which gave Lord Nelville, as will be seen in the sequel, so great an ascendancy over the
heart of his mistress, was the unexpected contrasts which gave a peculiar charm to his manners.
Everybody admired his intellect and the gracefulness of his figure; but he must have been particularly
interesting to one, who uniting in herself by a singular accord, constancy and mobility, took
delight in impressions, at once various and faithful. Never did he think of anything but Corinne;
and this very occupation of his mind incessantly assumed different characters: at one time
he was governed by reserve, at another he was open and communicative: one moment he was perfectly
calm, and another a prey to the most gloomy and bitter sensations, which proved the depth of
his sentiments, but mingled anxiety with confidence and incessantly gave birth to new emotions.
Oswald, internally agitated, endeavoured to assume an external appearance of composure, and
Corinne, occupied in conjecturing his thoughts, found in this mystery a continual interest.
One would have said, that the very defects of Oswald were only made to set off his agreeable
qualities. No man, however distinguished, in whose character there was no contradiction, who
was subject to no internal conflict, could have captivated the imagination of Corinne. She
felt a sort of awe of Oswald, which subjected her to him. He reigned over her soul by a good
and by an evil power; by his qualities, and by the disquietude which these qualities, badly
combined, could inspire: in short there was no security in the happiness that Lord Nelville
conferred, and perhaps the violence of Corinne's passion was owing to this; perhaps she could
only love, to such a degree, him whom she feared to lose. A superior mind, a sensibility as
ardent as it was delicate, might become weary of everything, except that truly extraordinary
man, whose soul, constantly agitated, seemed like the sky--sometimes serene, sometimes covered
with clouds. Oswald, always true, always of profound and impassioned feelings, was nevertheless
often ready to renounce the object of his tenderness, because a long habit of mental pain made
him believe, that only remorse and suffering could be found in the too exquisite affections
of the heart.

Lord Nelville and Corinne, in their journey to Tivoli, passed before the ruins of Adrian's
palace, and the immense garden which surrounded it. That prince had collected together in this
garden, the most rare productions, the most admirable masterpieces of those countries which
were conquered by the Romans. To this very day some scattered stones are seen there, which
are called Egypt, India, and Asia. Farther on was the retreat, where Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra,
ended her days. She did not support in adversity, the greatness of her destiny; she was incapable
of dying for glory like a man; or like a woman, dying rather than betray her friend.

At length they discovered Tivoli, which was the abode of so many celebrated men, of Brutus,
of Augustus, of Mecenas, and of Catullus; but above all, the abode of Horace, for it is his
verse which has rendered this retreat illustrious. The house of Corinne was built over the
noisy cascade of Teverone; at the top of the mountain, opposite her garden, was the temple
of the Sybil. It was a beautiful idea of the ancients, to place their temples on the summits
of high places. They majestically presided over the surrounding country, as religious ideas
over all other thoughts. They inspired more enthusiasm for nature, by announcing the Deity
from which she emanates, and the eternal gratitude of successive generations towards her. The
landscape, from whatever point of view considered, formed a picture with the temple, which
was placed there as the centre and the ornament of the whole. Ruins spread a singular charm
over the campagna of Italy. They do not recall, like modern edifices, the labour and the presence
of man; they are confounded with nature and the trees; they seem in harmony with the solitary
torrent; they present the image of time, which has made them what they are. The most beautiful
countries in the world, when they bring to mind no recollection, when they bear the stamp of
no remarkable event, are stripped of interest when compared with historical countries. What
place in Italy could be more suitable for the habitation of Corinne than the retreat consecrated
to the sybil, to the memory of a woman, animated by divine inspiration. The house of Corinne
was delightful; it was ornamented with the elegance of modern taste, and yet discovered the
charm of an imagination enamoured of the beauties of antiquity; happiness, in the most elevated
sense of the word, seemed to reign there; a felicity which consisted in all that ennobles the
soul, excites thought, and vivifies talent.

In walking with Corinne, Oswald perceived that the wind possessed an harmonious sound, and
filled the air with chords, which seemed to proceed from the waving of the flowers, and the
rustling of the trees, and to give a voice to nature. Corinne told him that the wind produced
this harmony from the æolian harps, which she had placed in grottoes to fill the air with sound,
as well as perfumes. In this delicious abode, Oswald was inspired with the purest sentiment.--"Hear
me," said he to Corinne; "till this moment I felt the happiness I derived from your society
blended with remorse; but now I say to myself, that you are sent by my father to terminate
my sufferings upon this earth. It is he that I had offended; but it is, nevertheless, he who
has obtained by his prayers my pardon in heaven. Corinne!" cried he, throwing himself upon
his knees, "I am pardoned; I feel it in this sweet calm of innocence which pervades my soul.
Thou canst now, without apprehension, unite thyself to me, nor fear that fate opposes our union."--"Well,"
said Corinne, "let us continue to enjoy this peace of the heart which is granted us. Let us
not meddle with destiny: she inspires so much dread when we wish to interfere with her, when
we try to obtain from her more than she will give! Since we are now happy, let us not desire
a change!"

Lord Nelville was hurt at this answer of Corinne. He conceived she ought to comprehend that
he was ready to tell her every thing, to promise every thing, if she would only confide to
him her history; and this manner of avoiding it gave him as much offence as apprehension; he
did not perceive that a sense of delicacy prevented Corinne from taking advantage of his emotion,
to bind him by an oath. Perhaps also, it is in the nature of a profound and genuine passion,
to dread a solemn moment, however much desired, and to tremble at exchanging hope for happiness
itself. Oswald, far from judging in this manner, persuaded himself, that although Corinne loved
him, she wished to preserve her independence, and intentionally deferred all that might lead
to an indissoluble union. This thought excited in him a painful irritation, and immediately
assuming a cold and reserved air, he followed Corinne to her gallery of pictures, without uttering
a word. She soon divined the impression she had produced on him, but knowing his pride, she
durst not impart to him her observations; however, in showing him her pictures and discussing
general topics, she felt a vague hope of softening him, which gave to her voice a more moving
charm, even when uttering the most indifferent words.

Her gallery was composed of historical pictures, paintings on poetical and religious subjects,
and landscapes. None of them was composed of a very large number of figures. That style of
painting undoubtedly presents greater difficulties, but affords less pleasure. Its beauties
are too confused, or too minute. That unity of interest, which is the vital principle of the
arts, as well as anything else, is necessarily divided and scattered. The first of the historical
pictures represented Brutus, in profound meditation, seated at the foot of the statue of Rome.
In the back ground, the slaves are carrying the lifeless bodies of his two sons, whom he had
condemned to death; and on the other side of the picture, the mother and sisters appear plunged
into an agony of grief: women are, happily, divested of that courage, which can triumph over
the affections of the heart. The statue of Rome, placed by the side of Brutus, is a beautiful
idea; it speaks eloquently. Yet how can any body know without an explanation, that it is the
elder Brutus who has just sent his sons to execution? Nevertheless, it is impossible to characterise
this event better than it is done in this picture. At a distance the city of Rome is perceived
in its ancient simplicity, without edifices or ornaments, but full of patriotic grandeur, since
it could inspire such a sacrifice.--"Undoubtedly," said Corinne, "when I have named Brutus,
your whole soul will become fixed to this picture; but still it would be possible to behold
it without divining the subject it represented. And does not this uncertainty, which almost
always exists in historical pictures, mingle the torment of an enigma with the enjoyment of
the fine arts, which ought to be so easy and so clear?

"I have chosen this subject because it recalls the most terrible action that love of country
has inspired. The companion to this picture is Marius, spared by the Cimbrian, who cannot bring
himself to kill this great man; the figure of Marius is imposing; the costume of the Cimbrian
and the expression of his physiognomy, are very picturesque. It is the second epoch of Rome,
when laws no longer existed, but when genius still exercised considerable influence upon circumstances.
Then comes that era when talents and fame were only objects of misfortune and insult. The third
picture which you see here, represents Belisarius, carrying on his shoulders the body of his
young guide, who died while asking alms for him. Belisarius, blind and mendicant, is thus recompensed
by his master; and in the universe which he has conquered, he is employed in bearing to the
grave the remains of the poor boy who alone had not abandoned him. This figure of Belisarius
is admirable; another so fine is not to be found in the modern school. The painter, with a
truly poetical imagination, has united here every species of misfortune, and perhaps the picture
is too dreadful even to awaken pity: but who tells us it is Belisarius? to indicate him it
should be faithful to history: but that fidelity would deprive the subject of all its picturesque
beauty. Following these pictures which represent in Brutus, virtues approaching to crime; in
Marius, glory, the cause of calamity; in Belisarius, services paid by the blackest persecutions;
in short, every misery of human destiny, which is recorded in the events of history, I have
placed two pictures of the old school, which a little relieve the oppressed soul by recalling
that religion which has consoled the enslaved and distracted universe, that religion which
stirred the depths of the heart when all without was but oppression and silence. The first
is by Albano; he has painted the infant Jesus sleeping on a cross. Behold the sweetness and
calm of that countenance! What pure ideas it recalls; how it convinces the soul that celestial
love has nothing to fear, either from affliction or death. The second picture is by Titian;
the subject is Christ sinking beneath the weight of the cross. His mother comes to meet Him,
and throws herself upon her knees on perceiving Him. Admirable reverence in a mother for the
misfortunes and divine virtues of her son! What a look is that of our Redeemer, what a divine
resignation in the midst of suffering, and in this suffering what sympathy with the heart of
man! That is, doubtless, the finest of my pictures. It is that towards which I incessantly
turn my eyes, without ever being able to exhaust the emotion which it inspires. Next come the
dramatic pieces," continued Corinne, "taken from four great poets. Judge with me, my lord,
of the effect which they produce. The first represents Æneas in the Elysian fields, when he
wishes to approach Dido. The indignant shade retires, rejoiced that she no longer carries in
her bosom that heart which would still beat with love at the aspect of her guilty paramour.
The vapoury colour of the shades and the paleness of the surrounding scene, form a contrast
with the life-like appearance of Æneas and of the sybil who conducts him. But this kind of
effect is an amusement of the artist, and the description of the poet is necessarily superior
to anything that painting can produce. I will say as much of this picture of Clorinda dying,
and Tancred. The utmost pathos which it can excite, is to call to our minds the beautiful lines
of Tasso, when Clorinda pardons her adoring enemy who has just pierced her breast. Painting
necessarily becomes subordinate to poetry, when devoted to subjects which have been treated
by great poets; for their words leave an impression which effaces every other; the situations
which they have chosen almost ever derive their chief strength from the development of the
passions and their eloquence, whilst the greater part of picturesque effects arises from a
calm beauty, a simple expression, a noble attitude, a moment of repose, worthy of being indefinitely
prolonged without ever wearying the eye.

"Your terrible Shakespeare, my lord," continued Corinne, "has furnished the subject of the
third dramatic picture--it is Macbeth,--the invincible Macbeth--who, ready to fight Macduff,
whose wife and children he has put to death, learns that the oracle of the witches is accomplished,
that Birnam Wood is advancing to Dunsinane, and that he is fighting a man who was born after
the death of his mother. Macbeth is conquered by fate, but not by his adversary.--He grasps
the sword with a desperate hand;--he knows that he is about to die;--but wishes to try whether
human strength cannot triumph over destiny. There is certainly in this head, a fine expression
of wildness and fury--of trouble and of energy; but how many poetical beauties do we miss?
Is it possible to paint Macbeth plunged in guilt by the spells of ambition, which offer themselves
to him under the shape of witchcraft? How can painting express the terror which he feels? That
terror, however, which is not inconsistent with intrepid bravery? Is it possible to characterise
that peculiar species of superstition which oppresses him? That belief without dignity, that
hell-born fatality which weighs him down, his contempt of life, his horror of death? Undoubtedly
the human countenance is the greatest of mysteries; but the motionless physiognomy of a painting
can never express more than the workings of a single sentiment. Contrasts, conflicts of the
mind, events, in short, belong to the dramatic art. Painting can with difficulty render a succession
of events: time and movement exist not for it.

"The Phèdre of Racine has furnished the subject of the fourth picture," said Corinne, showing
it to Lord Nelville.--"Hippolitus, in all the beauty of youth and innocence, repels the perfidious
accusations of his step-mother; the hero, Theseus, still protects his guilty spouse, whom he
encircles with his conquering arm. There is in the countenance of Phèdre, a trouble which freezes
the soul with horror; and her nurse, without remorse, encourages her in her guilt. Hippolitus
in this picture is perhaps more beautiful than even in Racine; he resembles more the ancient
Meleager, because no love for Aricia disturbs the impression of his wild and noble virtue;
but is it possible to suppose that Phèdre, in the presence of Hippolitus, can support her falsehood?
Is it possible that she can behold him innocent and persecuted without falling at his feet?
An offended woman may wrong the object of her affection in his absence; but when she sees him,
her heart is wholly absorbed in love. The poet has never put Phèdre and Hippolitus in the same
scene after the former has calumniated the latter; the painter has been obliged to do so in
order to bring together, as he has done in his picture, all the beauties of the contrast; but
is not this a proof that there is such a difference between poetical and picturesque subjects
that it would be better for the poets to write from pictures, than for the painters to compose
their works from the poets? The history of the human mind proves to us that imagination must
always precede thought."

Whilst Corinne was thus explaining her pictures to Lord Nelville, she had stopped several times,
in the hope that he would speak to her; but his wounded soul did not betray itself by a single
word; whenever she expressed a feeling idea he only sighed and turned his head, in order that
she might not see how easily he was affected in his present state of mind. Corinne, overcome
by this silence, sat down and covered her face with her hands--Lord Nelville for some time
walked about the room with a hurried step, then approaching Corinne, was about to betray his
feelings; but the invincible pride of his nature repressed his emotion, and he returned to
the pictures as if he were waiting for Corinne to finish showing them. Corinne expected much
from the effect of the last of all; and making an effort in her turn to appear calm, she arose
and said, "My lord, I have yet three landscapes to show you--two of them are allied to very
interesting ideas. I am not fond of those rustic scenes which are as dull in painting as idylls,
when they make no allusion to fable or to history. I am most pleased with the manner of Salvator
Rosa, who represents, as you see in this picture, a rock with torrents and trees, without a
single living creature, without even a bird recalling an idea of life. The absence of man in
the midst of natural scenes, excites deep reflection. What would the earth be in this state
of solitude? A work without an aim; and yet a work so beautiful, the mysterious impression
of which would be addressed to the Divinity alone!

"We are come at last to the two pictures in which, according to my opinion, history and poetry
are happily blended with landscape[27]. One represents the moment when Cincinnatus is invited
by the consuls to leave the plough, in order to take the command of the Roman armies. In this
landscape you behold all the luxury of the South, its abundant vegetation, its burning sky,
the smiling aspect of all nature, discoverable even in the plants themselves; and that other
picture which forms a contrast with this, is the son of Cairbar asleep upon the tomb of his
father.--For three days and three nights he has awaited the arrival of the bard who is to honour
the memory of the dead. This bard is perceived at a distance descending the mountain; the shade
of the father hovers in the clouds; the country is covered with hoar frost; the trees, though
naked, are agitated by the wind, and their dead branches and dried leaves, still follow the
current of the storm."

Till then, Oswald had been influenced by resentment at what had taken place in the garden;
but on beholding this picture, the tomb of his father and the mountains of Scotland appeared
to his mind, and his eyes were filled with tears. Corinne took her harp, and before this picture,
began to sing one of those Scotch ballads whose simple notes seem to accompany the noise of
the wind, mournfully complaining through the valleys. She sang the farewell of a warrior quitting
his native land and his mistress; and the word, no more, one of the most harmonious and touching
in the English language, was pronounced by Corinne with the most moving expression. Oswald
sought not to resist his emotion, and both yielded without restraint to their tears.--"Ah!"
cried Lord Nelville, "does my native country speak no language to thy heart? Wouldst thou follow
me into those retreats, peopled by my recollections? Wouldst thou be the worthy companion of
my life, as thou art its sole charm and delight?"--"I believe so," replied Corinne--"I believe
so; for I love thee!"--"In the name of love then, no longer conceal anything from me," said
Oswald.--"I consent," interrupted Corinne; "since it is thy wish. My promise is given; I only
make one condition, which is, that thou wilt not exact it of me before the approaching epoch
of our religious ceremonies. Will not the support of heaven be more than ever necessary to
me at the moment when my fate is about to be decided?"--"No more," cried Lord Nelville, "if
that fate depend upon me, it is no longer doubtful."--"Thou thinkest so," replied she; "I have
not the same confidence; but, in a word, I intreat thee show that condescension to my weakness
which I request."--Oswald sighed, without either granting or refusing the delay required.--"Let
us now return to town," said Corinne. "How can I conceal anything from thee in this solitude?
And if what I have to relate must divide us, ought I so soon--Let us go, Oswald--thou wilt
return hither again, happen what may: my ashes will find rest here." Oswald, much affected,
obeyed Corinne. He returned to the city with her, and scarcely a word passed between them upon
the road. From time to time they looked at each other with an affection that said everything;
but nevertheless, a sentiment of melancholy reigned in the depths of their souls when they
arrived in the midst of Rome.

FOOTNOTE:

[27] The historical pictures which compose the gallery of Corinne, are either from copies or
originals of the Brutus of David, the Maurius of Drouet, and the Belisarius of Gerard; among
the other pictures mentioned, that of Dido was done by M. Rehberg, a German painter; that of
Clorinda, is in the gallery of Florence; that of Macbeth, is in an English collection of pictures
from Shakespeare; and that of Phèdre, is by Guérin; lastly, the two landscapes of Cincinnatus
and Ossian, are at Rome, and were done by Mr Wallis, an English painter.

Book ix.

THE POPULAR FESTIVAL, AND MUSIC.

Chapter i.

It was the last day of carnival, which is the most noisy festival of the year, when a fever
of joy, a mania of amusement, unparalleled in any other country, seized the Roman people. Everybody
is disguised; hardly does there remain at the windows, an unmasked spectator: the scene of
gaiety commences at a given hour on a certain day, and scarcely ever does any public or private
event of the year hinder any person from joining the sports of the season.

It is then that we can form a judgment of the extent of imagination possessed by the common
people. The Italian language, even in their mouths, is full of charm. Alfieri said that he
went to the public market at Florence to learn to speak good Italian,--Rome has the same advantages:
and perhaps these are the only two cities in the world where the people speak so well that
the mind may receive entertainment at every corner of the street.

That kind of humour which shines in the authors of harlequinades and opera-buffa, is very commonly
found even among men without education. In these days of carnival, when extravagance and caricature
are admitted, the most comic scenes take place between the masks.

Often a burlesque gravity is contrasted with the vivacity of the Italians; and one would say
that these fantastic vestments inspired a dignity in the wearers, not natural to them; at other
times, they manifest such a singular knowledge of mythology in their disguises, that we would
be inclined to believe the ancient fables still popular in Rome; and more frequently they ridicule
different gradations of society with a pleasantry full of force and originality. The nation
appears a thousand times more distinguished in its sports than in its history. The Italian
language yields to every shade of gaiety with a facility which only requires a light inflection
of the voice and a little difference of termination in order to increase or diminish, ennoble
or travesty, the sense of words. It is particularly graceful in the mouth of children[28].
The innocence of this age and the natural malice of the language, form an exquisite contrast.
In truth, it may be said, that it is a language which explains itself without any aid and always
appears more intellectual than he who speaks it.

There is neither luxury nor good taste in the feast of carnival; a kind of universal petulance
makes it resemble the bacchanals of the imagination; but in imagination only is this resemblance,
for the Romans are in general very sober, and except the last day of carnival, tolerably serious.
We often make sudden discoveries of every sort in the character of the Italians, and this is
what contributes to give them the reputation of being subtle and crafty.--There is, undoubtedly,
a strong habit of dissimulation in this country, which has supported so many different yokes;
but it is not to dissimulation that we must always attribute the rapid transition from one
manner of being to another. An inflammable imagination is often the cause of it. The character
of a people who are only rational or witty, may be easily understood and will not suddenly
surprise us, but all that belongs to the imagination is unexpected. It leaps over intermediate
barriers, it is often hurt at nothing, and frequently indifferent to that which ought most
to affect it. In fact, it is a law unto itself, and we can never calculate its impressions
from their causes.

For example, we cannot comprehend what amusement the Roman nobility find in riding in their
carriages from one end of the corso to the other for whole hours together, as well during the
carnival as on the other days of the year. Nothing ever diverts them from this custom. There
are also among the masks, men who saunter about with every appearance of weariness, in the
most ridiculous costume imaginable, and who--melancholy harlequins and silent punchinellos,--do
not say a word the whole evening, but appear, if it may be so expressed, to have satisfied
their carnival conscience by having neglected nothing to be merry.

We find at Rome a certain species of mask which is not seen elsewhere: masks formed after the
figures of the ancient statues, and which at a distance imitate the most perfect beauty--the
women often lose greatly by removing them. But nevertheless this motionless imitation of life,
these stalking wax countenances, however pretty they may be, have something terrifying in them.
The great nobles make a tolerably grand display of carriages on the last days of the carnival;
but the pleasure of this festival is the crowd and the confusion: it seems like a relic of
the Saturnalia; every class in Rome is mixed together. The most grave magistrates ride with
official dignity in the midst of the masks; every window is decorated. The whole town is in
the streets: it is truly a popular festival. The pleasure of the people consists neither in
the shows nor the feasts that are given them, nor the magnificence they witness. They commit
no excess either in drinking or eating: their recreation is to be set at liberty, and to find
themselves among the nobility, who on their side are pleased at being among the people. It
is especially the refinement and delicacy of amusements as well as the perfection of education,
that places a barrier between different classes of people. But in Italy this distinction of
rank is not very sensible; the country is more characterised by the natural talent and imagination
of all, than by the extraordinary cultivation of the upper classes. There is therefore, pending
carnival, a complete confusion of ranks, of manners, and of sentiments: the crowd, the cries,
the wit, and the comfits with which they inundate without distinction the carriages as they
pass along, confound every mortal together and set the nation pell-mell, as if social order
no longer existed.

Corinne and Lord Nelville, both buried in thought, arrived in the midst of this tumult. They
were at first almost stunned; for nothing appears more singular than this activity of noisy
pleasures, when the soul is entirely absorbed in itself. They stopped at the Piazza del Popolo
to ascend the amphitheatre near the obelisk, whence is seen the race course. At the moment
they got out of their calash, the Count d'Erfeuil perceived them and took Oswald aside to speak
to him.

"It is not right," said he, "to show yourself in this public manner, arriving from the country
alone with Corinne; you will compromise her character, then what will you do?" "I do not think,"
answered Nelville, "that I compromise the character of Corinne by showing the attachment she
inspires me with. But even were that true, I should be too happy if the devotion of my life--"
"As to your being happy," interrupted the Count, "I do not believe it;" people can only be
happy in acting becomingly. Society, think as you may, has much influence "upon our happiness,
and we should never do what it disapproves."--"We should then never be guided by our own thoughts
and our own feelings, but live entirely for society," replied Oswald. Thus there was much before
and around us to cheer our hearts and fill them with the brightest anticipations. It seemed
to me, that, if I had been travelling in a long lane, I was now approaching a delightful turn,--for
it has been said that there is none so long as to be without one.

We had dined frugally, as usual, and mother had set away an ample provision for the two absentees, who
invariably came home with great appetites. Our work had been resumed around the stove, and
all was calm and comfortable within the little sitting-room, though without the wind had risen
higher and the snow fell faster and faster, when the door was suddenly opened, and as suddenly
shut, by the wife of a neighbor, who, with hands clasped together, as if overcome by some terrible
grief, rushed toward where my mother was sitting, and exclaimed,--

"Oh, Mrs. Lacey! how can I tell you?"

"What is it?" eagerly inquired my mother, starting from her seat, and casting from her the work
on which she had been engaged. "What is it? Speak! What has happened?" she cried, wild at the
woman's apparent inability to communicate the tidings she had evidently come to relate.

Regaining her composure in some measure, the latter, covering her face with her hands, and bursting
into tears, sobbed out,--

"He's drowned!"

"Oh! which of them?" shrieked my mother, wringing her hands, and every vestige of color in
her cheeks supplanted by a pallor so frightful that it struck dismay
to my heart.

A mysterious instinct had warned her, the moment the woman spoke the first words, that some
calamity had overtaken us.

"Which of them?" she repeated, with frantic impetuosity, "Is it my husband or my son? Speak! speak!
My heart breaks!"

"Your husband, Mrs. Lacey," the woman replied; and as if relieved from the crushing burden she had
thus transferred from her own spirit to ours, she sank back exhausted into a chair.

"Oh! when, where, and how?" demanded my mother. "Are you sure it is true? Who brought the news?"

"Your
own son, Ma'am; he sent me here to tell you," answered the woman.

The door opened at the moment, and Fred, accompanied by several of the neighbors, entered the
room. Crying as if his heart would break, he called out,--

"Oh, mother! it's too true,--father is gone!"

This confirmation of the withering blow broke her down. I saw that she was tottering to a fall, and
threw my arms round her just in time to prevent it. We laid her on the settee, insensible to
everything about her.

As the news of our great bereavement spread, the neighbors crowded in, offering their sympathy
and aid. It was very kind of them, but, alas! could do nothing towards lightening its weight.
The story of how my dear father came to his untimely end was at length related to us. He had gone out
upon the river in a boat from which a seine was being cast, and by accident, no one could tell
exactly how, had fallen overboard. Being no swimmer, and the water of icy coldness, he sank
immediately, without again coming to the surface. Strong arms were waiting to seize him, upon rising,
but the deep had closed over him.

I know not how it was, but the prostration of my poor mother seemed
to give me new strength to bear up under this terrible affliction.

Oh! that was a sad evening for us, and the birthday to which all had looked forward with so
much pleasure as the happiest of my life was to be the saddest.

Morning--it was Sunday--brought comparative calmness to my mother. But she was broken down by
the awful suddenness of the blow.

She wept over the thought that he had died without her being near him,--that there had been
no opportunity for parting words,--that she was not able to close
his dying eyes.

She could have borne it better, if she had been permitted to speak
to him, to hear him say farewell, before death shut out the world
from his view.

Then there was the painful anxiety as to recovering the body. It had sunk in deep water, in
the middle of the river, and it was uncertain how far the strong current might have swept it away
from the spot where the accident occurred. The neighbors had already begun to search for it with
drags, and all through that gloomy Sunday had continued their labor without success; for they
were not watermen, and therefore knew little of the proper methods of procedure.

Days passed away in this distressing uncertainty. Our pastor, Mr. Seeley, missing Fred and Jane
from Sunday-school, as well as myself from the charge of my class, and learning the cause
of our absence, came down to see us. His consolations to my mother, his sympathy, his prayers,
revived and strengthened her. Finding that her immediate anxiety was about the recovery of
the body, he told her that the bodies of drowned persons were seldom
found without a reward being offered for them, and that one must be
promised in the present case.

This suggestion brought up the question of payment, and for the first time in our affliction
it was recollected that my father had always persisted in carrying in his pocket-wallet all
the money he had saved, and thus whatever he might have accumulated was with him at the time of his
death. Following, nevertheless, the advice of our excellent pastor, a reward of fifty dollars was
advertised, and just one week from the fatal day the body was brought to our now desolated home.
But the wallet, with its contents, had been abstracted. The little fund my mother had always managed
to keep on hand was too small to meet this heavy draft of the reward in addition to that occasioned
by the funeral, so that, when that sad ceremony was over, we found ourselves beginning the world
that now opened on us incumbered with a debt of fifty dollars.

But though borne down by the weight of our affliction, we were far from being hopelessly discouraged.
It is true that my young hopes had been suddenly blasted. The bright pictures of the future which
we had painted in our little sitting-room the very morning of the day that our calamity overtook
us had all faded from sight, and were remembered only in contrast with the dark shadows that
now filled their places.

The cup, brimming with joyous anticipations, had been dashed from my lips. My birthday passed
in sorrow and gloom. But I roused myself from a torpor which would have been likely to increase
by giving way to it, and put on all the energy of which I was capable. I felt, that, while
I had griefs for the dead, I had duties to perform to the living. The staff on which we had mainly
leaned for support had been taken away, and we were now left to depend exclusively on our own exertions.
I saw that the condition of my mother devolved the chief burden on me, and I determined that
I would resolutely assume it.

I had Fred immediately apprenticed to an iron-founder in the neighborhood; and thenceforward,
by his weekly allowance for board, he became a contributor to the common support. My knowledge
of the sewing-machine secured for me a situation in a large establishment, in which more than
thirty other girls were employed in making bosoms, wristbands, and collars for shirts; and I gradually
recovered from what at first was the bitter disappointment of having no machine of my own.

I have seen it stated in the newspaper, that, when some cotton had been imported into a certain
manufacturing town in England, where all the mills had long been closed for want of a supply
from this country, the people, who were previously in the greatest distress, went out to meet it
as it was approaching the town, and the women wept over the bales, and kissed them, and then
sang a hymn of thanksgiving for the welcome importation. It would give them work! It was with
a feeling akin to this that I took my position in the great establishment referred to, having also succeeded
in obtaining a situation for my sister, whom I instructed in the use of the machine until she became
as expert an operator as myself.

The certainty of employment, even at moderate wages, relieved my mind of many domestic cares, while
the employment itself was a further relief.

It was, moreover, infinitely more agreeable than working for the slop-shops, or even for the
most fashionable tailors. Our duties were defined and simple, and there was no unreasonable
hurry, and no night-work: we had our evenings to ourselves. As usual with sewing-women, the
pay was invariably small. The old formula had been adhered to,--that because the cost of a sewing-woman's
board was but trifling, therefore her wages should be graduated to a figure just above it. She
was not permitted, as men are, to earn too much. My sister and I were sometimes able to earn eight
dollars a week between us, sometimes only six. But this little income was the stay of the family.
And it was well enough, so long as we had no sickness to interrupt our work and lessen the moderate
sum.

They paid off the girls by gas-light on Saturday evening. As we had a long walk to reach home,
the streets through which we passed presented, on that evening, an animated appearance. A vast
concourse of work-women, laborers, mechanics, clerks, and others, who had also received their
weekly wages, thronged the streets. There were crowds of girls from the binderies, mostly well
dressed, and sewing-women carrying great bundles to the tailors,
many of them, without doubt uncertain as to whether their work would
be accepted, just as we had been in former days.

As the evening advanced, the shops of all descriptions for the supply of family-stores were crowded
by the wives of workmen thus paid off, and the sewing-girls or their mothers, all purchasing
necessaries for the coming week, thus immediately disbursing the vast aggregate paid out on
Saturday for wages.

The quickness with which I secured employment on the sewing-machine, because of my having qualified
myself to operate it, was a new confirmation of my idea that women are engaged in so few occupations
only because they have not been taught. Employers want skilful workers, not novices to whom
they are compelled to teach everything. But what was to be the ultimate effect on female labor of
the introduction of this machine had been a doubtful question with me until now, I worked so steadily
in this establishment, the occupation was so constant, as well as so light, with far more bodily
exercise than formerly when sitting in one position over the needle, and the wages were paid so
punctually, with no mean attempts to cut us down on the false plea of imperfect work, that I
came insensibly to the conclusion that a vast benefit had been conferred on the sex by its introduction.
Yet the apprehensions felt by all sewing-women, when the new instrument was first brought
out, were perfectly natural. I have read that similar apprehensions were entertained by others
on similar occasions. When the lace-machines were first introduced in Nottingham, they were destroyed
by riotous mobs of hand-loom weavers, who feared the ruin of their business. But where, fifty years
ago, there were but a hundred and forty lace-machines in use in England, there are now thirty-five
hundred, while the price of lace has fallen from a hundred shillings the square yard to sixpence.
Before this lace-machinery was invented, England manufactured only two million dollars' worth
per annum, and in doing so employed only eight thousand-hands; whereas
now she produces thirty million dollars' worth annually, and employs
a hundred and thirty thousand hands.

It has been the same with power-looms, reapers, threshing-machines, and every other contrivance
to economize human labor. I am sure that my brother would be thrown out of employment, if
there were no steam-engine to operate the foundry where he is at work, and that, if there were
no sewing-machines, my sister and myself would be compelled to join the less fortunate army of
seamstresses who still labor so unrequitedly for the slop-shops.

To satisfy my mind on this subject, I have looked into such books as I have had time and opportunity
to consult, and have found evidence of the fact, that, the more we increase our facilities
for performing work with speed and cheapness, the more we shall have to do, and so the more hands
will be required to do it. The time was when it was considered so great an undertaking for a man
to farm a hundred acres, that very few persons were found cultivating a larger tract. But now,
with every farming process facilitated by the use of labor-saving machines, there are farms of
ten thousand acres better managed than were formerly those of only a hundred acres. There
would be no penny paper brought daily to our door, unless the same wonderful revolution had
been made in all the processes of the paper-mill, and in the speed of printing-presses. If I
had doubted what was to be the consequence of bringing machinery
into competition with the sewing-women, it was owing to my utter ignorance
of how other great revolutions had affected the labor of different
classes of workers.

This doubt thus satisfactorily resolved, it very soon became with me a question for profound wonder,
what became of the immensely increased quantity of clothing which was manufactured by so many
thousands of machines. I could not learn that our population had suddenly increased to an extent
sufficient to account for the enlarged consumption that was evidently taking place. I had heard
that there were nations of savages who considered shirts a sort of superfluity, and who moved about
in very much the same costume as that in which our primal mother clothed herself just previously
to indulging in the forbidden fruit. But they could not have thus suddenly taken to the wearing
of machine-made shirts. There was a paragraph also in our paper which stated that the usual dress
in hot weather, in some parts of our own South, was only a hat and
spurs.

This, however, I regarded as a piece of raillery, and was not inclined to place much faith in it.
But I had never heard that any other portion of our people were in the habit of going without shirts
or pantaloons. If such had been the practice, and if it had on the instant been renounced,
it would have accounted for the sudden and unprecedented demand which now sprang up for these
indispensable articles of dress. Or if the fashion had so changed that men had taken to wearing
two shirts instead of one, that also might account for it,--though the wearing of two would
be considered as great an eccentricity as the wearing of none.

I found that others with whom I conversed on the subject were equally surprised with myself. Even some
who were concerned in carrying on the establishment in which we were employed could not account
for the immediate absorption of the vastly increased quantities of work that were turned out.
Few could tell exactly why more was wanted than formerly, nor where it went. The only fact apparent
was that there was a demand for thrice as much as before sewing-machines were brought into use. My
own conclusion was eventually this,--that distant sections of our country were supplied exclusively
from these manufactories in the great cities, which combined capital,
energy, and enterprise in the creation of an immense business.

Yet I could not understand why people in those distant sections did not establish manufactories
of their own. They had quite as much capital, and could procure machines as readily, while the population
to be supplied was immediately at their doors.

I had always heard that the South and West had never at any time manufactured their own clothing.
I knew that the Southern women, particularly, were so ignorant and helpless that they had always
been dependent on the North for almost everything they wore, from the most elaborate bonnet
down to a pocket pin-cushion, and that the supplying of their wardrobes, by the men-milliners of this
section, was a highly lucrative employment. As it is a difficult matter to divert any business from
a channel in which it has long flowed, I concluded that our Northern dealers, having always
commanded these distant markets, would easily retain them by adapting their business to the change
of circumstances. They had the trade already, and could keep it flowing in its old channels by
promptly availing themselves of the new invention.

They did so without hesitation,--indeed, the great struggle was as to who should be first to do
it,--and not only kept their business, but obtained for it an unprecedented increase. In doing
this they must have displaced thousands of sewing-women all over the country, as their cheaper
fabrics enabled them to undersell the latter everywhere. I know that this was the first effect here,
and it is difficult to understand how in other places it should have been otherwise. These
sewing-women must have been deprived of work, or the consumers of clothing must have immediately
begun to purchase and wear double or treble as much as they had been accustomed to. I do not doubt
that the consumption increased from the mere fact of increased cheapness. I believe it is an invariable
law of trade, that consumption increases as price diminishes. If silks were to fall to a shilling
a yard, everybody would turn away from cotton shirts. As it was, shirts were made without collars,
and the collars were produced in great manufactories by steam.

They were made by millions, and by millions they were consumed. They were sold in boxes of
a dozen or a hundred, at two or three cents apiece, according to the wants of the buyer. He
could appear once or twice a day in all the glory of an apparently clean shirt, according
to his ambition to shine in a character which might be a very new one. Judging by the consumption
of these conveniences, it would seem, that, if one had only a clean
collar to display, it was of little consequence whether he had a shirt
or not.

To digress a moment, I will observe, that, when I first saw these ingenious contrivances to escape
the washerwoman's bill, as well as the cuffs made by the same process for ladies' use, they both
struck me so favorably, while their cheapness was so surprising, that my curiosity was inflamed
to see and know how they were made. In company with my sister, I visited the manufactory. It was
in a large building, and employed many hands, who operated with machinery that exceeds my ability
to describe. They took a whole piece of thin, cheap muslin, to each side of which they pasted
a covering of the finest white paper by passing the three layers between iron rollers. The
paper and muslin were in rolls many hundred feet long. The beautiful product of this union was then
parted into strips of the proper width and dried, then passed through
hot metal rollers, combining friction with pressure, whence it was
delivered with a smooth, glossy, enamelled surface. The material for
many thousand collars was thus enamelled in five minutes. It was then
cut by knives into the different shapes and sizes required, and so
rapidly that a man and boy could make more than ten thousand in an
hour. Every collar was then put through a machine which printed upon
it imitation stitches, so exactly resembling the best work of a sewing-machine
as to induce the belief that the collar was actually stitched. Two
girls were working or attending two of these machines, and the two
produced nearly a hundred collars per minute, or about sixty thousand
daily. The button-holes were next punched with even greater rapidity,
then the collar was turned over so nicely that no break occurred in
the material. Then they were counted and put in boxes, and were ready
for market.

Besides these shirt-collars, there was a great variety
of ladies' worked cuffs and collars, adapted to every taste, and imitating
the finest linen with the nicest exactness, but all made of paper.
Some hundreds of thousands of these were piled up around, ready for
counting and packing, sufficient, it appeared to me, to supply our
whole population for a twelvemonth. They were sold so cheaply, also,
that it cost no more to buy a new collar than to wash an old one.
Like friction-matches, they were used only once and then thrown away;
hence, the consumption being perpetual, the production was continuous
the year round.

I inquired of the proprietor how he accounted for
the immense consumption of these articles, without which the world
had been getting on comfortably for so many thousand years.

"Why,"
said he, "we have been fortunate enough to create a new want. Perhaps
we did not really create the want, but only discovered that an unsatisfied
one existed. It is all the same in either case. Any great convenience,
or luxury, heretofore unknown to the public, when fairly set before
them is sure to come into general use. It has been so, in my experience,
with many things that were not thought of twenty years ago. I have
been as much puzzled to account for the unlimited consumption of cuffs
and collars as you are to know why so much more clothing is used now
than before sewing-machines came into operation.

It was in these very assemblies, however, that Oswald had found so much to interest him a few
days before; the slight obstacle which the company opposed to his conversation with Corinne,--the
speedy opportunity which she took to return to him as soon as she had been sufficiently polite
to the rest of the circle,--the similarity of sentiment which existed between them in the observations
which the company suggested,--the pleasure which Corinne took when discoursing in Oswald's
presence, to address indirectly to him some reflection of which he alone comprehended the true
meaning, had attached such recollections to every part of this very room, that Oswald had been
deluded so far as to believe that there was something amusing in these assemblies themselves. And
let none marvel that of these the greater part, albeit well-pleasing to the gods, nevertheless
were subject to death--which is the way of nature, (4) but their fame has grown--nor yet that their
prime of manhood so far differed.

Book x.

HOLY WEEK.

Chapter i.

Oswald passed the following day in the gardens of some monasteries. He went first to that of
the Carthusians, and stopped some time before he entered, to contemplate two Egyptian lions
which are at a little distance from the gate. Those lions have a remarkable expression of strength
and repose; there is something in their physiognomy belonging neither to the animal nor the
man: they seem one of the forces of nature and enable us to form a conception how the gods
of the Pagan theology might be represented under this emblem.

The Carthusian monastery is built upon the ruins of the Thermæ of Diocletian; and the church
by the side of the monastery, is decorated with such of its granite columns as remained standing. It
gave me a malicious pleasure to see that the pre-Adamite man, as well as the rest of us, imposes
upon himself at times these difficult duties, toting about that foolish
face, so laboriously vacant of precisely that with which it is brimming
full. The mode of life observed
by the Carthusians, supposes in them either a very limited mind, or the most noble and continued
elevation of religious sentiments; this succession of days without any variety of event, reminds
us of that celebrated line:

     Sur les mondes détruits le Temple dort immobile.

     The Temple sleeps motionless on the ruins of worlds. 

The diacritical marks have been lost.

ON HUNTING

A Sportsman's Manual

Commonly Called CYNEGETICUS

I

To
the gods themselves is due the discovery, to Apollo and Artemis, patrons
of the chase and protectors of the hound. This dark and silent tree, which is with difficulty agitated by the wind,
introduces no appearance of motion into this abode. Near the cypresses is a fountain, scarcely
heard, whose fall is so feeble and slow, that one would be led to call it the clepsydra of
this solitude, where time makes so little noise. Sometimes the moon penetrates it with her
pale lustre, and her absence and return may be considered as an event in this monotonous scene.

Those men who exist thus, are nevertheless the same to whom war and all its bustle would scarcely
suffice if they had been brought up to it. 

And in the next reign, when the same thing was attempted, the Covenanters, the true spiritual descendants
of Knox, opposed to the most brutal persecution a fierce, morose heroism, strangely compounded
of barbaric passion and Christian fortitude. To know another perfectly, would
be the task of a whole life; what is it then that we understand by knowing men? To govern them
is practicable by human wisdom, but to comprehend them belongs to God alone.

