I don't know but we should almost have served her right, if we had done something as a good
old minister I have heard of, once did in very similar circumstances. He was making a call
upon one of the ladies of his parish--upon Aunt Katy, who was noted all over the neighborhood
for being close-fisted. Almost as soon as the good man had got into the house, she invited
him to go into the buttery, and look at her nice cheeses. He went in, the old lady acting as
a guide. "There," said she, pointing to a mammoth cheese which she had just made for the fair,
and which she was particularly proud of, "there's a cheese for you." "Thank you, Aunt Katy,"
said the minister, "my wife was saying only this morning that we should have to get a new cheese
pretty soon." And he took the cheese down from the shelf, carried it out to his wagon, bade
the astonished lady of the house a good morning, and drove off to visit some of the rest of
his flock.

Selfishness has the same face, look at it where you will. It made quite a scar in the features
of Caroline's character. Without that, they would have been beautiful--with it, they were ugly
enough.

But about that kitten. Clara Goodsell was as full of fun as a hickory nut is of meat. She heard
of Caroline's kitten, and she, too, was invited to call and see it. She did not go, though,
and, indeed, the girls very generally failed to comply with the invitation. They knew well
enough that, if they went to see the kitten, they would not be allowed to take it, and that
all they could do would be to stand a little way off, and look at it, and remark how beautiful
it was.

One day, when the girls at school were required to write compositions, Clara thought she would
write something which would make Carrie ashamed of her selfishness. The teacher read all the
compositions aloud. When he came to Clara's, the girls had as much as they could do to keep
from laughing, for they knew, before it was read, what it was about. The schoolmaster had to
bite his lips to keep from smiling a little, too.

Clara did not call any names. But she wrote such a composition about "My Pretty Kitten" that
anybody could see it was meant for Caroline. The selfish girl saw it, as well as the rest,
and before school was out, she burst into tears, she felt so badly. But the composition did
her good. She improved wonderfully after that.

X.

"I DON'T KNOW."

How difficult it is for many people to say these words. Formerly Secretary of the Cambridge Philological
Society. Author of Manual of Comparative Philology; &c.

- B.

P. S. - PHILIP SCHIDROWITZ, PH.D., F.C.S. Member of Council,
Institute of Brewing; Member of Committee of Society of Chemical Industry.
 And oh, what wretched work
they sometimes make with their answers. They make perfect fools of themselves.

People never appear well, among those of good sense, who attempt to pass themselves off as
knowing more than they do. It is not to be expected that any one person can know everything;
and why should you, or anybody else, be ashamed to own that you can't tell all about this thing,
or that thing? Why it is often one part of wisdom to see that you can't understand a particular
subject, and another part of wisdom to confess that you can't understand it.

I think that the dog, who figures with a certain vain, self-conceited monkey, in the fable,
showed a good deal of wisdom in his remarks.

