Such cases are highly probable, and no large, vague propositions about the "self-determination"
of peoples can meet all the cases. In Macedonia, for instance, there is a jumble of Albanian,
Serbian, Bulgarian, Greek and Rumanian villages always jostling one another and maintaining
an intense irritation between the kindred nations close at hand. And quite a large number of
areas and cities in the world, it has to be remembered, are not homogeneous at all. Will the
great nations of the world have the self-abnegation to permit a scattered subject population
to appeal against the treatment of its ruling power to the Supreme Court? This is a much more
serious interference with sovereignty than intervention in an external quarrel. Could a Greek
village in Bulgarian Macedonia plead in the Supreme Court? Could the Armenians in Constantinople,
or the Jews in Roumania, or the Poles in West Prussia, or the negroes in Georgia, or the Indians
in the Transvaal make such an appeal? Could any Indian population in India appeal? Personally
I should like to see the power of the Supreme Court extend as far as this. I do not see how
we can possibly prevent a kindred nation pleading for the scattered people of its own race
and culture, or any nation presenting a case on behalf of some otherwise unrepresented people--the
United States, for example, presenting a case on behalf of the Armenians. But I doubt if many
people have made up their minds yet to see the powers of the Supreme Court of the League of
Nations go so far as this. I doubt if, to begin with, it will be possible to provide for these
cases. I would like to see it done, but I doubt if the majority of the sovereign peoples concerned
will reconcile their national pride with the idea, at least so far as their own subject populations
go.

Here, you see, I do no more than ask a question. It is a difficult one, and it has to be answered
before we can clear the way to the League of Free Nations.

But the Supreme Court, whether it is to have the wider or the narrower scope here suggested,
would be merely the central function of the League of Free Nations. Behind the decisions of
the Supreme Court must lie power. And here come fresh difficulties for patriotic digestions.
The armies and navies of the world must be at the disposal of the League of Free Nations, and
that opens up a new large area of delegated authority. The first impulse of any power disposed
to challenge the decisions of the Supreme Court will be, of course, to arm; and it is difficult
to imagine how the League of Free Nations can exercise any practical authority unless it has
power to restrain such armament. The League of Free Nations must, in fact, if it is to be a
working reality, have power to define and limit the military and naval and aerial equipment
of every country in the world. This means something more than a restriction of state forces.
It must have power and freedom to investigate the military and naval and aerial establishments
of all its constituent powers. It must also have effective control over every armament industry.
And armament industries are not always easy to define. Are aeroplanes, for example, armament?
Its powers, I suggest, must extend even to a restraint upon the belligerent propaganda which
is the natural advertisement campaign of every armament industry. It must have the right, for
example, to raise the question of the proprietorship of newspapers by armament interests. Disarmament
is, in fact, a necessary factor of any League of Free Nations, and you cannot have disarmament
unless you are prepared to see the powers of the council of the League extend thus far. The
very existence of the League presupposes that it and it alone is to have and to exercise military
force. Any other belligerency or preparation or incitement to belligerency becomes rebellion,
and any other arming a threat of rebellion, in a world League of Free Nations.

But here, again, has the general mind yet thought out all that is involved in this proposition?
In all the great belligerent countries the armament industries are now huge interests with
enormous powers. Krupp's business alone is as powerful a thing in Germany as the Crown. In
every country a heavily subsidized "patriotic" press will fight desperately against giving
powers so extensive and thorough as those here suggested to an international body. So long,
of course, as the League of Free Nations remains a project in the air, without body or parts,
such a press will sneer at it gently as "Utopian," and even patronize it kindly. But so soon
as the League takes on the shape its general proposition makes logically necessary, the armament
interest will take fright. Then it is we shall hear the drum patriotic loud in defence of the
human blood trade. Are we to hand over these most intimate affairs of ours to "a lot of foreigners"?
Among these "foreigners" who will be appealed to to terrify the patriotic souls of the British
will be the "Americans." Are we men of English blood and tradition to see our affairs controlled
by such "foreigners" as Wilson, Lincoln, Webster and Washington? Perish the thought! When they
might be controlled by Disraelis, Wettins, Mount-Battens, and what not! And so on and so on.
Krupp's agents and the agents of the kindred firms in Great Britain and France will also be
very busy with the national pride of France. In Germany they have already created a colossal
suspicion of England.

Here is a giant in the path....

But let us remember that it is only necessary to defeat the propaganda of this vile and dangerous
industry in four great countries. And for the common citizen, touched on the tenderest part
of his patriotic susceptibilities, there are certain irrefutable arguments. Whether the ways
of the world in the years to come are to be the paths of peace or the paths of war is not going
to alter this essential fact, that the great educated world communities, with a social and
industrial organization on a war-capable scale, are going to dominate human affairs. Whether
they spend their power in killing or in educating and creating, France, Germany, however much
we may resent it, the two great English-speaking communities, Italy, Japan China, and presently
perhaps a renascent Russia, are jointly going to control the destinies of mankind. Whether
that joint control comes through arms or through the law is a secondary consideration. To refuse
to bring our affairs into a common council does not make us independent of foreigners. It makes
us more dependent upon them, as a very little consideration will show.

I am suggesting here that the League of Free Nations shall practically control the army, navy,
air forces, and armament industry of every nation in the world. What is the alternative to
that? To do as we please? No, the alternative is that any malignant country will be free to
force upon all the rest just the maximum amount of armament it chooses to adopt. Since 1871
France, we say, has been free in military matters. What has been the value of that freedom?
The truth is, she has been the bond-slave of Germany, bound to watch Germany as a slave watches
a master, bound to launch submarine for submarine and cast gun for gun, to sweep all her youth
into her army, to subdue her trade, her literature, her education, her whole life to the necessity
of preparations imposed upon her by her drill-master over the Rhine. And Michael, too, has
been a slave to his imperial master for the self-same reason, for the reason that Germany and
France were both so proudly sovereign and independent. Both countries have been slaves to Kruppism
and Zabernism--because they were sovereign and free! So it will always be. So long as patriotic
cant can keep the common man jealous of international controls over his belligerent possibilities,
so long will he be the helpless slave of the foreign threat, and "Peace" remain a mere name
for the resting phase between wars.

But power over the military resources of the world is by no means the limit of the necessary
powers of an effective League of Free Nations. There are still more indigestible implications
in the idea, and, since they have got to be digested sooner or later if civilization is not
to collapse, there is no reason why we should not begin to bite upon them now. I was much interested
to read the British press upon the alleged proposal of the German Chancellor that we should
give up (presumably to Germany) Gibraltar, Malta, Egypt, and suchlike key possessions. It seemed
to excite several of our politicians extremely. I read over the German Chancellor's speech
very carefully, so far as it was available, and it is clear that he did not propose anything
of the sort. Wilfully or blindly our press and our demagogues screamed over a false issue.
The Chancellor was defending the idea of the Germans remaining in Belgium and Lorraine because
of the strategic and economic importance of those regions to Germany, and he was arguing that
before we English got into such a feverish state of indignation about that, we should first
ask ourselves what we were doing in Gibraltar, etc., etc. That is a different thing altogether.
And it is an argument that is not to be disposed of by misrepresentation. The British have
to think hard over this quite legitimate German tu quoque. It is no good getting into a patriotic
bad temper and refusing to answer that question. We British people are so persuaded of the
purity and unselfishness with which we discharge our imperial responsibilities, we have been
so trained in imperial self-satisfaction, we know so certainly that all our subject nations
call us blessed, that it is a little difficult for us to see just how the fact that we are,
for example, so deeply rooted in Egypt looks to an outside intelligence. Of course the German
imperialist idea is a wicked and aggressive idea, as Lord Robert Cecil has explained; they
want to set up all over the earth coaling stations and strategic points, on the pattern of
ours. Well, they argue, we are only trying to do what you British have done. If we are not
to do so--because it is aggression and so on and so on--is not the time ripe for you to make
some concessions to the public opinion of the world? That is the German argument. Either, they
say, tolerate this idea of a Germany with advantageous posts and possessions round and about
the earth, or reconsider your own position.

Well, at the risk of rousing much patriotic wrath, I must admit that I think we have to reconsider
our position. Our argument is that in India, Egypt, Africa and elsewhere, we stand for order
and civilization, we are the trustees of freedom, the agents of knowledge and efficiency. On
the whole the record of British rule is a pretty respectable one; I am not ashamed of our record.
Nevertheless the case is altering.

