During Brandon's honeymoon, Dr. Grant had got matters in such excellent train that he made
his proposal in due form, and was accepted; but there could not be such promptitude in carrying
it out as in Brandon's case, for he could never think of taking a lady of Miss Phillips's pretensions
to Ben More without making considerable additions and improvements on it, and the masons and
carpenters were very slow about their work. The pangs occasioned by delay were sweetened by
frequent and long visits; and the plan of his house, and of the garden which he was laying
out and planting, was constantly in the hands of the betrothed lovers for mutual suggestions
and admiration. At last the day was fixed, and it was to be a very grand affair. There was
to be a special licence, and she was to be married from her brother's house, as there was no
English church within reasonable distance. The Lord Bishop of Melbourne was to come out to
perform the ceremony, and all the neighbours from far and near were invited;--the Ballantynes
and some of their town acquaintance besides. There were to be thirty-five at breakfast; and
little or nothing could be had from town, so there was an extraordinary amount of cooking going
on at Wiriwilta. Mrs. Bennett, who was worth any two of the women servants in the house, was
going hither and thither, and surpassing herself in her culinary successes. Emily was instructing
Harriett how she was to behave on the following day as bridesmaid, for the two little girls
were to support their aunt on the trying occasion; and after officiating in that capacity at
the marriage of her favourites, Brandon and Alice, Emily felt quite experienced on the subject.
Their dresses were very pretty; and as for Miss Phillips's, it was magnificent, for she thought,
if there ever was an occasion on which one should be richly dressed, it was on an occasion
like this. Mrs. Phillips had been persuaded for once to allow her sister-in-law to outshine
her, at least so far as she could do so. Jane was as busy in the kitchen as any one; when she
was called away by Miss Phillips, to be consulted as to how her veil should be disposed of,
for Mrs. Phillips had declined to give an opinion--and there were two modes of arranging it
that she was doubtful about. Could not Miss Melville settle that knotty point?

"I really cannot say; one seems to me to look as well as the other," said Jane.

"That is very unsatisfactory," said Harriett. "I know they are not equally becoming."

"Elsie will be here this evening," said Jane, "or early to-morrow morning; and I am sure she
will be most happy to give the last touches to your dress. Her taste is good, and you know
how wretched mine is."

"Well, I suppose I must trust to that; but I should prefer to have everything settled to-day,
so that my mind might be quite easy. I should not like to look flurried to-morrow. I must ask
Dr. Grant when he comes in. Perhaps he will give me an idea. Your sister's dress was very simple,
she told me; but then the affair was so hurried--there was no time to make preparations. We
have not that excuse, thanks to those tiresome tradespeople. But Alice and Brandon seem to
get on pretty comfortably."

"Very happily, I think," said Jane.

"Oh, yes, he is good-natured enough, and I dare say, very kind to her, and she seems quite
satisfied. But I have been just thinking how difficult it would have been for me to have been
suited in such a colony as this if I had not been so fortunate as to meet with Dr. Grant. Being
a professional man, he is necessarily an educated man, and you know how much that weighs with
me; and he has the manners of a gentleman, which are also indispensable to my happiness in
marriage. None of your rough, boorish bushmen, who can only talk of sheep and cattle, could
possibly have done for me. Then, his family connections are most unexceptionable; my own relations
cannot feel in any way compromised by such an alliance. The near neighbourhood (as I suppose
it must be called) to Wiriwilta, and even to Barragong, makes it very pleasant. I should not
have at all liked marrying to be at distance from my brother and his family. Coming out, as
I did, on their account principally, it would be dreadful for all of us if we were separated.
I am sure I am quite pleased, too, to have your sister and Brandon as neighbours. Alice looks
quite a different person now she has a house of her own. I don't call her pretty--I never did;
but she looks very well indeed at Barragong, and seems to get on wonderful well, considering."

"Considering what?" was about to come from Jane's lips, for she had never liked Miss Phillips's
condescending way of talking about her sister; but she checked herself, for it was no use to
argue with the bride on the eve of her wedding-day, and gave an indifferent and conciliatory
reply; but the conversation was here interrupted by the entrance of two old friends, not any
of the party invited for the morrow, but two large beautiful dogs, who ran up to Jane with
the wildest expressions of canine delight.

"Oh, Nep! oh Flora!" said Jane, "where have you come from? Who can have brought you here? Poor
old fellows! dear old fellows!" And the favourites from Cross Hall laid their happy heads in
her lap, and rejoiced in their old mistress's caresses.

"What beauties!" said Miss Phillips; "but I do not like dogs in the drawing-room."

"I will take them out," said Jane, trembling with wonder and agitation. She went out of the
room, and at the hall door, which stood (bush fashion) hospitably open, she saw Francis standing,
allowing Nep and Flora, who seemed to know there was a friend in the house, to make an entrance
and introduce themselves. She extended her hand, but he clasped her in his arms.

"Not farewell this time, dearest Jane. I have come for you, and I will not be refused. When
we parted I said you knew I loved you, and now I believe you love me. I have given up everything--the
property, the seat in Parliament; and now that I have no career to relinquish, perhaps you
will acknowledge that you love me?"

"Oh, Francis, I have always loved you! but I could have lived without you all my life if I
had thought it for your good and your happiness. I could not bear to be your stumbling-block.
But is it really the case? did you believe that strange story? have you given up what you made
such good use of?"

"Come out into the garden with me, and I will tell you all about it;" and Francis led Jane
where they were more secure from interruption. Flora and Nep followed them in the greatest
exuberance of spirits.

"I had to stay one day in Melbourne, and found that I could get a situation there as accountant
in a merchant's office, at 300 pounds to begin with. I had Mr. Rennie's testimonial to speak
for me. It is not so much as my 50 pounds in Edinburgh; but will you marry me on that?" said
Francis.

"I would marry you on less," said Jane, "for my own part of it; but you care more for comfort
and luxury than I do. If you will consent to be cheerfully without what we cannot afford, I
will do my best."

"I have been roughing it a little on board ship; you may ask Peggy and Mary Forrester if I
have not. But I hope to get on, for your sake, if not for my own. I feel just like a boy again
beginning the world, and feeling it is all his for the winning."

"But your plans--your ambitions--are they all given up? You know the property was really yours--as
much yours without a name as with my uncle's. I am sorry you were so rash."

"No, Jane, don't be sorry; don't be anything but very glad. I never was so happy in my life.
I left all my regrets on the other side of the world. Now, when I have your hand in mine, your
heart in my keeping, when you have promised to give yourself to me, I will not feel that I
have cause for anything but devout gratitude to our Heavenly Father, and humble but confident
hope that He will bless our union. My dearest love, do look in my face and say you are happy."

"Yes, I am happy," said Jane, "very happy. Thank God for all his goodness."

"But what are we to do for a name? I ought not to be Hogarth, or Ormistown, or Francis either.
Can you give me a new name to begin our new life with?"

"I think we will still call you Francis Hogarth; it is the name I learned to love you by, and
I think if my poor dear uncle saw us now, and saw how we love each other, he would be pleased
that my husband should have his name. Then you have really given up everything?" said Jane,
who could not at once believe in the fact.

"To the benevolent societies. But they behaved very handsomely, and gave to me--or rather,
to you--a sum of money sufficient to better our position. I have not only the 300 pounds a-year--I
have 2,500 pounds besides, and a lot of things from Cross Hall to furnish a cottage with. I
had to leave the horses, but I thought you and Elsie would like the dogs. Susan helped to pack
the furniture; and I have brought her out to go into your service in any capacity. I suppose
we can afford to keep one domestic on our small means, even in Melbourne."

"I suppose the rest of the establishment were sorry to lose a good master," said Jane; "and
the labourers, too--what about your arrangements there?"

"The cottages were built and the allotments made over securely, and I think they are the better,
and not the worse, for my two years' tenure of Cross Hall. As for the political and social
reforms, I have no doubt that there are five hundred men in England as good as me. Sinclair
is as good an apostle of my crotchets as I could be, only he is not in the House. I will not
be so insincere as to say that I did not give up my parliamentary life with the greatest regret.
That really was THE sacrifice. You must be very, very kind to me on that account; but you know
that I could not, as an honest man, keep property which had been bequeathed to me under such
a mistake. You would not have done it under the circumstances. I tried to save it for you,
to whom it ought to have been left; but after consulting the best authorities I found I could
not do so, for your uncle's will was so distinct in excluding you from any benefit from his
estate. So, Jane, you must say that you are glad. Don't look as if you were anything but my
guiding-star--the life of my life--all the world to me. A hindrance, a stumbling-block! Without
you I should have had no high aims, no noble ambition. If I had done little or nothing, I have
learned a great deal; so

  "'Love me for the sake of what I am,
  And not of what I do.'"

"You know that I will be only too happy to be your wife, Francis," said Jane.

"And perhaps if I get on well here I may go into political life in the colony and do the work
I was sent into the world for at the other end of it. Then when are you going to give yourself
to me?"

"As soon as I can possibly leave this family. We must let Mr. Phillips know immediately. How
surprised Elsie will be!"

"Not so much as you are, I fancy. Bless her for writing me that letter; there is not one of
yours that I prize more. But with regard to the Phillipses, Miss Marry Forrester, I think,
would be very happy to take your place; and, from all I can see of her, she will do admirably.
Did you really want me to fall in love with her?"

"I wanted you to be happy, and I thought she could make you so. You do not understand how unselfish
a woman's love can be. Then, if Miss Forrester can take my place here, there need be no delay."

"You make none on your part, like a good, honest girl, as you are."

"Why should I? We have loved each other for two years. Our wedding will be the simplest affair
possible. Why should I pretend to wish to delay what will be my happiness as well as yours?
Oh, Francis! though I could not have wished you to make the sacrifices you have made for my
poor sake, yet, now that it is done, it is not a half-heart I give you. I will try to give
you no cause to regret what I have cost you. Oh, how glad I am to be able to tell you frankly
how dear you are to me!"

Epilogue

It is Christmas-day, 186-. Jane Hogarth is busy making arrangements for a quiet family dinner
party, in her pretty house, not far from Melbourne, a little annoyed because the season is
so backward that no fruit is to be had for love or money; but, on the whole, certain that things
will go off very well without it. Francis has succeeded very well in Victoria. His talents
and industry made him very valuable to the mercantile house he went into. In the course of
a few years he put his capital into it, and got a partnership, which, now that the principal
was absent on a visit to England, was on equal terms. The Brandons and Hogarths exchange Christmas
visits with each other, and this year it is Jane's turn to be the entertainer, and Elsie with
her husband and children have come down from the bush to have a little gaiety in Melbourne.

This occasion was one to be especially remarked on, for there was a bride to be honoured in
the person of pretty Grace Forrester, whom Tom Lowrie, now a rising engineer, had succeeded
in winning as his wife. All the Lowries had made good colonists; the eldest girl had married
respectably; the second assisted her aunt in the shop, which she had recently enlarged and
improved; but Tom's prospects were better than those of any other of the family, and fully
justified Jane's hopes and expectations. There is no saying where he may stop in his colonial
career. Peggy, now called Miss Walker universally, except by one or two old friends, was to
accompany her nephew and his wife. Is it really Peggy whom we see at Mrs. Hogarth's door with
the dress of rich black silk, destitute of crinoline, and the bonnet, in these days of tall
bonnets, flattened down in contempt of fashion, but still of excellent materials?

She is a better-looking woman in her older days than when she was younger. Brandon declares
that in time she will turn out quite a beauty, and takes more interest in the caps that his
wife makes as a regular thing for Peggy--four every year (nobody can make them to please her
as Mrs. Brandon can do)--than in any other of her attempts at millinery.

Another member of the party was Mr. Dempster, who had just come over from Adelaide. He had
been seized on by Francis, and begged to accept of a little corner of their somewhat crowded
house. There are a number of very bright faces collected round the table. How many recollections
of early difficulties faithfully wrestled with and overcome, throng upon our friends at such
an hour of meeting!

Peggy was disposed to improve the occasion. "Well," said she, "to think of us all being together
in this way after all we've come through! I'm not speaking of you, Mr. Dempster, for I know
none of your harassments--but when I mind of the night when Miss Jean and Miss Elsie sat in
my little room, so downcast, and so despairing, and I told them about all my troubles just
to hearten them up a bit, and to show what God had enabled me to win through, little did I
think of how the Almighty was leading us all! You mind well of how I spoke of Miss Thomson
that night, and of the money she gave for my help when I was in sore straits how to provide
for my bairns. And to think of my Tam being married on her niece! It's no for worms like us
to be proud, but to be connected with such as Miss Thomson is a cause of thanksgiving."

"And I have had a letter from Aunt Margaret, and so has Tom," said Grace, "and she is quite
pleased with our engagement. She says she knows that as Tom has raised himself so far by his
own industry and abilities, helped by the education his good aunt gave to him, that there is
no fear of his ever falling; and she said Tom's letter to her is the best thing of the kind
she ever read."

"Mrs. Hogarth taught him to write letters," said Peggy; "and really when he reads out anything
to me that he has written, it reads like a printed book. As for Miss Thomson's own letter,
it deserves to be printed in letters of gold; but mind, you young folk, not to be overmuch
set up about being married, and all your friends being so satisfied. It is a great good Providence
that you have happened so well; but all folk have not your good luck. You must not look down
on your sister Mary--who is the best of the whole bunch of you, I reckon--because she is six
years older than you and not married yet."

"Oh, auntie!" said Grace,--"with such a maiden aunt as I have, and such a maiden aunt as Tom
has, you never could dream of my looking down on old maids, or fancying I can be compared to Mary."

"Bravo! Mrs. Lowrie," said Brandon; "I wish I could find any one good enough for Miss Forrester,
but I cannot."

"Mr. Sinclair cannot comprehend my going off before Mary. He says, if he does not hear news
of her in two years' time, he must come to Australia for her himself," said Grace.

"There is likely to be another wedding ere long, at Wiriwilta, however," said Brandon.

"Emily," said Peggy, "Grace was getting word of it from her sister. She's young yet."

"So she is, and so is Edgar; but it is a settled thing. A year's engagement--or something of
that sort. Mr. and Mrs. Phillips have consented very handsomely, but Mrs. Grant thinks that,
with Emily's beauty and education (for Miss Forrester has certainly brought her on wonderfully),
she should make a better marriage."

"But, for my part, Frank," said Brandon, addressing his brother-in-law. "I do like to see young
people falling in love in this natural way, and willing to begin life not just as their fathers
leave off. I talked to Emily like a father, and told her what she could expect until they worked
for it; and she gave me a kiss, and said that she knew quite well that she could not have everything
just as it was at Wiriwilta, but if there was twice as much to give up she would do it; for,
as she said very charmingly, 'I am very fond of Edgar, and Edgar is very fond of me.' To see
people beginning life in a love-marriage so young as the happy pair in company, or even younger,
as in the case of Edgar and Emily, is very refreshing to old fogies like you and me, Frank,
who began our married life a good deal on the wrong side of thirty, and whose eldest children
look out for white hairs in our heads. The only consolation I have for not being happy younger
is, that if I had married before I should have married some one else, and that would never
have done. Elsie might have taken me a year before she did, however. I have never quite forgiven
her."

"And the young people are very fond of each other," said Peggy. "All very right, but I don't
like to see them make too much fuss. Tom and Grace are very ridiculous whiles."

