"Artificer W. H. Bartlett attracted my particular attention by [his] cool and steady gallantry,
Artificer A. S. Read shot the color bearer of the Twelfth Regiment of artillery, and secured
the color."

"Lieutenant Foster was at this time, as I have before remarked, detached with a portion of
the company; and, at the head of his men, led the Ninth and Twelfth Regiments of Infantry in
their attack on the flank of the retreating column at Contreras."

"Lieutenant McClellan, frequently detached, and several times in command of the engineer company,
is entitled to the highest praise for his cool and daring gallantry, on all occasions, in the
actions of both the 19th and 20th." (Ex. Doc. No. 1, Appendix, p. 69.)

In the pursuit, we passed through the village of San Angel; and near that place, were again
halted. During that halt, I noticed a large, high building, in an extensive open field, five
or six hundred yards to the North. Yet it may be well, perhaps, if I disclaim any intention of
derogating from their value, when I insist upon the paramount necessity of recollecting that there
is no sort of relation between the ethical, or the aesthetic, or even the scientific importance
of such works, and their worth as historical documents.

Unquestionably, to the poetic artist, or even to the student of psychology, "Hamlet" and "Macbeth"
may be better instructors than all the books of a wilderness of professors of aesthetics or of
moral philosophy. He laughingly replied: "I have been directed by General Smith to follow you and your company--of
course I will go with you".

We had not proceeded more than two hundred yards towards the building when we were overtaken
by Lieutenant Van Dorn, Aide to General Smith, who brought an order requiring the Rifle Regiment
and the engineer company to return to the head of the column on the road. I told Van Dorn the
purpose I had in view, asked him to explain the matter to General Smith, and expressed my conviction
that he would approve the movement, when he knew its object. Van Dorn replied: "General Smith
was very peremptory. I am directed to see that you and Major Loring, with your respective commands,
return at once". On our way back, Van Dorn said that General Pillow had reached the front and
taken control; and his belief was that General Pillow had ordered General Smith to recall the
engineer company and the Rifle Regiment. A short time thereafter we moved from San Angel to
Coyoacan, where the head of the column again halted; and was soon joined by General Scott.

There is good reason to believe that observations, which could easily have been made from the
roof of the high building above referred to, would have resulted in obtaining such information
in regard to the Mexican position at the Convent of Churubusco and at the tête-de-pont, as
would have enabled General Scott to complete the rout of the Mexican Army without incurring
the additional loss of nearly one thousand men in killed and wounded.

AT CHURUBUSCO. The following quotations are taken from my official report:

"Between 12 and 1 o'clock, P. M., [August 20, 1847] I received orders to move, from the village
of [Coyoacan] immediately after the rifle regiment, on a road intersecting the road from San
Antonio to Mexico, in order to cut off the enemy already retreating from San Antonio.

"I had not gone two hundred yards when I received orders to countermarch and move on another
route intersecting the road from San Antonio to the city nearer to Mexico. [The latter road
led nearly due east, parallel to the front of the earthworks at the Convent, distant from those
works about 250 yards]. The regiment of riflemen continued on the road on which I first started.
[This road led south-east from Coyoacan]. The company took its place [again] at the head of
the column [Twiggs's division]. The column was halted by General Twiggs, and I was directed
by him to send an officer in advance to see the position of a battery reported to be not far
in front. But have we a right to do so? The narrative speaks of "the whole earth." But what is
the meaning of this expression? Surely not the whole surface of the earth according to the
ideas of modern geographers, but, at most, according to the conceptions of the Biblical author.
This very simple conclusion, however, is never drawn by too many readers of the Bible. But one
need only cast one's eyes over the tenth chapter of Genesis in order to become acquainted with
the geographical horizon of the Jews. Having proceeded 500 yards, we saw
[Mexican] troops on our right, left, and in front. A lancer was taken prisoner. Lieutenant
Stevens directed me to take the prisoner to the general and request an additional escort of
two companies. We were at this time about 300 yards from the battery, but it was still almost
masked from view. I delivered the prisoner and the message to General Twiggs, and returned
at once to my company which I had left in charge of Lieutenant Foster. Lieutenant Stevens joined
General Twiggs whilst I was with him. When I resumed command of the company, Lieutenant McClellan
reported to me that our troops were already engaged in our front; having, apparently, turned
the battery and convent by our right. One of General Twiggs's staff, [Lieutenant W. T. H. Brooks,
A. A. Adjutant General, Twiggs's division,] was present and informed us that the rifles with
Captain Lee of the engineers, were reconnoitring the same works, and had gone to our right
considerably farther from the battery than we then were. We all concurred in opinion that the
rifles were engaged with a vastly superior force. There was at this time no firing of artillery.
I ordered Lieutenant McClellan to report the result of his observations to General Twiggs.
He did so, and on the recommendation of Lieutenants Stevens and McClellan, in which I concurred,
the First Regiment of Artillery was ordered to support the rifles. The firing on the right
increased; it was evident that several thousands of the enemy were pouring a heavy musketry
fire into our troops on the right. The tops of the convent and the surrounding walls were lined
with troops; the roof was literally covered. Lieutenant Stevens was of opinion that a few rounds
of grape would disperse these masses and relieve our troops already engaged [on the right]
from a destructive plunging fire. He went back to the general, leaving myself the senior engineer
then in front of the [convent] battery. If the Gospels truly report that which an incarnation of the
God of Truth communicated to the world, then it surely is absurd to attend to any other evidence touching
matters about which he made any clear statement, or the truth of
which is distinctly implied by his words.
Nothing heavier than a 4 or 6-pounder had yet been fired." (Ex. Doc. No. 1, Appendix, p. 69.)

In my official report it is further stated that: "The troops had become engaged in our front
within ten minutes after a reconnaissance had been ordered by General Twiggs, and before the
officer whom I was escorting had been able to make a single observation".

In my official copy of that report, I find the following sentence, which is not in the printed
report:

"Deeply do I regret that the attack, in advance of the reconnoitring party, precipitated the
attack on our side, and involved us in action against we knew not what".

The force which became engaged, far to our right--before the reconnaissance, supported by the
engineer company, fairly commenced, was the advance of Worth's division pursuing the Mexicans
who had abandoned their strong works at San Antonio.

Captain James L. Mason, engineer of Worth's division, says, in his official report, that the
works attacked by that division, and "so gallantly stormed, had not been reconnoitred".