Volume I.

                             Part 15. The whole story is curious and uncommon, and
abounds with incidents that fill the hearers with wonder and
astonishment; and so great is the pleasure we have found in listening to
it that we should be glad if it were to begin again, even though
to-morrow were to find us still occupied with the same tale." And while
he said this Cardenio and the rest of them offered to be of service to
him in any way that lay in their power, and in words and language so
kindly and sincere that the captain was much gratified by their
good-will. In particular Don Fernando offered, if he would go back with
him, to get his brother the marquis to become godfather at the baptism of
Zoraida, and on his own part to provide him with the means of making his
appearance in his own country with the credit and comfort he was entitled
to. For all this the captive returned thanks very courteously, although
he would not accept any of their generous offers.

By this time night closed in, and as it did, there came up to the inn a coach attended by some
men on horseback, who demanded accommodation; to which the landlady replied that there was
not a hand's breadth of the whole inn unoccupied.

"Still, for all that," said one of those who had entered on horseback, "room must be found
for his lordship the Judge here."

At this name the landlady was taken aback, and said, "Senor, the fact is I have no beds; but
if his lordship the Judge carries one with him, as no doubt he does, let him come in and welcome;
for my husband and I will give up our room to accommodate his worship."

"Very good, so be it," said the squire; but in the meantime a man had got out of the coach
whose dress indicated at a glance the office and post he held, for the long robe with ruffled
sleeves that he wore showed that he was, as his servant said, a Judge of appeal. He led by
the hand a young girl in a travelling dress, apparently about sixteen years of age, and of
such a high-bred air, so beautiful and so graceful, that all were filled with admiration when
she made her appearance, and but for having seen Dorothea, Luscinda, and Zoraida, who were
there in the inn, they would have fancied that a beauty like that of this maiden's would have
been hard to find. Don Quixote was present at the entrance of the Judge with the young lady,
and as soon as he saw him he said, "Your worship may with confidence enter and take your ease
in this castle; for though the accommodation be scanty and poor, there are no quarters so cramped
or inconvenient that they cannot make room for arms and letters; above all if arms and letters
have beauty for a guide and leader, as letters represented by your worship have in this fair
maiden, to whom not only ought castles to throw themselves open and yield themselves up, but
rocks should rend themselves asunder and mountains divide and bow themselves down to give her
a reception. Enter, your worship, I say, into this paradise, for here you will find stars and
suns to accompany the heaven your worship brings with you, here you will find arms in their
supreme excellence, and beauty in its highest perfection."

The Judge was struck with amazement at the language of Don Quixote, whom he scrutinized very
carefully, no less astonished by his figure than by his talk; and before he could find words
to answer him he had a fresh surprise, when he saw opposite to him Luscinda, Dorothea, and
Zoraida, who, having heard of the new guests and of the beauty of the young lady, had come
to see her and welcome her; Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the curate, however, greeted him in
a more intelligible and polished style. In short, the Judge made his entrance in a state of
bewilderment, as well with what he saw as what he heard, and the fair ladies of the inn gave
the fair damsel a cordial welcome. On the whole he could perceive that all who were there were
people of quality; but with the figure, countenance, and bearing of Don Quixote he was at his
wits' end; and all civilities having been exchanged, and the accommodation of the inn inquired
into, it was settled, as it had been before settled, that all the women should retire to the
garret that has been already mentioned, and that the men should remain outside as if to guard
them; the Judge, therefore, was very well pleased to allow his daughter, for such the damsel
was, to go with the ladies, which she did very willingly; and with part of the host's narrow
bed and half of what the Judge had brought with him, they made a more comfortable arrangement
for the night than they had expected.

The captive, whose heart had leaped within him the instant he saw the Judge, telling him somehow
that this was his brother, asked one of the servants who accompanied him what his name was,
and whether he knew from what part of the country he came. The servant replied that he was
called the Licentiate Juan Perez de Viedma, and that he had heard it said he came from a village
in the mountains of Leon. From this statement, and what he himself had seen, he felt convinced
that this was his brother who had adopted letters by his father's advice; and excited and rejoiced,
he called Don Fernando and Cardenio and the curate aside, and told them how the matter stood,
assuring them that the judge was his brother. The servant had further informed him that he
was now going to the Indies with the appointment of Judge of the Supreme Court of Mexico; and
he had learned, likewise, that the young lady was his daughter, whose mother had died in giving
birth to her, and that he was very rich in consequence of the dowry left to him with the daughter.
He asked their advice as to what means he should adopt to make himself known, or to ascertain
beforehand whether, when he had made himself known, his brother, seeing him so poor, would
be ashamed of him, or would receive him with a warm heart.

"Leave it to me to find out that," said the curate; "though there is no reason for supposing,
senor captain, that you will not be kindly received, because the worth and wisdom that your
brother's bearing shows him to possess do not make it likely that he will prove haughty or
insensible, or that he will not know how to estimate the accidents of fortune at their proper
value."

"Still," said the captain, "I would not make myself known abruptly, but in some indirect way."

"I have told you already," said the curate, "that I will manage it in a way to satisfy us all."

By this time supper was ready, and they all took their seats at the table, except the captive,
and the ladies, who supped by themselves in their own room. In the middle of supper the curate
said:

"I had a comrade of your worship's name, Senor Judge, in Constantinople, where I was a captive
for several years, and that same comrade was one of the stoutest soldiers and captains in the
whole Spanish infantry; but he had as large a share of misfortune as he had of gallantry and
courage."

"And how was the captain called, senor?" asked the Judge.

"He was called Ruy Perez de Viedma," replied the curate, "and he was born in a village in the
mountains of Leon; and he mentioned a circumstance connected with his father and his brothers
which, had it not been told me by so truthful a man as he was, I should have set down as one
of those fables the old women tell over the fire in winter; for he said his father had divided
his property among his three sons and had addressed words of advice to them sounder than any
of Cato's. But I can say this much, that the choice he made of going to the wars was attended
with such success, that by his gallant conduct and courage, and without any help save his own
merit, he rose in a few years to be captain of infantry, and to see himself on the high-road
and in position to be given the command of a corps before long; but Fortune was against him,
for where he might have expected her favour he lost it, and with it his liberty, on that glorious
day when so many recovered theirs, at the battle of Lepanto. I lost mine at the Goletta, and
after a variety of adventures we found ourselves comrades at Constantinople. Thence he went
to Algiers, where he met with one of the most extraordinary adventures that ever befell anyone
in the world."

Here the curate went on to relate briefly his brother's adventure with Zoraida; to all which
the Judge gave such an attentive hearing that he never before had been so much of a hearer.
The curate, however, only went so far as to describe how the Frenchmen plundered those who
were in the boat, and the poverty and distress in which his comrade and the fair Moor were
left, of whom he said he had not been able to learn what became of them, or whether they had
reached Spain, or been carried to France by the Frenchmen.

The captain, standing a little to one side, was listening to all the curate said, and watching
every movement of his brother, who, as soon as he perceived the curate had made an end of his
story, gave a deep sigh and said with his eyes full of tears, "Oh, senor, if you only knew
what news you have given me and how it comes home to me, making me show how I feel it with
these tears that spring from my eyes in spite of all my worldly wisdom and self-restraint!
That brave captain that you speak of is my eldest brother, who, being of a bolder and loftier
mind than my other brother or myself, chose the honourable and worthy calling of arms, which
was one of the three careers our father proposed to us, as your comrade mentioned in that fable
you thought he was telling you. I followed that of letters, in which God and my own exertions
have raised me to the position in which you see me. My second brother is in Peru, so wealthy
that with what he has sent to my father and to me he has fully repaid the portion he took with
him, and has even furnished my father's hands with the means of gratifying his natural generosity,
while I too have been enabled to pursue my studies in a more becoming and creditable fashion,
and so to attain my present standing. My father is still alive, though dying with anxiety to
hear of his eldest son, and he prays God unceasingly that death may not close his eyes until
he has looked upon those of his son; but with regard to him what surprises me is, that having
so much common sense as he had, he should have neglected to give any intelligence about himself,
either in his troubles and sufferings, or in his prosperity, for if his father or any of us
had known of his condition he need not have waited for that miracle of the reed to obtain his
ransom; but what now disquiets me is the uncertainty whether those Frenchmen may have restored
him to liberty, or murdered him to hide the robbery. All this will make me continue my journey,
not with the satisfaction in which I began it, but in the deepest melancholy and sadness. Oh
dear brother! that I only knew where thou art now, and I would hasten to seek thee out and
deliver thee from thy sufferings, though it were to cost me suffering myself! Oh that I could
bring news to our old father that thou art alive, even wert thou the deepest dungeon of Barbary;
for his wealth and my brother's and mine would rescue thee thence! Oh beautiful and generous
Zoraida, that I could repay thy good goodness to a brother! That I could be present at the
new birth of thy soul, and at thy bridal that would give us all such happiness!"

All this and more the Judge uttered with such deep emotion at the news he had received of his
brother that all who heard him shared in it, showing their sympathy with his sorrow. The curate,
seeing, then, how well he had succeeded in carrying out his purpose and the captain's wishes,
had no desire to keep them unhappy any longer, so he rose from the table and going into the
room where Zoraida was he took her by the hand, Luscinda, Dorothea, and the Judge's daughter
following her. The captain was waiting to see what the curate would do, when the latter, taking
him with the other hand, advanced with both of them to where the Judge and the other gentlemen
were and said, "Let your tears cease to flow, Senor Judge, and the wish of your heart be gratified
as fully as you could desire, for you have before you your worthy brother and your good sister-in-law.
He whom you see here is the Captain Viedma, and this is the fair Moor who has been so good
to him. The Frenchmen I told you of have reduced them to the state of poverty you see that
you may show the generosity of your kind heart."

The captain ran to embrace his brother, who placed both hands on his breast so as to have a
good look at him, holding him a little way off but as soon as he had fully recognised him he
clasped him in his arms so closely, shedding such tears of heartfelt joy, that most of those
present could not but join in them. The words the brothers exchanged, the emotion they showed
can scarcely be imagined, I fancy, much less put down in writing. They told each other in a
few words the events of their lives; they showed the true affection of brothers in all its
strength; then the judge embraced Zoraida, putting all he possessed at her disposal; then he
made his daughter embrace her, and the fair Christian and the lovely Moor drew fresh tears
from every eye. And there was Don Quixote observing all these strange proceedings attentively
without uttering a word, and attributing the whole to chimeras of knight-errantry. Then they
agreed that the captain and Zoraida should return with his brother to Seville, and send news
to his father of his having been delivered and found, so as to enable him to come and be present
at the marriage and baptism of Zoraida, for it was impossible for the Judge to put off his
journey, as he was informed that in a month from that time the fleet was to sail from Seville
for New Spain, and to miss the passage would have been a great inconvenience to him. In short,
everybody was well pleased and glad at the captive's good fortune; and as now almost two-thirds
of the night were past, they resolved to retire to rest for the remainder of it. Don Quixote
offered to mount guard over the castle lest they should be attacked by some giant or other
malevolent scoundrel, covetous of the great treasure of beauty the castle contained. Those
who understood him returned him thanks for this service, and they gave the Judge an account
of his extraordinary humour, with which he was not a little amused. Sancho Panza alone was
fuming at the lateness of the hour for retiring to rest; and he of all was the one that made
himself most comfortable, as he stretched himself on the trappings of his ass, which, as will
be told farther on, cost him so dear.

The ladies, then, having retired to their chamber, and the others having disposed themselves
with as little discomfort as they could, Don Quixote sallied out of the inn to act as sentinel
of the castle as he had promised. It happened, however, that a little before the approach of
dawn a voice so musical and sweet reached the ears of the ladies that it forced them all to
listen attentively, but especially Dorothea, who had been awake, and by whose side Dona Clara
de Viedma, for so the Judge's daughter was called, lay sleeping. No one could imagine who it
was that sang so sweetly, and the voice was unaccompanied by any instrument. At one moment
it seemed to them as if the singer were in the courtyard, at another in the stable; and as
they were all attention, wondering, Cardenio came to the door and said, "Listen, whoever is
not asleep, and you will hear a muleteer's voice that enchants as it chants."

One solitary distant star
  Is all I have to guide me,
A brighter orb than those of old
  That Palinurus lighted.

And vaguely drifting am I borne,
  I know not where it leads me;
I fix my gaze on it alone,
  Of all beside it heedless.

But over-cautious prudery,
  And coyness cold and cruel,
When most I need it, these, like clouds,
  Its longed-for light refuse me.

Bright star, goal of my yearning eyes
  As thou above me beamest,
When thou shalt hide thee from my sight
  I'll know that death is near me.

The singer had got so far when it struck Dorothea that it was not fair to let Clara miss hearing
such a sweet voice, so, shaking her from side to side, she woke her, saying:

"Forgive me, child, for waking thee, but I do so that thou mayest have the pleasure of hearing
the best voice thou hast ever heard, perhaps, in all thy life."

Clara awoke quite drowsy, and not understanding at the moment what Dorothea said, asked her
what it was; she repeated what she had said, and Clara became attentive at once; but she had
hardly heard two lines, as the singer continued, when a strange trembling seized her, as if
she were suffering from a severe attack of quartan ague, and throwing her arms round Dorothea
she said:

"Ah, dear lady of my soul and life! why did you wake me? The greatest kindness fortune could
do me now would be to close my eyes and ears so as neither to see or hear that unhappy musician."

"What art thou talking about, child?" said Dorothea. "Why, they say this singer is a muleteer!"

"Nay, he is the lord of many places," replied Clara, "and that one in my heart which he holds
so firmly shall never be taken from him, unless he be willing to surrender it."

Dorothea was amazed at the ardent language of the girl, for it seemed to be far beyond such
experience of life as her tender years gave any promise of, so she said to her:

"You speak in such a way that I cannot understand you, Senora Clara; explain yourself more
clearly, and tell me what is this you are saying about hearts and places and this musician
whose voice has so moved you? But do not tell me anything now; I do not want to lose the pleasure
I get from listening to the singer by giving my attention to your transports, for I perceive
he is beginning to sing a new strain and a new air."

"Let him, in Heaven's name," returned Clara; and not to hear him she stopped both ears with
her hands, at which Dorothea was again surprised; but turning her attention to the song she
found that it ran in this fashion:

  Sweet Hope, my stay,
That onward to the goal of thy intent
  Dost make thy way,
Heedless of hindrance or impediment,
  Have thou no fear
If at each step thou findest death is near.

  No victory,
No joy of triumph doth the faint heart know;
  Unblest is he
That a bold front to Fortune dares not show,
  But soul and sense
In bondage yieldeth up to indolence.

  If Love his wares
Do dearly sell, his right must be contest;
  What gold compares
With that whereon his stamp he hath imprest?
  And all men know
What costeth little that we rate but low.

  Love resolute
Knows not the word "impossibility;"
  And though my suit
Beset by endless obstacles I see,
  Yet no despair
Shall hold me bound to earth while heaven is there.

Here the voice ceased and Clara's sobs began afresh, all which excited Dorothea's curiosity
to know what could be the cause of singing so sweet and weeping so bitter, so she again asked
her what it was she was going to say before. On this Clara, afraid that Luscinda might overhear
her, winding her arms tightly round Dorothea put her mouth so close to her ear that she could
speak without fear of being heard by anyone else, and said:

"This singer, dear senora, is the son of a gentleman of Aragon, lord of two villages, who lives
opposite my father's house at Madrid; and though my father had curtains to the windows of his
house in winter, and lattice-work in summer, in some way--I know not how--this gentleman, who
was pursuing his studies, saw me, whether in church or elsewhere, I cannot tell, and, in fact,
fell in love with me, and gave me to know it from the windows of his house, with so many signs
and tears that I was forced to believe him, and even to love him, without knowing what it was
he wanted of me. One of the signs he used to make me was to link one hand in the other, to
show me he wished to marry me; and though I should have been glad if that could be, being alone
and motherless I knew not whom to open my mind to, and so I left it as it was, showing him
no favour, except when my father, and his too, were from home, to raise the curtain or the
lattice a little and let him see me plainly, at which he would show such delight that he seemed
as if he were going mad. Meanwhile the time for my father's departure arrived, which he became
aware of, but not from me, for I had never been able to tell him of it. He fell sick, of grief
I believe, and so the day we were going away I could not see him to take farewell of him, were
it only with the eyes. But after we had been two days on the road, on entering the posada of
a village a day's journey from this, I saw him at the inn door in the dress of a muleteer,
and so well disguised, that if I did not carry his image graven on my heart it would have been
impossible for me to recognise him. But I knew him, and I was surprised, and glad; he watched
me, unsuspected by my father, from whom he always hides himself when he crosses my path on
the road, or in the posadas where we halt; and, as I know what he is, and reflect that for
love of me he makes this journey on foot in all this hardship, I am ready to die of sorrow;
and where he sets foot there I set my eyes. I know not with what object he has come; or how
he could have got away from his father, who loves him beyond measure, having no other heir,
and because he deserves it, as you will perceive when you see him. And moreover, I can tell
you, all that he sings is out of his own head; for I have heard them say he is a great scholar
and poet; and what is more, every time I see him or hear him sing I tremble all over, and am
terrified lest my father should recognise him and come to know of our loves. I have never spoken
a word to him in my life; and for all that I love him so that I could not live without him.
This, dear senora, is all I have to tell you about the musician whose voice has delighted you
so much; and from it alone you might easily perceive he is no muleteer, but a lord of hearts
and towns, as I told you already."

"Say no more, Dona Clara," said Dorothea at this, at the same time kissing her a thousand times
over, "say no more, I tell you, but wait till day comes; when I trust in God to arrange this
affair of yours so that it may have the happy ending such an innocent beginning deserves."

"Ah, senora," said Dona Clara, "what end can be hoped for when his father is of such lofty
position, and so wealthy, that he would think I was not fit to be even a servant to his son,
much less wife? And as to marrying without the knowledge of my father, I would not do it for
all the world. I would not ask anything more than that this youth should go back and leave
me; perhaps with not seeing him, and the long distance we shall have to travel, the pain I
suffer now may become easier; though I daresay the remedy I propose will do me very little
good. I don't know how the devil this has come about, or how this love I have for him got in;
I such a young girl, and he such a mere boy; for I verily believe we are both of an age, and
I am not sixteen yet; for I will be sixteen Michaelmas Day, next, my father says."

Dorothea could not help laughing to hear how like a child Dona Clara spoke. "Let us go to sleep
now, senora," said she, "for the little of the night that I fancy is left to us: God will soon
send us daylight, and we will set all to rights, or it will go hard with me."

With this they fell asleep, and deep silence reigned all through the inn. The only persons
not asleep were the landlady's daughter and her servant Maritornes, who, knowing the weak point
of Don Quixote's humour, and that he was outside the inn mounting guard in armour and on horseback,
resolved, the pair of them, to play some trick upon him, or at any rate to amuse themselves
for a while by listening to his nonsense. As it so happened there was not a window in the whole
inn that looked outwards except a hole in the wall of a straw-loft through which they used
to throw out the straw. At this hole the two demi-damsels posted themselves, and observed Don
Quixote on his horse, leaning on his pike and from time to time sending forth such deep and
doleful sighs, that he seemed to pluck up his soul by the roots with each of them; and they
could hear him, too, saying in a soft, tender, loving tone, "Oh my lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
perfection of all beauty, summit and crown of discretion, treasure house of grace, depositary
of virtue, and finally, ideal of all that is good, honourable, and delectable in this world!
What is thy grace doing now? Art thou, perchance, mindful of thy enslaved knight who of his
own free will hath exposed himself to so great perils, and all to serve thee? Give me tidings
of her, oh luminary of the three faces! Perhaps at this moment, envious of hers, thou art regarding
her, either as she paces to and fro some gallery of her sumptuous palaces, or leans over some
balcony, meditating how, whilst preserving her purity and greatness, she may mitigate the tortures
this wretched heart of mine endures for her sake, what glory should recompense my sufferings,
what repose my toil, and lastly what death my life, and what reward my services? And thou,
oh sun, that art now doubtless harnessing thy steeds in haste to rise betimes and come forth
to see my lady; when thou seest her I entreat of thee to salute her on my behalf: but have
a care, when thou shalt see her and salute her, that thou kiss not her face; for I shall be
more jealous of thee than thou wert of that light-footed ingrate that made thee sweat and run
so on the plains of Thessaly, or on the banks of the Peneus (for I do not exactly recollect
where it was thou didst run on that occasion) in thy jealousy and love."

Don Quixote had got so far in his pathetic speech when the landlady's daughter began to signal
to him, saying, "Senor, come over here, please."

At these signals and voice Don Quixote turned his head and saw by the light of the moon, which
then was in its full splendour, that some one was calling to him from the hole in the wall,
which seemed to him to be a window, and what is more, with a gilt grating, as rich castles,
such as he believed the inn to be, ought to have; and it immediately suggested itself to his
imagination that, as on the former occasion, the fair damsel, the daughter of the lady of the
castle, overcome by love for him, was once more endeavouring to win his affections; and with
this idea, not to show himself discourteous, or ungrateful, he turned Rocinante's head and
approached the hole, and as he perceived the two wenches he said:

"I pity you, beauteous lady, that you should have directed your thoughts of love to a quarter
from whence it is impossible that such a return can be made to you as is due to your great
merit and gentle birth, for which you must not blame this unhappy knight-errant whom love renders
incapable of submission to any other than her whom, the first moment his eyes beheld her, he
made absolute mistress of his soul. Forgive me, noble lady, and retire to your apartment, and
do not, by any further declaration of your passion, compel me to show myself more ungrateful;
and if, of the love you bear me, you should find that there is anything else in my power wherein
I can gratify you, provided it be not love itself, demand it of me; for I swear to you by that
sweet absent enemy of mine to grant it this instant, though it be that you require of me a
lock of Medusa's hair, which was all snakes, or even the very beams of the sun shut up in a vial."

"My mistress wants nothing of that sort, sir knight," said Maritornes at this.

"What then, discreet dame, is it that your mistress wants?" replied Don Quixote.

"Only one of your fair hands," said Maritornes, "to enable her to vent over it the great passion
passion which has brought her to this loophole, so much to the risk of her honour; for if the
lord her father had heard her, the least slice he would cut off her would be her ear." 

In some cases, however, only a trained observer can decide the question.

~Changes in physical state.~ One class of physical changes should
be noted with especial care, since it is likely to prove misleading.

It is a familiar fact that ice is changed into water, and water into steam, by heating. Here
we have three different substances,--the solid ice, the liquid water, and the gaseous steam,--the
properties of which differ widely. The chemist can readily show, however, that these three bodies
have exactly the same composition, being composed of the same substances in the same proportion.
Hence the change from one of these substances into another is a physical change. Many other substances
may, under suitable conditions, be changed from solids into liquids, or from liquids into
gases, without change in composition. Thus butter and wax will melt when heated; alcohol and gasoline
will evaporate when exposed to the air. The three states--solid, liquid, and gas--are called
the three physical states of matter.

~Physical and chemical properties.~ Many properties of a substance can be noted without causing
the substance to undergo chemical change, and are therefore called its physical properties.
Among these are its physical state, color, odor, taste, size, shape,
weight.

Other properties are only discovered when the substance undergoes chemical change. These are
called its chemical properties. Thus we find that coal burns in air, gunpowder explodes when
ignited, milk sours when exposed to air.

~Definition of physics and chemistry.~ It is now possible to make a general distinction between
physics and chemistry.

DEFINITION: Physics is the science which deals with those changes in matter which do not involve
a change in composition.

DEFINITION: Chemistry is the science which deals with those changes in matter which do involve
a change in composition.

~Two factors in all changes.~ In all the changes which matter can undergo, whether physical or chemical,
two factors must be taken into account, namely, energy and matter.

~Energy.~ It is a familiar fact that certain bodies have the power to do work. Thus water falling
from a height upon a water wheel turns the wheel and in this way does the work of the mills.
Magnetized iron attracts iron to itself and the motion of the iron
as it moves towards the magnet can be made to do work. When coal is
burned it causes the engine to move and transports the loaded cars
from place to place. When a body has this power to do work it is said
to possess energy.

~Law of conservation of energy.~ Careful experiments
have shown that when one body parts with its energy the energy is
not destroyed but is transferred to another body or system of bodies.
Just as energy cannot be destroyed, neither can it be created. If
one body gains a certain amount of energy, some other body has lost
an equivalent amount. These facts are summed up in the law of conservation
of energy which may be stated thus: While energy can be changed from
one form into another, it cannot be created or destroyed. Nevertheless he pulled his arm to see if he could release himself, but it had been
made so fast that all his efforts were in vain. It is true he pulled it gently lest Rocinante
should move, but try as he might to seat himself in the saddle, he had nothing for it but to
stand upright or pull his hand off. Then it was he wished for the sword of Amadis, against
which no enchantment whatever had any power; then he cursed his ill fortune; then he magnified
the loss the world would sustain by his absence while he remained there enchanted, for that
he believed he was beyond all doubt; then he once more took to thinking of his beloved Dulcinea
del Toboso; then he called to his worthy squire Sancho Panza, who, buried in sleep and stretched
upon the pack-saddle of his ass, was oblivious, at that moment, of the mother that bore him;
then he called upon the sages Lirgandeo and Alquife to come to his aid; then he invoked his
good friend Urganda to succour him; and then, at last, morning found him in such a state of
desperation and perplexity that he was bellowing like a bull, for he had no hope that day would
bring any relief to his suffering, which he believed would last for ever, inasmuch as he was
enchanted; and of this he was convinced by seeing that Rocinante never stirred, much or little,
and he felt persuaded that he and his horse were to remain in this state, without eating or
drinking or sleeping, until the malign influence of the stars was overpast, or until some other
more sage enchanter should disenchant him.

But he was very much deceived in this conclusion, for daylight had hardly begun to appear when
there came up to the inn four men on horseback, well equipped and accoutred, with firelocks
across their saddle-bows. They called out and knocked loudly at the gate of the inn, which
was still shut; on seeing which, Don Quixote, even there where he was, did not forget to act
as sentinel, and said in a loud and imperious tone, "Knights, or squires, or whatever ye be,
ye have no right to knock at the gates of this castle; for it is plain enough that they who
are within are either asleep, or else are not in the habit of throwing open the fortress until
the sun's rays are spread over the whole surface of the earth. Withdraw to a distance, and
wait till it is broad daylight, and then we shall see whether it will be proper or not to open
to you."

"What the devil fortress or castle is this," said one, "to make us stand on such ceremony?
If you are the innkeeper bid them open to us; we are travellers who only want to feed our horses
and go on, for we are in haste."

"Do you think, gentlemen, that I look like an innkeeper?" said Don Quixote.

"I don't know what you look like," replied the other; "but I know that you are talking nonsense
when you call this inn a castle."

"A castle it is," returned Don Quixote, "nay, more, one of the best in this whole province,
and it has within it people who have had the sceptre in the hand and the crown on the head."

"It would be better if it were the other way," said the traveller, "the sceptre on the head
and the crown in the hand; but if so, may be there is within some company of players, with
whom it is a common thing to have those crowns and sceptres you speak of; for in such a small
inn as this, and where such silence is kept, I do not believe any people entitled to crowns
and sceptres can have taken up their quarters."

"You know but little of the world," returned Don Quixote, "since you are ignorant of what commonly
occurs in knight-errantry."

But the comrades of the spokesman, growing weary of the dialogue with Don Quixote, renewed
their knocks with great vehemence, so much so that the host, and not only he but everybody
in the inn, awoke, and he got up to ask who knocked. It happened at this moment that one of
the horses of the four who were seeking admittance went to smell Rocinante, who melancholy,
dejected, and with drooping ears stood motionless, supporting his sorely stretched master;
and as he was, after all, flesh, though he looked as if he were made of wood, he could not
help giving way and in return smelling the one who had come to offer him attentions. But he
had hardly moved at all when Don Quixote lost his footing; and slipping off the saddle, he
would have come to the ground, but for being suspended by the arm, which caused him such agony
that he believed either his wrist would be cut through or his arm torn off; and he hung so
near the ground that he could just touch it with his feet, which was all the worse for him;
for, finding how little was wanted to enable him to plant his feet firmly, he struggled and
stretched himself as much as he could to gain a footing; just like those undergoing the torture
of the strappado, when they are fixed at "touch and no touch," who aggravate their own sufferings
by their violent efforts to stretch themselves, deceived by the hope which makes them fancy
that with a very little more they will reach the ground.

CHAPTER XLIV.

IN WHICH ARE CONTINUED THE UNHEARD-OF ADVENTURES OF THE INN

So loud, in fact, were the shouts of Don Quixote, that the landlord opening the gate of the
inn in all haste, came out in dismay, and ran to see who was uttering such cries, and those
who were outside joined him. Maritornes, who had been by this time roused up by the same outcry,
suspecting what it was, ran to the loft and, without anyone seeing her, untied the halter by
which Don Quixote was suspended, and down he came to the ground in the sight of the landlord
and the travellers, who approaching asked him what was the matter with him that he shouted
so. He without replying a word took the rope off his wrist, and rising to his feet leaped upon
Rocinante, braced his buckler on his arm, put his lance in rest, and making a considerable
circuit of the plain came back at a half-gallop exclaiming:

"Whoever shall say that I have been enchanted with just cause, provided my lady the Princess
Micomicona grants me permission to do so, I give him the lie, challenge him and defy him to
single combat."

The newly arrived travellers were amazed at the words of Don Quixote; but the landlord removed
their surprise by telling them who he was, and not to mind him as he was out of his senses.
They then asked the landlord if by any chance a youth of about fifteen years of age had come
to that inn, one dressed like a muleteer, and of such and such an appearance, describing that
of Dona Clara's lover. The landlord replied that there were so many people in the inn he had
not noticed the person they were inquiring for; but one of them observing the coach in which
the Judge had come, said, "He is here no doubt, for this is the coach he is following: let
one of us stay at the gate, and the rest go in to look for him; or indeed it would be as well
if one of us went round the inn, lest he should escape over the wall of the yard." "So be it,"
said another; and while two of them went in, one remained at the gate and the other made the
circuit of the inn; observing all which, the landlord was unable to conjecture for what reason
they were taking all these precautions, though he understood they were looking for the youth
whose description they had given him.

It was by this time broad daylight; and for that reason, as well as in consequence of the noise
Don Quixote had made, everybody was awake and up, but particularly Dona Clara and Dorothea;
for they had been able to sleep but badly that night, the one from agitation at having her
lover so near her, the other from curiosity to see him. Don Quixote, when he saw that not one
of the four travellers took any notice of him or replied to his challenge, was furious and
ready to die with indignation and wrath; and if he could have found in the ordinances of chivalry
that it was lawful for a knight-errant to undertake or engage in another enterprise, when he
had plighted his word and faith not to involve himself in any until he had made an end of the
one to which he was pledged, he would have attacked the whole of them, and would have made
them return an answer in spite of themselves. But considering that it would not become him,
nor be right, to begin any new emprise until he had established Micomicona in her kingdom,
he was constrained to hold his peace and wait quietly to see what would be the upshot of the
proceedings of those same travellers; one of whom found the youth they were seeking lying asleep
by the side of a muleteer, without a thought of anyone coming in search of him, much less finding
him.

The man laid hold of him by the arm, saying, "It becomes you well indeed, Senor Don Luis, to
be in the dress you wear, and well the bed in which I find you agrees with the luxury in which
your mother reared you."

The youth rubbed his sleepy eyes and stared for a while at him who held him, but presently
recognised him as one of his father's servants, at which he was so taken aback that for some
time he could not find or utter a word; while the servant went on to say, "There is nothing
for it now, Senor Don Luis, but to submit quietly and return home, unless it is your wish that
my lord, your father, should take his departure for the other world, for nothing else can be
the consequence of the grief he is in at your absence."

"But how did my father know that I had gone this road and in this dress?" said Don Luis.

"It was a student to whom you confided your intentions," answered the servant, "that disclosed
them, touched with pity at the distress he saw your father suffer on missing you; he therefore
despatched four of his servants in quest of you, and here we all are at your service, better
pleased than you can imagine that we shall return so soon and be able to restore you to those
eyes that so yearn for you."

"That shall be as I please, or as heaven orders," returned Don Luis.

"What can you please or heaven order," said the other, "except to agree to go back? Anything
else is impossible."

All this conversation between the two was overheard by the muleteer at whose side Don Luis
lay, and rising, he went to report what had taken place to Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the
others, who had by this time dressed themselves; and told them how the man had addressed the
youth as "Don," and what words had passed, and how he wanted him to return to his father, which
the youth was unwilling to do. With this, and what they already knew of the rare voice that
heaven had bestowed upon him, they all felt very anxious to know more particularly who he was,
and even to help him if it was attempted to employ force against him; so they hastened to where
he was still talking and arguing with his servant. Dorothea at this instant came out of her
room, followed by Dona Clara all in a tremor; and calling Cardenio aside, she told him in a
few words the story of the musician and Dona Clara, and he at the same time told her what had
happened, how his father's servants had come in search of him; but in telling her so, he did
not speak low enough but that Dona Clara heard what he said, at which she was so much agitated
that had not Dorothea hastened to support her she would have fallen to the ground. Cardenio
then bade Dorothea return to her room, as he would endeavour to make the whole matter right,
and they did as he desired. All the four who had come in quest of Don Luis had now come into
the inn and surrounded him, urging him to return and console his father at once and without
a moment's delay. He replied that he could not do so on any account until he had concluded
some business in which his life, honour, and heart were at stake. The servants pressed him,
saying that most certainly they would not return without him, and that they would take him
away whether he liked it or not.

"You shall not do that," replied Don Luis, "unless you take me dead; though however you take
me, it will be without life."

By this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the dispute, but particularly Cardenio,
Don Fernando, his companions, the Judge, the curate, the barber, and Don Quixote; for he now
considered there was no necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer. Cardenio being
already acquainted with the young man's story, asked the men who wanted to take him away, what
object they had in seeking to carry off this youth against his will.

"Our object," said one of the four, "is to save the life of his father, who is in danger of
losing it through this gentleman's disappearance."

Upon this Don Luis exclaimed, "There is no need to make my affairs public here; I am free,
and I will return if I please; and if not, none of you shall compel me."

"Reason will compel your worship," said the man, "and if it has no power over you, it has power
over us, to make us do what we came for, and what it is our duty to do."

"Let us hear what the whole affair is about," said the Judge at this; but the man, who knew
him as a neighbour of theirs, replied, "Do you not know this gentleman, Senor Judge? He is
the son of your neighbour, who has run away from his father's house in a dress so unbecoming
his rank, as your worship may perceive."

The judge on this looked at him more carefully and recognised him, and embracing him said,
"What folly is this, Senor Don Luis, or what can have been the cause that could have induced
you to come here in this way, and in this dress, which so ill becomes your condition?"

Tears came into the eyes of the young man, and he was unable to utter a word in reply to the
Judge, who told the four servants not to be uneasy, for all would be satisfactorily settled;
and then taking Don Luis by the hand, he drew him aside and asked the reason of his having
come there.

But while he was questioning him they heard a loud outcry at the gate of the inn, the cause
of which was that two of the guests who had passed the night there, seeing everybody busy about
finding out what it was the four men wanted, had conceived the idea of going off without paying
what they owed; but the landlord, who minded his own affairs more than other people's, caught
them going out of the gate and demanded his reckoning, abusing them for their dishonesty with
such language that he drove them to reply with their fists, and so they began to lay on him
in such a style that the poor man was forced to cry out, and call for help. The landlady and
her daughter could see no one more free to give aid than Don Quixote, and to him the daughter
said, "Sir knight, by the virtue God has given you, help my poor father, for two wicked men
are beating him to a mummy."

To which Don Quixote very deliberately and phlegmatically replied, "Fair damsel, at the present
moment your request is inopportune, for I am debarred from involving myself in any adventure
until I have brought to a happy conclusion one to which my word has pledged me; but that which
I can do for you is what I will now mention: run and tell your father to stand his ground as
well as he can in this battle, and on no account to allow himself to be vanquished, while I
go and request permission of the Princess Micomicona to enable me to succour him in his distress;
and if she grants it, rest assured I will relieve him from it."

"Sinner that I am," exclaimed Maritornes, who stood by; "before you have got your permission
my master will be in the other world."

"Give me leave, senora, to obtain the permission I speak of," returned Don Quixote; "and if
I get it, it will matter very little if he is in the other world; for I will rescue him thence
in spite of all the same world can do; or at any rate I will give you such a revenge over those
who shall have sent him there that you will be more than moderately satisfied;" and without
saying anything more he went and knelt before Dorothea, requesting her Highness in knightly
and errant phrase to be pleased to grant him permission to aid and succour the castellan of
that castle, who now stood in grievous jeopardy. The princess granted it graciously, and he
at once, bracing his buckler on his arm and drawing his sword, hastened to the inn-gate, where
the two guests were still handling the landlord roughly; but as soon as he reached the spot
he stopped short and stood still, though Maritornes and the landlady asked him why he hesitated
to help their master and husband.

"I hesitate," said Don Quixote, "because it is not lawful for me to draw sword against persons
of squirely condition; but call my squire Sancho to me; for this defence and vengeance are
his affair and business."

Thus matters stood at the inn-gate, where there was a very lively exchange of fisticuffs and
punches, to the sore damage of the landlord and to the wrath of Maritornes, the landlady, and
her daughter, who were furious when they saw the pusillanimity of Don Quixote, and the hard
treatment their master, husband and father was undergoing. But let us leave him there; for
he will surely find some one to help him, and if not, let him suffer and hold his tongue who
attempts more than his strength allows him to do; and let us go back fifty paces to see what
Don Luis said in reply to the Judge whom we left questioning him privately as to his reasons
for coming on foot and so meanly dressed.

To which the youth, pressing his hand in a way that showed his heart was troubled by some great
sorrow, and shedding a flood of tears, made answer:

"Senor, I have no more to tell you than that from the moment when, through heaven's will and
our being near neighbours, I first saw Dona Clara, your daughter and my lady, from that instant
I made her the mistress of my will, and if yours, my true lord and father, offers no impediment,
this very day she shall become my wife. For her I left my father's house, and for her I assumed
this disguise, to follow her whithersoever she may go, as the arrow seeks its mark or the sailor
the pole-star. She knows nothing more of my passion than what she may have learned from having
sometimes seen from a distance that my eyes were filled with tears. You know already, senor,
the wealth and noble birth of my parents, and that I am their sole heir; if this be a sufficient
inducement for you to venture to make me completely happy, accept me at once as your son; for
if my father, influenced by other objects of his own, should disapprove of this happiness I
have sought for myself, time has more power to alter and change things, than human will."

With this the love-smitten youth was silent, while the Judge, after hearing him, was astonished,
perplexed, and surprised, as well at the manner and intelligence with which Don Luis had confessed
the secret of his heart, as at the position in which he found himself, not knowing what course
to take in a matter so sudden and unexpected. All the answer, therefore, he gave him was to
bid him to make his mind easy for the present, and arrange with his servants not to take him
back that day, so that there might be time to consider what was best for all parties. Don Luis
kissed his hands by force, nay, bathed them with his tears, in a way that would have touched
a heart of marble, not to say that of the Judge, who, as a shrewd man, had already perceived
how advantageous the marriage would be to his daughter; though, were it possible, he would
have preferred that it should be brought about with the consent of the father of Don Luis,
who he knew looked for a title for his son.

The guests had by this time made peace with the landlord, for, by persuasion and Don Quixote's
fair words more than by threats, they had paid him what he demanded, and the servants of Don
Luis were waiting for the end of the conversation with the Judge and their master's decision,
when the devil, who never sleeps, contrived that the barber, from whom Don Quixote had taken
Mambrino's helmet, and Sancho Panza the trappings of his ass in exchange for those of his own,
should at this instant enter the inn; which said barber, as he led his ass to the stable, observed
Sancho Panza engaged in repairing something or other belonging to the pack-saddle; and the
moment he saw it he knew it, and made bold to attack Sancho, exclaiming, "Ho, sir thief, I
have caught you! hand over my basin and my pack-saddle, and all my trappings that you robbed
me of."

Sancho, finding himself so unexpectedly assailed, and hearing the abuse poured upon him, seized
the pack-saddle with one hand, and with the other gave the barber a cuff that bathed his teeth
in blood. The barber, however, was not so ready to relinquish the prize he had made in the
pack-saddle; on the contrary, he raised such an outcry that everyone in the inn came running
to know what the noise and quarrel meant. "Here, in the name of the king and justice!" he cried,
"this thief and highwayman wants to kill me for trying to recover my property."

"You lie," said Sancho, "I am no highwayman; it was in fair war my master Don Quixote won these
spoils."

Don Quixote was standing by at the time, highly pleased to see his squire's stoutness, both
offensive and defensive, and from that time forth he reckoned him a man of mettle, and in his
heart resolved to dub him a knight on the first opportunity that presented itself, feeling
sure that the order of chivalry would be fittingly bestowed upon him.

In the course of the altercation, among other things the barber said, "Gentlemen, this pack-saddle
is mine as surely as I owe God a death, and I know it as well as if I had given birth to it,
and here is my ass in the stable who will not let me lie; only try it, and if it does not fit
him like a glove, call me a rascal; and what is more, the same day I was robbed of this, they
robbed me likewise of a new brass basin, never yet handselled, that would fetch a crown any day."

At this Don Quixote could not keep himself from answering; and interposing between the two,
and separating them, he placed the pack-saddle on the ground, to lie there in sight until the
truth was established, and said, "Your worships may perceive clearly and plainly the error
under which this worthy squire lies when he calls a basin which was, is, and shall be the helmet
of Mambrino which I won from him in air war, and made myself master of by legitimate and lawful
possession. With the pack-saddle I do not concern myself; but I may tell you on that head that
my squire Sancho asked my permission to strip off the caparison of this vanquished poltroon's
steed, and with it adorn his own; I allowed him, and he took it; and as to its having been
changed from a caparison into a pack-saddle, I can give no explanation except the usual one,
that such transformations will take place in adventures of chivalry. To confirm all which,
run, Sancho my son, and fetch hither the helmet which this good fellow calls a basin."

"Egad, master," said Sancho, "if we have no other proof of our case than what your worship
puts forward, Mambrino's helmet is just as much a basin as this good fellow's caparison is
a pack-saddle."

"Do as I bid thee," said Don Quixote; "it cannot be that everything in this castle goes by
enchantment."

Sancho hastened to where the basin was, and brought it back with him, and when Don Quixote
saw it, he took hold of it and said:

"Your worships may see with what a face this squire can assert that this is a basin and not
the helmet I told you of; and I swear by the order of chivalry I profess, that this helmet
is the identical one I took from him, without anything added to or taken from it."

"There is no doubt of that," said Sancho, "for from the time my master won it until now he
has only fought one battle in it, when he let loose those unlucky men in chains; and if had
not been for this basin-helmet he would not have come off over well that time, for there was
plenty of stone-throwing in that affair."

"And whoever says the contrary," said Don Quixote, "I will let him know he lies if he is a
knight, and if he is a squire that he lies again a thousand times."

Our own barber, who was present at all this, and understood Don Quixote's humour so thoroughly,
took it into his head to back up his delusion and carry on the joke for the general amusement;
so addressing the other barber he said:

"Senor barber, or whatever you are, you must know that I belong to your profession too, and
have had a licence to practise for more than twenty years, and I know the implements of the
barber craft, every one of them, perfectly well; and I was likewise a soldier for some time
in the days of my youth, and I know also what a helmet is, and a morion, and a headpiece with
a visor, and other things pertaining to soldiering, I meant to say to soldiers' arms; and I
say-saving better opinions and always with submission to sounder judgments--that this piece
we have now before us, which this worthy gentleman has in his hands, not only is no barber's
basin, but is as far from being one as white is from black, and truth from falsehood; I say,
moreover, that this, although it is a helmet, is not a complete helmet."

"Certainly not," said Don Quixote, "for half of it is wanting, that is to say the beaver."

"It is quite true," said the curate, who saw the object of his friend the barber; and Cardenio,
Don Fernando and his companions agreed with him, and even the Judge, if his thoughts had not
been so full of Don Luis's affair, would have helped to carry on the joke; but he was so taken
up with the serious matters he had on his mind that he paid little or no attention to these
facetious proceedings.

"God bless me!" exclaimed their butt the barber at this; "is it possible that such an honourable
company can say that this is not a basin but a helmet? Why, this is a thing that would astonish
a whole university, however wise it might be! That will do; if this basin is a helmet, why,
then the pack-saddle must be a horse's caparison, as this gentleman has said."

"To me it looks like a pack-saddle," said Don Quixote; "but I have already said that with that
question I do not concern myself."

"As to whether it be pack-saddle or caparison," said the curate, "it is only for Senor Don
Quixote to say; for in these matters of chivalry all these gentlemen and I bow to his authority."

"By God, gentlemen," said Don Quixote, "so many strange things have happened to me in this
castle on the two occasions on which I have sojourned in it, that I will not venture to assert
anything positively in reply to any question touching anything it contains; for it is my belief
that everything that goes on within it goes by enchantment. The first time, an enchanted Moor
that there is in it gave me sore trouble, nor did Sancho fare well among certain followers
of his; and last night I was kept hanging by this arm for nearly two hours, without knowing
how or why I came by such a mishap. So that now, for me to come forward to give an opinion
in such a puzzling matter, would be to risk a rash decision. As regards the assertion that
this is a basin and not a helmet I have already given an answer; but as to the question whether
this is a pack-saddle or a caparison I will not venture to give a positive opinion, but will
leave it to your worships' better judgment. Perhaps as you are not dubbed knights like myself,
the enchantments of this place have nothing to do with you, and your faculties are unfettered,
and you can see things in this castle as they really and truly are, and not as they appear to me."

"There can be no question," said Don Fernando on this, "but that Senor Don Quixote has spoken
very wisely, and that with us rests the decision of this matter; and that we may have surer
ground to go on, I will take the votes of the gentlemen in secret, and declare the result clearly
and fully."

To those who were in the secret of Don Quixote's humour all this afforded great amusement;
but to those who knew nothing about it, it seemed the greatest nonsense in the world, in particular
to the four servants of Don Luis, as well as to Don Luis himself, and to three other travellers
who had by chance come to the inn, and had the appearance of officers of the Holy Brotherhood,
as indeed they were; but the one who above all was at his wits' end, was the barber basin,
there before his very eyes, had been turned into Mambrino's helmet, and whose pack-saddle he
had no doubt whatever was about to become a rich caparison for a horse. All laughed to see
Don Fernando going from one to another collecting the votes, and whispering to them to give
him their private opinion whether the treasure over which there had been so much fighting was
a pack-saddle or a caparison; but after he had taken the votes of those who knew Don Quixote,
he said aloud, "The fact is, my good fellow, that I am tired collecting such a number of opinions,
for I find that there is not one of whom I ask what I desire to know, who does not tell me
that it is absurd to say that this is the pack-saddle of an ass, and not the caparison of a
horse, nay, of a thoroughbred horse; so you must submit, for, in spite of you and your ass,
this is a caparison and no pack-saddle, and you have stated and proved your case very badly."

"May I never share heaven," said the poor barber, "if your worships are not all mistaken; and
may my soul appear before God as that appears to me a pack-saddle and not a caparison; but,
'laws go,'-I say no more; and indeed I am not drunk, for I am fasting, except it be from sin."

The simple talk of the barber did not afford less amusement than the absurdities of Don Quixote,
who now observed:

"There is no more to be done now than for each to take what belongs to him, and to whom God
has given it, may St. Peter add his blessing."

But said one of the four servants, "Unless, indeed, this is a deliberate joke, I cannot bring
myself to believe that men so intelligent as those present are, or seem to be, can venture
to declare and assert that this is not a basin, and that not a pack-saddle; but as I perceive
that they do assert and declare it, I can only come to the conclusion that there is some mystery
in this persistence in what is so opposed to the evidence of experience and truth itself; for
I swear by"--and here he rapped out a round oath-"all the people in the world will not make
me believe that this is not a barber's basin and that a jackass's pack-saddle."

"It might easily be a she-ass's," observed the curate.

"It is all the same," said the servant; "that is not the point; but whether it is or is not
a pack-saddle, as your worships say."

On hearing this one of the newly arrived officers of the Brotherhood, who had been listening
to the dispute and controversy, unable to restrain his anger and impatience, exclaimed, "It
is a pack-saddle as sure as my father is my father, and whoever has said or will say anything
else must be drunk."

"You lie like a rascally clown," returned Don Quixote; and lifting his pike, which he had never
let out of his hand, he delivered such a blow at his head that, had not the officer dodged
it, it would have stretched him at full length. The pike was shivered in pieces against the
ground, and the rest of the officers, seeing their comrade assaulted, raised a shout, calling
for help for the Holy Brotherhood. The landlord, who was of the fraternity, ran at once to
fetch his staff of office and his sword, and ranged himself on the side of his comrades; the
servants of Don Luis clustered round him, lest he should escape from them in the confusion;
the barber, seeing the house turned upside down, once more laid hold of his pack-saddle and
Sancho did the same; Don Quixote drew his sword and charged the officers; Don Luis cried out
to his servants to leave him alone and go and help Don Quixote, and Cardenio and Don Fernando,
who were supporting him; the curate was shouting at the top of his voice, the landlady was
screaming, her daughter was wailing, Maritornes was weeping, Dorothea was aghast, Luscinda
terror-stricken, and Dona Clara in a faint. The barber cudgelled Sancho, and Sancho pommelled
the barber; Don Luis gave one of his servants, who ventured to catch him by the arm to keep
him from escaping, a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood; the Judge took his part; Don Fernando
had got one of the officers down and was belabouring him heartily; the landlord raised his
voice again calling for help for the Holy Brotherhood; so that the whole inn was nothing but
cries, shouts, shrieks, confusion, terror, dismay, mishaps, sword-cuts, fisticuffs, cudgellings,
kicks, and bloodshed; and in the midst of all this chaos, complication, and general entanglement,
Don Quixote took it into his head that he had been plunged into the thick of the discord of
Agramante's camp; and, in a voice that shook the inn like thunder, he cried out:

"Hold all, let all sheathe their swords, let all be calm and attend to me as they value their
lives!"

All paused at his mighty voice, and he went on to say, "Did I not tell you, sirs, that this
castle was enchanted, and that a legion or so of devils dwelt in it? In proof whereof I call
upon you to behold with your own eyes how the discord of Agramante's camp has come hither,
and been transferred into the midst of us. See how they fight, there for the sword, here for
the horse, on that side for the eagle, on this for the helmet; we are all fighting, and all
at cross purposes. Come then, you, Senor Judge, and you, senor curate; let the one represent
King Agramante and the other King Sobrino, and make peace among us; for by God Almighty it
is a sorry business that so many persons of quality as we are should slay one another for such
trifling cause." The officers, who did not understand Don Quixote's mode of speaking, and found
themselves roughly handled by Don Fernando, Cardenio, and their companions, were not to be
appeased; the barber was, however, for both his beard and his pack-saddle were the worse for
the struggle; Sancho like a good servant obeyed the slightest word of his master; while the
four servants of Don Luis kept quiet when they saw how little they gained by not being so.
The landlord alone insisted upon it that they must punish the insolence of this madman, who
at every turn raised a disturbance in the inn; but at length the uproar was stilled for the
present; the pack-saddle remained a caparison till the day of judgment, and the basin a helmet
and the inn a castle in Don Quixote's imagination.

All having been now pacified and made friends by the persuasion of the Judge and the curate,
the servants of Don Luis began again to urge him to return with them at once; and while he
was discussing the matter with them, the Judge took counsel with Don Fernando, Cardenio, and
the curate as to what he ought to do in the case, telling them how it stood, and what Don Luis
had said to him. It was agreed at length that Don Fernando should tell the servants of Don
Luis who he was, and that it was his desire that Don Luis should accompany him to Andalusia,
where he would receive from the marquis his brother the welcome his quality entitled him to;
for, otherwise, it was easy to see from the determination of Don Luis that he would not return
to his father at present, though they tore him to pieces. On learning the rank of Don Fernando
and the resolution of Don Luis the four then settled it between themselves that three of them
should return to tell his father how matters stood, and that the other should remain to wait
upon Don Luis, and not leave him until they came back for him, or his father's orders were
known. Thus by the authority of Agramante and the wisdom of King Sobrino all this complication
of disputes was arranged; but the enemy of concord and hater of peace, feeling himself slighted
and made a fool of, and seeing how little he had gained after having involved them all in such
an elaborate entanglement, resolved to try his hand once more by stirring up fresh quarrels
and disturbances.

It came about in this wise: the officers were pacified on learning the rank of those with whom
they had been engaged, and withdrew from the contest, considering that whatever the result
might be they were likely to get the worst of the battle; but one of them, the one who had
been thrashed and kicked by Don Fernando, recollected that among some warrants he carried for
the arrest of certain delinquents, he had one against Don Quixote, whom the Holy Brotherhood
had ordered to be arrested for setting the galley slaves free, as Sancho had, with very good
reason, apprehended. Suspecting how it was, then, he wished to satisfy himself as to whether
Don Quixote's features corresponded; and taking a parchment out of his bosom he lit upon what
he was in search of, and setting himself to read it deliberately, for he was not a quick reader,
as he made out each word he fixed his eyes on Don Quixote, and went on comparing the description
in the warrant with his face, and discovered that beyond all doubt he was the person described
in it. As soon as he had satisfied himself, folding up the parchment, he took the warrant in
his left hand and with his right seized Don Quixote by the collar so tightly that he did not
allow him to breathe, and shouted aloud, "Help for the Holy Brotherhood! and that you may see
I demand it in earnest, read this warrant which says this highwayman is to be arrested."

The curate took the warrant and saw that what the officer said was true, and that it agreed
with Don Quixote's appearance, who, on his part, when he found himself roughly handled by this
rascally clown, worked up to the highest pitch of wrath, and all his joints cracking with rage,
with both hands seized the officer by the throat with all his might, so that had he not been
helped by his comrades he would have yielded up his life ere Don Quixote released his hold.
The landlord, who had perforce to support his brother officers, ran at once to aid them. The
landlady, when she saw her husband engaged in a fresh quarrel, lifted up her voice afresh,
and its note was immediately caught up by Maritornes and her daughter, calling upon heaven
and all present for help; and Sancho, seeing what was going on, exclaimed, "By the Lord, it
is quite true what my master says about the enchantments of this castle, for it is impossible
to live an hour in peace in it!"

Don Fernando parted the officer and Don Quixote, and to their mutual contentment made them
relax the grip by which they held, the one the coat collar, the other the throat of his adversary;
for all this, however, the officers did not cease to demand their prisoner and call on them
to help, and deliver him over bound into their power, as was required for the service of the
King and of the Holy Brotherhood, on whose behalf they again demanded aid and assistance to
effect the capture of this robber and footpad of the highways.

Don Quixote smiled when he heard these words, and said very calmly, "Come now, base, ill-born
brood; call ye it highway robbery to give freedom to those in bondage, to release the captives,
to succour the miserable, to raise up the fallen, to relieve the needy? Infamous beings, who
by your vile grovelling intellects deserve that heaven should not make known to you the virtue
that lies in knight-errantry, or show you the sin and ignorance in which ye lie when ye refuse
to respect the shadow, not to say the presence, of any knight-errant! Come now; band, not of
officers, but of thieves; footpads with the licence of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me who was
the ignoramus who signed a warrant of arrest against such a knight as I am? Who was he that
did not know that knights-errant are independent of all jurisdictions, that their law is their
sword, their charter their prowess, and their edicts their will? Who, I say again, was the
fool that knows not that there are no letters patent of nobility that confer such privileges
or exemptions as a knight-errant acquires the day he is dubbed a knight, and devotes himself
to the arduous calling of chivalry? What knight-errant ever paid poll-tax, duty, queen's pin-money,
king's dues, toll or ferry? What tailor ever took payment of him for making his clothes? What
castellan that received him in his castle ever made him pay his shot? What king did not seat
him at his table? What damsel was not enamoured of him and did not yield herself up wholly
to his will and pleasure? And, lastly, what knight-errant has there been, is there, or will
there ever be in the world, not bold enough to give, single-handed, four hundred cudgellings
to four hundred officers of the Holy Brotherhood if they come in his way?"

"For all that," said the curate, "you must not take him away this time, nor will he, it is
my opinion, let himself be taken away."

In short, the curate used such arguments, and Don Quixote did such mad things, that the officers
would have been more mad than he was if they had not perceived his want of wits, and so they
thought it best to allow themselves to be pacified, and even to act as peacemakers between
the barber and Sancho Panza, who still continued their altercation with much bitterness. When
a lump of coal is burned ashes and invisible gases are formed which are entirely different
in composition and properties from the original coal. A rod of iron when exposed to moist air
is gradually changed into rust, which is entirely different from the original iron. When sugar
is heated a black substance is formed which is neither sweet nor soluble in water. Such changes
are evidently quite different from the physical changes just described, for in them new substances
are formed in place of the ones undergoing change. These two disputes, which were the most important and gravest, being settled,
it only remained for the servants of Don Luis to consent that three of them should return while
one was left to accompany him whither Don Fernando desired to take him; and good luck and better
fortune, having already begun to solve difficulties and remove obstructions in favour of the
lovers and warriors of the inn, were pleased to persevere and bring everything to a happy issue;
for the servants agreed to do as Don Luis wished; which gave Dona Clara such happiness that
no one could have looked into her face just then without seeing the joy of her heart. Zoraida,
though she did not fully comprehend all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she
watched and studied the various countenances, but particularly her Spaniard's, whom she followed
with her eyes and clung to with her soul. The gift and compensation which the curate gave the
barber had not escaped the landlord's notice, and he demanded Don Quixote's reckoning, together
with the amount of the damage to his wine-skins, and the loss of his wine, swearing that neither
Rocinante nor Sancho's ass should leave the inn until he had been paid to the very last farthing.
The curate settled all amicably, and Don Fernando paid; though the Judge had also very readily
offered to pay the score; and all became so peaceful and quiet that the inn no longer reminded
one of the discord of Agramante's camp, as Don Quixote said, but of the peace and tranquillity
of the days of Octavianus: for all which it was the universal opinion that their thanks were
due to the great zeal and eloquence of the curate, and to the unexampled generosity of Don
Fernando. 

In a general way it may be said that they are both concerned with inanimate matter rather than with
living, and more particularly with the changes which such matter may be made to undergo. These
changes must be considered more closely before a definition of the two sciences can be given.

~Physical
changes.~ One class of changes is not accompanied by an alteration in the composition of matter.
When a lump of coal is broken the pieces do not differ from the original lump save in size. A rod of
iron may be broken into pieces; it may be magnetized; it may be heated until it glows; it may
be melted. In none of these changes has the composition of the iron been affected. The pieces
of iron, the magnetized iron, the glowing iron, the melted iron, are just as truly iron as
was the original rod.
All this I say, exalted and esteemed lady, because it seems to me that for us to remain any
longer in this castle now is useless, and may be injurious to us in a way that we shall find
out some day; for who knows but that your enemy the giant may have learned by means of secret
and diligent spies that I am going to destroy him, and if the opportunity be given him he may
seize it to fortify himself in some impregnable castle or stronghold, against which all my
efforts and the might of my indefatigable arm may avail but little? Therefore, lady, let us,
as I say, forestall his schemes by our activity, and let us depart at once in quest of fair
fortune; for your highness is only kept from enjoying it as fully as you could desire by my
delay in encountering your adversary."

Don Quixote held his peace and said no more, calmly awaiting the reply of the beauteous princess,
who, with commanding dignity and in a style adapted to Don Quixote's own, replied to him in
these words, "I give you thanks, sir knight, for the eagerness you, like a good knight to whom
it is a natural obligation to succour the orphan and the needy, display to afford me aid in
my sore trouble; and heaven grant that your wishes and mine may be realised, so that you may
see that there are women in this world capable of gratitude; as to my departure, let it be
forthwith, for I have no will but yours; dispose of me entirely in accordance with your good
pleasure; for she who has once entrusted to you the defence of her person, and placed in your
hands the recovery of her dominions, must not think of offering opposition to that which your
wisdom may ordain."

"On, then, in God's name," said Don Quixote; "for, when a lady humbles herself to me, I will
not lose the opportunity of raising her up and placing her on the throne of her ancestors.
Let us depart at once, for the common saying that in delay there is danger, lends spurs to
my eagerness to take the road; and as neither heaven has created nor hell seen any that can
daunt or intimidate me, saddle Rocinante, Sancho, and get ready thy ass and the queen's palfrey,
and let us take leave of the castellan and these gentlemen, and go hence this very instant."

Sancho, who was standing by all the time, said, shaking his head, "Ah! master, master, there
is more mischief in the village than one hears of, begging all good bodies' pardon."

"What mischief can there be in any village, or in all the cities of the world, you booby, that
can hurt my reputation?" said Don Quixote.

"If your worship is angry," replied Sancho, "I will hold my tongue and leave unsaid what as
a good squire I am bound to say, and what a good servant should tell his master."

"Say what thou wilt," returned Don Quixote, "provided thy words be not meant to work upon my
fears; for thou, if thou fearest, art behaving like thyself; but I like myself, in not fearing."

"It is nothing of the sort, as I am a sinner before God," said Sancho, "but that I take it
to be sure and certain that this lady, who calls herself queen of the great kingdom of Micomicon,
is no more so than my mother; for, if she was what she says, she would not go rubbing noses
with one that is here every instant and behind every door."

Dorothea turned red at Sancho's words, for the truth was that her husband Don Fernando had
now and then, when the others were not looking, gathered from her lips some of the reward his
love had earned, and Sancho seeing this had considered that such freedom was more like a courtesan
than a queen of a great kingdom; she, however, being unable or not caring to answer him, allowed
him to proceed, and he continued, "This I say, senor, because, if after we have travelled roads
and highways, and passed bad nights and worse days, one who is now enjoying himself in this
inn is to reap the fruit of our labours, there is no need for me to be in a hurry to saddle
Rocinante, put the pad on the ass, or get ready the palfrey; for it will be better for us to
stay quiet, and let every jade mind her spinning, and let us go to dinner."

Good God, what was the indignation of Don Quixote when he heard the audacious words of his
squire! So great was it, that in a voice inarticulate with rage, with a stammering tongue,
and eyes that flashed living fire, he exclaimed, "Rascally clown, boorish, insolent, and ignorant,
ill-spoken, foul-mouthed, impudent backbiter and slanderer! Hast thou dared to utter such words
in my presence and in that of these illustrious ladies? Hast thou dared to harbour such gross
and shameless thoughts in thy muddled imagination? Begone from my presence, thou born monster,
storehouse of lies, hoard of untruths, garner of knaveries, inventor of scandals, publisher
of absurdities, enemy of the respect due to royal personages! Begone, show thyself no more
before me under pain of my wrath;" and so saying he knitted his brows, puffed out his cheeks,
gazed around him, and stamped on the ground violently with his right foot, showing in every
way the rage that was pent up in his heart; and at his words and furious gestures Sancho was
so scared and terrified that he would have been glad if the earth had opened that instant and
swallowed him, and his only thought was to turn round and make his escape from the angry presence
of his master.

But the ready-witted Dorothea, who by this time so well understood Don Quixote's humour, said,
to mollify his wrath, "Be not irritated at the absurdities your good squire has uttered, Sir
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, for perhaps he did not utter them without cause, and from
his good sense and Christian conscience it is not likely that he would bear false witness against
anyone. We may therefore believe, without any hesitation, that since, as you say, sir knight,
everything in this castle goes and is brought about by means of enchantment, Sancho, I say,
may possibly have seen, through this diabolical medium, what he says he saw so much to the
detriment of my modesty."

"I swear by God Omnipotent," exclaimed Don Quixote at this, "your highness has hit the point;
and that some vile illusion must have come before this sinner of a Sancho, that made him see
what it would have been impossible to see by any other means than enchantments; for I know
well enough, from the poor fellow's goodness and harmlessness, that he is incapable of bearing
false witness against anybody."

"True, no doubt," said Don Fernando, "for which reason, Senor Don Quixote, you ought to forgive
him and restore him to the bosom of your favour, sicut erat in principio, before illusions
of this sort had taken away his senses."

Don Quixote said he was ready to pardon him, and the curate went for Sancho, who came in very
humbly, and falling on his knees begged for the hand of his master, who having presented it
to him and allowed him to kiss it, gave him his blessing and said, "Now, Sancho my son, thou
wilt be convinced of the truth of what I have many a time told thee, that everything in this
castle is done by means of enchantment."

"So it is, I believe," said Sancho, "except the affair of the blanket, which came to pass in
reality by ordinary means."

"Believe it not," said Don Quixote, "for had it been so, I would have avenged thee that instant,
or even now; but neither then nor now could I, nor have I seen anyone upon whom to avenge thy
wrong."

They were all eager to know what the affair of the blanket was, and the landlord gave them
a minute account of Sancho's flights, at which they laughed not a little, and at which Sancho
would have been no less out of countenance had not his master once more assured him it was
all enchantment. For all that his simplicity never reached so high a pitch that he could persuade
himself it was not the plain and simple truth, without any deception whatever about it, that
he had been blanketed by beings of flesh and blood, and not by visionary and imaginary phantoms,
as his master believed and protested.

The illustrious company had now been two days in the inn; and as it seemed to them time to
depart, they devised a plan so that, without giving Dorothea and Don Fernando the trouble of
going back with Don Quixote to his village under pretence of restoring Queen Micomicona, the
curate and the barber might carry him away with them as they proposed, and the curate be able
to take his madness in hand at home; and in pursuance of their plan they arranged with the
owner of an oxcart who happened to be passing that way to carry him after this fashion. They
constructed a kind of cage with wooden bars, large enough to hold Don Quixote comfortably;
and then Don Fernando and his companions, the servants of Don Luis, and the officers of the
Brotherhood, together with the landlord, by the directions and advice of the curate, covered
their faces and disguised themselves, some in one way, some in another, so as to appear to
Don Quixote quite different from the persons he had seen in the castle. This done, in profound
silence they entered the room where he was asleep, taking his his rest after the past frays,
and advancing to where he was sleeping tranquilly, not dreaming of anything of the kind happening,
they seized him firmly and bound him fast hand and foot, so that, when he awoke startled, he
was unable to move, and could only marvel and wonder at the strange figures he saw before him;
upon which he at once gave way to the idea which his crazed fancy invariably conjured up before
him, and took it into his head that all these shapes were phantoms of the enchanted castle,
and that he himself was unquestionably enchanted as he could neither move nor help himself;
precisely what the curate, the concoctor of the scheme, expected would happen. Of all that
were there Sancho was the only one who was at once in his senses and in his own proper character,
and he, though he was within very little of sharing his master's infirmity, did not fail to
perceive who all these disguised figures were; but he did not dare to open his lips until he
saw what came of this assault and capture of his master; nor did the latter utter a word, waiting
to the upshot of his mishap; which was that bringing in the cage, they shut him up in it and
nailed the bars so firmly that they could not be easily burst open.

They then took him on their shoulders, and as they passed out of the room an awful voice--as
much so as the barber, not he of the pack-saddle but the other, was able to make it--was heard
to say, "O Knight of the Rueful Countenance, let not this captivity in which thou art placed
afflict thee, for this must needs be, for the more speedy accomplishment of the adventure in
which thy great heart has engaged thee; the which shall be accomplished when the raging Manchegan
lion and the white Tobosan dove shall be linked together, having first humbled their haughty
necks to the gentle yoke of matrimony. And from this marvellous union shall come forth to the
light of the world brave whelps that shall rival the ravening claws of their valiant father;
and this shall come to pass ere the pursuer of the flying nymph shall in his swift natural
course have twice visited the starry signs. And thou, O most noble and obedient squire that
ever bore sword at side, beard on face, or nose to smell with, be not dismayed or grieved to
see the flower of knight-errantry carried away thus before thy very eyes; for soon, if it so
please the Framer of the universe, thou shalt see thyself exalted to such a height that thou
shalt not know thyself, and the promises which thy good master has made thee shall not prove
false; and I assure thee, on the authority of the sage Mentironiana, that thy wages shall be
paid thee, as thou shalt see in due season. This in turn may be changed into the energy of motion,
as when the current is used for propelling the cars, or into the energy of heat and light, as
when it is used for heating and lighting the cars. Again, the energy of coal may be converted
into energy of heat and subsequently of motion, as when it is used as a fuel in steam engines.

Since
the energy possessed by coal only becomes available when the coal is made to undergo a chemical
change, it is sometimes called chemical energy.

Don Quixote was comforted by the prophecy he heard, for he at once comprehended its meaning
perfectly, and perceived it was promised to him that he should see himself united in holy and
lawful matrimony with his beloved Dulcinea del Toboso, from whose blessed womb should proceed
the whelps, his sons, to the eternal glory of La Mancha; and being thoroughly and firmly persuaded
of this, he lifted up his voice, and with a deep sigh exclaimed, "Oh thou, whoever thou art,
who hast foretold me so much good, I implore of thee that on my part thou entreat that sage
enchanter who takes charge of my interests, that he leave me not to perish in this captivity
in which they are now carrying me away, ere I see fulfilled promises so joyful and incomparable
as those which have been now made me; for, let this but come to pass, and I shall glory in
the pains of my prison, find comfort in these chains wherewith they bind me, and regard this
bed whereon they stretch me, not as a hard battle-field, but as a soft and happy nuptial couch;
and touching the consolation of Sancho Panza, my squire, I rely upon his goodness and rectitude
that he will not desert me in good or evil fortune; for if, by his ill luck or mine, it may
not happen to be in my power to give him the island I have promised, or any equivalent for
it, at least his wages shall not be lost; for in my will, which is already made, I have declared
the sum that shall be paid to him, measured, not by his many faithful services, but by the
means at my disposal."

Sancho bowed his head very respectfully and kissed both his hands, for, being tied together,
he could not kiss one; and then the apparitions lifted the cage upon their shoulders and fixed
it upon the ox-cart.

