Figure 3 shows the fight after Red and Blue have both made their first move. It is taken from
Red's side. Red has not as yet realised the danger of his position. His left gun struggles
into position to the left of the church, his centre and right push for the farm. Blue's five
cavalry on his left have already galloped forward into a favourable position to open fire at
the next move--they are a little hidden in the picture by the church; the sixteen infantry
follow hard, and his main force makes straight for the farm.

Figure 4 shows the affair developing rapidly. Red's cavalry on his right have taken his two
guns well forward into a position to sweep either side of the farm, and his left gun is now
well placed to pound Blue's infantry centre. His infantry continue to press forward, but Blue,
for his second move, has already opened fire from the woods with his right gun, and killed
three of Red's men. His infantry have now come up to serve this gun, and the cavalry who brought
it into position at the first move have now left it to them in order to gallop over to join
the force attacking the farm. Undismayed by Red's guns, Blue has brought his other two guns
and his men as close to the farm as they can go. His leftmost gun stares Red's in the face,
and prevents any effective fire, his middle gun faces Red's middle gun. Some of his cavalry
are exposed to the right of the farm, but most are completely covered now by the farm from
Red's fire. Red has now to move. The nature of his position is becoming apparent to him. His
right gun is ineffective, his left and his centre guns cannot kill more than seven or eight
men between them; and at the next move, unless he can silence them, Blue's guns will be mowing
his exposed cavalry down from the security of the farm. He is in a fix. How is he to get out
of it? His cavalry are slightly outnumbered, but he decides to do as much execution as he can
with his own guns, charge the Blue guns before him, and then bring up his infantry to save
the situation.

Figure 5a shows the result of Red's move. His two effective guns have between them bowled over
two cavalry and six infantry in the gap between the farm and Blue's right gun; and then, following
up the effect of his gunfire, his cavalry charges home over the Blue guns. One oversight he
makes, to which Blue at once calls his attention at the end of his move. Red has reckoned on
twenty cavalry for his charge, forgetting that by the rules he must put two men at the tail
of his middle gun. His infantry are just not able to come up for this duty, and consequently
two cavalry-men have to be set there. The game then pauses while the players work out the cavalry
melee. Red has brought up eighteen men to this; in touch or within six inches of touch there
are twenty-one Blue cavalry. Red's force is isolated, for only two of his men are within a
move, and to support eighteen he would have to have nine. By the rules this gives fifteen men
dead on either side and three Red prisoners to Blue. By the rules also it rests with Red to
indicate the survivors within the limits of the melee as he chooses. He takes very good care
there are not four men within six inches of either Blue gun, and both these are out of action
therefore for Blue's next move. Of course Red would have done far better to have charged home
with thirteen men only, leaving seven in support, but he was flurried by his comparatively
unsuccessful shooting--he had wanted to hit more cavalry--and by the gun-trail mistake. Moreover,
he had counted his antagonist wrongly, and thought he could arrange a melee of twenty against
twenty.

Figure 5b shows the game at the same stage as 5a, immediately after the adjudication of the
melee. The dead have been picked up, the three prisoners, by a slight deflection of the rules
in the direction of the picturesque, turn their faces towards captivity, and the rest of the
picture is exactly in the position of 5a.

It is now Blue's turn to move, and figure 6a shows the result of his move. He fires his rightmost
gun (the nose of it is just visible to the right) and kills one infantry-man and one cavalry-man
(at the tail of Red's central gun), brings up his surviving eight cavalry into convenient positions
for the service of his temporarily silenced guns, and hurries his infantry forward to the farm,
recklessly exposing them in the thin wood between the farm and his right gun. The attentive
reader will be able to trace all this in figure 6a, and he will also note the three Red cavalry
prisoners going to the rear under the escort of one Khaki infantry man.

Figure 6b shows exactly the same stage as figure 6a, that is to say, the end of Blue's third
move. A cavalry-man lies dead at the tail of Red's middle gun, an infantry-man a little behind
it. His rightmost gun is abandoned and partly masked, but not hidden, from the observer, by
a tree to the side of the farmhouse.

And now, what is Red to do?

The reader will probably have his own ideas, as I have mine. What Red did do in the actual
game was to lose his head, and then at the end of four minutes' deliberation he had to move,
he blundered desperately. He opened fire on Blue's exposed centre and killed eight men. (Their
bodies litter the ground in figure 7, which gives a complete bird's-eye view of the battle.)
He then sent forward and isolated six or seven men in a wild attempt to recapture his lost
gun, massed his other men behind the inadequate cover of his central gun, and sent the detachment
of infantry that had hitherto lurked uselessly behind the church, in a frantic and hopeless
rush across the open to join them. (The one surviving cavalry-man on his right wing will be
seen taking refuge behind the cottage.) There can be little question of the entire unsoundness
of all these movements. Red was at a disadvantage, he had failed to capture the farm, and his
business now was manifestly to save his men as much as possible, make a defensive fight of
it, inflict as much damage as possible with his leftmost gun on Blue's advance, get the remnants
of his right across to the church--the cottage in the centre and their own gun would have given
them a certain amount of cover--and build up a new position about that building as a pivot.
With two guns right and left of the church he might conceivably have saved the rest of the fight.

That, however, is theory; let us return to fact. Figure 8 gives the disastrous consequences
of Red's last move. Blue has moved, his guns have slaughtered ten of Red's wretched foot, and
a rush of nine Blue cavalry and infantry mingles with Red's six surviving infantry about the
disputed gun. These infantry by the definition are isolated; there are not three other Reds
within a move of them. The view in this photograph also is an extensive one, and the reader
will note, as a painful accessory, the sad spectacle of three Red prisoners receding to the
right. The melee about Red's lost gun works out, of course, at three dead on each side, and
three more Red prisoners.

Henceforth the battle moves swiftly to complete the disaster of Red. Shaken and demoralised,
that unfortunate general is now only for retreat. His next move, of which I have no picture,
is to retreat the infantry he has so wantonly exposed back to the shelter of the church, to
withdraw the wreckage of his right into the cover of the cottage, and--one last gleam of enterprise--to
throw forward his left gun into a position commanding Blue's right.

Blue then pounds Red's right with his gun to the right of the farm and kills three men. He
extends his other gun to the left of the farm, right out among the trees, so as to get an effective
fire next time upon the tail of Red's gun. He also moves up sufficient men to take possession
of Red's lost gun. On the right Blue's gun engages Red's and kills one man. All this the reader
will see clearly in figure 9, and he will also note a second batch of Red prisoners--this time
they are infantry, going rearward. Figure 9 is the last picture that is needed to tell the
story of the battle. Red's position is altogether hopeless. He has four men left alive by his
rightmost gun, and their only chance is to attempt to save that by retreating with it. If they
fire it, one or other will certainly be killed at its tail in Blue's subsequent move, and then
the gun will be neither movable nor fireable. Red's left gun, with four men only, is also in
extreme peril, and will be immovable and helpless if it loses another man.

Very properly Red decided upon retreat. His second gun had to be abandoned after one move,
but two of the men with it escaped over his back line. Five of the infantry behind the church
escaped, and his third gun and its four cavalry got away on the extreme left-hand corner of
Red's position. Blue remained on the field, completely victorious, with two captured guns and
six prisoners.

There you have a scientific record of the worthy general's little affair.

V

EXTENSIONS AND AMPLIFICATIONS OF LITTLE WAR

Now that battle of Hook's Farm is, as I have explained, a simplification of the game, set out
entirely to illustrate the method of playing; there is scarcely a battle that will not prove
more elaborate (and eventful) than this little encounter. If a number of players and a sufficiently
large room can be got, there is no reason why armies of many hundreds of soldiers should not
fight over many square yards of model country. So long as each player has about a hundred men
and three guns there is no need to lengthen the duration of a game on that account. But it
is too laborious and confusing for a single player to handle more than that number of men.

Moreover, on a big floor with an extensive country it is possible to begin moving with moves
double or treble the length here specified, and to come down to moves of the ordinary lengths
when the troops are within fifteen or twelve or ten feet of each other. To players with the
time and space available I would suggest using a quite large country, beginning with treble
moves, and, with the exception of a select number of cavalry scouts, keeping the soldiers in
their boxes with the lids on, and moving the boxes as units. (This boxing idea is a new one,
and affords a very good substitute for the curtain; I have tried it twice for games in the
open air where the curtain was not available.) Neither side would, of course, know what the
other had in its boxes; they might be packed regiments or a mere skeleton force. Each side
would advance on the other by double or treble moves behind a screen of cavalry scouts, until
a scout was within ten feet of a box on the opposite side. Then the contents of that particular
box would have to be disclosed and the men stood out. Troops without any enemy within twenty
feet could be returned to their boxes for facility in moving. Playing on such a scale would
admit also of the introduction of the problem of provisions and supplies. Little toy Army Service
waggons can be bought, and it could be ruled that troops must have one such waggon for every
fifty men within at least six moves. Moreover, ammunition carts may be got, and it may be ruled
that one must be within two moves of a gun before the latter can be fired. All these are complications
of the War Game, and so far I have not been able to get together sufficient experienced players
to play on this larger, more elaborate scale. It is only after the smaller simpler war game
here described has been played a number of times, and its little dodges mastered completely,
that such more warlike devices become practicable.

