The man himself was no taller than Nokomee, though much more solidly built, with thick, slightly
bowed legs and heavy black brows on bulging bone structure, his eyes deep-set beneath. His
ears, like Nokomee's, were high and too small to be natural. His teeth were larger than normal
on earth, and the incisors smaller and more pointed, the canines heavier and longer. There
was a point to his chin, heavy-angled and thick-boned as it was, it was not an earthman's chin.
His neck was long, more supple and active, he kept moving his head in an unnatural watchfulness
like a wild animal's. I wondered what other differences, small in themselves, but adding up
to complete strangeness of aspect, I would find in time.

"That is Holaf," murmured Nokomee in Korean to me. "He is a chief among us now, since the fall
of our strength. He is good, but young and always too impetuous. He needs long experience,
and it looks as if he would get it, now."

"You have more than one leader?" I asked.

"We have three chiefs left to us, who rule their families--their clans. We have but one real
leader. He is an old wise man left us by good fortune. He is our lone scientist. The chiefs
of the clans listen to the leader, but they argue. Things look bad for us all."

"You are too few to reconquer the city?"

"Too few, yes. And time plays against us, for with the coming of the ships from our home planet--that
I should call that tyrant's nest home!--there will be even more of the Schrees, then. We are
a lost people now. There is no hope, eventually we will be hunted down as you earthmen will
be hunted down, like animals. Made into slaves--and worse than slaves. You will learn what
I mean when next you see your three friends."

It was too much for me. I asked:

"Why don't you leave this place, and go on to another?"

"On your little world? It is not big enough to hide ourselves from them. And we have lost our
ships, we cannot get others."

"You think that they mean to conquer our whole planet?"

"In time they will do so. Not yet, but when they are many, they will spread, slaughter all
who fight them, and enslave all who do not. They are very terrible creatures, not men at all,
you know."

"Not like you and I?"

"Not at all. You will see, soon. Hurry, it is late, and we have council to attend."

There was a deep passion in her words, quick and sharp and strange on her lips as they were,
a passion of anger and hopeless effort that somehow roused me into desire to help her and these
strange people of hers. Too, if what she said was true, these raiders who had despoiled her
people would in time engulf the world with a war of conquest, even if they were less able to
defeat us than she estimated. I resolved to make the most of this opportunity to learn the
worst of this hidden threat to men everywhere. I felt a kinship with Nokomee and her friend,
silent and alert beside me, and I realized it could well be that I had in my hands the future
of mankind, and that it behooved me not to let it fall through carelessness.

Lapsed now into silence, we reached the end of the trail along the ledge. We came out upon
a broad shelf, with several cave mouths opening along its cliff-side. Gathered here in the
twilight were some two-score men and women, bearing weapons; some the short powerful bow I
had seen in Nokomee's hands; others weapons like Holaf's tapered tube; still others bearing
small, round metal shields embossed with weird designs that meant nothing to me. Squatted here,
without fire, they fell silent at our approach, eyeing me with curiosity and the beginnings
of anger at my intrusion. Nokomee began to talk swiftly in that rattling, high-pitched tongue
of theirs. I squatted down on my heels, took out my pipe, lit it. At the flare of my match
Holaf struck it from my hand. I realized it had been a blunder, even a spark might attract
attention to their presence on the hillside. Still, the incident told me Nokomee had not been
lying to me.

Holaf pointed at the city far below, now glowing here and there with lights, and at the match
on the ground. Then he motioned to a cave mouth, and I followed him. Inside there was a fire
burning, furs strewn about the floor, metal urns and even mirrors hung on the rough stone walls.
I sat on a rude wooden bench of newly-hewed wood, lit my pipe again without interference. But
I was sorry to miss that conference outside in the open air. I wanted to hear, even if I could
not understand. Holaf still remained by my side, and his hand did not leave the oddly-carved
butt of the tapered tube-gun.

I sat there, feeling very much alone, with Holaf watching me somberly, the only light a flickering
amber from the fire. I started to my feet as a musically pitched, almost singing voice questioned
Holaf in their tongue. I looked about for the source, then saw her moving toward me in the
half-light, and I stepped back in a kind of awe and embarrassment, for this was new.

She was as tall as myself, shaped with slender Amazonian strength, but curved and soft and
subtly aware of her feminine allure, strongly interested and pleased at the awe and pleasure
in my face. Her, rounded, fully adult body was sketched over with a web of silkily gleaming
black net, light and unsubstantial as a dream, clinging and wholly revealing. Her eyes were
dark-lidded and wide-set, her brow high and proud, and about her neck hung a web of emeralds
set in a golden mesh of yielding links.

She came on, moving on shoes like Japanese water shoes, completely mystifying as to how she
balanced on the stilt-like soles. Stepping thus in little balancing steps like a dancer, she
moved very close, peering into my eyes, so that I blushed deeply at the nearness and the nudity
of her, and she laughed, amusedly, as at a child. Her long, gemmed hand reached out and touched
me, and she talked to Holaf excitedly, her face all smiles and interest; I was a wholly fascinating
new toy he had brought her, it seemed. Then she sank to the bench, crossing her lovely knees
over her hands, clasped together as if to make sure they behaved. To me she was wholly cultured
and I some strange boor who had never been in a drawing room. I felt the impact of that culture
in her interested eyes and in the sleek, smart bearing of her utterly relaxed body. She stretched
a hand to gesture me to be seated, and I tried Korean on her.

"It is a pleasure to meet you, lady. If I but knew who you were, and how to speak properly,
there is much we could find of interest to discuss."

"I am sure of it, stranger. First you must tell me of yourself, and then later we will talk
of what is familiar to me. I cannot put off the curiosity which burns me. Please tell me all
about your people and yourself!" Her voice was hard to follow, she handled the clumsy Korean
with a bird-like quickness and an utter disregard for the nature of the language. They have
admirable Capacities when their Humours and Tempers are perfectly understood; and if well taught,
they might advance themselves and do great Good in the Service of
Religion; whereas now they are rather taught to become worse than
better by falling into the worst Practices of vile nominal Christians,
which they add to their own Indian Manners and Notions.

To prevent this therefore, let there be chosen continually four Indian Servitors out of the Indian
School, as the other four out of the Grammar School.

Thus engaged, and engrossed by her, I glanced up absently to note Nokomee's eyes blazing into
my own in fury, and spaced about the room in a listening circle, a score of others. I stopped
abruptly, and Nokomee lashed out at the woman beside me with a string of alien expletives that
made her face flame with an anger as great as Nokomee's own. I wondered vaguely what I had done....

Their strange, grim faces, all watching me, seeming to peer inside me, trying to gauge me as
an enemy or a friend. I stood up, for the exciting near-nude body of the woman who had caused
Nokomee's outburst was too close, too intimately relaxed.

Abruptly Nokomee took me by the hand, led me out and along the ledge on the cliff. Into another
cavern entrance she led me, to a smaller chamber, where another fire burned, and another bench
invited to its warmth. She half pushed me to a seat, and busied herself in the next adjoining
chamber, rattling dishware, and now and again giving a sharp exclamation as of extreme disgust.

I gathered I had been guilty of falling for the Zerv equivalent of a vamp. How wrong I was
in this deduction I was to learn. It was not the woman's beauty that Nokomee feared, but something
vastly more dangerous. I was very ignorant then. The Zervs were an ancient people and their
ways were strange entirely. For the net-clad beauty had been a "Zoorph." I asked Nokomee, as
she repeated the word again.

"What is a Zoorph, that makes you so angry? I thought she was very charming. I saw no harm
in talking to her!"

Nokomee thrust her head out of the curtained doorway, from which the smell of food told me
I had not eaten since morning.

"A Zoorph dear child of earth, is a creature not good for man or beast! Only a Zerv would be
fool enough to keep so dangerous an animal about! If I told you, you would not believe it."

"Tell me anyway, Nokomee."

The girl came, bearing food on a tray. She squatted at my feet, putting the tray on the bench,
and holding a large graceful urn of some liquid to replenish my cup. Very prettily she did
this, yet I gathered that it was something which would have overwhelmed me with the honor if
I had understood. I did appreciate her service, and I tried to say so, but she silenced me.

"Never mind, one day you will understand how proud we are, that in our own world and in our
own society you would be less than a worm. Yet I serve you, who am more above you than a princess
would be in your world. Thus does the world change about one, and one adjusts. But do not think
of it. It must be, or some terrible thing like the Zoorph would seize upon you here among us."

I laughed a little, for I was sure she was telling a lie, to warn me against the "vamp" in
the only words she could think of in the alien tongue.

Her face flushed deep red at my laughter, and she half rose as if to leave, but restrained
her anger.

"A Zoorph is worse than a disease, it has enervated my people until they have lost everything,
and still they are among us. They are children raised by a secret cult on my own world, trained
into strange practices. It is somewhat like a witch or sorcerer would be to you, but much,
much different. You could not understand unless you were raised among us. When men are tired
of life, they go to a Zoorph. It is not nice to speak of, what they are and what they do. To
us, it is like death, only worse. Yet we have them, as ants have pets, as dogs have lice, as
your people have disease. It is a custom. It is a kind of escape from life and life's dullness--but
it is escape into madness, for the Zoorph has an art that is utter degradation, and few realize
how bad they are for us. You must never go near her again!"

Days passed into weeks, and every day I learned a few words of the Zerv language, every day
I picked up a little more insight into their utterly different ways and customs and standards--their
scale of values. It was a process replete with surprises, with revelations, with new understanding
of nature itself as seen through the alien eyes.

I remained as a kind of semi-prisoner, tolerated because of Nokomee's position and her affection
for me. Nokomee, I learned, was "of the blood," though there were few surviving of her family
to carry on the power and prestige she would have inherited. Yet, she was "of the blood" and
entitled to all the respect and obedience the Zervs gave even to their old ruler.

He was an attenuated skeleton of a man, with weary eyes and trembling hands, and I grew more
and more sure that the inactivity against their usurpers visible in the valley beneath was
due more to his age and timorous nature than to any inability to turn the tables. They seemed
to hold the "Schrees" in contempt, yet never took any action against them, so that I wondered
if the contempt were justified or was an inherited, sublimated hatred.

The supplies, rifles and ammunition which had been left on our horses when we entered the cavern
of the golden image, had been brought to Nokomee's cavern and locked in a small chamber before
my eyes. It was all there. As the time dragged on, I chafed at the inactivity, fought against
the barriers of language and alien custom that separated me from these people, struggled to
overcome their indifference and their, to me, impossible waiting for what I did not understand.

Finally I could wait no longer. In the night, I burst the lock of the closet with a bar, took
out a rifle and .45 and two belts of cartridges. I slid over the lip of the ledge that hid
us from the city's eyes. I was going to see for myself what we were hiding from, what we were
waiting for, was going to take my chances with the dangers in that place they had built and
from which they now hid. In North Carolina and several Parts of Virginia Children are often neglected
to be baptized till they are grown up, and then perhaps may never know or never mind that they
want to be christen'd; and many esteem it unnecessary.


The night was dark as pitch. I had left Nokomee asleep in her chamber. I had avoided Holaf,
who still kept a kind of amused watch over my activities, and I was free. Free to explore that
weird city of plodding lives, of strange unexplained sounds, of ominously hidden activity!

Scrambling, sliding, worrying in the dimness, I finally reached the less precipitous slopes
of the base of the cliff. As I stopped to get a bearing on the direction of the city, above
me came a slithering, a soft feminine exclamation, and down upon me came a perfumed weight,
knocking me sprawling in the grass.

My eyes quickly adjusted, I crawled to the dim shape struggling to her feet. Her face was not
Nokomee's, as I had at first thought. Those enormous shadowed eyes, that thin lovely nose,
the flower-fragile lips, the mysterious allure--were the woman whom Nokomee had described as
a "Zoorph" and whom she had both feared and despised. I spoke sharply in the tongue of the
Zervs. I had learned enough under Nokomee's tutelage to carry on a conversation.

"Why do you follow me, Zoorph?"

"Because I am weary of being cooped up with those who do not trust me, just as you. I want
to find a new, exciting thing; just as do you. Even if it is death or worse, I want it. I am
alive, as are you."

I put down the dislike and distrust the girl Nokomee had aroused in me against her. Perhaps
she had been merely jealous of her.

"Don't you know what could happen in the city?" To me it was curious that she should want to
go where the others feared to go.

"I know no better than you what awaits there, and I do not believe what they have told me of
the Schrees. They are not wholly human, but neither are they evil wholly, as the Zervs suppose."

"Why do the Zervs wait, instead of trying to do something for themselves? They speak of the
threat of these raiders, yet they do not try to help me bring others of my people here to stop
the threat they speak of so fearfully. I do not understand."

"The old ruler thinks the ships will come and drive them off from his city. But he is wrong,
they will never come. It is like waiting for the moon to fall. The raiders' ships will return,
and they will be stronger than ever. But not a ship of the Zervs remains in neighboring space
to succor us. Yet he hopes, and his followers wait. It is foolish, and he cannot trust you
or men like you to get help for him. He is too old to meet new conditions and to understand."

Few of the Zervs had shown the rapt interest in me and my people that this Zoorph had made
so plain. I thought backward on how carefully she and I had been kept apart since our first
meeting, and I realized there was more to it than Nokomee's words of anger.

"What is a Zoorph, and what is your name? Why did Nokomee warn me against all Zoorphs?"

"A Zoorph is a member of a cult; a student of mysteries not understood by the many. The others
have a superstition about us, that we destroy souls and make others slaves to our will. It
is stupid, but it is like all superstitions--hard to disprove because so vague in nature."
She flickered impossible eyelashes at me languishingly, in perfect coquetry. "You don't think
me dangerous to your soul, do you?"

I didn't. I thought her a very charming and talented woman, whom I wanted to know much better.
I said so, and she laughed.

"You are wiser than I thought, to see through their lies. They are good people, but like all
people everywhere, they have their little insanities, their beliefs and their intolerances."

Yet within me there was a little warning shudder borne of the strange power of her eyes on
my own, of the chill of the night, of many little past-observed strangenesses in her ways,
in the fear the Zervs bore for her ... I reserved something of caution. She saw this in my
eyes and smiled sadly, and that sad and understanding smile was perfectly calculated to dispel
my last doubt of her. I slid closer across the grass, to lie beside her.

"What could I gain by a knowledge of what lies in the city, Zoorph?" I asked.

"My name is Carna, stranger. In that city you can learn whether there is danger for your people
in what the Schrees plan on earth. We could not tell that, for we do not know enough about
your own race's abilities. You could steal a vehicle to take you to your own rich cities. And
as for me, I could go with you, to practice my arts in your cities and become rich and famous."

"What are your arts, Carna?"

"Nothing you would call spectacular, perhaps. I can read thought, I can foretell the future,
and I can sometimes make things happen fortunately, if I try very hard. Such things, very unsubstantial
arts, not like your gun which kills. Subtle things, like making men fall in love with me, perhaps."

She laughed into my eyes and I got abruptly to my feet. She was telling the truth in the last
sentence, and I did not blame Nokomee for fearing her power.

"Let us see, then, Carna, what the night can give us. I cannot wait forever for chance to bring
me freedom. Come," I bent and helped her to her feet, very pleasant and clinging her grasp
on my arm, very soft and utterly smooth the flesh of her arm in my hand, very graceful and
lovely her swift movement to rise. My heart was beating wildly, she was a kind I understood,
but could not resist any the better for knowing. Or was I unkind, and she but starved for kindness
and human sympathy, so long among a people who disliked and feared her?

We walked along in the darkness, the distant moving lights of that city closer each step, and
a dread in my breast at what I would find there, a dread that grew. Beside me Carna was silent,
her face lovely and glowing in the night, her step graceful as a deer's.

We circled the high wall of white marble keeping some twenty feet away, where the grass gave
knee-high cover we could drop into instantly. We came around to the far side from the cliff,
and stopped where a paved highway ran smooth, like pebbled glass, straight across the valley.
I glanced at Carna, she gestured toward the open gate in the wall, and smiled a daring word.

"In...?"

"In!" I answered, and like two kids, hand in hand, we stole through the shadowed gateway, sliding
quickly out of the light, standing with our backs to the wall, looking up the long, dim-lit
way along which a myriad dark doorways told of life. But it was seemingly deserted. Carna whispered
softly:

"When it was ours, the night was gay with life and love, now--it is death!"

"Death or taxes, we're going to take a look."

We stole along the shadowed side of the street, the moon was up, shedding much too bright a
light now for comfort. Perhaps a hundred yards along that strange street we went, I letting
the Zoorph lead the way, for I had an idea she must know the city and have some plan, or she
would not be here. If she meant to use me to escape into my world, I was all for her.

Then, from ahead, came the sound of feet, many of them in unison. We darted into a doorway,
crouched behind a balustrade. Nearer came the feet, and I peered between the interstices of
the screening balustrade. The feet came on; slow, rhythmic, marching without zest or pause
or break, perfection without snap. As the first marching figure came into sight in the moonlight,
I shuddered to the core with something worse than fear.

For they were men who were no longer men! When Barto and Polter and Noldi had been carried
off unconscious, Nokomee had told me:

"They are not my people. They go their way and we go ours. Time has made us a people divided.
Time, and a cruel science."

These were the mole-men, the crab-men, the creatures built for specific purposes as tools are
built. Each thing bore on his back a bale of goods, or a bar of metal, a burden sizeable enough
for two ordinary men. They were strong, and they were silent and smooth-moving as machines.
I realized they were machines--made out of flesh.

"Are these slaves, or what?" I asked Carna.

"These were once the slaves, or workmen of the race of Zervs. They now serve the Schrees, for
they are mindless, in a way. They are not important. It is those who guard and guide them I
wait to see. I have not yet seen a Schree, but only heard the Zervs describe them."

The nightmare procession went on for minutes, long minutes that were to me a nightmare. Yet
I realized that if I had been raised to the idea of humankind made into machines, it would
not be revolting--not after they had been hereditarily moulded for centuries into what they
were. These are to serve seven, and sometimes fourteen Years, and they and Servants by Indentures
have an Allowance of Corn and Cloaths, when they are out of their
Time, that they may be therewith supported, till they can be provided
with Services, or otherwise settled. They must have been once specially selected for strength
as well as beauty, for about them was a sad and terrible grace, a remainder of noble chiseling
of brow and nostril, distorted as by a fiend into the horror that it was--these had once been
a noble race!

"Do you feel the terrible horror of this sight?" I asked Carna.

"Always I have felt the horror that was done to them in the past. It is still done to man.
Look, there are the three who came with you, and fell into the hands of the priests. They are
the thing that the Zervs really fear, yet they live with it, and have done so for centuries.
They can despise the Schrees, but they are as bad themselves--look!"

I followed with my eye her pointing finger. Yes, that figure was hulking Barto, and I almost
yelled "Jake, snap out of it!" before I remembered my own peril.

Then he came into the full light, and passed not twenty feet away. I leaned against the railing
of stone, sick as a dog and retching. They had made him over, with some unknown aborted science
of an evil world! Jake was clubfooted, lumbering, with his jaws grown into great jowls of bone,
his arms elongated and ending in hooks. Two of the fingers, or the thumb and finger had been
enlarged or grafted into a bone-like semblance of a crab's claw. What he was going to be when
they got through, I didn't know, but neither did Jake. He didn't know anything! He clumped
along, his crossed eyes unmoving, his back bent with a weight heavy for even his broad shoulders--a
man no longer, but a mindless zombie. A cross-eyed zombie!

I cursed silently, tearing my hands against the stone as I resisted the impulse to fire and
fire again upon those hopping, thin, white things that came after.

"Just what are those hopping things?"

"They are a separate race, who have lived with both Zervs and with Schrees. They are a part
of our life. You have dogs, horses, machines. We have Jivros--that is, priests--and we have
the workmen we call Shinros, and too, we have the Zoorphs!" She laughed a little as I stared
at her. "Do not worry, the Zoorphs are not really so different. But the Schrees and Shinros
are different."

"Damned, beastly, demoniac life it must be."

"To you, who expect things to be like your knowledge tells you it must be. To us, it is our
way. For a Zerv, or for a Schree, it is a good way. The Jivros do the supervisory work, the
Shinros do the hard work, and the Schrees take it easy and enjoy life. Why do you have machines?"

"Machines are not alive. That is different."

"Neither are the Shinros alive, they only seem so. They do not know what they have lost--it
is much as if they had died.

"But come, I must show you where we can get a ship to take us away from this and into your
world. I have a life to live, I want to live it! You--have a message to deliver to your people,
or they will become the Shinros of the whole race of Schrees. I do not like to think what can
happen to your world!"

I followed her again on our furtive way among the shadows. She was swift and sure, and made
good time. She knew where she was going. It was a broad open space deep within the city. On
three sides were wide closed doors like hangar doors. The fourth was a massive structure of
rose granite, beetling above us, a monstrous shape in the dimness, throwing a shadow half across
the paved space. We raced across the shadow toward the nearest doorway, flattened against it,
listening for life inside. Carna worked on the catch of the door, after a second slid the door
aside slowly, carefully. Inside I could see a shimmering smoothness, round, higher than my
head, a top-shaped object. I guessed that this was the ship she meant to steal from the Schrees.
Suddenly the door she was sliding open scraped, and emitted a shrill, high-pitched sound. I
did not know if it was an alarm activated by the opening door or just rust on the rails and
wheels of the door mechanism. Carna cried:

"Hurry, get into the ship, we must take off at once. They will come; they must have heard that
sound!"

I ducked into the darkness, circled the bulging shape, looking for an opening. Smooth, there
seemed no way I could find.

"Here it is, help me open it," Carna panted behind me.

I leaped to her side. She was twisting at an inset handle around which faint lines indicated
the door edge. I pulled her aside, took hold of the handle, twisted hard. It bent, then gave,
and the door swung easily open in my hands. We tumbled in. Carna raced through the first chamber,
and even as I got the door closed, the floor lifted under my feet easily, drifted out of the
wide doorway, shot upward so quickly I was thrown to the floor. I lay there, the increasing
acceleration pressing me hard against the cool metal. After a time I struggled up, made my
way to the woman's side.

Ahead was the moonlit range of mountains. Carna was setting a course straight along the ridge
of them, heading southward.

"How far will this thing fly?" I asked.

"It will fly around your world many times, if I want it to."

"What kind of fuel does it use?" I asked incredulously.

"I don't know what that is. It uses a substance we call Ziss. It is a good fuel."

"It must be!"

I looked back along the ridge of the mountain's top toward the valley we had left. We were
in a bubble on the top of the flat, circular ship; one could see in any direction. Back there
a series of glowing round shapes shot upward, came after us in a long curve that would bring
them ahead of us on our course. Carna changed her course to parallel the pursuit, and they
changed again, to intercept her new direction. Again she changed, circling farther west.

But it was no use! Rapidly they overhauled us.

"Can't you get more speed out of it?" I shouted at her, for they were very close.

"We have been unlucky, my friend. This ship is not in good shape. There is something wrong
with it. I cannot make it go as it should, or there is something I do not know...."

Swiftly they came up with us, over us, and beams of light shot from them down upon us. The
ship was held now, rigid. One could feel the acceleration cease. Like a bird on a string we
followed as they swung back toward the valley. Minutes later we were being lowered into the
open space we had just left. I clicked the safety off my rifle, loosened the gun in my holster.
I covered the door, shielding myself behind the round shape of a machine. But Carna put a hand
on my weapon, shook her head.

"If you kill some of them, they will make of you a Shinro. If you submit meekly, it may be
I can talk to someone and save you. I have ways. I understand them. They will be glad to get
me, and I will tell them you know many things they need to know. I can save your life. Later
we can try again, in another ship. Next time we will not be so unlucky."

It sounded like sense, and I looked into her deep eyes searchingly. She meant well. Perhaps
she could do what she said. I did not know these aliens; she was almost one of them.

As the door opened in the side, I lay the rifle down, stood with crossed arms as the thin,
hopping horrors came near.

These things had never been men. They had faces that were empty of features, just flat, shiny,
gray eyes, two holes where they breathed, no mouth that I could see. There was a long neck
around which the collar of their white robe was gathered in folds. Their hands were horny,
like an insect's claws. They were not human, they were only four-limbed, and walked--or hopped--in
an erect position. There the resemblance ceased.

They led us out, Carna rattling off a series of sounds I could hardly follow. He should see that the Lord's Supper be duly and decently administered,
encourage People to frequent Communion, and instruct them in the Nature
of that holy Sacrament; and as for Baptism he should see that it be
rightly performed, and by the Bishop of London's Directions should
prescribe the requisite Alteration in the last Clauses of the Form
of Baptism; as also those Alterations wanting in the Prayer for the
General Assembly, instead of the Prayer for the Parliament.

 Within
twenty minutes we were entering a tremendous room, and Carna nudged me.

"Their boss, Carl! Look impressed."

It was easy to look impressed. I was mightily impressed by the She on the throne!

       *       *       *

I had no eyes for the score or so of Schrees that surrounded the massive carved chair, even
though I was curious about their difference from men. Above them were her sleepy eyes, wide
almonds, molten and wise, incandescent with intense inner fire above a mouth that was a wide,
scarlet oval torn into the whitely-glowing face.

A great black pelt softened the harsh lines of the throne, framed her chalk-white body so that
it curved starkly sensual, dominating the great chamber with beauty. It was a beauty one knew
this woman used as a tool, a weapon, keen and polished and ready, and it struck at me swift
as a great serpent, the fires behind her eyes driving the blow.

She wore a kind of sark of shadowy black veil, sewn over with sparkling bits of gem. It was
in truth but an effective ornament for the proud firm breasts, the narrow waist, the arch of
the hips and the curves of her thighs. Inadvertently I let out a low whistle of approbation
and astonishment. Carna, beside me, nudged me sharply, and I snapped out of it.

The purple, lazy lids of her eyes moved, the slow weary-wise gaze centered on me, her hand
moved. In two strides a man from the throne-side had me by the arm, and another seized my other,
tugged me forward to her feet, thrust me down on my knees. Still, I looked. Curiosity and something
more held me in a grip I couldn't shake.

This was more than a woman, I sensed. There was an awe of her throbbing in me. Not fear--something
deeper, something one feels before the unexplainable, something one feels gazing at the moon
and wondering; an ominous, deep, thrilling and unexplainable emotion.

Closer, I could see her firm flesh was dusted over with a glittering powder, the soft curves
of her hair swept back to mingle and lose themselves in the black fur of the pelt so that the
night-black hair seemed to spread everywhere about her and melt into the shadows.

Her hands were sinuous as serpents, the fingers tapering, the nails very long like the Chinese.
Her nose was exquisite, but thin-edged, and with a cruel line on each side that vanished when
she spoke.

"It is death to strangers in this valley...." she mused, not speaking to me or to anyone, but
with a cruel intent to toy with me in the words, mocking, waiting for me to answer.

"I have been long on the way," I answered, in much the same tone, as though we were speaking
of some one not present.

"The way to death is sometimes long, and sometimes short. And, too, there are things worse
than death. But what was it you came here seeking?"

"I did not know, until just now," I answered, still looking at her eyes, which glanced at me,
then away, then back again. She was interested in spite of her apparent weariness with routine--or
perhaps with life itself.

"Now that you know, will you tell me?" She smiled a little, not a good smile, but a secret
jest with herself. An appearance of extreme evil sat for a moment on her face, then went again,
like the wind. Her voice was grave, careless, yet modulated with an extreme care as if she
spoke to a child.

"I seek the wisdom I see in your eyes, to know what is and why it wearies you. I want to know
a great many things, about your people and what they do here, what they mean to mine, what
your plans may be--a great many things I need now."

The sleepiness left her eyes, and she bent toward me with the grace of a great cat and the
shadows circling her eyes lifted a little. Wise, aloof, indifferent, yet she did not know what
I was, or what I meant, and she meant to find out.

"So you know...." she mused, as if to herself.

"I know you are from space. I know it has been a long long time since you first touched here;
your people, that is. I know that you drove the Zervs from this city and took it for your own.
But that is all."

"It is too much. You cannot leave here." Her voice was sharp, and I was surprised to learn
that she had even considered letting me go free. It was encouraging, after the dire pictures
the Zervs and Nokomee had drawn for me of these Schrees.

I looked curiously at them, the Zervs had called them "not human." They were different, as
a negro is different from a white, or an Oriental from a Finn. Their eyes were wide-set and
a little prominent, their ears thinner and smaller, their necks very long and supple--different
still from the Zervs. Yet they were a human race. I had misunderstood--or I had not yet met
those whom the Zervs called Schree.

Carna had knelt beside me, and I murmured to her:

"Are these the Schrees, or something else?"

"These are the high-class Schrees, they are very like the Zervs in appearance. The other classes
of the Schrees at sometime in the past were changed by medical treatments into a different
appearance. It was a way of fixing the caste system permanently--understand?" She answered
me swiftly, in a whisper, and the woman on the throne frowned as she noticed our conversation.

Her eyes fixed ours as she said, with a curiously excited inflection, no longer bored with
us: "Take these two to the place of questioning. I will supervise the proceeding. I must know
what these two intended here, whether others of this man's people understand us."

"We're in for it!" said Carna, and I knew what she meant. Jerked to our feet, we were hurried
from the big throne room, down a corridor, through a great open door which closed behind us.

That place! It was a laboratory out of Mr. Hyde's nightmares.

Up until now I had accepted the many divergencies and peculiarities of the Zervs, the priestly
insect-men, the monstrous workers--all the variance of this colony from space--as only to be
expected of another planet's races. I had consciously tried to resist the impact of horror
on my mind, had tried to put it aside as a natural reaction and one which did not necessarily
mean that this expedition from space was a horrible threat to men. I had tried to accept their
ways as not necessarily monstrous, but as a different way of life that could be as good a way
as our own if I once understood it. There were attractive points about the Zervs and even about
these Schrees' rulers which bore out this impulse toward tolerance in me.

But in this laboratory--or abattoir--some nameless, ominous aura or smell or electric force--what
it was I know not--struck at my already staggering understanding with a final blow.

Now at last I met the real Schrees! I knew without asking. They seemed to me to be an attempt
by the peculiar insect-like "priests" to make from normal men a creature more like themselves
in appearance. Perhaps it had been done from the natural urge to have about them beings more
like themselves than men ... and it was plain that the race of the insect-like creatures and
of men had become inextricably linked--become a social unity in the past. It was also increasingly
plain that the four-limbed insect creatures had in the beginning been the cultured race, been
the fathers of the science and culture of this race, had through the centuries lost their dominance
to the Zervs and the Schree's upper classes--had retained the "priest" role as their own place
in society. It was perhaps at that time that their science had brought the Schree type into
existence. There were perhaps a hundred of them at work in the big chamber--a chamber bewilderingly
filled with hanging surgical non-glare lights, filling the place with a shadowless illumination,
revealing great, gurgling bottles of fluid with tubes and gleaming metal rods; pulsing elastic
bulbs; throbbing little pumps, with row on row of gauges and dials and little levers along
the walls.

There were a score of ominous-looking operating tables, some occupied, some empty, about them
gathered group after group of white-masked Schrees. These were taller than men, near seven
feet, with very bony arms and legs, a skeletal structure altered into attenuation, with high,
narrow skulls, great liquid eyes, no brows, hairless skulls showing bare and pointed above
the white surgical masks.

Very like the Jivro caste, yes, but different as men are different from insect. They walked
with a long graceful stride, not hopping as the priests' class. Their eyes were mournful and
liquid with a dog-like softness, their hands were snake-quick and long, they looked like sad-faced
ghouls busy about the dismemberment of a corpse--a corpse of someone they had loved, and they
appearing very sad about the necessity. Such was their appearance; mournful, ghoulish, yet
human and warm in a repressed, frustrated way.

