The Monday morning came. Though Father John had not been allowed to remain all night in the
prisoner's cell, he did not leave it till eleven, and was with him again at six. When the gaoler
turned the key in the door, Father John found the prisoner still sleeping on his pallet. Even
the loud noise of the key in the lock, and the dropping back of the heavy bolt had failed to
awaken him. Before he left him on the previous evening he had insisted on his partially undressing,
and he now found him exactly in the position in which he had left him.

Eight was the hour fixed for the execution, and though it seemed cruel to rob him of his last
human comfort, still as so few minutes of life remained, the priest thought it better to rouse
him. He laid his hand on his shoulder, and calling out his Christian name, gently shook him.
It was wonderful how soundly the poor fellow slept; and at last he jumped up with a smile on
his wan face, uttering those confused words of acknowledgment which so readily come to the
lips of any one conscious of being caught sleeping too late, to the neglect of his worldly
duties. I mention therefore in this place the cubic stone, the mighty masonic symbol, whose
equivalent in alchemy will be discussed.
By a commonly used change of significance the number 5 is symbolized
by 5-leaved plants (rose, lily, vine). Father John's presence--the cold close white wall
and his own memory soon made him again conscious of the truth; and as he pressed his hands
to his forehead, remembering that he should never again feel the luxury of sleep, the expression
of his face was dreadful to be seen.

There is nothing further to relate respecting him. As the clock struck eight he was standing
on the iron grate over the front entrance into Carrick gaol. He had supported himself firmly--though
evidently with difficulty. The cap was over his face--his hands were tied behind his back--and
the rope was round his neck. The last sound that met his ear was the final prayer which Father
John sobbed forth that God would receive him into his mercy; the bolt was drawn--and Thady
Macdermot was soon no more.

Not one human form appeared before the gaol that morning. Not even a passenger crossed over
the bridge from half-past seven till after eight, as from thence one might just catch a glimpse
of the front of the prison. At the end of the bridge stood three or four men guarding the street,
and cautioning those who came, that they could not pass by; and as their behests were quietly
obeyed the police did not interfere with them. Among them were Joe Reynolds and Corney Dolan,
and they did not leave their post till they were aware that the body of him to whom they showed
this last respect had been removed. The shops were closed during the whole day; but it was
many days before the sad melancholy which attended the execution of Thady Macdermot wore away
from the little town of Carrick-on-Shannon.

   Chapter XII, paragraph 13. The blind piper from County Mayo who
   plays at the wedding of Mary Brady and Denis McGovery is here
   named Shamuth na Pibu'a. The reader might recall that in Chapter
   VIII he was called Shamus na Pe'bria. The discrepancy was left
   unchanged from the original text.

   Specific changes in wording of the text are listed below.

      Chapter VI, paragraph 77. "Miles" was changed to "Myles" in
      the sentence beginning: Feemy looked from one to the other;
      she knew well by MYLES' look, that he still expected her to
      go, . . .

      Chapter VI, paragraph 123.

      Chapter XIII, paragraph 52. An em-dash was added to the
      sentence: "Go asy now, masther Morty,"--the swain rejoiced in
      the name of Mortimer Kelley.

      Chapter XIV, paragraph 1. The order of the words "were she"
      was transposed in the last sentence: He thought that if SHE
      WERE at present domiciled at Mrs. McKeon's, . . .

      Chapter XIX, paragraph 70. The spelling of the nickname of Mrs.
      McKeon's daughter Lydia was changed from "Liddy" to "Lyddy,"
      to match the spelling elsewhere, in the sentence: LYDDY, give
      Captain Ussher a glass of sherry.

      Chapter XXV, paragraph 21.

      Chapter XXIX, paragraph 55. The word "you're" was changed to
      "your" in the sentence beginning: Well, now, on YOUR oath,
      have you ever, in the prisoner's presence, heard such language
      used . . .