In the past, Italians have come by the millions into the United States.  They have been welcomed,
they have prospered, they have become good citizens, community and governmental leaders.  They
are not Italian-Americans.  They are Americans--Americans of Italian descent.

The Italians have gone in great numbers to the other Americas-- Brazil and the Argentine, for
example--hundreds and hundreds of thousands of them.  They have gone to many other nations
in every continent of the world, giving of their industry and their talents, and achieving
success and the comfort of good living, and good citizenship.

Italy should go on as a great mother nation, contributing to the culture and the progress and
the good will of all mankind-- developing her special talents in the arts and crafts and sciences,
and preserving her historic and cultural heritage for the benefit of all peoples.

We want and expect the help of the future Italy toward lasting peace.  All the other nations
opposed to Fascism and Nazism ought to help to give Italy a chance.

The Germans, after years of domination in Rome, left the people in the Eternal City on the
verge of starvation.  We and the British will do and are doing everything we can to bring them
relief. Anticipating the fall of Rome, we made preparations to ship food supplies to the city,
but, of course, it should be borne in mind that the needs are so great, the transportation
requirements of our armies so heavy, that improvement must be gradual.  But we have already
begun to save the lives of the men, women and children of Rome.

This, I think, is an example of the efficiency of your machinery of war.  The magnificent ability
and energy of the American people in growing the crops, building the merchant ships, in making
and collecting the cargoes, in getting the supplies over thousands of miles of water, and thinking
ahead to meet emergencies--all this spells, I think, an amazing efficiency on the part of our
armed forces, all the various agencies working with them, and American industry and labor as
a whole. 

The hesitation and stammering of his tongue he corrected by practising to speak with pebbles
in his mouth; and he strengthened his voice by running or walking
uphill, and pronouncing some passage in an oration or a poem during
the difficulty of breath which that caused.

And so I extend the congratulations and thanks tonight of the American people to General Alexander,
who has been in command of the whole Italian operation; to our General Clark and General Leese
of the Fifth and the Eighth Armies; to General Wilson, the Supreme Allied commander of the
Mediterranean theater, to General Devers, his American Deputy; to General Eaker; to Admirals
Cunningham and Hewitt; and to all their brave officers and men.

May God bless them and watch over them and over all of our gallant, fighting men.

June 23, 1944.

All our fighting men overseas today have their appointed stations on the far-flung battlefronts
of the world.  We at home have ours too.  We need, we are proud of, our fighting men--most
decidedly. But, during the anxious times ahead, let us not forget that they need us too.

It goes almost without saying that we must continue to forge the weapons of victory--the hundreds
of thousands of items, large and small, essential to the waging of war.  This has been the
major task from the very start, and it is still a major task.  This is the very worst time
for any war worker to think of leaving his machine or to look for a peacetime job.

And it goes almost without saying, too, that we must continue to provide our government with
the funds necessary for waging war not only by the payment of taxes--which, after all, is an
obligation of American citizenship--but also by the purchase of war bonds--an act of free choice
which every citizen has to make for himself under the guidance of his own conscience.

Whatever else any of us may be doing, the purchase of war bonds and stamps is something all
of us can do and should do to help win the war.

I am happy to report tonight that it is something which nearly everyone seems to be doing.
Although there are now approximately sixty-seven million persons who have or earn some form
of income, eighty-one million persons or their children have already bought war bonds.  They
have bought more than six hundred million individual bonds.  Their purchases have totaled more
than thirty-two billion dollars.  These are the purchases of individual men, women, and children.
Anyone who would have said this was possible a few years ago would have been put down as a
starry-eyed visionary.  But of such visions is the stuff of America fashioned.

Of course, there are always pessimists with us everywhere, a few here and a few there.  I am
reminded of the fact that after the fall of France in 1940 I asked the Congress for the money
for the production by the United States of fifty thousand airplanes that year.  Well, I was
called crazy--it was said that the figure was fantastic; that it could not be done.  And yet
today we are building airplanes at the rate of one hundred thousand a year.

There is a direct connection between the bonds you have bought and the stream of men and equipment
now rushing over the English Channel for the liberation of Europe.  There is a direct connection
between your bonds and every part of this global war today.

Tonight, therefore, on the opening of this Fifth War Loan Drive, it is appropriate for us to
take a broad look at this panorama of world war, for the success or the failure of the drive
is going to have so much to do with the speed with which we can accomplish victory and the peace.

While I know that the chief interest tonight is centered on the English Channel and on the
beaches and farms and the cities of Normandy, we should not lose sight of the fact that our
armed forces are engaged on other battlefronts all over the world, and that no one front can
be considered alone without its proper relation to all.

It is worth while, therefore, to make over-all comparisons with the past.  Let us compare today
with just two years ago--June, 1942.  At that time Germany was in control of practically all
of Europe, and was steadily driving the Russians back toward the Ural Mountains. Germany was
practically in control of North Africa and the Mediterranean, and was beating at the gates
of the Suez Canal and the route to India.  Italy was still an important military and supply
factor--as subsequent, long campaigns have proved.

Japan was in control of the western Aleutian Islands; and in the South Pacific was knocking
at the gates of Australia and New Zealand--and also was threatening India.  Japan had seized
control of most of the Central Pacific.

American armed forces on land and sea and in the air were still very definitely on the defensive,
and in the building-up stage.  Our allies were bearing the heat and the brunt of the attack.

In 1942 Washington heaved a sigh of relief that the first war bond issue had been cheerfully
oversubscribed by the American people. Way back in those days, two year ago, America was still
hearing from many "amateur strategists" and political critics, some of whom were doing more
good for Hitler than for the United States--two years ago.

But today we are on the offensive all over the world--bringing the attack to our enemies.

