After the King of Naples had gone to fulfill this mission, Colonel Gourgaud was called during
the morning into the Emperor's tent, where I then was.  "I will be tomorrow on the road to
Pirna," said his Majesty; "but I shall halt at Stolpen.  As for you, hasten to Dresden; go
with the utmost speed; reach it this night.  Interview on your arrival the King of Naples,
Durosnel, the Duke of Bassano, and Marshal Gouvion Saint-Cyr; reassure them all.  See also
the Saxon minister Gersdorf.  Say to him that you could not see the king because you set out
in such haste; but that I can to-morrow bring forty thousand men into Dresden, and that I am
preparing to enter with all the army.  Next day you will see the commandant of the engineering
corps; you will visit the redoubts and the fortifications of the town; and when you have inspected
everything, you will return quickly and meet me at Stolpen.  Report to me exactly the real
state of affairs, as well as the opinion of Marshal Saint-Cyr and the Duke of Bassano.  Set
out."  The colonel left immediately at a gallop, though he had eaten nothing as yet that day.

The next evening at eleven o'clock, Colonel Gourgaud returned to the Emperor, after performing
all the requirements of his mission. The bitterly-disappointed Secessionists denounced the majority
as "Submissionists," and threatened all manner of things.

The election occurred on the same day that Jefferson Davis was inaugurated
President of the Southern Confederacy.

When the State Convention met at Jefferson City, it was found that
of its 99 members 53 were natives of either Virginia of Kentucky,
and all but 17 had been born in Slave States. Only 13 were natives
of the North, three were Germans, and one an Irishman.  "As I left," said Colonel Gourgaud, "I saw a village in flames
half a league from the great gardens, and Marshal Gouvion Saint-Cyr was preparing to evacuate
that position."--"But after all," said the Emperor eagerly, "what is the opinion of the Duke
of Bassano?"--"Sire, the Duke of Bassano does not think that we can hold out twenty-four hours."--"And
you?"--"I, Sire?  I think that Dresden will be taken to-morrow if your Majesty is not there."--"I
can then rely upon what you tell me?"-- "Sire, I will answer for it with my head."

Then his Majesty summoned General Haxo, and said to him, his finger on the map, "Vandamme is
advancing by way of Pirna beyond the Elbe.  The eagerness of the enemy in penetrating as far
as Dresden has been extreme. Vandamme will find himself in his rear.  I intend to sustain his
movement with my whole army; but I am uneasy as to the fate of Dresden, and am not willing
to sacrifice that city.  I can reach it in a few hours, and I shall do so, although it grieves
me much to abandon a plan which if well executed might furnish the means of routing all the
allies at one blow. Happily Vandamme is still in sufficient strength to supplement the general
movement by attacks at special points which will annoy the enemy. Order him, then, to go from
Pirna to Ghiesubel, to gain the defiles of Peterswalde, and when intrenched in this impregnable
position, to await the result of operations under the walls of Dresden.  I reserve for him
the duty of receiving the swords of the vanquished.  But in order to do this it is necessary
that he should keep his wits about him, and pay no attention to the tumult made by the terrified
inhabitants.  Explain to General Vandamme exactly what I expect of him.  Never will he have
a finer opportunity to gain the marshal's baton."

General Haxo set out instantly; and the Emperor made Colonel Gourgaud reenter his apartment,
and ordered him to take a fresh horse, and return to Dresden more quickly than he had come,
in order to announce his arrival. Gen. Harney wrote the Adjutant-General of the Army a pathetic
letter, in which he said:

My confidence in the honor and integrity of Gen. Price, in the purity of his motives, and in his loyalty
to the Government, remains unimpaired.

It was ten o'clock in the morning when the inhabitants of Dresden, now reduced to despair,
and speaking freely of capitulation, witnessed his Majesty's arrival.  The scene changed suddenly;
and to the most complete discouragement succeeded most entire confidence, especially when the
haughty cuirassiers of Latour-Maubourg defiled over the bridge, holding their heads high, and
their eyes fixed on the neighboring hillsides covered by the enemy's lines.  The Emperor immediately
alighted at the palace of the king, who was preparing to seek an asylumn in the new town, but
whose intentions were changed by the arrival of this great man.  The interview was extremely
touching.

I cannot undertake to describe all the occurrences of those memorable days, in which the Emperor
covered himself with glory, and was more exposed to danger than he had ever been at any time.
Pages, equerries, and aides-decamp fell dead around him, balls pierced the stomach of his horse,
but nothing could touch him.  The soldiers saw this and redoubled their ardor, and also their
confidence and admiration.  I shall simply state that the Emperor did not re-enter the chateau
until midnight, and then spent the hours until daylight dictating orders, while promenading
up and down the room with great strides, until at break of day he remounted his horse.  The
weather was horrible, and the rain lasted the whole day.  In the evening, the enemy being completely
routed, the Emperor returned to the palace in a frightful condition.  From the time he mounted
his horse, at six o'clock in the morning, the rain had not ceased a single instant, and he
was so wet that it could be said without any figure of speech that the water ran down into
his boots from the collar of his coat, for they were entirely filled with it.  His hat of very
fine beaver was so ruined that it fell down over his shoulders, his buff belt was perfectly
soaked with water; in fact a man just drawn out of the river would not be wetter than the Emperor.
The King of Saxony, who awaited him, met him in this condition, and embraced him as a cherished
son who had just escaped a great danger; and this excellent prince's eyes were full of tears
as he pressed the saviour of his capital to his heart.  After a few reassuring and tender words
from the Emperor, his Majesty entered his apartments, leaving everywhere traces of the water
which dripped from every part of his clothing, and I had much difficulty in undressing him.
Knowing that the Emperor greatly enjoyed a bath after a fatiguing day, I had it prepared; but
as he felt unusually fatigued, and in addition to this began to shiver considerably, his Majesty
preferred retiring to his bed, which I hurriedly warmed.  Hardly had the Emperor retired, however,
than he had Baron Fain, one of his secretaries, summoned to read his accumulated correspondence,
which was very voluminous.  After this he took his bath, but had remained in it only a few
moments when he was seized with a sudden sickness accompanied by vomiting, which obliged him
to retire to bed.

His Majesty said to me, "My dear Constant, a little rest is absolutely indispensable to me;
see that I am not awaked except for matters of the gravest importance; say this to Fain." 
I obeyed the Emperor's orders, after which I took my position in the room in front of his Majesty's
chamber, watching with the attention of a sentinel on duty lest he should be awakened, or any
one should even approach his apartment.

The next morning the Emperor rang very early, and I entered his room immediately, anxious to
know how he had passed the night.  I found him almost entirely restored, and in fine spirits.
He told me, however, that he had had a short attack of fever.  I must here remark that it was
the only time the Emperor had fever, and during the whole time I was with him I never saw him
ill enough to keep his bed for twenty-four hours.  He rose at his usual hour, and when he descended
was intensely gratified by the fine appearance made by the battalion on duty.  Those brave
grenadiers, who the evening before had served as his escort, and reentered Dresden with him
in a most pitiable condition, this morning he saw ranged in the court of the palace in splendid
condition, and bearing arms as brilliant as if it were a day of parade on the Place du Carrousel.
These brave fellows had spent the night polishing their arms, and drying themselves around
great fires which they had kindled for the purpose, having thus preferred the satisfaction
of presenting themselves in faultless condition before their Emperor's eyes to the sleep and
rest which they must so greatly have needed. 

It runs north-east and south-west, so deep that there is no anchoring but very nigh the shore.
There is but little tide; the flood setting north and the ebb to
the southward.

At the north-east end of this channel are two points of land not above a league asunder; one
on the south side upon Timor, called Kupang; the other on the north side, upon the island Anabao.
From this last point the land trends away northerly two or three leagues, opens to the sea,
and then bends in again to the westward.

KUPANG BAY. FORT CONCORDIA.

Being past these points you open a bay of about eight leagues long and four wide. This bay
trends in on the south side north-east by east from the south point
before mentioned; making many small points or little coves.  This journey, as may well be imagined, had been
suggested by the Emperor, who sought every opportunity of putting the Empress forward, and
making her perform the duties of a sovereign, as regent of the Empire. She summoned and presided
over the council of ministers, and more than once I heard the Emperor congratulate himself
after the declaration of war with Austria that his Louise, as he called her, acted solely for
the interests of France, and had nothing Austrian but her birth.  He also allowed her the satisfaction
of herself publishing and in her own name all the official news of the army.  The bulletins
were no longer issued; but the news was transmitted to her all ready for publication, which
was doubtless an attention on the part of his Majesty in order to render the Empress Regent
more popular, by making her the medium of communication between the government and the public.
Moreover, it is a fact, that we who were on the spot, although we knew at once whether the
battle was gained or lost, often did not know the entire operations of the different corps
maneuvering on an immense line of battle, except through the journals of Paris; and our eagerness
to read them may well be imagined.