He is a giant of a man for stature; taller by a good deal than Harry Mowlidge, in your neighbourhood,
and large boned, and scraggy; and has a hand!--I never saw such an one in my life. He has great
staring eyes, like the bull's that frightened me so; vast jaw-bones sticking out: eyebrows
hanging over his eyes; two great scars upon his forehead, and one on his left cheek; and two
large whiskers, and a monstrous wide mouth; blubber lips; long yellow teeth, and a hideous
grin. He wears his own frightful long hair, tied up in a great black bag; a black crape neckcloth
about a long ugly neck: and his throat sticking out like a wen. As to the rest, he was dressed
well enough, and had a sword on, with a nasty red knot to it; leather garters, buckled below
his knees; and a foot--near as long as my arm, I verily think.

He said, he fright de lady; and offered to withdraw; but she bid him not; and I told Mrs. Jewkes,
That as she knew I had been crying, she should not have called me to the gentleman without
letting me know he was there. I soon went up to my closet; for my heart ached all the time
I was at table, not being able to look upon him without horror; and this brute of a woman,
though she saw my distress, before this addition to it, no doubt did it on purpose to strike
more terror into me. And indeed it had its effect: for when I went to bed, I could think of
nothing but his hideous person, and my master's more hideous actions: and thought them too
well paired; and when I dropt asleep, I dreamed they were both coming to my bedside, with the
worst designs; and I jumped out of my bed in my sleep, and frightened Mrs. Jewkes; till, waking
with the terror, I told her my dream; and the wicked creature only laughed, and said, All I
feared was but a dream, as well as that; and when it was over, and I was well awake, I should
laugh at it as such!

And now I am come to the close of Wednesday, the 27th day of my distress.

Poor Mr. Williams is actually arrested, and carried away to Stamford. So there is an end of
all my hopes from him, poor gentleman! His over-security and openness have ruined us both!
I was but too well convinced, that we ought not to have lost a moment's time; but he was half
angry, and thought me too impatient; and then his fatal confessions, and the detestable artifice
of my master!--But one might well think, that he who had so cunningly, and so wickedly, contrived
all his stratagems hitherto, that it was impossible to avoid them, would stick at nothing to
complete them. I fear I shall soon find it so!

But one stratagem I have just invented, though a very discouraging one to think of; because
I have neither friends nor money, nor know one step of the way, if I was out of the house.
But let bulls, and bears, and lions, and tigers, and, what is worse, false, treacherous, deceitful
men, stand in my way, I cannot be in more danger than I am; and I depend nothing upon his three
weeks: for how do I know, now he is in such a passion, and has already begun his vengeance
on poor Mr. Williams, that he will not change his mind, and come down to Lincolnshire before
he goes to London?

My stratagem is this: I will endeavour to get Mrs. Jewkes to go to bed without me, as she often
does, while I sit locked up in my closet: and as she sleeps very sound in her first sleep,
of which she never fails to give notice by snoring, if I can but then get out between the two
bars of the window, (for you know I am very slender, and I find I can get my head through,)
then I can drop upon the leads underneath, which are little more than my height, and which
leads are over a little summer-parlour, that juts out towards the garden; and as I am light,
I can easily drop from them; for they are not high from the ground: then I shall be in the
garden; and then, as I have the key of the back-door, I will get out. But I have another piece
of cunning still: Good Heaven, succeed to me my dangerous, but innocent devices!--I have read
of a great captain, who, being in danger, leaped overboard into the sea, and his enemies, as
he swam, shooting at him with bows and arrows, he unloosed his upper garment, and took another
course, while they stuck that full of their darts and arrows; and so he escaped, and lived
to triumph over them all. So what will I do, but strip off my upper petticoat, and throw it
into the pond, with my neckhandkerchief! For to be sure, when they miss me, they will go to
the pond first, thinking I have drowned myself: and so, when they see some of my clothes floating
there, they will be all employed in dragging the pond, which is a very large one; and as I
shall not, perhaps, be missed till the morning, this will give me opportunity to get a great
way off; and I am sure I will run for it when I am out. And so I trust, that Providence will
direct my steps to some good place of safety, and make some worthy body my friend; for sure,
if I suffer ever so, I cannot be in more danger, nor in worse hands, than where I am; and with
such avowed bad designs.

O my dear parents! don't be frightened when you come to read this!--But all will be over before
you can see it; and so God direct me for the best! My writings, for fear I should not escape,
I will bury in the garden; for, to be sure, I shall be searched and used dreadfully if I can't
get off. And so I will close here, for the present, to prepare for my plot. Prosper thou, O
gracious Protector of oppressed innocence! this last effort of thy poor handmaid! that I may
escape the crafty devices and snares that have begun to entangle my virtue; and from which,
but by this one trial, I see no way of escaping. And oh! whatever becomes of me, bless my dear
parents, and protect poor Mr. Williams from ruin! for he was happy before he knew me.

Just now, just now! I heard Mrs. Jewkes, who is in her cups, own to the horrid Colbrand, that
the robbing of poor Mr. Williams was a contrivance of hers, and executed by the groom and a
helper, in order to seize my letters upon him, which they missed. They are now both laughing
at the dismal story, which they little think I overheard--O how my heart aches! for what are
not such wretches capable of! Can you blame me for endeavouring, through any danger, to get
out of such clutches?

Past eleven o'clock.

Mrs. Jewkes is come up, and gone to bed; and bids me not stay long in my closet, but come to
bed. O for a dead sleep for the treacherous brute! I never saw her so tipsy, and that gives
me hopes. I have tried again, and find I can get my head through the iron bars. I am now all
prepared, as soon as I hear her fast; and now I'll seal up these, and my other papers, my last
work: and to thy providence, O my gracious God! commit the rest.--Once more, God bless you
both! and send us a happy meeting; if not here, in his heavenly kingdom. Amen.

Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st days of my distress.

And distress indeed! For here I am still; and every thing has been worse and worse! Oh! the
poor unhappy Pamela!--Without any hope left, and ruined in all my contrivances. But, oh! my
dear parents, rejoice with me, even in this low plunge of my distress; for your poor Pamela
has escaped from an enemy worse than any she ever met with; an enemy she never thought of before,
and was hardly able to stand against: I mean, the weakness and presumption, both in one, of
her own mind; which had well nigh, had not the divine grace interposed, sunk her into the lowest,
last abyss of misery and perdition! 

One might as well walk under water and hope to guess out a route and stick to it, I should
think. Yet it is claimed that the aboriginal "tracker" was able to hunt out people lost in the
scrub.

Also in the "bush"; also in the desert; and even follow them over patches of bare rocks and over
alluvial ground which had to all appearance been washed clear of footprints.

From reading Australian books and talking with the people, I became convinced that the aboriginal
tracker's performances evince a craft, a penetration, a luminous sagacity, and a minuteness
and accuracy of observation in the matter of detective-work not found in nearly so remarkable a
degree in any other people, white or colored. In an official account of the blacks of Australia published
by the government of Victoria, one reads that the aboriginal not only notices the faint marks
left on the bark of a tree by the claws of a climbing opossum, but knows in some way or other
whether the marks were made to-day or yesterday.

And there is the case, on records where A., a settler, makes a bet with B., that B. may lose
a cow as effectually as he can, and A. will produce an aboriginal who will find her. B. selects
a cow and lets the tracker see the cow's footprint, then be put under guard. B. then drives
the cow a few miles over a course which drifts in all directions, and frequently doubles back
upon itself; and he selects difficult ground all the time, and once
or twice even drives the cow through herds of other cows, and mingles
her tracks in the wide confusion of theirs. He finally brings his
cow home; the aboriginal is set at liberty, and at once moves around
in a great circle, examining all cow-tracks until he finds the one
he is after; then sets off and follows it throughout its erratic course,
and ultimately tracks it to the stable where B. has hidden the cow. I tried, and tried, and feeling about, I found a padlock
besides, on another part of the door. O then how my heart sunk!--I dropt down with grief and
confusion, unable to stir or support myself, for a while. But my fears awakening my resolution,
and knowing that my attempt would be as terrible for me as any other danger I could then encounter,
I clambered up upon the ledges of the door, and upon the lock, which was a great wooden one;
and reached the top of the door with my hands; then, little thinking I could climb so well,
I made shift to lay hold on the top of the wall with my hands; but, alas for me! nothing but
ill luck!--no escape for poor Pamela! The wall being old, the bricks I held by gave way, just
as I was taking a spring to get up; and down came I, and received such a blow upon my head,
with one of the bricks, that it quite stunned me; and I broke my shins and my ancle besides,
and beat off the heel of one of my shoes.

In this dreadful way, flat upon the ground, lay poor I, for I believe five or six minutes;
and then trying to get up, I sunk down again two or three times; and my left hip and shoulder
were very stiff, and full of pain, with bruises; and, besides, my head bled, and ached grievously
with the blow I had with the brick. Yet these hurts I valued not; but crept a good way upon
my feet and hands, in search of a ladder, I just recollected to have seen against the wall
two days before, on which the gardener was nailing a nectarine branch that was loosened from
the wall: but no ladder could I find, and the wall was very high. What now, thought I, must
become of the miserable Pamela!--Then I began to wish myself most heartily again in my closet,
and to repent of my attempt, which I now censured as rash, because it did not succeed.

God forgive me! but a sad thought came just then into my head!--I tremble to think of it! Indeed
my apprehensions of the usage I should meet with, had like to have made me miserable for ever!
O my dear, dear parents, forgive your poor child; but being then quite desperate, I crept along,
till I could raise myself on my staggering feet; and away limped I!--What to do, but to throw
myself into the pond, and so put a period to all my griefs in this world!--But, O! to find
them infinitely aggravated (had I not, by the divine grace, been withheld) in a miserable eternity!
As I have escaped this temptation, (blessed be God for it!) I will tell you my conflicts on
this dreadful occasion, that the divine mercies may be magnified in my deliverance, that I
am yet on this side the dreadful gulf, from which there could have been no return.

It was well for me, as I have since thought, that I was so maimed, as made me the longer before
I got to the water; for this gave me time to consider, and abated the impetuousness of my passions,
which possibly might otherwise have hurried me, in my first transport of grief, (on my seeing
no way to escape, and the hard usage I had reason to expect from my dreadful keepers,) to throw
myself in. But my weakness of body made me move so slowly, that it gave time, as I said, for
a little reflection, a ray of grace, to dart in upon my benighted mind; and so, when I came
to the pond-side, I sat myself down on the sloping bank, and began to ponder my wretched condition;
and thus I reasoned with myself.

Pause here a little, Pamela, on what thou art about, before thou takest the dreadful leap;
and consider whether there be no way yet left, no hope, if not to escape from this wicked house,
yet from the mischiefs threatened thee in it.

I then considered; and, after I had cast about in my mind every thing that could make me hope,
and saw no probability; a wicked woman, devoid of all compassion! a horrid helper, just arrived,
in this dreadful Colbrand! an angry and resenting master, who now hated me, and threatened
the most afflicting evils! and that I should, in all probability, be deprived even of the opportunity,
I now had before me, to free myself from all their persecutions!--What hast thou to do, distressed
creature, said I to myself, but throw thyself upon a merciful God, (who knows how innocently
I suffer,) to avoid the merciless wickedness of those who are determined on my ruin?

And then, thought I, (and oh! that thought was surely of the devil's instigation; for it was
very soothing, and powerful with me,) these wicked wretches, who now have no remorse, no pity
on me, will then be moved to lament their misdoings; and when they see the dead corpse of the
unhappy Pamela dragged out to these dewy banks, and lying breathless at their feet, they will
find that remorse to soften their obdurate heart, which, now, has no place there!--And my master,
my angry master, will then forget his resentments, and say, O, this is the unhappy Pamela!
that I have so causelessly persecuted and destroyed! Now do I see she preferred her honesty
to her life, will he say, and is no hypocrite, nor deceiver; but really was the innocent creature
she pretended to be! Then, thought I, will he, perhaps, shed a few tears over the poor corpse
of his persecuted servant; and though he may give out, it was love and disappointment; and
that, perhaps, (in order to hide his own guilt,) for the unfortunate Mr. Williams, yet will
he be inwardly grieved, and order me a decent funeral, and save me, or rather this part of
me, from the dreadful stake, and the highway interment; and the young men and maidens all around
my dear father's will pity poor Pamela! But, O! I hope I shall not be the subject of their
ballads and elegies; but that my memory, for the sake of my dear father and mother, may quickly
slide into oblivion.

I was once rising, so indulgent was I to this sad way of thinking, to throw myself in: But,
again, my bruises made me slow; and I thought, What art thou about to do, wretched Pamela?
How knowest thou, though the prospect be all dark to thy short-sighted eye, what God may do
for thee, even when all human means fail? God Almighty would not lay me under these sore afflictions,
if he had not given me strength to grapple with them, if I will exert it as I ought: And who
knows, but that the very presence I so much dread of my angry and designing master, (for he
has had me in his power before, and yet I have escaped;) may be better for me, than these persecuting
emissaries of his, who, for his money, are true to their wicked trust, and are hardened by
that, and a long habit of wickedness, against compunction of heart? God can touch his heart
in an instant; and if this should not be done, I can then but put an end to my life by some
other means, if I am so resolved.

But how do I know, thought I, that even these bruises and maims that I have gotten, while I
pursued only the laudable escape I had meditated, may not kindly have furnished me with the
opportunity I am now tempted with to precipitate myself, and of surrendering up my life, spotless
and unguilty, to that merciful Being who gave it!

Then, thought I, who gave thee, presumptuous as thou art, a power over thy life? Who authorised
thee to put an end to it, when the weakness of thy mind suggests not to thee a way to preserve
it with honour? How knowest thou what purposes God may have to serve, by the trials with which
thou art now exercised? Art thou to put a bound to the divine will, and to say, Thus much will
I bear, and no more? And wilt thou dare to say, That if the trial be augmented and continued,
thou wilt sooner die than bear it?

This act of despondency, thought I, is a sin, that, if I pursue it, admits of no repentance,
and can therefore hope no forgiveness.--And wilt thou, to shorten thy transitory griefs, heavy
as they are, and weak as thou fanciest thyself, plunge both body and soul into everlasting
misery! Hitherto, Pamela, thought I, thou art the innocent, the suffering Pamela; and wilt
thou, to avoid thy sufferings, be the guilty aggressor? And, because wicked men persecute thee,
wilt thou fly in the face of the Almighty, and distrust his grace and goodness, who can still
turn all these sufferings to benefits? And how do I know, but that God, who sees all the lurking
vileness of my heart, may have permitted these sufferings on that very score, and to make me
rely solely on his grace and assistance, who, perhaps, have too much prided myself in a vain
dependence on my own foolish contrivances?

Then, again, thought I, wilt thou suffer in one moment all the good lessons of thy poor honest
parents, and the benefit of their example, (who have persisted in doing their duty with resignation
to the divine will, amidst the extreme degrees of disappointment, poverty, and distress, and
the persecutions of an ungrateful world, and merciless creditors,) to be thrown away upon thee:
and bring down, as in all probability this thy rashness will, their grey hairs with sorrow
to the grave, when they shall understand, that their beloved daughter, slighting the tenders
of divine grace, despairing of the mercies of a protecting God, has blemished, in this last
act, a whole life, which they had hitherto approved and delighted in?

What then, presumptuous Pamela, dost thou here? thought I: Quit with speed these perilous banks,
and fly from these curling waters, that seem, in their meaning murmurs, this still night, to
reproach thy rashness! Tempt not God's goodness on the mossy banks, that have been witnesses
of thy guilty purpose: and while thou hast power left thee, avoid the tempting evil, lest thy
grand enemy, now repulsed by divine grace, and due reflection, return to the assault with a
force that thy weakness may not be able to resist! and let one rash moment destroy all the
convictions, which now have awed thy rebellious mind into duty and resignation to the divine will!

And so saying, I arose; but was so stiff with my hurts, so cold with the moist dew of the night,
and the wet grass on which I had sat, as also with the damps arising from so large a piece
of water, that with great pain I got from this pond, which now I think of with terror; and
bending my limping steps towards the house, took refuge in the corner of an outhouse, where
wood and coals are laid up for family use, till I should be found by my cruel keepers, and
consigned to a more wretched confinement, and worse usage than I had hitherto experienced;
and there behind a pile of firewood I crept, and lay down, as you may imagine, with a mind
just broken, and a heart sensible to nothing but the extremest woe and dejection.

This, my dear father and mother, is the issue of your poor Pamela's fruitless enterprise; and
who knows, if I had got out at the back-door, whether I had been at all in a better case, moneyless,
friendless, as I am, and in a strange place!--But blame not your poor daughter too much: Nay,
if ever you see this miserable scribble, all bathed and blotted with my tears, let your pity
get the better of your reprehension! But I know it will--And I must leave off for the present.--For,
oh! my strength and my will are at this time very far unequal to one another.--But yet I will
add, that though I should have praised God for my deliverance, had I been freed from my wicked
keepers, and my designing master; yet I have more abundant reason to praise him, that I have
been delivered from a worse enemy,--myself!

I will conclude my sad relation.

It seems Mrs. Jewkes awaked not till day-break; and not finding me in bed, she called me; and,
no answer being returned, she relates, that she got out of bed, and ran to my closet; and,
missing me, searched under the bed, and in another closet, finding the chamber-door as she
had left it, quite fast, and the key, as usual, about her wrist. For if I could have got out
of the chamber-door, there were two or three passages, and doors to them all, double-locked
and barred, to go through into the great garden; so that, to escape, there was no way, but
out of the window; and of that window, because of the summer-parlour under it: for the other
windows are a great way from the ground.

She says she was excessively frightened; and instantly raised the Swiss, and the two maids,
who lay not far off; and finding every door fast, she said, I must be carried away, as St.
Peter was out of prison, by some angel. It is a wonder she had not a worse thought!

She says, she wept, and wrung her hands, and took on sadly, running about like a mad woman,
little thinking I could have got out of the closet window, between the iron bars; and, indeed,
I don't know whether I could do so again. But at last finding that casement open, they concluded
it must be so; and ran out into the garden, and found my footsteps in the mould of the bed
which I dropt down upon from the leads: And so speeded away all of them; that is to say, Mrs.
Jewkes, Colbrand, and Nan, towards the back-door, to see if that was fast; while the cook was
sent to the out-offices to raise the men, and make them get horses ready, to take each a several
way to pursue me.

But, it seems, finding that door double-locked and padlocked, and the heel of my shoe, and
the broken bricks, they verily concluded I was got away by some means over the wall; and then,
they say, Mrs. Jewkes seemed like a distracted woman: Till, at last, Nan had the thought to
go towards the pond: and there seeing my coat, and cap, and handkerchief, in the water, cast
almost to the banks by the agitation of the waves, she thought it was me; and, screaming out,
ran to Mrs. Jewkes, and said, O, madam, madam! here's a piteous thing!--Mrs. Pamela lies drowned
in the pond. Thither they all ran; and finding my clothes, doubted not I was at the bottom;
and they all, Swiss among the rest, beat their breasts, and made most dismal lamentations;
and Mrs. Jewkes sent Nan to the men, to bid them get the drag-net ready, and leave the horses,
and come to try to find the poor innocent! as she, it seems, then called me, beating her breast,
and lamenting my hard hap; but most what would become of them, and what account they should
give to my master.

While every one was thus differently employed, some weeping and wailing, some running here
and there, Nan came into the wood-house; and there lay poor I; so weak, so low, and dejected,
and withal so stiff with my bruises, that I could not stir, nor help myself to get upon my
feet. And I said, with a low voice, (for I could hardly speak,) Mrs. Ann! Mrs. Ann!--The creature
was sadly frightened, but was taking up a billet to knock me on the head, believing I was some
thief, as she said; but I cried out, O Mrs. Ann, Mrs. Ann, help me, for pity's sake, to Mrs.
Jewkes! for I cannot get up!--Bless me, said she, what! you, madam!--Why, our hearts are almost
broken, and we were going to drag the pond for you, believing you had drowned yourself. Now,
said she, you'll make us all alive again!

And, without helping me, she ran away to the pond, and brought all the crew to the wood-house.--The
wicked woman, as she entered, said, Where is she?--Plague of her spells, and her witchcrafts!
She shall dearly repent of this trick, if my name be Jewkes; and, coming to me, took hold of
my arm so roughly, and gave me such a pull, as made me squeal out, (my shoulder being bruised
on that side,) and drew me on my face. O cruel creature! said I, if you knew what I have suffered,
it would move you to pity me!

Even Colbrand seemed to be concerned, and said, Fie, madam, fie! you see she is almost dead!
You must not be so rough with her. The coachman Robin seemed to be sorry for me too, and said,
with sobs, What a scene is here! Don't you see she is all bloody in her head, and cannot stir?--Curse
of her contrivance! said the horrid creature; she has frightened me out of my wits, I'm sure.
How the d---l came you here?--Oh! said I, ask me now no questions, but let the maids carry
me up to my prison; and there let me die decently, and in peace! For, indeed, I thought I could
not live two hours.

The still more inhuman tigress said, I suppose you want Mr. Williams to pray by you, don't
you? Well, I'll send for my master this minute: let him come and watch you himself, for me;
for there's no such thing as holding you, I'm sure.

So the maids took me up between them, and carried me to my chamber; and when the wretch saw
how bad I was, she began a little to relent--while every one wondered (at which I had neither
strength nor inclination to tell them) how all this came to pass, which they imputed to sorcery
and witchcraft.

I was so weak, when I had got up stairs, that I fainted away, with dejection, pain, and fatigue;
and they undressed me, and got me to bed; and Mrs. Jewkes ordered Nan to bathe my shoulder,
and arm, and ancle, with some old rum warmed; and they cut the hair a little from the back
part of my head, and washed that; for it was clotted with blood, from a pretty long, but not
a deep gash; and put a family plaister upon it; for, if this woman has any good quality, it
is, it seems, in a readiness and skill to manage in cases, where sudden misfortunes happen
in a family.

After this, I fell into a pretty sound and refreshing sleep, and lay till twelve o'clock, tolerably
easy, considering I was very feverish, and aguishly inclined; and she took a deal of care to
fit me to undergo more trials, which I had hoped would have been happily ended: but Providence
did not see fit.

She would make me rise about twelve: but I was so weak, I could only sit up till the bed was
made, and went into it again; and was, as they said, delirious some part of the afternoon.
But having a tolerable night on Thursday, I was a good deal better on Friday, and on Saturday
got up, and ate a little spoon-meat, and my feverishness seemed to be gone; and I was so mended
by evening, that I begged her indulgence in my closet, to be left to myself; which she consented
to, it being double-barred the day before, and I assuring her, that all my contrivances, as
she called them, were at an end. But first she made me tell the whole story of my enterprise;
which I did very faithfully, knowing now that nothing could stand me in any stead, or contribute
to my safety and escape: And she seemed full of wonder at my resolution; but told me frankly,
that I should have found it a hard matter to get quite off; for that she was provided with
a warrant from my master (who is a justice of peace in this county as well as in the other)
to get me apprehended, if I had got away, on suspicion of wronging him, let me have been where
I would.

O how deep-laid are the mischiefs designed to fall on my devoted head!--Surely, surely, I cannot
be worthy of all this contrivance! This too well shews me the truth of what was hinted to me
formerly at the other house, that my master swore he would have me! O preserve me, Heaven!
from being his, in his own wicked sense of the adjuration!

I must add, that now the woman sees me pick up so fast, she uses me worse, and has abridged
me of paper, all but one sheet, which I am to shew her, written or unwritten, on demand: and
has reduced me to one pen: yet my hidden stores stand me in stead. But she is more and more
snappish and cross; and tauntingly calls me Mrs. Williams, and any thing she thinks will vex me.

Sunday afternoon.

Mrs. Jewkes has thought fit to give me an airing, for three or four hours, this afternoon;
and I am a good deal better and should be much more so, if I knew for what I am reserved. But
health is a blessing hardly to be coveted in my circumstances, since that but exposes me to
the calamity I am in continual apprehensions of; whereas a weak and sickly state might possibly
move compassion for me. O how I dread the coming of this angry and incensed master; though
I am sure I have done him no harm!

Just now we heard, that he had like to have been drowned in crossing the stream, a few days
ago, in pursuing his game. What is the matter, that with all his ill usage of me, I cannot
hate him? To be sure, I am not like other people! He has certainly done enough to make me hate
him; but yet, when I heard his danger, which was very great, I could not in my heart forbear
rejoicing for his safety; though his death would have ended my afflictions. Ungenerous master!
if you knew this, you surely would not be so much my persecutor! But, for my late good lady's
sake, I must wish him well; and O what an angel would he be in my eyes yet, if he would cease
his attempts, and reform!

Well, I hear by Mrs. Jewkes, that John Arnold is turned away, being detected in writing to
Mr. Williams; and that Mr. Longman, and Mr. Jonathan the butler, have incurred his displeasure,
for offering to speak in my behalf. Mrs. Jervis too is in danger; for all these three, probably,
went together to beg in my favour; for now it is known where I am.

Mrs. Jewkes has, with the news about my master, received a letter: but she says the contents
are too bad for me to know. They must be bad indeed, if they be worse than what I have already
known.

Just now the horrid creature tells me, as a secret, that she has reason to think he has found
out a way to satisfy my scruples: It is, by marrying me to this dreadful Colbrand, and buying
me of him on the wedding day, for a sum of money!--Was ever the like heard?--She says it will
be my duty to obey my husband; and that Mr. Williams will be forced, as a punishment, to marry
us; and that, when my master has paid for me, and I am surrendered up, the Swiss is to go home
again, with the money, to his former wife and children; for, she says, it is the custom of
those people to have a wife in every nation.

But this, to be sure, is horrid romancing! Yet, abominable as it is, it may possibly serve
to introduce some plot now hatching!--With what strange perplexities is my poor mind agitated!
Perchance, some sham-marriage may be designed, on purpose to ruin me; But can a husband sell
his wife against her own consent?--And will such a bargain stand good in law?

Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, the 32d, 33d, and 34th days of my imprisonment.

Nothing offers these days but squabblings between Mrs. Jewkes and me. She grows worse and worse
to me. I vexed her yesterday, because she talked nastily; and told her she talked more like
a vile London prostitute, than a gentleman's housekeeper; and she thinks she cannot use me
bad enough for it. Bless me! she curses and storms at me like a trooper, and can hardly keep
her hands off me. You may believe she must talk sadly, to make me say such harsh words: indeed
it cannot be repeated; as she is a disgrace to her sex. And then she ridicules me, and laughs
at my notions of honesty; and tells me, impudent creature as she is! what a fine bed-fellow
I shall make for my master (and such-like), with such whimsical notions about me!--Do you think
this is to be borne? And yet she talks worse than this, if possible! quite filthily! O what
vile hands am I put into!

Thursday.

I have now all the reason that can be, to apprehend my master will be here soon; for the servants
are busy in setting the house to rights; and a stable and coach-house are cleaning out, that
have not been used some time. I asked Mrs. Jewkes; but she tells me nothing, nor will hardly
answer me when I ask her a question. Sometimes I think she puts on these strange wicked airs
to me, purposely to make me wish for, what I dread most of all things, my master's coming down.
He talk of love!--If he had any the least notion of regard for me, to be sure he would not
give this naughty body such power over me:--And if he does come, where is his promise of not
seeing me without I consent to it? But, it seems, his honour owes me nothing! So he tells me
in his letter. And why? Because I am willing to keep mine. But, indeed, he says, he hates me
perfectly: But it is plain he does, or I should not be left to the mercy of this woman: and,
what is worse, to my woful apprehensions.

Friday, the 36th day of my imprisonment.

I took the liberty yesterday afternoon, finding the gates open, to walk out before the house;
and, ere I was aware, had got to the bottom of the long row of elms; and there I sat myself
down upon the steps of a sort of broad stile, which leads into the road, and goes towards the
town. And as I sat musing upon what always busies my mind, I saw a whole body of folks running
towards me from the house, men and women, as in a fright. At first I wondered what was the
matter, till they came nearer; and I found they were all alarmed, thinking I had attempted
to get off. I spoke of the previous conversation and said there something very pathetic about
this half century of exile, and that I wished the L200 scheme had succeeded.

"With him? Oh, it did. It's not so sad a case. He is modest, and he
left out some of the particulars. Colbrand said, O
how have you frighted us all!--And went behind me, lest I should run away, as I suppose.

I sat still, to let them see I had no view to get away; for, besides the improbability of succeeding,
my last sad attempt has cured me of enterprising again. And when Mrs. Jewkes came within hearing,
I found her terribly incensed, and raving about my contrivances. Why, said I, should you be
so concerned? Here I have sat a few minutes, and had not the least thought of getting away,
or going farther; but to return as soon as it was duskish. She would not believe me; and the
barbarous creature struck at me with her horrid fist, and, I believe, would have felled me,
had not Colbrand interposed, and said, He saw me sitting still, looking about me, and not seeming
to have the least inclination to stir. But this would not serve: She ordered the two maids
to take me each by an arm, and lead me back into the house, and up stairs; and there have I
been locked up ever since, without shoes. In vain have I pleaded, that I had no design, as
indeed I had not the least; and last night I was forced to be between her and Nan; and I find
she is resolved to make a handle of this against me, and in her own behalf.--Indeed, what with
her usage, and my own apprehensions of still worse, I am quite weary of my life.

Just now she has been with me, and given me my shoes, and has laid her imperious commands upon
me, to dress myself in a suit of clothes out of the portmanteau, which I have not seen lately,
against three or four o'clock; for she says, she is to have a visit from Lady Darnford's two
daughters, who come purposely to see me; and so she gave me the key of the portmanteau. But
I will not obey her; and I told her, I would not be made a show of, nor see the ladies. She
left me, saying, it would be worse for me, if I did not. But how can that be?

Five o'clock is come,

And no young ladies!--So that I fancy--But hold! I hear their coach, I believe. I'll step to
the window.--I won't go down to them, I am resolved--

Good sirs! good sirs! What will become of me! Here is my master come in his fine chariot!--Indeed
he is! What shall I do? Where shall I hide myself?--O! What shall I do? Pray for me! But oh!
you'll not see this!--Now, good God of heaven, preserve me; if it be thy blessed will!

Seven o'clock.

Though I dread to see him, yet do I wonder I have not. To be sure something is resolved against
me, and he stays to hear all her stories. I can hardly write; yet, as I can do nothing else,
I know not how to forbear!--Yet I cannot hold my pen--How crooked and trembling the lines!--I
must leave off, till I can get quieter fingers!--Why should the guiltless tremble so, when
the guilty can possess their minds in peace?

Saturday morning.

Now let me give you an account of what passed last night: for I had no power to write, nor
yet opportunity till now.

This vile woman held my master till half an hour after seven; and he came hither about five
in the afternoon. And then I heard his voice on the stairs, as he was coming up to me. It was
about his supper; for he said, I shall choose a boiled chicken with butter and parsley.--And
up he came!

He put on a stern and majestic air; and he can look very majestic when he pleases. Well, perverse
Pamela, ungrateful runaway, said he, for my first salutation!--You do well, don't you, to give
me all this trouble and vexation! I could not speak; but throwing myself on the floor, hid
my face, and was ready to die with grief and apprehension.--He said, Well may you hide your
face! well may you be ashamed to see me, vile forward one, as you are!--I sobbed and wept,
but could not speak. And he let me lie, and went to the door, and called Mrs. Jewkes.--There,
said he, take up that fallen angel!--Once I thought her as innocent as an angel of light but
I have now no patience with her. The little hypocrite prostrates herself thus, in hopes to
move my weakness in her favour, and that I'll raise her from the floor myself. But I shall
not touch her: No, said he, cruel gentleman as he was! let such fellows as Williams be taken
in by her artful wiles! I know her now, and see she is for any fool's turn, that will be caught
by her.

I sighed, as if my heart would break!--And Mrs. Jewkes lifted me up upon my knees; for I trembled
so, I could not stand. Come, said she, Mrs. Pamela, learn to know your best friend; confess
your unworthy behaviour, and beg his honour's forgiveness of all your faults. I was ready to
faint: And he said, She is mistress of arts, I'll assure you; and will mimic a fit, ten to
one, in a minute.

