Let us turn our attention to model war-ships. A torpedo-boat destroyer is clearly illustrated
in Figs. 28 and 29. This is very simple to construct and makes a pleasing craft when finished.
The hull is formed by two blocks. One of these forms the raised deck on the bow of the boat.
The cabin is built up on this raised deck. It will be seen that the part of the hull that rests
in the water is formed by one block. In building boats of this nature the constructor should
be careful to keep them long and slender, since torpedo-boat destroyers are always of this
type. They are high-speed craft, and their displacement must therefore be as small as possible.
Some of these boats carry four stacks and some two. The author prefers four stacks as giving
the boat a better appearance than two. The two little cabins near the stern of the boat are
placed there merely to take away the plainness of construction. The guns mounted forward and
aft are merely round pieces of wood with a piece of wire bent around them and forced into a
hole in the deck.

The boat-builder should not be satisfied with one or two of these craft; he should make a whole
fleet. This will afford the average boy a great amount of pleasure, since he can add to his
fleet from time to time and have official launchings. Each boat can also be given a name and
a number. A little gray paint on the hull of these boats and black on the stacks gives them
a very presentable appearance.

A battleship is shown in Fig. 30. A battleship should be at least twice as long as a torpedo-boat
destroyer. A view of the battleship as it will look in the water is shown in Fig. 31. By carefully
examining this drawing the builder will be able to see just the number and shape of the blocks
that enter into the construction of the craft. The battleship is provided with four main batteries
mounted in turrets, one forward and three aft. A mast is also built, and strings run from it
to the top of the main cabin and to the end of one of the turrets mounted aft. A screw is placed
through the centers of the fore and aft turrets, so they can be turned to any position. Battleships
should be painted gray. It will be necessary to place rather a heavy keel on the boat just
described in order to bring it down to the proper depth in the water. Otherwise it will be
topheavy and will capsize very easily. A fleet of battleships and battle-cruisers can easily
be made according to the foregoing instructions, and the builder should not be satisfied with
producing only one.

A pleasure yacht is illustrated in Fig. 32. The hull of this craft is formed by two boards
nailed together. The cabins are very simple, being formed by a solid block of wood with a piece
of cigar-box wood tacked to the top. The windows and doors are marked in place with a soft
lead-pencil, and the stack is mounted midway between the two cabins. A wireless antenna should
be placed on the boat, with a few guy-wires from the masts run to various parts of the deck.
A lead-in wire also runs down into one of the cabins. The hull of this boat should be painted
pure white. The deck can be left its natural color, while the stack should be painted black
and the cabins white with green trimmings.

Almost any type of boat can be produced by the use of simple blocks of wood and other miscellaneous
pieces easily brought to shape from ordinary materials. This method of construction offers
a wonderful opportunity for the boy to exercise his creative faculties.

CHAPTER IV

STEAM AND ELECTRIC PROPULSION

BOATS are propelled by two different systems. Some inland-water boats still employ side paddle-wheels,
while ocean-going vessels use the more modern propeller or screw.

