"What?  Is that all you are going to give me, when you know that the sum must be divided among
twenty families?" complained Lihoa. "To-morrow morning in the market you will get three times
that amount for the beautiful fish."

"Well--and why not?  When I take inferior things to the market, I have to content myself with
a small price.--Not a sapeck more for you," answered the dealer.

"Now then, Nona, don't be surprised if you get no more fish from us. We are going into a more
profitable business.  We are going to the distant Goldland, and shall come back rich men."

"What?  What do you mean, you fools?" cried Nona.  "Do you want to be drowned?  Well, if you
get back with whole skins you'll be doing well, and no matter how much gold you get, the rich
Natse will have it all before you are through with him."

"As far as drowning is concerned, we could drown easily in the business in which we are now
engaged, and as to Natse's getting our gold, we'll attend to that."  With these words Lihoa
put the money in his pocket and started with his followers to the harbor, where, behind one
of the warehouses, they laid down and took a nap.

At break of day they went to interview Natse, who was trying to get three hundred men to sail
on the "St. George".  When they arrived, he had just engaged a hundred or more, and there seemed
no likelihood of there being a place for Lihoa and his followers, "though Lohe's people always
had the preference".  "But", said Natse, "if you have some one among your people who understands
the language of the West well enough to act as interpreter, perhaps I can arrange for you and
a dozen or more of your friends to go."

Then an idea popped into old Lihoa's head: "Wait until to-night, and I will bring you an answer,"
he said.  "I think I can get an interpreter."

Lihoa sent his companions to the hamlet with the command, that those who wished to go on the
trip to the Goldland were to get ready immediately, and he betook himself straight to the College
of the Holy Saviour.  There he asked to see the foreign teacher.  Father Somazzo came into
the reception room, and learned to his utter astonishment that the old Chinaman had called
to demand his beloved pupil, little Peppo.  Quietly the priest listened while the old man spoke,
then took a pinch of snuff, and said: "My dear friend, for twelve years we have had this boy
in our care, and have spent much time and money on him, and now that he is old enough to be
of use, you ask us to give him to you.  You are unreasonable.  Prove in the court that the
child is yours, and then, that we took him illegally, and you can have him.  He has not been
brought up in your religion, as you know, but is a Christian.  We have many plans and hopes
for him, and I am sure he will not care to leave us.  Go, and may peace attend you."

"But I am the boy's uncle, and an uncle has paternal power over his sister's children according
to Chinese law.  I know the boy by the birthmark on his wrist," said Lihoa.

"Take your claims into court, and we will settle them there.  In the meantime may peace attend
you," repeated the missioner as he left the man.

Lihoa expected a refusal, for he was not so simple-minded as to believe that the child would
be given over to him without ado, but the answer that he received, according to his way of
thinking, justified his kidnapping his nephew.  He knew a Chinese youth, who was a servant
at the seminary, and to him he went for help to carry out his plan of getting possession of
Peppo.  In a nearby tavern he waited for Totu--for that was the youth's name--knowing that
while the missioners and their pupils were at table, he was accustomed to come here for a glass
of saki, a wine made from burnt rice.  When he entered, Lihoa went and sat down beside him,
addressed him as cousin, and ordered and paid for a second glass of saki.  The two conversed
for a time in low tones, then finally Totu said:

"Agreed!  The day after to-morrow, at the New Year's celebration, I'll see to it that you get
your nephew, but may the gods of the sea destroy your ship, if you do not pay me the money
you say you will.  I must have three tael to-morrow, for this may cost me my job, and you know,
'No penny, no paternoster'."  Lihoa promised what Totu asked, and the two separated.

CHAPTER VI.

The Chinese New Year.

The New Year came and found Hongkong in festal array.  All the Chinese houses were decorated
with plants and flowers, and from long cords stretched from house to house, and diagonally
across the streets, were suspended hundreds upon hundreds of lanterns of various colors.  At
the first peep of day thousands of people, dressed in holiday attire, began to throng the streets
and crowd into the great open squares, where eatables of all sorts were to be had.  Here were
tables loaded down with all kinds of Chinese delicacies, many of which, I fear, my little readers
would not find palatable.  For example, there were sugar-coated worms, preserved red snails,
trepang,--a kind of sea-worm,--and putrid doves' eggs in an unspeakable sauce.  The cakes made
of honey, sugar and rice-meal, I am sure, would have been much more to your liking. Each hour
the crowd increased, as the people poured into the city from the villages on the island of
Hongkong, and from neighboring places. It was a general reception day.  Whenever a Chinaman
met an acquaintance, putting his hands in the wide, flowing sleeves of his gown, he greeted
him with many bows, wished him a happy New Year, and invited him to have a cup of tea or saki.
Even the poorest people had saved up enough to take part in the celebration.  All over the
great city joy reigned.

The missioners, glad to give their pupils English as well as Chinese, all the pleasure they
could, always celebrated the New Year by having a more elaborate supper than usual, and taking
the boys to see the brilliantly lighted city and the puppet shows.  For weeks beforehand all
looked forward to the great holiday, and could hardly wait for the time to come when the city
would be in holiday attire, and the fireworks and puppet shows in progress.  On this night
supper was over, the bell had rung, and the boys were in a double line ready to start on their
little excursion.  At the head of the ranks stood young Peppo, the leader, in a state of subdued
excitement.  He was anxious to see the beautiful lights, and also hoped to find his little
companion, Willy, at the puppet show, where he knew he would be, if possible. Just as the happy
band was about to start, Father Somazzo called Peppo back, for it occurred to him that perhaps
the man, who had a few days previous to this so impudently demanded possession of him, might
try to kidnap him.

"Peppo", he said, addressing Lihu by his Italian nickname, "Peppo, you know that I mean well
by you."

"Yes, Father," answered the boy impatiently, "but please don't keep me now.  We are going to
the city and I am to be the leader of the ranks."

"Peppo, not very long ago you said that you were willing to make a great sacrifice to God,
because he saved you from death, and permitted you to be baptized, and because you are soon
to receive your first communion."

"Yes, Father, I did, and I will willingly make a sacrifice, but let me go now.  Brother Onufrio
has already opened the door."

"Peppo, would it not be a beautiful sacrifice for you to give up going to-night?"

"O Father," stammered the child with tears in his eyes, "no, I don't want to.  I will make
a sacrifice, but not to-night.  I want to see the fire-works and the puppet show.  And Willy
will be at the puppet show, I want to find him, too.  He will go if he can, for he knows that
every New Year's night we boys go.  Please, Father, do not keep me.  I will willingly live
on rice and water for a month rather than stay home to-night."

"Poor child, you do not know what is for your best good," answered Father Somazzo.  "I wanted
you to look upon this as a sacrifice which you were willing to make, but since you will not,
I command you to remain at home, for a reason which I cannot tell you.  Come, Peppo, into the
class-room.  You may take my big picture-book with all the pictures of European cities and
churches, ladies and gentlemen in fine clothes and battles and ships.  The time will pass quickly.
Come and win the reward of obedience."

"I don't want to, I won't go!" cried the boy, crying at the top of his lungs and stamping his
feet on the floor.

"What?  What?  Such a thing as this from you?  That is no way to behave.  If you do not come
with me willingly, you shall not have the pretty picture-book."

With these words Father Somazzo led the weeping child into the class-room, while he went to
get the promised book.  Totu, the servant, who was standing near the door at the time, was
a witness of the scene. His plan was to seize the boy at the puppet show, when the attention
of all the by-standers was on the stage, fasten him to himself by a cunningly contrived chain
and belt, so that he could not possibly escape in the crowd, and deliver him over to his uncle.
When he saw that the boy was detained against his will, the sly fellow changed his tactics.

"Ha, ha," said he, "this is much easier for Totu," and hurrying into the garden, stationed
himself under the window which opened into and was on a level with the garden.  As soon as
Father Somazzo left the room, Peppo went to the window to watch the sky rockets that every
now and then went shooting into the sky, and to listen to the shouts of the merry revelers
in the streets.

"What, little Lihu, are you not going to the celebration?  Why, down in the marketplace there
is the finest puppet show that was ever seen or heard of anywhere," said Totu in a sympathetic
tone of voice.

"I can't," said he, "Father Somazzo is an old tyrant.  He wants me to renounce this pleasure,
to make a sacrifice to God to-night by staying at home."

"Oh, nonsense!" answered the tempter.  "You come with me.  I'll take you down into the city,
and to the puppet show, and the fireworks, and everything else.  We'll be back in an hour,
and Father Somazzo, who is saying his prayers, won't even know you've been away."

"He has locked the door, and will be angry if he finds me gone," said the boy, half ready to
yield to the tempter.

"He won't find it out.  Quick.  Climb up on the window-sill, I'll lift you down, and in a moment
we'll be out through the little gate in the wall, for I have the key that unlocks it.  We've
no time to lose. Don't you hear the drums and tomtoms in the market-place?  The puppet show
is beginning."

Little Peppo's conscience told him that he ought not to go, but his anger at what seemed to
him an unjust command, caused him to give no heed to its dictation.  "Well, anyway, when Father
Somazzo shuts me up for punishment, I'll have seen the puppet show and the fireworks," he said,
climbing up on the window-sill, and the next moment he was in the garden.  Taking Totu by the
hand, he slunk along in the shadow of the wall to the little gate, and soon the two were with
the crowd out in the brilliantly lighted street.

Father Somazzo was detained a short time, and when he returned to the classroom was dumbfounded
to find his favorite pupil gone.  He went to the window and called "Peppo, Peppo", but received
no answer.  At first he could scarcely believe that the boy, who had always been so obedient,
could be guilty of such a grievous breach of discipline; but as calling and searching proved
of no avail, at last, with a heavy heart, he had to admit that even good little Peppo had yielded
to temptation.

"Lord, deal not harshly with the erring," sighed the missioner, and then he prayed: "Let not
his disobedience cause him and us too much sorrow, Blessed Virgin.  Take the poor child to
thy motherly bosom, and bring him back to us in safety.  Thou knowest we have great hopes for him."

Father Somazzo could do no more than this, for he could not leave the house alone; and, even
if he had been able to do so, his attempts to find the child in the crowds that thronged the
streets would have availed nothing.  Hoping that Peppo would join his companions and return
with them, the good Father waited, but in vain.  He neither came with the boys, nor later by
himself.

On the following morning Father Somazzo received a visit from Mr. Black, the lawyer, whom he
had consulted concerning the guardianship of Willy.  He came to report that he believed he
had sufficient proof to ask the court to take Willy away from John Brown, and also to cause
his imprisonment.  He had through agents sought out the sailors dismissed from the "St. George",
and from them not only learned of the life of John Brown in Dublin, but also of the peculiar
circumstances attendant upon his brother's death at sea.  Mr. Black asked whether he should
prosecute, adding: "Whatever is done, must be done quickly, for I am told that the 'St. George'
will sail to-morrow morning, or the morning after at the latest, for Australia with three hundred
Chinaman on board."

Father Somazzo signed the necessary papers, then told of little Peppo's disappearance, and
his conjecture that he had been carried off by a Chinaman named Lihoa, who claimed to be a
relative.

"I'll wager ten to one, this Lihoa is one of the greedy Chinamen who is going to sail on the
'St. George'," said Mr. Black.  "Let's go down to the office of the Chief of Police, and, if
my conjecture is true, we'll find the people we want on board the 'St. George'--'kill two birds
with one stone', as the old saying has it.  Be quick, Father, get your hat and walking stick
and come with me.  We haven't a moment to lose."

The two men hurried down to the harbor.  The Chief of Police received them in a friendly manner,
but when they laid their case before him, he shrugged his shoulders and said: "I am very sorry,
indeed.  You have come just eight hours too late.  The 'St. George' sailed this morning at
two with the tide and a favorable wind."

"What is to be done?" questioned the Father.

"We will send your papers to Melbourne and Sidney and have the Captain and Lihoa arrested when
they put into port.  That is all that can be done," answered the Chief.

Matters had to be left thus.  Mr. Black returned to his office to make out the necessary documents,
and Father Somazzo to the College to commend both boys to God and his ministering angels.

CHAPTER VII.

An Unexpected Departure.

On the morning following the Chinese New Year, with a favoring west wind the "St. George" put
to sea with Green at the helm, because the Captain was unable to find a man that he liked better,
who was capable of taking his place.  Restlessly the Captain paced up and down the deck, gazing
at the island in the moonlight until it was lost in the sea.  As soon as the morning light
gave better opportunities, he climbed to the crow's nest and with a field glass searched the
western horizon, and not until the sun was well up did he push the glass together.  Then he
muttered to himself as he came down from the rigging:

"My fears are vain.  Why, that Italian priest wouldn't have the Chief of Police send a steam
launch after us on account of that boy.  And yet Redfox states positively that he sent the
agents of the police to the sailors' home, to sidle up to the crew that I dismissed and to
try to get out of them all the information they could.  But what do they know? What can they
prove?--Oh, I am such a coward!  Come, John, come.  Drive these stupid fears out of your head.
Think of the future and not of the past."

The Captain went to the helmsman and found the boatswain and first officer, Redfox, with him.
All greeted the Captain in a becoming manner and wished for favoring winds to carry them on
their way.

"We could make use of them all right," cried the Captain.  "Gray, the ship can carry more canvas.
Set all the sails, and Green, do you steer as straight as a crow flies for the Channel of Balintang.
How far is it to Balintang, Redfox?"

"Four hundred and fifty sea miles, but we can save a hundred miles by holding for the southern
point of Luzon--"

"Yes, and be wrecked on some one of the hundred reefs and islands which make the route by the
Philippines so dangerous!  No, Mr. Redfox, though it is of great importance for me to get to
Melbourne as soon as possible, I shall not take any risks going that way.  We'll go farther
to the north through the Balintang, from there down between the Palau and Caroline Islands,
on through by the Soloman Islands, and the Lousiade Archipelago."

"We shall meet with dangerous seas that way, too, but if it's the route you've decided on,
that's all there is to it.  What's going on with the three hundred Chinamen in the steerage?"

"I don't know.  Let them stay down where they are; they won't suffocate yet awhile, and we'll
have peace on deck for an hour or two," growled the Captain.

"With the last lot that came on board there was a little pigmy, barely ten years old," said
Gray.  "An old Chinaman carried him in his arms and said he was asleep.  It seemed to me that
he was in a stupor, and I had more than half a mind to send them back, and then it occurred
to me that we could use the lad in the kitchen, as the cook's assistant. I'll get the boy,
Captain, and let you see what you think of giving him over to the cook.  By cuffs and knocks
perhaps he can be developed into something useful."

"Go ahead, Gray," answered the Captain.  "And you, Redfox, want my nephew, of whom this small
Chinaman makes me think."  Then he added in a low tone: "Since our last talk I have thought
the thing over.--You are right.  It cannot be otherwise.  He must disappear, at least for a
time, that is, until we are in possession of the money; later I will restore it to him."

"Quite right.  And if--by any accident--he should fall from the rigging, or else--"

"No, no, I won't have him put to death.  God knows I wish my brother were alive.  The thought
even that perhaps in my drunkenness I sanctioned the changing of his medicine, almost drives
me mad.--I am satisfied, though, that we will have to hide this boy for a time in some institution,
and then announce to the authorities that at the shipwreck, which we contemplate having, he
perished."

"Captain, you are always for half-way measures.  But as you like, so long as you hold fast
to our agreement--the half of the property."

"On the day on which I come into possession of the property, the half is yours."

"Very well.  You have sworn to this, and now be assured that just so surely as you betray me,
or attempt to cheat me out of the wages of my sins, you are a dead man, even if at that very
hour I go to eternal damnation with you."

"You may depend upon me.  Half and half, just as I have sworn.  And now I'll go for my nephew."

With these words the Captain stepped into the cabin.  Through this cabin ran a partition, and
in one corner of the smaller part Willy had hung his hammock.  So soundly had he slept, that
his first knowledge that the "St. George" was under sail came when he noticed the motion of
the ship, and heard the swishing of the water.

"O dear!  We've left Hongkong, and Father Somazzo couldn't get me away from my uncle," was
his first thought.  "And last night I dreamed that he did get me away, and that Brother Onufrio
and Peppo were with me, but I can't remember where.--O dear, we are out at sea and on the way
to Australia, or God knows where."

Willy was almost in tears.  Father Somazzo's comforting words came to his mind, then kneeling
down for a short morning prayer, he commended himself to the care of his guardian angel.  Strengthened
by the thought that God's holy guardian angels are companions and protectors at sea as well
as on land, he was rising from his knees just as his uncle came into the room.

"What, up and dressed!  By the seven sleepers of old, I verily believe that you have been praying!
That's what they set you to doing at the pension, but you'll soon get over it; a seaman has
no time for any such superfluous business as that."

"Superfluous to say one's prayers?" questioned Willy in utmost surprise, opening wide his big
blue eyes.  "The good Fathers prayed every day, and used to say that 'he who knows not how
to pray, the sea will teach to pray'.  What will become of us, if God and his angels do not
watch over and guard us?"

"Oh, dear me!  You talk just like the preaching Brothers," laughed the Captain, in a way that
made the boy shudder.

"Well, for aught that I care keep on praying to your guardian angel to watch over you, but
now go into the kitchen and get a cup of coffee and a biscuit or two.  Hurry yourself.  In
five minutes be ready for work and report on deck to the first officer."

In the meantime the boatswain had started for the steerage, where three hundred Chinamen were
packed like herrings on the floor and in the berths along the sides of the room.  When he opened
the trap-door to go down the stairs, the poisonous stench which assailed his nostrils almost
knocked him down.  "By all the great sharks in the sea," he cried angrily, "I believe it would
be easier to breathe in the bottom of the ocean than down there with those pig-tailed Chinamen!
He!  I don't want to go down there.  Be quick, and send the interpreter up here," he called.

A babel of Chinese words came from the unventilated room which was lighted by an old kerosene
lamp, and the crowd pushed to the gangway to get up on deck.  The boatswain thundered "Back",
and to make his words emphatic as well as intelligible, drew his revolver.  The men went back,
and Lihoa brought his nephew, the small Peppo, to the foot of the gangway.  "Tell him that
he is to let us come out on deck before we suffocate in this vile hole," commanded Lihoa.

As soon as Peppo began to tell in English what he had been told to say, the boatswain cried
out: "Ha, ha!  So you are the interpreter, you little pigmy?  Why, that's all right.  How lucky!
Come up.  I am looking for you, but your pig-tailed cousins will have to stay down there. 
They won't suffocate for awhile; the air of the steerage is thicker and more nourishing than
that on deck."

After a little parleying Lihoa let his nephew go.  Quickly he ran up the ladder, and when Gray
had closed the trap-door he threw himself at his feet, and with outstretched hands begged to
land, because he had been brought on board against his will.

"Land?" laughed Gray.  "Land on what?  We have been under sail for six hours or more and are
now a goodly number of miles from Hongkong, and probably won't see land again for weeks.  For
good or for evil, for better or for worse, my little pigmy, you'll have to go with us until
we land those cousins of yours in Australia.  Get up.  I'll take you to the kitchen, and there
our cook will find so much for you to do, that you won't have time for sad thoughts."

With these words he seized Peppo by the arm and led him to the kitchen, where he gave him over
to the cook.  The fat cook with the big white apron looked at the slender youth half angrily,
half compassionately, and grumbled:

"That little Chinaman is to give me the promised help?  How is he to lift the heavy kettles
of rice off the fire, Mr. Gray?"

