A FOUNTAIN SEALED

by

ANNE DOUGLAS SEDGWICK

(Mrs. Basil de Selincourt)

Author of 'The Little French Girl,' 'Franklin Winslow Kane,' 'Tante,' etc.

I

Three people were sitting in a small drawing-room, the windows of which looked out upon a wintry
Boston street. It was a room rather empty and undecorated, but the idea of austerity was banished
by a temperature so nearly tropical. There were rows of books on white shelves, a pale Donatello
cast on the wall, and two fine bronze vases filled with roses on the mantelpiece. Over the
roses hung a portrait in oils, very sleek and very accurate, of a commanding old gentleman
in uniform, painted by a well-known German painter, and all about the room were photographs
of young women, most of them young mothers, with smooth heads and earnest faces, holding babies.
Outside, the snow was heaped high along the pavements and thickly ridged the roofs and lintels.
After the blizzard the sun was shining and all the white glittered. The national colors, to
a patriotic imagination, were pleasingly represented by the red, white and blue of the brick
houses, the snow, and the vivid sky above.

The three people who talked, with many intimate pauses of silence, were all Bostonians, though
of widely different types. The hostess, sitting in an easy chair and engaged with some sewing,
was a girl of about twenty-six. She wore a brown skirt of an ugly cut and shade and a white
silk shirt, adorned with a high linen collar, a brown tie and an old-fashioned gold watch-chain.
Her forehead was too large, her nose too short; but her lips were full and pleasant and when
she smiled she showed charming teeth. The black-rimmed glasses she wore emphasized the clearness
and candor of her eyes. Her thick, fair hair was firmly fastened in a group of knobs down the
back of her head. There was an element of the grotesque in her appearance and in her careful,
clumsy movements, yet, with it, a quality almost graceful, that suggested homely and wholesome
analogies,--freshly-baked bread; fair, sweet linen; the safety and content of evening firesides.
This was Mary Colton.

The girl who sat near the window, her furs thrown back from her shoulders, a huge muff dangling
from her hand, was a few years younger and exceedingly pretty. Her skin was unusually white,
her hair unusually black, her velvety eyes unusually large and dark. In. her attitude, lounging,
graceful, indifferent, in her delicate face, the straight, sulky brows, the coldly closed lips,
the coldly observant eyes, a sort of permanent discontent was expressed, as though she could
find, neither in herself nor in the world, any adequate satisfaction. This was Rose Packer.

The other guest, sitting sidewise on a stiff chair, his hand hanging over the back, his long
legs crossed, was a young man, graceful, lean and shabby. He was clean-shaven, with brown skin
and golden hair, an unruly lock lying athwart his forehead. His face, intent, alert, was veiled
in an indolent nonchalance. He looked earnest, yet capricious, staunch, yet sensitive, and
one felt that, conscious of these weaknesses, he tried to master or to hide them.

These three had known one another since childhood. Jack's family was old and rich; Mary's old
and poor; Rose Packer's new and of fantastic wealth. Rose was a young woman of fashion and
her whole aspect seemed to repudiate any closeness of tie between herself and Mary, who passed
her time in caring for General Colton, her invalid father, attending committees, and, as a
diversion, going to "sewing-circles" and symphony concerts; but she was fonder of Mary than
of any one else in the world. Rose, who had, as it were, been brought up all over the world,
divided her time now between two continents and quaintly diversified her dancing, hunting,
yachting existence by the arduous study of biology. Jack, in appearance more ambiguous than
either, looked neither useful nor ornamental; but, in point of fact, he was a much occupied
person. He painted very seriously, was something of a scholar and devoted much of his time
and most of his large fortune to intricate benevolences. His shabby clothes were assumed, like
the air of indolence; his wealth irked him and, full of a democratic transcendentalism, he
longed to efface all the signs that separated him from the average toiler. While Rose was quite
ignorant of her own country west of the Atlantic seaboard, Jack had wandered North, South,
West. As for Mary, she had hardly left Boston in her life, except to go to the Massachusetts
coast in summer and to pay a rare visit now and then to New York. It was of such a visit that
she had been talking to them and of the friend who, since her own return home only a few days
before, had suffered a sudden bereavement in the death of her father. Jack Pennington, also
a near friend of Imogen Upton's, had just come from New York, where he had been with her during
the mournful ceremonies of death, and Mary Colton, after a little pause, had said, "I suppose
she was very wonderful through it all."

"She bore up very well," said Jack Pennington. "There would never be anything selfish in her
grief."

"Never. And when one thinks what a grief it is. She is wonderful," said Mary.

"You think every one wonderful, Molly," Rose Packer remarked, not at all aggressively, but
with her air of quiet ill-temper.

"Mary's enthusiasm has hit the mark this time," said Pennington, casting a glance more scrutinizing
than severe upon the girl.

"I really can't see it. Of course Imogen Upton is pretty--remarkably pretty--though I've always
thought her nose too small; and she is certainly clever; but why should she be called wonderful?"

"I think it is her goodness, Rose," said Mary, with an air of gentle willingness to explain.
"It's her radiant goodness. I know that Imogen has mastered philosophies, literatures, sciences--in
so far as a young and very busy girl can master them, and that very wise men are glad to talk
to her; but it's not of that one thinks--nor of her great beauty, either. Both seem taken up,
absorbed in that selflessness, that loving-kindness, that's like a higher kind of cleverness--almost
like a genius."

"She's not nearly so good as you are, Molly. And after all, what does she do, anyway?"

Mary kept her look of leniency, as if over the half-playful naughtinesses of a child. "She
organizes and supports all sorts of charities, all sorts of reforms; she is the wisest, sweetest
of hostesses; she takes care of her brother; she took care of her father;--she takes care of
anybody who is in need or unhappy."

"Was Mr. Upton so unhappy? He certainly looked gloomy;--I hardly knew him; Eddy, however, I
do know, very well; he isn't in the least unhappy. He doesn't need help."

"I think we all need help, dear. As for Mr. Upton,--you know," Mary spoke very gravely now,
"you know about Mrs. Upton."

"Of course I do, and what's better, I know her herself a little. Elle est charmeuse."

"I have never seen her," said Mary, "but I don't understand how you can call a frivolous and
heartless woman, who practically deserted her husband and children, charmeuse;--but perhaps
that is all that one can call her."

"I like frivolous people," said Rose, "and most women would have deserted Mr. Upton, if what
I've heard of him was true."

"What have you heard of him?"

"That he was a bombastic prig."

At this Mary's pale cheek colored. "Try to remember, Rose, that he died only a week ago."

"Oh, he may be different now, of course."

"I can't bear to hear you speak so, Rose. I did know him. I saw a great deal of him during
this last year. He was a very big person indeed."

"Of course I'm a pig to talk like this, if you really liked him, Molly."

But Mary was not to be turned aside by such ambiguous apology. "You see, you don't know, Rose.
The pleasure-seeking, worldly people among whom you live could hardly understand a man like
Mr. Upton. Simply what he did for civic reform,--worked himself to death over it. And his books
on ethics, politics. It isn't a question of my liking him. I don't know that I ever thought
of my feeling for him in those terms. It was reverence, rather, and gratitude for his being
what he was."

"Well, dear, I do remember hearing men, and not worldly men, as you call them, either, say
that his work for civic reform amounted to very little and that his books were thin and unoriginal.
As for that community place he founded at, where was it?--Clackville? He meddled that out of life."

"He may have been Utopian, he may have been in some ways ineffectual; but he was a good man,
a wonderful, yes, Rose, a wonderful man,"

"And do you think that Molly has hit the mark in this, too?" Rose asked, turning her eyes on
Pennington. He had been listening with an air of light inattention and now he answered tersely,
as if conquering some inner reluctance by over-emphasis, "Couldn't abide him."

Rose laughed out, though with some surprise in her triumph; and Mary, redder than before, rejoined
in a low voice, "I didn't expect you, Jack, to let personal tastes interfere with fair judgment."

"Oh, I'm not judging him," said Jack.

"But do you feel with me," said Rose, "that it's no wonder that Mrs. Upton left him."

"Not in the least," Pennington replied, glad, evidently, to make clear his disagreement. "I
don't know of any reason that Mrs. Upton had for deserting not only her husband but her children."

"But have they been left? Isn't it merely that they prefer to stay?"

"Prefer to live in their own country? among their own people? Certainly."

"But she spends part of every year with them. There was never any open breach."

"Everybody knew that she would not live with her husband and everybody knew why," Mary said.
"It has nearly broken Imogen's heart. She left him because he wouldn't lead the kind of life
she wanted to lead--the kind of life she leads in England--one of mere pleasure and self-indulgent
ease. She hasn't the faintest conception of duty or of patriotism. She couldn't help her husband
in any way, and she wouldn't let him help her. All she cares for is fashion, admiration and
pretty clothes."

"Stuff and nonsense, my dear! She doesn't think one bit more about her clothes than Imogen
does. It requires more thought to look like a saint in velvet than to go to the best dressmaker
and order a trousseau. I wonder how long it took Imogen to find out that way of doing her hair."

"Rose!--I must beg of you--I love her."

"But I'm saying nothing against her!"

"When I think of what she is suffering now, what you say sounds cruelly irreverent. Jack, I
know, feels as I do."

"Yes, he does," said the young man. He got up now and stood, very tall, in the middle of the
room looking down at Mary. "I must be off. I'll bring you those books to-morrow afternoon--though
I don't see much good in your reading d'Annunzio."

"Why, if you do, Jack?" said Mary, with some wonder. And the degree of intimate equality in
the relations of these young people may be gaged by the fact that he appeared to receive her
rejoinder as conclusive.

"Well, he's interesting, of course, and if one wants to understand modern decadence in an all-round
way--"

"I want to understand everything," said Mary. "And please bring your best Italian dictionary
with them."

"Before you go, Jack," said Rose, "pray shut the register. It's quite stifling in here."

"Far too hot," said Jack, showing his impartiality of spirit by his seconding of Rose's complaint,
for it was evident she had much displeased him. "I've often told you, Mary, how bad it was
for you. That's why you are so pale."

"I'm so sorry. Have you been feeling it much? Leave the door into the hall open."

"And do cast one glance, if only of disapprobation, upon me, Jack," Rose pleaded in mock distress.

"You are a very amusing child, Rose, sometimes," was Pennington's only answer.

"He's evidently very cross with me," said Rose, when he was gone. "While you are not--you who
have every right to be, angelic Molly."

"I hope you didn't realize, Rose, how you were hurting him."

"I?" Rose opened wide eyes. "How, pray?"

"Don't you know that he is devoted to Imogen Upton?"

"Why, who isn't devoted to her, except wicked me?"

"Devoted in particular--in love with her, I think," said Mary.

Rose's face took on a more acutely discontented look, after the pause in which she seemed,
though unrepentantly, to acquiesce in a conviction of ineptitude. "Really in love with her?"

"I think so; I hope so."

"How foolish of him," said Rose. Mary, at this, rested a gaze so long and so reproachful upon
her that the discontent gave way to an affectionate compunction. "The truth is, Mary, that
I'm jealous; I'm petty; I'm horrid. I don't like sharing you. I like you to like me most, and
not to find other people wonderful."

"If you own that you are naughty, Rose, dear, and that you try hard to be naughtier than you
really are, I can't be angry with you. But it does hurt me, for your own sake, to see you--really
malicious, dear."

"Oh, dear! Am I that?"

"Really you are."

"Because I called Imogen Upton a saint in velvet?--and like her mother so much, much more?"

"Yes, because of that--and all the rest. As for jealousy, one doesn't love people more because
they are wonderful. One is glad of them and one longs to share them. It's one of my dearest
hopes that you may come to care for Imogen as I do--and as Jack does."

Rose listened, her head bent forward, her eyes, ambiguous in their half-ironic, half-tender,
meaning, on her friend; but she only said, "I shall remain in love with you, Mary." She didn't
say again, though she was thinking it, that Jack was very foolish.

II

"Darling, darling Mother:

"I know too well what you have been feeling since the cable reached you; and first of all I
want to help you to bear it by telling you at once that you could not have reached him in time.
You must not reproach yourself for that.

"I am shattered by this long day. Father died early this morning, but I must hold what strength
I have, firmly, for you, and tell you all that you will want to hear. He would have wished
that; you know how he felt about a selfish yielding to grief.

"He seemed quite well until the beginning of this week--five days ago--but he was never strong;
the long struggle that life must always mean to those who face life as he did, wore on him
more and more; for others' sakes he often assumed a buoyancy of manner that, I am sure,--one
feels these things by intuition of those one loves--often hid suffering and intense weariness.
It was just a case of the sword wearing out the scabbard. A case of, 'Yes, uphill to the very
end.' I know that you did not guess how fragile the scabbard had become, and you must not reproach
yourself, darling, for that either. We are hardly masters of the intuitions that warn us of
these things. Death teaches us so much, and, beside him, looking at his quiet face, so wonderful
in its peace and triumph, I have learned many lessons. He has seemed to teach me, in his silence,
the gentler, deeper sympathy with temperament. You couldn't help it, darling, I seem to understand
that more and more. You weren't at the place, so to speak, where he could help you. Oh, I want
to be so tender with you, my mother,--and to help you to wise, strong tenderness toward yourself.

"On Tuesday he worked, as usual, all morning; he had thrown himself heart and soul, as you
know, into our great fight with civic corruption--what a worker he was, what a fighter! He
was so wonderful at lunch, I remember. I had my dear little Mary Colton with me and he held
us both spellbound, talking, with all his enthusiasm and ardor, of politics, art, life and
the living of life. Mary said, when she left me that day, that to know him had been one of
the greatest things in her experience. In the afternoon he went to a committee meeting at the
Citizens' Union. It was bitterly cold and though I begged him to be selfish for once and take
a cab, he wouldn't--you remember his Spartan contempt of costly comforts--and I can see him
now, going down the steps, smiling, shaking his head, waving his hand, and saying with that
half-sad, half-quizzical, smile of his, 'Plenty of people who need bread a good deal more than
I need cabs, little daughter.' So, in the icy wind, he walked to the cable-car, with its over-heated
atmosphere. He got back late, only in time to dress for dinner. Several interesting men came
and we had a splendid evening, really wonderful talk, constructive talk, vitalizing, inspiring,
of the world and the work to be done for it. I noticed that father seemed flushed, but thought
it merely the interest of the discussion. He did not come down to breakfast next morning and
when I went to him I found him very feverish. He confessed then that he had caught a bad chill
the day before. I sent for the doctor at once, and for a little while had no anxiety. But the
fever became higher and higher and that night the doctor said that it was pneumonia.

"Dearest, dearest mother, these last days are still too much with me for me to feel able to
make you see them clearly. It is all a tragic confusion in my mind. Everything that could be
done was done to save him. He had nurses and consultations--all the aids of science and love.
I wired for Eddy at once, and dear Jack Pennington was with me, too, so helpful with his deep
sympathy and friendship. I needed help, mother, for it was like having my heart torn from me
to see him go. He was very calm and brave, though I am sure he knew, and once, when I sat beside
him, just put out his hand to mine and said: 'Don't grieve overmuch, little daughter; I trust
you to turn all your sorrow to noble uses.' He spoke only once of you, dear mother, but then
it was to say: 'Tell her--I forgive. Tell her not to reproach herself.' And then--it was the
saddest, sweetest summing up, and it will comfort you--'She was like a child.' At the end he
simply went--sleeping, unconscious. Oh, mother, mother!--forgive these tears, I am weak....
He lies now, up-stairs, looking so beautiful--like that boyish portrait, you remember, with
the uplifted, solemn gaze--only deeper, more peaceful and without the ardor....

"Darling mother, don't bother a bit about me. Eddy and Jack will help me in everything, all
our friends are wonderful to us.--Day after to-morrow we are to carry him to his rest.--After
that, when I feel a little stronger, I will write again. Eddy goes to you directly after the
funeral. If you need me, cable for me at once. I have many ties and many claims here, but I
will leave them all to spend the winter with you, if you need me. For you may not feel that
you care to come to us, and perhaps it will be easier for you to bear it over there, where
you have so many friends and have made your life. So if I can be of any help, any comfort,
don't hesitate, mother dear.

"And--oh, I want to say it so lovingly, my arms around you--don't fear that I have any hardness
in my heart toward you. I loved him--with all my soul--as you know; but if, sometimes, seeing
his patient pain, I have judged you, perhaps, with youth's over-severity,--all that is gone
now. I only feel our human weakness, our human need, our human sorrow. Remember, darling, that
our very faults, our very mistakes, are the things that may help us to grow higher. Don't sink
into a useless self-reproach. 'Turn your sorrow to noble uses.' Use the past to light you to
the future. Build on the ruins, dear one. You have Eddy and me to live for, and we love you.
God bless you, my darling mother.

"IMOGEN."

This letter, written in a large, graceful and very legible hand, was being read for the third
time by the bereaved wife as she sat in the drawing-room of a small house in Surrey on a cold
November evening. The room was one of the most finished comfort, comfort its main intention,
but so thoroughly attained that beauty had resulted as if unconsciously. The tea-table, the
fire, the wide windows, their chintz curtains now drawn, were the points around which the room
had so delightfully arranged itself. It was a room a trifle overcrowded, but one wouldn't have
wanted anything taken away, the graceful confusion, on a background of almost austere order,
gave the happiest sense of adaptability to a variety of human needs and whims. Mrs. Upton had
finished her own tea, but the flame still burned in waiting under the silver urn; books and
reviews lay in reach of a lazy hand; lamps, candle-light and flowers made a soft radiance;
a small griffon dozed before the fire. The decoration of the room consisted mainly in French
engravings from Watteau and Chardin, in one or two fine black lacquer cabinets and in a number
of jars and vases of Chinese porcelain, some standing on the floor and some on shelves, the
neutral-tinted walls a background to their bright, delicate colors.

Mrs. Upton was an appropriate center to so much ease and beauty. In deep black though she was,
her still girlish figure stretched out in a low chair, her knees crossed, one foot held to
the fire, she did not seem to express woe or the poignancy of regret. The delicate appointments
of her dress, the freshness of her skin, her eyes, bright and unfatigued, suggested nothing
less than a widow plunged in remorseful grief. Her eyes, indeed, were thoughtful, her lips,
as she read her daughter's communication, grave, but there was much discrepancy between her
own aspect and the letter's tone, and, letting it drop at last, she seemed herself aware of
it, sighing, glancing about her at the Chinese porcelain, the tea-table, the dozing dog. She
didn't look stricken, nor did she feel so. The first fact only vaguely crossed her mind; the
latter stayed and her face became graver, sadder, in contemplating it. She contemplated it
for a long time, going over a retrospect in which her dead husband's figure and her own were
seen, steadily, sadly, but without severity for either.

Since the shock of the announcement, conveyed in a long, tender cable over a week ago, she
had had no time, as it were, to cast up these accounts with the past. Her mind had known only
a confused pain, a confused pity, for herself and for the man whom she once had loved. The
death, so long ago, of that young love seemed more with her than her husband's death, which
took on the visionary, picture aspect of any tragedy seen from a distance, not lived through.
But now, in this long, firelit leisure, that was the final summing of it all. She was grave,
she was sad; but she could feel no severity for herself, and, long ago, she had ceased to feel
any for poor Everard. They had been greatly mistaken in fancying themselves made for each other,
two creatures could hardly have been less so; but Everard had been a good man and she,--she
was a harmless woman. Both of them had meant well. Of course Everard had always, and for everything,
meant a great deal more than she, in the sense of an intentional shaping of courses. She had
always owned that, had always given his intentions full credit; only, what he had meant had
bored her--she could not find it in herself now to fix on any more self-exonerating term. After
the first perplexed and painful years of adjustment to fundamental disappointment she had at
last seen the facts clearly and not at all unkindly, and it seemed to her that, as far as her
husband went, she had made the best of them. It was rather odious of her, no doubt, to think
it now, but it seemed the truth, and, seen in its light, poor little Imogen's exhortations
and consolations were misplaced. Once or twice in reading the letter she had felt an inclination
to smile, an inclination that had swiftly passed into compunction and self-reproach.

Yes, there it was; she could find very little of self-reproach within her in regard to her
husband; but in regard to Imogen her conscience was not easy, and as her thoughts passed to
her, her face grew still sadder and still graver. She saw Imogen, in the long retrospect,--it
was always Imogen, Eddy had never counted as a problem--first as a child whom she could take
abroad with her for French, German, Italian educational experiences; then as a young girl,
very determined to form her own character, and sure, with her father to second her assurance,
that boarding-school was the proper place to form it. Eddy was also at school, and Mrs. Upton,
with the alternative of flight or an unbroken tete-a-tete with her husband before her, chose
the former. There was no breach, no crash; any such disturbances had taken place long before;
she simply slid away, and her prolonged absences seemed symbols of fundamental and long recognized
divisions. She came home for the children's holidays; built, indeed, the little house among
the Vermont hills, so that she might, as it were, be her husband's hostess there. She hoped,
through the ambiguous years, for Imogen's young-womanhood; looking forward to taking her place
beside her when the time came for her first steps in the world. But here, again, Imogen's clear-cut
choice interfered. Imogen considered girlish frivolities a foolish waste of time; she would
take her place in the world when she was fully equipped for the encounter; she was not yet
equipped to her liking and she declared herself resolved on a college course.

Imogen had been out of college for three years now, but the routine of Mrs. Upton's life was
unchanged. The rut had been made too deep for her to climb out of it. It had become impossible
to think of reentering her husband's home as a permanent part of it. Eddy was constantly with
her in England in the intervals of his undergraduate life; but how urge upon Imogen more frequent
meetings when her absence would leave the father desolate? The summers had come to be their
only times of reunion and Mrs. Upton had more and more come to look forward to them with an
inward tremor of uncertainty and discomfort. For, under everything, above everything, was the
fact, and she felt herself now to be looking it hard in the face, that Imogen had always, obviously,
emphatically, been fondest of her father. It had been from the child's earliest days, this
more than fondness, this placid partizanship. In looking back it seemed to her that Imogen
had always disapproved of her, had always shown her disapproval, gently, even tenderly, but
with a sad firmness. Her liberation from her husband's standard was all very well; she cared
nothing for Imogen's standard either, in so far as it was an echo, a reflection; only, for
her daughter not to care for her, to disapprove of her, to be willing that she should go out
of her life,--there was the rub; and the fact that she should be considering it over a tea-table
in Surrey while Imogen was battling with all the somber accompaniments of grief in New York,
challenged her not to deny some essential defect in her own maternity. She was an honest woman,
and after her hour of thought she could not deny it, though she could not see clearly where
it lay; but the recognition was but a step to the owning that she must try to right herself.
And at this point,--she had drawn a deep breath over it, straightening herself in her chair,--her
friends came in from their drive and put an end to her solitude.

For the first years of her semi-detached life Mrs. Upton had been as gay as a very decorous
young grass-widow can be. Her whole existence, until her marriage, which had dropped, or lifted,
her to graver levels, had been passed among elaborate social conditions, and wherever she might
go she found the protection of a recognized background. She had multitudes of acquaintances
and these surrounding nebula condensed, here and there, into the fixed stars of friendship.
Not that such condensations were swift or frequent. Mrs. Upton was not easily intimate. Her
very graces, her very kindnesses, her sympathy and sweetness, were, in a manner, outposts about
an inner citadel and one might for years remain, hospitably entertained, yet kept at a distance.
But the stars, when they did form, were very fixed. Of such were the two friends who now came
in eager for tea, after their nipping drive: Mrs. Pakenham, English, mother of a large family,
wife of a hard-worked M.P. and landowner; energetically interested in hunting, philanthropy,
books and people; slender and vigorous, with a delicate, emaciated face, weather-beaten to
a pale, crisp red, her eyes as blue as porcelain, her hair still gold, her smile of the kindest,
and Mrs. Wake, American, rosy, rather stout, rather shabby, and extremely placid of mien. Mrs.
Pakenham, after her drive, was beautifully tidy, furred as to shoulders and netted as to hair;
Mrs. Wake was much disarranged and came in, smiling patiently, while she put back the disheveled
locks from her brow. She was childless, a widow, very poor; eking out her insufficient income
by novel-writing; unpopular novels that dealt, usually, with gloomy themes of monotonous and
disappointed lives. She was, herself, anything but gloomy.

She gave her friend, now, swift, short glances, while, standing before her, her back to the
fire, she put her hair behind her ears. She had known Valerie Upton from childhood, when they
had both been the indulged daughters of wealthy homes, and through all the catastrophes and
achievements of their lives they had kept in close touch with each other. Mrs. Wake's glances,
now, were fond, but slightly quizzical, perhaps slightly critical. They took in her friend,
her attitude, her beautifully "done" hair, her fresh, sweet face, so little faded, even her
polished finger-nails, and they took in, very unobtrusively, the American letter on her lap.
It was Mrs. Pakenham who spoke of the letter.

"You have heard, then, dear?"

"Yes, from Imogen."

Both had seen her stunned, undemonstrative pain in the first days of the bereavement; the cables
had supplied all essential information. Her quiet, now, seemed to intimate that the letter
contained no harrowing details.

"The poor child is well, I hope?"

"Yes, I think so; she doesn't speak much of herself; she is very brave."

Mrs. Pakenham, a friend of more recent date, had not known Mr. Upton, nor had she ever met Imogen.

"Eddy was with her, of course," said Mrs. Wake.

"Yes, and this young Mr. Pennington, who seems to have become a great friend. May Smith and
Julia Halliwell, of course, must have helped her through it all. She says that people are very
kind." Mrs. Upton spoke quietly. She did not offer to show the letter.

"Jack Pennington. Imogen met him when she went last year to Boston. You remember old Miss Pennington,
his great-aunt, Valerie."

"Very well. But this Jack I've never met."

"He is, I hear, devoted to Imogen."

"So I infer."

"And the very nicest kind of young man, though over-serious."

"I inferred that, too."

"And now," said Mrs. Wake, "Eddy will be here on Saturday; but what of Imogen?"

"Imogen says that she will come over at once, if I want her."

"Far the best plan. She will live with you here--until she marries Mr. Pennington, or some
other devotee," said Mrs. Pakenham comfortably.

Mrs. Upton looked up at her. "No, I shall go to her, until she marries Mr. Pennington or some
other devotee."

There was after this a slight pause, and it was Mrs. Pakenham who broke it with undiminished
cheerfulness. "Perhaps, on the whole, that will be best, for the present. Of course it's a
pity to have to shut up your home, just as you are so nicely installed for the winter. But,
you mustn't let her delay, my dear, in getting married. You can't wait over there indefinitely,
you know."

"Ah, it's just that that I must do," said Mrs. Upton.

There was, again, silence at this, perhaps over a further sense of fitness, but in it Mrs.
Pakenham's eyes met Mrs. Wake's in a long interchange. Mrs. Upton, in the event of Imogen "delaying,"
would not stay; that was what, plainly, it intimated.

"Of course," said Mrs. Pakenham, after some moments of this silent acquiescence and silent
skepticism, "that will make it very evident why you didn't stay before."

"Not necessarily. Imogen has no one with her now; my preferences as to a home would naturally
go down before such an obvious duty."

"So that you will simply take up all the threads, yours and hers?"

"I shall try to."

"You think she'll like that?" Mrs. Pakenham inquired.

"Like what?" Mrs. Upton rather quickly asked.

"That you should take up her threads. Isn't she very self-reliant? Hasn't her life, the odd
situation, made her so?"

At this Mrs. Upton, her eyes on the fire, blushed; faintly, yet the deepening of color was
evident, and Mrs. Pakenham, leaning impulsively forward, put her hand on hers, saying, "Dear
Valerie, I don't mean that you're responsible!"

"But I am responsible." Mrs. Upton did not look at her friend, though her hand closed gently
on hers.

"For nothing with which you can reproach yourself, which you can even regret, then. It's well,
altogether well, that a girl should be self-reliant and have her own threads."

"Not well, though," said Mrs. Wake, folding the much-entangled veil she had removed, "that
a daughter should get on so perfectly without her mother."

"Really, I don't know about that"--Mrs. Pakenham was eager in generous theories--"not well
for us poor mothers, perhaps, who find it difficult to believe that we are such background
creatures."

"Not well for the daughter," Mrs. Wake rejoined. "In this case I think that Imogen has been
more harmed than Valerie."

"Harmed!" Mrs. Pakenham exclaimed, while Valerie Upton's eyes remained fixed on the fire. "How
can she have been harmed? From all I hear of her she is the pink of perfection."

"She is a good girl."

"You mean that she's suffered?"

"No, I don't think that she has suffered."

Mrs. Wake was evidently determined to remain enigmatical; but Valerie Upton quietly drew aside
her reserves. "That is the trouble, you think; she hasn't."

"That is a symptom of the trouble. She doesn't suffer; she judges. It's very harmful for a
young girl to sit in judgment."

"But Valerie has seen her so much!" Mrs. Pakenham cried, a little shocked at the other's ruthlessness.
"Three months of every year--almost."

"Three months when they played hostess to each other. It was really Valerie who was the guest
in the house when Imogen and her father were there. The relation was never normal. Now that
poor Everard is gone, the necessary artificiality can cease. Valerie can try her hand at being
a mother, not a guest. It will do both her and Imogen good."

"That's just the conclusion I had come to. That's just how I had been seeing it." The fresh
tea-pot was brought in at this juncture, and, as she spoke, Valerie roused herself to measure
in the tea and pour on the boiling water. She showed them, thus, more fully, the grace, the
freshness, the look of latent buoyancy that made her so young, that made her, even now, in
her black dress and with her gravity, remind one of a flower, submerged, momentarily, in deep
water, its color hardly blurred, its petals delicately crisp, its fragrance only needing air
and sunlight to diffuse itself. For all the youthfulness, a quality of indolent magic was about
her, a soft haze, as it were, woven of matured experience, of detachment from youth's self-absorption,
of the observer's kindly, yet ironic, insight. Her figure was supple; her nut-brown hair, splendidly
folded at the back of her head, was hardly touched with white; her quickly glancing, deliberately
pausing, eyes were as clear, as pensive, as a child's; with almost a child's candor of surprise
in the upturning of their lashes. A brunette duskiness in the rose of lips and cheeks, in the
black brows, in the fruit-like softness of outline, was like a veil drawn across and dimming
the fairness that paled to a pearly white at throat and temples. Her upper lip was ever so
faintly shadowed with a brunette penciling of down, and three grains de beaute, like tiny patches
of velvet, seemed applied with a pretty coquetry, one on her lip and two high on her cheek,
where they emphasized and lent a touch of the Japanese to her smile. Even her physical aspect
carried out the analogy of something vivid and veiled. She was clear as day, yet melting, merged,
elusive, like the night; and in her glance, in her voice, was that mingled brightness and shadow.
When she had given them their tea she left her friends, taking her toasted little dog, languid
and yawning, under her arm, and, at a sharp yelp from this petted individual, his paw struck
by the opening of the door, they heard her exclaiming in contrition over him, "Darling lamb!
did his wicked mother hurt him!"

Mrs. Pakenham and Mrs. Wake sipped their tea for some time in silence, and it was Mrs. Pakenham
who voiced at last the thought uppermost for both of them, "I wonder how Sir Basil will take it."

"Everard's death, you mean, or her going off?"

"Both."

"It's obvious, I think, that if he doesn't follow her at once it will only be because he thinks
that now his chance has come he will make it surer by waiting."

"It's rather odious of me to think about it at all, I suppose," Mrs. Pakenham mused, "but one
can't help it, having seen it all; having seen more than either of them have, I'm quite sure,
poor, lovely dears."

"No, one certainly can't help it," Mrs. Wake acquiesced. "Though I, perhaps, should have been
too prudish to own to it just now--with poor Everard hardly in his grave. But that's the comfort
of being with a frank, unscrupulous person like you; one gets it all out and need take no responsibility."

Mrs. Pakenham smiled over her friend's self-exposure and helped her to greater comfort with
a still more crude, "It will be perfect, you know, if he does succeed. I suppose there's no
doubt that he will."

"I don't know; I really don't know," Mrs. Wake mused.

"One knows well enough that she's tremendously fond of him,--it's just that that she has taken
her stand on so beautifully, so gracefully."

"Yes, so beautifully and so gracefully that while one does know that, one can't know more--he
least of all. He, I'm pretty sure, knows not a scrap more,"

"But, after all, now that she's free, that is enough."

"Yes--except--".

"Really, my dear, I see no exception. He is a delightful creature, as sound, as strong, as
true; and if he isn't very clever, Valerie is far too clever herself to mind that, far too
clever not to care for how much more than clever he is."

"Oh, it's not that she doesn't care--"

"What is it, then, you carping, skeptical creature? It's all perfect. An uncongenial, tiresome
husband--and she need have no self-reproach about him, either--finally out of the way; a reverential
adorer at hand; youth still theirs; money; a delightful place--what more could one ask?"

"Ah," Mrs. Wake sighed a little, "I don't know. It's not, perhaps, that one would ask more,
but less. It's too pretty, too easy, too a propos; so much so that it frightens me a little.
Valerie has, you see, made a mess of it. She has, you see, spoiled her life, in that aspect
of it. To mend it now, so completely, to start fresh at--how old is she?--at forty-six, it's
just a little glib. Somehow one doesn't get off so easily as that. One can't start so happily
at forty-six. Perhaps one is wiser not to try."

"Oh, nonsense, my dear! It's very American, that, you know, that picking of holes in excellent
material, furbishing up your consciences, running after your motives as if you were ferrets
in a rat-hole. If all you have to say against it is that it's too perfect, too happy,--why,
then I keep to my own conviction. She'll be peacefully married and back among us in a year."

Mrs. Wake seemed to acquiesce, yet still to have her reserves. "There's Imogen, you know. Imogen
has to be counted with."

"Counted with! Valerie, I hope, is clever enough to manage that young person. It would be a
little too much if the daughter spoiled the end of her life as the husband spoiled the beginning."

"You are a bit hard on Everard, you know, from mere partizanship. Valerie was by no means a
misused wife and his friends may well have thought him a misused husband; Imogen does, I'm
sure. She has, perhaps, a right to feel that, as her father's representative, her mother owes
her something in the way of atonement."

"It does vex me, my dear, to have you argue like that against your own convictions. It was
all his fault,--one only has to know her to be sure of it. He made things unbearable for her."

"It was hardly his fault. He couldn't help being unbearable."

"Well--certainly she couldn't help it!" cried Mrs. Pakenham, laughing as if this settled it.
She rose, putting her hands on the mantelpiece and warming her foot preparatory to her departure;
and, summing up her cheerful convictions, she added: "I'm sorry for the poor man, of course;
but, after all, he seems to have done very much what he liked with his life. And I can't help
being very glad that he didn't succeed in quite spoiling hers. Good luck to Sir Basil is what
I say."

III

Mrs. Upton was in the drawing-room next morning when Sir Basil Thremdon was announced. She
had not seen this old friend and neighbor since the news of her bereavement had reached her,
and now, rising to meet him, a consciousness of all that had changed for her, a consciousness,
perhaps more keen, of all that had changed for him, showed in a deepening of her color.

Sir Basil was a tall, spare, stalwart man of fifty, the limpid innocence of his blue eyes contrasting
with his lean, aquiline countenance. His hair and mustache were bleached by years to a light
fawn-color and his skin tanned by a hardy life to a deep russet; and these tints of fawn and
russet predominated throughout his garments with a pleasing harmony, so that in his rough tweeds
and riding-gaiters he seemed as much a product of the nature outside as any bird or beast.
The air of a delightfully civilized rurality was upon him, an air of landowning, law-dispensing,
sporting efficiency; and if, in the fitness of his coloring, he made one think of a fox or
a pheasant, in character he suggested nothing so much as one of the deep-rooted oaks of his
own park. His very simplicity and uncomplexity of consciousness was as fresh, as wholesome,
as genially encompassing, as full summer foliage. One rested in his shade.

He was an inarticulate person and his eyes, now, in their almost seared solicitude, spoke more
of sympathy and tenderness than his halting tongue. He ended by repeating a good many times
that he hoped she wasn't too frightfully pulled down. Mrs. Upton said that she was really feeling
very well, though conscious that her sincerity might somewhat bewilder her friend in his conceptions
of fitness, and they sat down side by side on a small sofa near the window.

We have said that for the first years of her freedom Mrs. Upton had been very gay. Of late
years the claims on her resources from the family across the Atlantic had a good deal clipped
her wings, and, though she made a round of spring and of autumn visits, she spent her time
for the most part in her little Surrey house, engaged desultorily in gardening, study, and
the entertainment of the friend or two always with her. She had not found it difficult to fold
her wings and find contentment in the more nest-like environment. She had never been a woman
to seek, accepting only, happily, whatever gifts life brought her; and it seemed as natural
to her that things should be taken as that things should be given. But with the renouncement
of more various outlooks this autumnal quietness, too, had brought its gift, discreet, delicate,
a whispered sentence, as it were, that one could only listen to blindfolded, but that, once
heard, gave one the knowledge of a hidden treasure. Sir Basil had been one of the reasons,
the greatest reason, for her happiness in the Surrey nest. It was since coming there to live
that she had grown to know him so well, with the slow-developing, deep-rooted intimacy of country
life. The meadows and parks of Thremdon Hall encompassed all about the heath where Valerie
Upton's cottage stood among its trees. They were Sir Basil's woods that ran down to her garden
walls and Sir Basil's lanes that, at the back of the cottage, led up, through the heather,
to the little village, a mile or so away. She had met Sir Basil before coming to live there,
once or twice in London, and once or twice for week-ends at country-houses; but he was not
a person whom one came really to know in drawing-room conditions; indeed, at the country-houses
one hardly saw him except at breakfast and dinner; he was always hunting, golfing, or playing
billiards, and in the interludes to these occupations one found him a trifle somnolent. It
was after settling quite under his wing--and that she was under it she had discovered only
after falling in love with the little white cottage and rushing eagerly into tenancy--that
she had found out what a perfect neighbor he was; then come to feel him as a near friend; then,
as those other friends had termed it, to care for him.

Valerie Upton, herself, had never called it by any other name, this feeling about Sir Basil;
though it was inevitable, in a woman of her clearness of vision, that she should very soon
recognize a more definite quality in Sir Basil's feeling about her. That she had always kept
him from naming it more definitely was a feat for which, she well knew it, she could allow
herself some credit. Not only had it needed, at some moments, dexterity; it had needed, at
others, self-control. Self-control, however, was habitual to her. She had long since schooled
herself into the acceptance of her stupidly maimed life, seeing herself in no pathetic similes
at all, but, rather, as a foolish, unformed creature who, partly through blindness, partly
through recklessness, had managed badly to cripple herself at the outset of life's walk, and
who must make the best of a hop-skip-and-jump gait for the rest of it. She had felt, when she
decided that she had a right to live away from Everard, that she had no right to ask more of
fortune than that escape, that freedom. One paid for such freedom by limiting one's possibilities,
and she had never hesitated to pay. Never to indulge herself in sentimental repinings or in
sentimental musings, never to indulge others in sentimental relationships, had been the most
obvious sort of payment; and if, in regard to Sir Basil, the payment had sometimes been difficult,
the reward had been that sense of unblemished peace, that sense of composure and gaiety. It
was enough to know, as a justification of her success, that she made him happy, not unhappy.
It was enough to know that she could own freely to herself how much she cared for him, so much
that, finding him funny, dear, and dull, she was far fonder of his funniness, of his dullness,
than of other people's cleverness. He made her feel as if, on that maimed, that rather hot
and jaded walk, she had come upon the great oak-tree and sat down to rest in its peaceful shadow,
hearing it rustle happily over her and knowing that it was secure strength she leaned against,
knowing that the happy rustle was for her, because she was there, peaceful and confident. So
it had all been like a gift, a sad, sweet secret that one must not listen to except with blindfolded
eyes. She had never allowed the gift to become a burden or a peril. And now, to-day, for the
first time, it was as though she could raise the bandage and look at him.

She sat beside him in her widow's enfranchising blackness and she couldn't but seer at last,
how deep was that upwelling, inevitable fondness. So deep that, gazing, as if with new and
dazzled eyes, she wondered a little giddily over the long self-mastery; so deep that she almost
felt it as a strange, unreal tribute to trivial circumstance that, without delay, she should
not lean her head against the dear oak and tell it, at last, that its shelter was all that
she asked of life. It was necessary to banish the vision by the firm turning to that other,
that dark one, of her dead husband, her grief-stricken child, and, in looking, she knew that
while it was so near she could not dwell on the possibilities of freedom. So she talked with
her friend, able to smile, able, once or twice, to use toward him her more intimate tone of
affectionate playfulness.

"But you are coming back--directly!" Sir Basil exclaimed, when she told him that she expected
her boy in a few days and that they would sail for New York together.

Not directly, she answered. Before very long, she hoped. So many things depended on Imogen.

"But she will live with you now, over here."

"I don't think that she will want to leave America," said Valerie. "I don't think, even, that
I want her to."

"But this is your home, now," Sir Basil protested, looking about, as though for evidences of
the assertion, at the intimate comforts of the room. "You know that you are more at home here
than there."

"Not now. My home, now, is Imogen's."

Sir Basil appeared to reflect, and then to put aside reflection as, after all, inapplicable,
as yet, to the situation.

"Well, I must pay America a visit," he said with an unemphatic smile. "I've not been there
for twenty years, you know. I'll like seeing it again, and seeing you--in Miss Imogen's home."

Valerie again flushed a little. In some matters Sir Basil was anything but dull, and his throwing,
now, of the bridge was most tactfully done. He intended that she should see it solidly spanning
the distance between them and only time was needed, she knew, to give him his right of walking
over it, and her right--but that was one of the visions she must not look at. A great many
things lay between now and then, confused, anxious, perhaps painful, things. The figure of
Imogen so filled the immediate future that the place where Sir Basil should take up his thread
was blotted into an almost melancholy haze of distance. But it was good to feel the bridge
there, to know him so swift and so sure.

"She is very clever, your girl, isn't she? I've always felt it from what you've told me," he
said, defining for himself, as she saw, the future where they were to meet.

"Very, I think."

"Very learned and artistic. I'm afraid she'll find me an awful Philistine. You must stand up
for me with her."

"I will," Valerie smiled, adding, "but Imogen is very pretty, too, you know."

"Yes, I know; one can see that in the photographs," said Sir Basil. There were several of these
standing about the room and he get up to look at them, one after the other--Imogen in evening,
in day dress, all showing her erect slenderness, her crown of hair, her large, calm eyes.

"She looks kind but very cool, you know," he commented. "She would take one in at a great rate;
not find much use for an every-day person like me."

"Oh, you won't be an every-day person to Imogen. And her great point, I think, is her finding
a use for everybody."

"Making them useful to her?"

"No--to themselves--to the world in general."

"Improving them, do you mean?"

"Well, yes, I should say that was more it. She likes to give people a lift."

"But--she's so very young. How does she manage it?" Sir Basil queried over the photograph,
whose eyes dwelt on him while he spoke,

"Oh, you'll see," Valerie smiled a little at his pertinacity. "I've no doubt that she will
improve you."

"Well," said Sir Basil, recognizing her jocund intention, "she's welcome to try. As long as
you are there to see that she isn't too hard on me." He dismissed Imogen, then, from his sight
and thoughts, replacing her on the writing-table and suggesting that Mrs. Upton should take
a little walk with him. His horse had been put into the stable and he could come back for him.
Mrs. Upton said that when they came back he must stay to lunch and that be could ride home
afterward, and this was agreed on; so that in ten minutes' time Mrs. Pakenham and Mrs. Wake,
from their respective windows, were able to watch their widowed friend walking away across
the heather with Sir Basil beside her.

Neither spoke much as they wended their way along the little paths of silvery sand that intersected
the common. The day was clear, with a milky, blue-streaked sky; the distant foldings of the
hills were of a deep, hyacinthine blue.

From time to time Sir Basil glanced at the face beside him, thoughtful to sadness, its dusky
fairness set in black, but attentive, as always, to the sights and sounds of the well-loved
country about her. He liked to watch the quick glancing, the clear gazing, of her eyes; everything
she looked at became at once more significant to him--the tangle of tenacious roots that thrust
through the greensand soil of the lane they entered, the suave, gray columns of the beeches
above, the blurred mauves and russets of the woods, the swift, awkward flight of a pheasant
that crossed their way with a creaking whir of wings, the amethyst stars of a bush of Michaelmas
daisies, showing over a whitewashed cottage wall, the far blue distance before them, framed
in the tracery of the beech-boughs. He knew that she loved it all from the way she looked at
it and, almost indignantly, as though against some foolish threat, he felt himself asseverating,
"It is her home--she knows it--the place she loves like that." And when they had made their
wide round, down the lane, up a grassy dell, into his park, where he had to show her some trees
that must come down; when they had skirted the park, along its mossy, fern-grown wall, and
under its overhanging branches, until, once more, they were on the common and the white of
Valerie's cottage glimmered before them, he voiced this protest, saying to her, as he watched
her eyes, dwell on the dear little place, "You could never bear to leave all this for good--even
if, even if we let you; you know you couldn't."

Valerie looked round at him, and in his face, against its high background of milk-streaked
blue, she saw the embodiment of his words; it was that, not the hyacinthine hills, not the
beech-woods, not the heathery common, not even the dear cottage, that she could not bear to
leave for good. But since this couldn't be said, she consented to the symbol of it that he
put before her, that "all this," and answered, as he had hoped, "No, indeed; I couldn't think
of leaving it all, for good."

IV

It was an icy, sunny day, and Imogen Upton and Jack Pennington were walking up and down the
gaunt wharf, not caring to take refuge from the cold in the stifling waiting-rooms. The early
morning sky was still pink. The waters of the vast harbor were whitened by blocks and sheets
of ice. The great city, drawn delicately on the pink in white and pearl, marched its fantastic
ranges of "sky-scrapers"--an army of giants--down to the water's edge. And, among all the rose
and gold and white, the ocean-liner, a glittering immensity of helpless strength, was being
hauled and butted into her dock, like some harpooned sea-monster, by a swarm of blunt-nosed,
agile little tugs.

Jack Pennington thought that he had never seen Imogen looking so "wonderful" as on this morning.
The occasion, to him, was brimming over with significance. He had not expected to share it,
but Imogen had spoken with such sweetness of the help that he would give her if he could be
with her in her long, cold waiting, that, with touched delight, he found himself in the position
of a friend so trusted, so leaned upon, that he could witness what there must be of pain and
fear for her in this meeting of her new life. The old life was with them both. Her black armed
her in it, as it were, made her valiant to meet the new. And for him that old life, the life
menaced, though so trivially, by the arriving presence, seemed embodied in the free spaces
of the great harbor, the soaring sky of frosty rose, the grotesque splendor of the giant city,
the glory, the ugliness of the country he loved, the country that made giant-like, grotesque
cities, and that made Imogens.

She was the flower of it all--the flower and the so much more than flower. He didn't care a
fig, so he told himself, about the mere fact of her being beautiful, finished, in her long
black furs, her face so white, her hair so gold under her little hat. She wasn't to be picked
and placed high, above the swarming ugliness. No, and that was why he cared for her when he
had ceased to care for so many pretty girls--her roots were deep; she shared her loveliness;
she gave; she opened; she did not shut away. She was the promise for many rather than the guerdon
of the few. Jack's democracy was the ripe fruit of an ancestry of high endeavor and high responsibility.
The service of impersonal ends was in his blood, and no meaner task had ever been asked of
him or of a long line of forebears. He had never in his own person experienced ugliness; it
remained a picture, seen but not felt by him, so that it was not difficult for him to see it
with the eyes of faith as glorified and uplifted. It constituted a splendid burden, an ennobling
duty, for those who possessed beauty, and without that grave and happy right to serve, beauty
itself would lose all meaning. He often talked about democracy to Imogen. She understood what
he felt about it more firmly, more surely, than he himself did; for, where he sometimes suspected
himself of theory, she acted. She, too, rejoiced in the fundamental sameness of the human family
that banded it together in, essentially, the same great adventure--the adventure of the soul.

Imogen understood; Imogen rejoiced; Imogen was bound on that adventure--not only with him,
but, and it was this that gave those wide wings to his feeling for her, with them--with all
the vast brotherhood of humanity. Now and then, to be sure, faint echoes in her of her father,
touches of youthful assurance, youthful grandiloquence, stirred the young man's sense of humor;
but it was quickly quelled by an irradiating tenderness that showed her limitations as symptoms
of an influence that, in its foolish aspects, he would not have had her too clearly recognize;
her beautiful, filial devotion more than compensated for her filial blindness--nay, sanctified
it; and her heavenly face had but to turn on him for him to envelop all her little solemnities
and importances in a comprehending reverence. Jack thought Imogen's face very heavenly. He
was an artist by profession, as we have said, taking himself rather seriously, too, but the
artistic perception was so strongly colored by ethical and intellectual preoccupations that
the spontaneous satisfaction in the Eternal Now of mere beauty was rarely his. Certainly he
saw the flower-like texture of Imogen's skin; the way in which the light azured its whiteness
and slid upon its child-like surfaces. He saw the long oval of the face, the firm and gentle
lips, drawn with a delicate amplitude, the broad hazel eyes set under a level sweep of dark
eyebrow and outlined, not shadowed, so clear, so wide they were, by the dark lashes. But all
the fresh loveliness of line, surface, color, remained an intellectual appreciation; while
what touched, what penetrated, were the analogies she suggested, the lovely soul that the lovely
face vouched for. The oval of her face and the charming squaring of her eyes, so candid, so
unmysterious, made him think of a Botticelli Madonna; and her long, narrow hands, with their
square finger-tips, might have been the hands of a Botticelli angel holding a votive offering
of fruit and flowers. His mind seldom rested in her beauty, passing at once through it to what
it expressed of purity, strength and serenity. It expressed so much of these that he had never
paused at the portals, as it were, to feel the defects of her face. Imogen's nose was too small;
neat rather than beautiful. Her eyes, with the porcelain-like quality of their white, the jewel-like
color of their irises, were over-large; and when she smiled, which she did often, though with
more gentleness than gaiety, she showed an over-spacious expanse of large white teeth. For
the rest, Imogen's figure was that of the typical well-groomed, well-trained, American girl,
long-limbed, slender, rounded; in her carriage a girlish air of consciousness; the poise of
her broad shoulders and slender hips expressing at once hygienic and fashionable ideals that
reproved slack gaits and outlines. As they walked, as they talked, watching the slow advance
of the great steamer; as their eyes rested calmly and intelligently on each other, one could
see that the girl's relation to this dear friend was untouched by any trace of coquetry and
that his feeling for her, if deep, was under most perfect control.

"It's over a year, now, since I saw mama," Imogen was saying, as they turned again from a long
scrutiny of the crowded decks--the distance was as yet too great for individual recognition.
"She didn't come over this summer as usual,--poor dear, how bitterly she must regret that now,
though it was hardly her fault, papa and I fixed on our Western trip for the summer. It seems
a very long time to me."

"And to me," said Jack. "It's only a year since I came really to know you; but how much longer
it seems than that."

"It's strange that we should know each other so well and yet that you have never seen my mother,"
said Imogen. "Is that she? No, she is not so tall. Poor darling, how tired and sad she must be."

"You are tired and sad, too," said Jack.

"Ah, but I am young--youth can bear so much better. And, besides, I don't think that my sadness
would ever be like mama's. You see, in a way, I have so much more in my life. I should never
sit down in my sadness and let it overwhelm me. I should use it, always. It is strange that
grief should so often make people selfish. It ought, rather, to open doors for us and give
us wider visions."

He was so sure that it had performed these offices for her, looking, as he now looked, at her
delicate profile, turned from him while she gazed toward the ship, that he was barely conscious
of the little tremor of amusement that went through him for the triteness of her speech. Such
triteness was beautiful when it expressed such reality.

"I suppose that you will count for more, now, in your mother's life," he said,--that Imogen
should, seemingly, have counted for so little had been the frequent subject of his indignant
broodings. "She will make you her object."

Imogen smiled a little. "Isn't it more likely that I shall make her mine? one of mine? But
you don't know mama yet. She is, in a way, very lovely--but so much of a child. So much younger--it
seems funny to say it, but it's true--than I am."

"Littler," Jack amended, "not younger."

But Imogen, while accepting the amendment, wouldn't accept the negation.

"Both, I'm afraid," she sighed.

"Will she like it over here?" Jack mused more than questioned.

"Hardly, since she has always lived as little here as she could manage."

"Perhaps she will want to take you back to England," he surmised, conscious, while he spoke
the almost humorous words, of a very firm determination that she shouldn't do so.

Imogen paused in her walk at this, fixing upon him eyes very grave indeed. "Take me back to
England? Do you really think that I would consent to that? Surely you know me better, Jack?"

"I think I do. Only you might yield against your will, if she insisted."

"Surely you know me well enough to know that I would never yield against my will, if I knew
that my will was right. I might sacrifice a great deal for mama--I am prepared to--but never
that; Never," Imogen repeated. "There are some things that one must not sacrifice. Her living
in England is a whim; my living in my own country is part of my religion."

"I know, of course, dear Imogen. But," Jack was argumentative, "as to sacrifice, say that it
was asked of you, by right. Say, for instance, that you married a man who had to take you out
of your own country?"

She smiled a little at the stupid surmise. "That hardly applies. Besides, I would never marry
a man who was not one of my own people, who was not a part--as I am a part--of the Whole I
live for. My life is here, all its meaning is here--you know it--just as yours is."

"I love to know it--I was only teasing you."

He loved to know it, of course. Yet, while it answered to all his own theories that the person
should be so much less to her than the idea the person lived for, he couldn't but feel at times,
with a rueful sense of unworthiness, that this rare capacity in her might apply in most unwelcome
fashion to his own case. In Jack, the deep wells of feeling and emotion were barred and bolted
over by a whole complicated system of reticences; by a careful sense of responsibility, not
only toward others, but toward himself; by a disciplined self-control that was a second nature.
But, he could see it well enough, if such, deep wells there were in Imogen, they, as yet, were
in no need of barring and bolting. Her eyes could show a quiet acceptance of homage, a placid
conviction of power, a tender sympathy, but the depth and trouble of emotion was not yet in
them. He often suspected that he was nearer to her when he talked to her of causes than when
he ventured, now and then, to talk about his feelings. There was always the uncomfortable surmise
that the man who could offer a more equipped faculty for the adventure of the soul, might altogether
outdistance him with Imogen. By any emotion, any appeal or passion that he might show, she
would remain, so his intuition at moments told him, quite unbiased; while she weighed simply
worth against worth, and weight--in the sense of strength of soul--against weight. And it was
this intuition that made self-control and reticence easier than they might otherwise have been.
His theories might assure him that such integrity of purpose was magnificent; his manly common-sense
told him that in a wife one wanted to be sure of the taint of personal preference; so that,
while he knew that he would never need to weigh Imogen's worth against anybody else's, he watched
and waited until some unawakened capacity in her should be able happily to respond to the more
human aspects of life. Meanwhile the steamer had softly glided into the dock and the two young
people at last descried upon the crowded decks the tall, familiar figure of Eddy Upton, like
Imogen in his fairness, clearness, but with a more masculine jut of nose and chin, sharper
lines of brow and cheek and lip. And beside Eddy--Jack hardly needed the controlled quiet of
Imogen's "There's mama" to identify the figure in black.

She leaned there, high and far, on the deck of the great steamer that loomed above their heads,
almost ominous in its gigantic bulk and darkness; she leaned there against the rosy sky, her
face intent, searching, bent upon the fluttering, shouting throng beneath; and for Jack, in
this first impression of her, before she had yet found Imogen, there was something pathetic
in the earnestness of her searching gaze, something that softened the rigors of his disapprobation.
But, already, too, he fancied that he caught the expected note of the frivolous in the outline
of her fur-lined coat, in the grace of her little hat.

Still she sought, her face pale and grave, while, with an imperceptible movement, the steamer
glided forward, and now, as Imogen raised her muff in a long, steady wave, her eyes at last
found her daughter and, smiling, smiling eagerly down upon them, she leaned far over the deck
to wave her answer. She put her hand on her son's arm, pointing them out to him, and Eddy,
also finding them, smiled too, but with his rather cool kindness, raising his hat and giving
Jack a recognizing nod. It was then as if he introduced Jack. Jack saw her question, saw him
assent, and her smile went from Imogen to him enveloping him with its mild radiance.

"She is very lovely, your mother, as you say," Jack commented, feeling a little breathless
over this silent meeting of forces that he must think of as hostile, and finding nothing better
to say.

Imogen, who had continued steadily to wave her muff, welcoming, but for her part unsmiling,
answered, "Yes."

"I hope that she won't mind my being here, in the way, after a fashion," said Jack.

"She won't mind," said Imogen.

He knew the significance of her voice; displeasure was in its gentleness, a quiet endurance
of distress. It struck him then, in a moment, that it was rather out of place for Mrs. Upton
to smile so radiantly at such a home-coming. Not that the smile had been a gay one. It had
shone out after her search for her daughter's face; for the finding of it and for him it had
continued to shine. It was like sunlight on a sad white day of mist; it did not dispel mournfulness,
it seemed only to irradiate it. But--to have smiled at all. With Imogen's eyes he saw, suddenly,
that tears would have been the more appropriate greeting and, in looking back at the girl once
more, he saw that her own, as if in vicarious atonement, were running down her cheeks. She,
then, felt a doubled suffering and his heart hardened against the woman who had caused it.

The two travelers had disappeared and the decks were filled with the jostling hurry of final
departure. Jack and Imogen moved to take their places by the long gangway that slanted up from
the dock.

He said nothing to her of her tears, silent before this subtle grief; perhaps, for all his
love and sympathy, a little disconcerted by its demonstration, and it was Imogen who spoke,
murmuring, as they stood together, looking up, "Poor, poor papa."

Yes, that had been the hurt, to see her dead put aside, almost forgotten, in the mother's over-facile
smile.

The passengers came trooping down the gangway, with an odd buoyancy of step caused by the steep
incline, and Jack, for all his expectancy, had eyes, appreciative and critical, for the procession
of his country-people. Stout, short men, embodying purely economic functions, with rudimentary
features, slightly embossed, as it were, upon pouch-like faces. Thin, young men, whose lean
countenances had somewhat the aspect of steely machinery, apt for swift, ruthless, utilitarian
processes. Bloodless old men, many of whom looked like withered, weary children adorned with
whitened hair. The average manhood of America, with its general air of cheap and hasty growth,
but varied here and there by a higher type; an athletic collegian, auspiciously Grecian in
length of limb, width of brow, deep placidity of eye; varied by a massive senatorial head or
so, tolerant, humorous, sagacious; varied by a stalwart Westerner, and by the weedier scholar,
sensitive, self-conscious, too much of the spiritual and too little of the animal in the meager
body and over-intelligent face.

There was a certain discrepancy, in dress and bodily well-being, between the feminine and the
masculine portion of the procession; many of the heavy matrons, wide-hipped, well-corseted,
benignant and commanding of mien, were ominously suggestive, followed as they were by their
fragile husbands, of the female spider and her doomed, inferior, though necessary, mate. The
young girls of the happier type resembled Imogen Upton in grace, in strength, in calm and in
assurance; the less fortunate were sharp, sallow, anxious-eyed; and the children were either
rosy, well-mannered, and confident, or ill-mannered, over-mature, but also, always, confident.

Highly equipped with every graceful quality of his race, not a touch of the male spider about
him, Eddy's head appeared at last, proud, delicate and strong. His mother, carrying a small
dog, was on his arm, and, as she emerged before the eyes that watched for her, she was smiling
again at something that Eddy had said to her. Then her eyes found them, Jack and Imogen, so
near now, sentinels before the old life, that her smile, her aspect, her very loveliness, seemed
to menace, and Jack felt that she caught a new gravity from the stern gentleness of Imogen's
gaze; that she adjusted her features to meet it; that, with a little shock, she recognized
the traces of weeping on her daughter's face and saw, in his own intentionally hardened look,
that she had tuned herself to a wrong pitch and had been, all unconsciously, jarring.

He couldn't but own that her readjustment, if readjustment it was, was very beautifully done.
Tears rose in her eyes, too. He saw, as she neared them, that her face was pale and weary;
it looked ever so gently, ever so sadly, perhaps almost timidly, at her daughter, and as she
came to them she put out her hand to Imogen, laid hold on her and held her without speaking
while they all moved away together.

The tears of quick sympathy had risen to Jack's own eyes and he stood apart while the mother
and daughter kissed. After that, and when they had gone on a little before him and Eddy, Mrs.
Upton turned to him, and if she readjusted herself she didn't, as it were, retract, for the
smile again rested on him while Eddy presented him to her. He saw then that she had suffered,
though with a suffering different from any that he would have thought of as obvious. How or
what she had suffered he could not tell, but the pale, weary features, for all their smile,
reassured him. She wasn't, at all events, a heartless, a flippant woman.

Eddy and Mrs. Upton's maid remained behind to do battle with the custom-house, and Jack, with
Imogen and her mother, got into the capacious cab that was waiting for them.

The streets in this mean quarter were deep in mud. The snow everywhere had been trampled into
liquid blackness, and the gaunt horses that galloped along the wharfs dragging noisy vans and
carts were splashed all over. It might have been some sordid quarter of an Italian town that
they drove through, so oddly foreign were the disheveled houses, their predominant color a
heavy, glaring red. Men in white uniforms were shoveling snow from the pavements. The many
negro countenances in the hurrying crowds showed blue tints in the bitter air. Coming suddenly
to a wide, mean avenue, when the carriage lurched and swayed on the street-car tracks, they
heard, mingled in an inconceivably ugly uproar, the crash and whine of the cable-cars about
them, and the thunder of the elevated-railway above their heads.

Jack, sensitive to others' impressions, wondered if this tumultuous ugliness made more dreary
to Mrs. Upton the dreary circumstances of her home-coming. There was no mitigation of dreariness
to be hoped for from Imogen, who was probably absorbed in her own bitter reflections. She gazed
steadily out of the window, replying only with quiet monosyllables to her mother's tentative
questions; her face keeping its look of endurance. One could infer from it that had she not
so controlled herself she must have wept, and sitting before the mother and daughter Jack felt
much awkwardness in his position. If their meeting were not to be one with more conventional
surface he really ought not to have been invited to share it. Imogen, poor darling, had all
his sympathy; she hadn't reckoned with the difficulties; she hadn't reckoned with that hurting
smile, with the sharp reawakening of the vicarious sense of wrong; but, all the same, before
her look, her silence, he could but feel for her mother, and feel, too, a keener discomfort
from the fact that his inopportune presence must make Mrs. Upton's discomfort the greater.

Mrs. Upton stroked her tiny dog, who, fulfilling all Jack's conceptions of costly frivolity,
was wrapped in a well-cut coat, in spite of which he was shivering, from excitement as much
as from cold, and her bright, soft gaze went from him to Imogen. She didn't acquiesce for long
in the silence. Leaning forward to him presently she began to ask him questions about Boston,
the dear old great-aunt; to make comments, some reminiscent, some interrogative, upon the scenes
they passed through; to lead him so tactfully into talk that he found himself answering and
assenting almost as fluently as if Imogen in her corner had not kept those large, sad eyes
fixed on the passing houses. So mercifully did her interest and her ease lift him from discomfort
that, with a sharp twinge of self-reproach, he more than once asked himself if Imogen found
something a little disloyal in his willingness to be helped. One couldn't, all the same, remain
at the dreadful depth where her silence plunged them; such depths were too intimate. Mrs. Upton
had felt that. It was because she was not intimate that she smiled upon him; it was because
she intended to hold them both firmly on the surface that she was so kind. He watched her face
with wonder, and a little fear, for which he was angry with himself. He noted the three grains
de beaute and the smile that seemed to break high on her cheek, in a small nick, like that
on the cheek of a Japanese doll. She frightened him, made him feel shy, yet made him feel at
ease, too, as though her own were contagious; and his impression of her was softly permeated
with the breath of violets. Jack disapproved of perfumes; but he really couldn't tell whether
it wasn't Mrs. Upton's gaze only, the sweet oddity of her smile, that, by some trick of association,
suggested the faint haze of fragrance.

They reached the long, far sweep of Fifth Avenue, piled high with snow--dazzling in white,
blue, gold--on either side, and they turned presently into a street of brownstone houses, houses
pleasant, peaceful, with an air of happy domesticity.

Mrs. Upton's eyes, while the cab advanced with many jolts among the heaps of snow, fixed themselves
on one of these houses, and Jack fancied that he saw in her glance a whole army of alarmed
memories forcibly beaten back. Here she had come as a bride and from here, not three weeks
ago, her dead husband had gone with only his children beside him. Now, if ever, she should
feel remorse. Whether she did or not he could not tell, but the eyes with which she greeted
her old home were not happy.

Imogen, as they alighted, spoke at last, asking him to stay to lunch. He recognized magnanimity
in her glance. He had seemed to ignore her hurt, and she forgave him, understanding his helplessness.
But though her mother seconded her invitation with, "Do, you must be so tired and hungry, after
all these hours," Jack excused himself. Already he thought, a woman with such a manner as Mrs.
Upton's--if manner were indeed the word for such a gliding simplicity--must wonder what in
the name of heaven he did there. She was simple, she was gliding; but she was not near.

"May I come in soon and see you?" he said to Imogen while they paused at the foot of the stone
steps. And, with at last her own smile, sad but sweet, for him, she answered, "As soon as you
will, dear Jack. You know how much of strength and comfort you mean to me."

V

Jack, however, did not go for three or four days, giving them plenty of time, as he told himself,
to get used to each other's excesses or lacks of grief. And as he waited for Imogen in the
long drawing-room that had been the setting of so many of their communings, he wondered what
adjustment the mother and daughter had come to.

The aspect of the drawing-room was unchanged; changelessness had always been for him its characteristic
mark; in essentials, he felt sure, it had not changed since the days of old Mrs. Upton, the
present Mrs. Upton's long deceased mother-in-law. Only a touch here and there showed the passage
of time. It was continuous with the dining-room, so that it was but one long room that crossed
all the depth of the house, tall windows at the back, heavily draped, echoing dimly the windows
of the front that looked out upon the snowy, glittering street. The inner half could be shut
away by folding-doors, and its highly polished sideboard, chairs, table, a silver epergne towering
upon it, glimmered in a dusky element that relegated it, when not illuminated for use, to a
mere ghostly decorativeness. By contrast, the drawing-room was vivid. Its fringed and buttoned
furniture,--crimson brocade set in a dark carved wood, the dangling lusters of the huge chandelier,
the elaborate Sevres vases on the mantelpiece, flanking a bronze clock portentously gloomy,
expressed old Mrs. Upton's richly solid ideals; but these permanent uglinesses distressed Jack
less than the pompous and complacent taste of the later additions. A pretentious cabinet of
late Italian Renaissance work stood in a corner; the dark marble mantelpiece, that looked like
a sarcophagus, was incongruously draped with an embroidered Italian cope, and a pseudo-Correggio
Madonna, encompassed with a wilderness of gilt frame, smiled a pseudo-smile from the embossed
paper of the walls. It was one of Jack's little trials to hear Imogen refer to this trophy
with placid conviction.

Yet, for all its solemn stupidity, the room was not altogether unpleasing; it signified something,
were it only an indifference to fashion, It was, funnily, almost Spartan, for all the carving,
the cushioning, the crimson, so little concession did it make to other people's standards or
to small, happy minor uses. Mr. Upton and his daughter had not changed it because they had
other things to think of; and they thought of these things not in the drawing-room but in the
large library up-stairs. There one could find the personal touches, that, but for the cope,
the cabinet, the Correggio, were lacking below. There the many photographs from the Italian
primitives, the many gracious Donatello and Delia Robbia bas-reliefs, expressed something of
Imogen, too, though Jack always felt that Imogen's esthetic; side expressed what was not very
essential in her.

While he waited now, he had paused at last before two portraits. He had often so paused while
waiting for Imogen. To-night it was with a new curiosity.

They hung opposite the Correggio and on either side of the great mirror that rose from the
mantelpiece to the cornice. One was of a young man dressed in the fashion of twenty-five years
before, dressed with a rather self-conscious negligence. He was pale, earnest, handsome, though
his nose was too small and his eyes too large. A touch of the histrionic was in his attitude,
in his dark hair, tossed carelessly, in the unnecessarily weighty and steady look of his dark
eyes, even in the slight smile of his firm, full lips, a smile too well-adapted, as it were,
to the needs of any interlocutor. Beneath his arm was a book; a long, distinguished hand hanging
slackly. Jack turned away with a familiar impatience. In twenty-five years Mr. Upton had changed
very little. It was much the same face that he had known; in especial, the slack, self-conscious
hand, the smile--always so much more for himself than for you--were familiar. The hand, the
necktie, the smile, so deep, so dark, so empty, were all, Jack was inclined to suspect, that
there had ever been of Mr. Upton.

The other portrait, painted with the sleek convention of that earlier epoch, was of a woman
in a ball-dress. The portrait was by a French master and under his brush the sitter had taken
on the look of a Feuillet heroine. She was gay, languid, sentimental, and extraordinarily pretty.
Her hair was dressed in a bygone fashion, drawn smoothly up from the little ears, coiled high
and falling across her forehead in a light, straight fringe. Her wonderful white shoulders
rose from a wonderfully low white bodice; a bracelet of emeralds was on her arm, a spray of
jasmine in her fingers; she was evidently a girl, yet in her apparel was a delicate splendor,
in her gaze a candid assurance, that marked her as an American girl. And she expressed charmingly,
with sincerity as it were, a frivolous convention. This was Miss Cray, a year or so before
her marriage with Mr. Upton. The portrait had been painted in Paris, where, orphaned, lovely,
but not largely dowered, she had, under the wing of an aunt domiciled in France for many years
and bearing one of its oldest names, failed to make the brilliant match that had been hoped
for her. This touch of France in girlhood echoed an earlier impress. Imogen had told him that
her mother had been educated for some years in a French convent, deposited there by pleasure-loving
parents during European wanderings, and Imogen had intimated that her mother's frequent returns
to her native land had never quite effaced alien and regrettable points of view. Before this
portrait, Jack was accustomed, not to impatience, but to a gaze of rather ironic comprehension.
It had always explained to him so much. But to-night he found himself looking at it with an
intentness in which was a touched curiosity; in which, also, and once more he was vexed with
himself for feeling it, was an anxiety, almost a fear. Of course it hadn't been like, even
then, he was surer than ever of that to-night, with his memory of the pale face smiling down
at him and at Imogen from the deck of the great steamer. The painter had seen the mask only;
even then there had been more to see. And sure, as he had never been before, of all that there
must have been besides to see, he wondered with a new wonder how she had come to marry Mr. Upton.

He glanced back at him. Handsome? Yes. Distinguished? Yes; there was no trace of the shoddy
in his spiritual histrionics. He had been fired by love, no doubt, far beyond his own chill
complacency. Such a butterfly girl, falling with, perhaps, bruised wings from the high, hard
glare of worldly ambitions, more of others for her than her own for herself--of that he felt,
also quite newly sure to-night--such a girl had thought Mr. Upton, no doubt, a very noble creature
and herself happy and fortunate. And she had been very young.

He was still looking up at Miss Cray when Imogen came in. He felt sure, from his first glance
at her, that nothing had happened, during the interval of his abstention, to deepen her distress.
In her falling and folding black she was serene and the look of untroubled force he knew so
well was in her eyes. She had taken the measure of the grown-up butterfly and found it easy
of management. He felt with relief that the mother could have threatened none of the things
they held dear. And, indeed, in his imagination, her spirit seemed to flutter over them in
the solid, solemn room, reassuring through its very lightness and purposelessness.

"I am so glad to see you," Imogen said, after she had shaken his hand and they had seated themselves
on the sofa that stretched along the wall under the Correggio. "I have been sorry about the
other day."

"Oh!" he answered vaguely, not quite sure for what the regret was.

"I ought to have mastered myself; been more able to play the trivial part, as you did; that
was such real kindness in you, Jack, dear. I couldn't have pretended gaiety, but I didn't intend
to cast a gloom. It only became that, I suppose, when I was--so hurt."

He understood now. "By there not being gloom enough?"

"If you like to put it so. To see her smile like that!"

Jack was sorry for her, yet, at the same time, sorry for the butterfly.

"Yes, I know how you must have felt. But, it was natural, you know. One smiles involuntarily
at a meeting, however sad its background. I believe that you would have smiled if she hadn't."

Imogen's clear eyes were upon him while he thus shared with her his sense of mitigations and
she answered without a pause: "Yes, I could have smiled at her. That would have been different."

"You mean--that you had a right to smile?"

"I can't see how she could," said Imogen in a low voice, not answering his question; thinking,
probably, that it answered itself. And she went on: "I was ready, you know, to help her to
bear it all, with my whole strength; but, and it is that that still hurts me so, she doesn't
seem to know that she needs help. She doesn't seem to be bearing anything."

Jack was silent, feeling here that they skirted too closely ground upon which, with Imogen,
he never ventured. He had brought from his study of the portraits a keener sense of how much
Mrs. Upton had to bear no longer.

"But," Imogen continued, oddly echoing his own sense of deeper insights, "I already understand
her so much better than I've ever done. I've never come so near. Never seen so clearly how
little there is to see. She's still essentially that, you know," and she pointed to the French
portrait that, with softly, prettily mournful eyes, gazed out at them.

"The butterfly thing," Jack suggested rather than acquiesced.

"The butterfly thing," she accepted.

But Jack went on: "Not only that, though. There is, I'm very sure, more to see. She is so--so
sensible."

"Sensible?" again Imogen accepted. "Well, isn't that portrait sensible? Doesn't that lovely,
luxurious girl see and want all the happy, the easy things of life? It is sensible, of course,
clearly to know what they are, and firmly to make for them. That's just what I recognize now
in her, that all she wants is to make things easy, to glisser."

"Yes, I can believe that," he murmured, a little dazed by her clear decisiveness; he often
felt Imogen to be so much more clear-sighted, so much more clever than himself when it came
to judgments and insights, that he could only at the moment acquiesce, through helplessness.
"I suppose that is the essential--the desire of ease."

"And it hurts you that I should be able to see it, to say it, of my mother." Her eyes, with
no hardness, no reproach, probed him, too. She almost made him feel unworthy of the trust she
showed him.

"No," he said, smiling at her, "because I know that it's only to a friend who so understands
you, who so cares for all that comes into your life."

"Only to such a friend, indeed," she returned gently.

"Have they been hard, these days?" he asked her, atoning to himself for the momentary shrinking
that she had detected.

"Yes, they have," she answered, "and the more so from my seeing all her efforts to keep them
soft; as if it was ease I wanted! But I have faced it all."

"What else has there been to face?"

She said nothing for some moments, looking at him with a thoughtful openness that, he felt,
was almost marital in its sharing of silence.

"She's against everything, everything," she said at last.

"You mean in the way we feared?--that she'll try to change things?"

"She'll not seem to try. She'll seem to accept. But she's against my country; against my life;
against me."

"Well, if she accepts, or seems to, that will make it easy for you. There will be nothing to
fight, to oppose."

"Don't use her word, Jack. She will make it easy on the surface; but it's that that will be
so hard for me to bear; the surface ease over the hidden discord."

"You may resolve the discord. Give her time to grow her roots. How can you expect anything
but effort now, in this soil that she can't but associate with mistakes and sorrows?"

"The mistakes and sorrows were in her, not in the soil," said Imogen; "but don't think that
though I find it hard, I don't face it; don't think that through it all I haven't my faith.
That is just what I am going to do: give her time, and help her to grow with all the strength
and love there is in me."

Something naughty, something rebellious and dissatisfied in him was vaguely stirring and muttering;
he feared that she might see into him again and give it a name, although he could only have
given it the old name of a humorous impatience with her assured rightness. Really, she was
so over-right that she almost irked and irritated him, dear and beloved as she was. One could
only call it over-rightness, for wasn't what she said the simple truth, just as he had always
seen it, just as she had always known that, with her, he saw it? She had this queer, light
burden suddenly on her hands, so much more of a burden for being so light, and if her own weight
and wisdom became a little too emphatic in dealing with it, how could he reproach her? He didn't
reproach her, of course; but he was afraid lest she should see that he found her, well, a little
funny.

"What does she do with herself?" he asked, turning hastily from his consciousness of amusement.

Imogen's pearly face, bent on him with such confidence, made him, once more, ashamed of himself.

"She has seen a good many of her friends. We have had quite a stream of fashionable, furbelowed
dames trooping up the steps; very few of them people that papa and I cared to keep in touch
with; you know his dislike for the merely pleasure-seeking side of life. And she has seen the
dear Delancy Pottses, too, and was very nice to them, one of the cases of seeming to accept;
I saw well enough that they were no more to her than quaint insects she must do her duty by.
And she has been very busy with business, closeted every day with Mr. Haliwell. And she takes
a walk with me when I can spare the time, and for the rest of the day she sits in her room
dressed in a wonderful tea-gown and reads French memoirs, just as she used always to do."

Jack was smiling, amused, now, in no way that needed hiding, by her smooth flow of description.
"You must take her down to the girls' club some day," he suggested, "and to see your cripples
and all the rest of it. Get her interested, you know; give her something else to think of besides
French memoirs."

"Indeed, I'm going to try to. Though among my girls I'm not sure that she would be a very wise
experiment. Such an ondulee, parfumee, polished person with such fashionable mourning would
be, perhaps, a little resented."

"You dress very charmingly, yourself, my dear Imogen."

"Oh, but quite differently. Mamma's is fashion at its very flower of subtle discretion. My
clothes, why, they are of any time you will." She swept aside her wing-like sleeves to show
the Madonna-like lines of her dress. "A factory girl could wear just the same shape if she
wanted to."

"And she doesn't want to, foolish girl? She wants to wear your mother's kind instead?"

"She would dimly recognize it as the unattainable perfection of what she wants. It would pierce."

"Make for envy, you think?"

"Well, I can't see that she would do them any good," said Imogen, now altogether in her lighter,
happier mood, "but since they may do her good I must, I think, take her there some day."

"And am I to do her some good? Am I to see her to-night?" Jack asked, feeling that though her
humor a little jarred on him he could do nothing better than echo it. Imogen, now, had one
of her frankest, prettiest looks.

"Do you know, she is almost too discreet, poor dear," she said. "She wants me to see that she
perfectly understands and sympathizes with the American freedom as to friendships between men
and women, so that she vacates the drawing-room for my people just as a farmer's wife would
do for her daughter's young men. She hasn't asked me even a question about you, Jack!"

Her gaiety so lifted and warmed him that he was prompted to say that Mrs. Upton would have
to, very soon, if the answer to a certain question that he wanted to ask Imogen were what he
hoped for. But the jocund atmosphere of their talk seemed unfit for such a grave allusion and
he repressed the sally.

VI

When Jack went away, after tea, Imogen remained sitting on the sofa, looking up from time to
time at the two portraits, while thoughts, quiet and mournful, but not distressing, passed
through her mind. An interview with Jack usually left her lapped about with a warm sense of
security; she couldn't feel desolate, even with the greatness of her loss so upon her, when
such devotion surrounded her. One deep need of her was gone, but another was there. Life, as
she felt it, would have little meaning for her if it had not brought to her deep needs that
she, and she alone, could satisfy. With Jack's devotion and Jack's need to sustain her, it
wasn't difficult to bear with a butterfly. One had only to stand serenely in one's place and
watch it hover. It was, after all, as if she had strung herself to an attitude of strength
only to find that no weight was to come crushing down upon her. The pain was that of feeling
her mother so light.

"Poor papa," Imogen murmured more than once, as she gazed up into the steady eyes; "what a
fate it was for you--to be hurt all your life by a butterfly." But he had been far, far too
big to let it spoil anything. He turned all pain to spiritual uses. What sorrow there was had
always been, most of all, for her.

And then--and here was the balm that had perfumed all her grief with its sacred aroma--she,
Imogen, had been there to fill the emptiness for him. She had always been there, it seemed
to her, as, in her quiet, sad retrospect, she looked back, now, to the very beginnings of consciousness.
From the first she had felt that her place was by his side; that, together they stood for something
and against somebody. In this very room, so unchanged--she could even remember the same dull
thump of the bronze clock, the blazing fire, the crimson curtains drawn on a snowy street,--had
happened the earliest of the episodes that her memory recalled as having so placed her, so
defined her attitude, even for her almost babyish apprehension. She had brought down her dolls
from her nursery, after tea, and ranged them on the sofa, while her father walked up and down
the room, his hands in his pockets, his head thrown back, reciting something to himself, some
poem, or stately fragment of antique oratory. He paused now and then as he passed her and laid
his hand upon her head and smiled down at her. Then the lovely lady of the portrait,--just
like the portrait in Imogen's recollection,--had come, all in white, with wonderful white shoulders,
holding a fan and long white gloves in her hand, and, looking round from her dolls, small Imogen
had known in a moment that displeasure was in the air. "You are not dressed!" Those had been
her mother's first words as she paused on the threshold; and then, echoing her father's words
with amazement and anger, "You are not coming!"

The dialogue that followed, vivid on her mother's side as sparks struck from steel, mild as
milk on her father's, had been lost upon her; but through it all she had felt that he must
be right, in his gentleness, and that she, in her vividness, must be wrong. She felt that for
herself, even before, turning as if from an unseemly contest, her father said, looking down
at her with a smile that had a twinge of tension, "You would rather go and see sick and sorry
people who wanted you, than the selfish, the foolish, the overfed,--wouldn't you, beautiful
little one?"

She had answered quickly, "Yes, papa," and had kept her eyes on him, not looking at her mother,
knowing in her childish soul that in so answering, so looking, she shared some triumph with him.

"I'll say you're suddenly ill, then?" had come her mother's voice, but with a deadened note,
as though she knew herself defeated.

"Lie? No. I must ask you, Valerie, never to lie for me. Say the truth, that I must go to a
friend who needs me; the truth won't hurt them."

"But it's unbelievable, your breaking a dinner engagement, at the last hour, for such a reason,"
the wife had said.

"Unbelievable, I've no doubt, to the foolish, the selfish, the over-fed. Social conventions
and social ideals will always go down for me, Valerie, before realities, such realities as
brotherhood and the need of a lonely human soul."

While he spoke he had lifted, gently, Imogen's long, fair curls, and smoothed her head, his
eyes still holding her eyes, and when her mother turned sharply and swept out of the room,
the sense of united triumph had made him bend down to her and made her stretch her arms tip
to him, so that, in their long embrace, he seemed to consecrate her to those "realities" that
the pretty, foolish mother flouted. That had been her initiation and her consecration.

After that, it could not have been many years after, though she had brought to it a far more
understanding observation, the next scene that came up for her was a wrangle at lunch one day,
over the Delancy Pottses--if wrangle it could be called when one was so light and the other
so softly stern. Imogen by this time had been old enough to know for what the Pottses counted.
They were discoveries of her father's, Mr. Potts a valuable henchman in that fight for realities
to which her father's life was dedicated. Mr. Potts wrote articles in ethical reviews about
her father's books--they never seemed to be noticed anywhere else--and about his many projects
for reform and philanthropy. Both he and Mrs. Potts adored her father. He lent them, indeed,
all their significance; they were there, as it were, only for the purpose of crystallizing
around his magnetic center. And of these good people her mother had said, in her crisp, merry
voice, "I hate 'em,"--disposing of the whole question of value, flipping the Pottses away into
space, as it were, and separating herself from any interest in them. Even then little Imogen
had comprehendingly shared her father's still indignation for such levity. Hate the excellent
Pottses, who wrote so beautifully of her father's books, so worshiped all that he was and did,
so tenderly cherished her small self? Imogen felt the old reprobation as sharply as ever, though
the Pottses had become, to her mature insight, rather burdensome, the poor, good, dull, pretentious
dears, and would be more so, now that their only brilliant function, that of punctually, coruscatingly,
and in the public press, adoring her father, had been taken from them. One need have no illusion
as to the quality of their note; it lacked distinction, serving only, in its unmodulated vehemence,
the drum-like purpose of calling attention to great matters, of reverberating, so one hoped,
through lethargic consciousness.

But Imogen loved the Pottses, so she told herself. To be sure of loving the Pottses was a sort
of pulse by which one tested one's moral health. She still went religiously at least twice
in every winter to their receptions--funny, funny affairs, she had to own it--with a kindly
smile and a pleasant sense of benign onlooking at oddity. One met there young girls dressed
in the strangest ways and affecting the manners of budding Margaret Fullers--young writers
or musicians or social workers, and funny frowsy, solemn young men who talked, usually with
defective accents, about socialism and the larger life over ample platefuls of ice-cream. Sweetness
and light, as Mrs. Potts told Imogen, was the note she tried for in her reunions, and high
endeavor and brotherly love.

Mrs. Potts was a small, stout woman, who held herself very straight indeed; her hands, on festive
occasions, folded on a lace handkerchief before her. She had smooth, black hair, parted and
coiled behind, and a fat face, pale fawn-color in tint, encompassing with waste of cheek and
chin such a small group of features--the small, straight nose, the small, sharp eyes, the small,
smiling mouth--all placed too high, and spanned, held together, as it were, by a pince-nez
firmly planted, like a bow-shaped ornament pinning a cluster of minute trinkets on a large cushion.

Mr. Delancy Potts was tall, limp, blond, and, from years of only dubious recognition, rather
querulous. He had a solemn eye under a fringe of whitened eyebrow, a long nose, that his wife
often fondly alluded to as "aristocratic" (they were keen on "blood," the Delancy Pottses),
and a very retreating chin that one saw sometimes in disastrous silhouette against the light.
Draped in the flowing fullness of hair and beard, his face showed a pseudo-dignity.

Imogen saw the Pottses with a very candid eye, and her mind drifted from that distant disposal
of them to the contrast of the recent meeting, recalling their gestures and postures as they
sat, with an uneasy assumption of ease, before her mother, of whom, for so many years, they
had disapproved more, almost, than they disapproved of municipal corruption and "the smart
set." As onlooker she had been forced to own that her mother's manner toward them had been
quite perfect. She had accepted them as her husband's mourners; had accepted them as Imogen's
friends; had, indeed, so thoroughly accepted them, in whatever capacity they were offered to
her, that Imogen felt that a slight enlightenment would be necessary, and that her mother must
be made to feel that her own, even her father's acceptance of the Pottses, had had always its
reservations.

And some acceptances, some atonements, came too late. The Pottses had not been the only members
of the little circle gathered about her father who had called forth her mother's wounding levity.
She had taken refuge on many other occasions in the half-playful, half-decisive, "I hate 'em,"
as if to throw up the final barrier of her own perversity before pursuit. Not that she hadn't
been decent enough in her actual treatment, it was rather that she would never take the Pottses,
or any of the others--oddities she evidently considered them-seriously; it was, most of all,
that she would never let them come near enough to try to take her seriously. She held herself
aloof, not disdainful, but indifferently gay, from her father's instruments, her father's friends,
her father's aims.

Later on, as Imogen grew into girlhood, her mother lost most of the gaiety and all of the levity.
Imogen guessed that storms, more violent than any she was allowed to witness, intervened between
young rebellion and the cautious peace, the hostility that no longer laughed and no longer
lost its temper, but that, quiet, kind, observant, went its own way, leaving her father to
go his. The last memory that came up for her was of what had followed such a storm. It seemed
to mark an epoch, to close the chapter of struggle and initiate that of acceptance. What the
contest had been she never knew, but she remembered in every detail its sequel, remembered
lying in bed in her placid, fire-lit room and hearing in her mother's room next hers the sound
of violent sobbing.

Imogen had felt, while she listened, a vague, alarmed pity, a pity mingled with condemnation.
Her father never lost his self-control and had taught her that to do so was selfish; so that,
as she listened to the undisciplined grief, and thought that it might be well for her to go
in to her mother and console her, she thought, too, of the line that, tenderly, she would say
to her--for Imogen, now, was fourteen years old, with an excellent taste in poetry:

    "The gods approve
  The depth, but not the tumult, of the soul."

It was a line her father often quoted to her and she always thought of him when she thought of it.

But, just as she was rising to go on this errand of mercy, her father himself had come in.
He sat down in silence by her bed and put out his hand to hers and then she seemed to understand
all from the very contrast that his silence made. The sobs they listened to were those of a
passionate, a punished child, of a child, too, who could use unchildlike weapons, could cut,
could pierce; she must not leave her father to go to it. After a little while the sobs were
still and, as her father, without speaking, sat on, stroking her hair and hand, the door softly
opened and her mother came in. Imogen could see her, in her long white dressing-gown, with
her wide braids falling on either side, all the traces of weeping carefully effaced. She often
came in so to kiss Imogen good-night, gently, and with a slight touch of shyness, as though
she knew herself shut away from the inner chamber of the child's heart, and the moment was
their tenderest, for Imogen, understanding, though powerless to respond, never felt so sorry
or so fond as then. But to-night her mother, seeing them there together hand in hand, seeing
that they must have listened to her own intemperate grief,--their eyes gravely, unitedly judging
her told her that,--seeing that her husband, as at the very beginning, had found at once his
ally, drew back quickly and went away without a word. Whatever the cause of contest, Imogen
knew that in this silent confrontation of each other in her presence was the final severance.
After that her mother had acquiesced.

She acquiesced, but she yielded nothing, confessed nothing. One couldn't tell whether she,
too, judged, but one suspected it, and the dim sense of an alien standard placed over against
them more and more closely drew Imogen and her father together for mutual sustainment. If,
however, her mother judged, she never expressed judgment; and if she felt the need of sustainment,
she never claimed it. It would, indeed, have been rather fruitless to claim it from the fourth
member of the family group. Eddy seemed so little to belong to the group. As far as he went,
to be sure, he went always with her and against his father, but then Eddy never went far enough
to form any sort of a bulwark. A cheerful, smiling, hard young pagan, Eddy, frankly bored by
his father, coolly fond of his mother, avoiding the one, but capable of little effective demonstration
toward the other. Eddy liked achievement, exactitude, a serene, smiling outlook, and was happily
absorbed in his own interests.

So it had all gone on,--Imogen traced it, sitting there in her quiet corner, holding balances
in fair, firm hands,--her mother drifting into a place of mere conventionality in the family
life; and Imogen, even now, could not see quite clearly whether it had been she who had judged
and abandoned her husband, or he who had judged and put her aside. In either case she could
sum it up, her eyes lifted once more to the portrait's steady eyes, with, "Poor, wonderful papa."

He was gone, the dear, the wonderful one, and she was left single-handed to carry on his work.
What this work was loomed largely, though vaguely, for her. The three slender volumes, literary
and ethical, were the only permanent testament that her father had given to the world; and
dealing, as in the main they did, with ultimate problems, their keynote an illumined democracy
that saw in most of the results as yet achieved by his country a base travesty of the doctrine,
the largeness of their grasp was perhaps a trifle loose. Imogen did not see it. Her appreciation
was more of aims than of achievements; but she felt that her father's writings were the body,
only, of his message; its spirit lived--lived in herself and in all those with whom he had
come in fruitful--contact. It was to hand on the meaning of that spirit that she felt herself
dedicated. Perfect, unflinching truth; the unfaltering bearing witness to all men of his conception
of right; the seeing of her own personality as but an instrument in the service of good--these
were the chief words of the gospel. Life in its realest sense meant only this dedication. To
serve, to love, to be the truth. Her eyes on her father's pictured eyes, Imogen smiled into
them, promising him and herself that she would not fail.

VII

It was in the library next morning that Valerie asked Imogen to join her, and the girl, who
had come into the room with her light, soft step, paused to kiss her mother's forehead before
going to the opposite seat.

"Deep in ways and means, mamma dear?" she asked her. "Why, you are quite a business woman."
"Quite," Valerie replied. "I have been going over things with Mr. Haliwell, you know." She
smiled thoughtfully at Imogen, preoccupied, as the girl could see, by what she had to say.

Imogen was slightly ruffled by the flavor of assurance that she felt in her mother, as of someone
who, after gently and vaguely fumbling about for a clue to her own meaning in new conditions,
had suddenly found something to which she held very firmly. Imogen was rejoiced for her that
she should find a field of real usefulness-were it only that of housekeeping and seeing to
weekly bills; but there was certainly a touch of the inappropriate, perhaps of the grotesque,
in any assumption on her mother's part of maturity and competence. She therefore smiled back
at her with much the same tolerantly interested smile that a parent might bestow on a child's
brick-building of a castle.

"I'm so glad that you have that to give yourself to, mama dear," she said. "You shall most
certainly be our business woman and add figures and keep an eye on investment to your heart's
content. I know absolutely nothing of the technical side of money--I've thought of it only
as an instrument, a responsibility, a power given me in trust for others."

Valerie, whose warmth of tint and softness of outline seemed dimmed and sharpened, as though
by a controlled anxiety, glanced at her daughter, gravely and a little timidly. And as, in
silence, she lightly dotted her pen over the paper under her hand, uncertain, apparently, with
what words to approach the subject, it was Imogen, again, who spoke, kindly, but with a touch
of impatience.

"We mustn't be too long over our talk, dear. I must meet Miss Bocock at twelve."

"Miss Bocock?" Valerie was vague. "Have I met her?"

"Not yet. She is a protegee of mine--English--a Newnham woman--a folk-lorist. I heard of her
from some Boston friends, read her books, and induced her to come over and lecture to us this
winter. We are arranging about the lectures now. I've got up a big class for her--when I say
'I,' I mean, of course, with the help of all my dear, good friends who are always so ready
to back me up in my undertakings. She is an immensely interesting woman; ugly, dresses tastelessly;
but one doesn't think of that when one is listening to her. She has a wonderful mind; strong,
disciplined, stimulating. I'm very happy that I've been able to give America to her and her
to America."

"She must be very interesting," said Valerie. "I shall like hearing her. We will get through
our business as soon as possible so that you may keep your appointment." And now, after this
digression, she seemed to find it easier to plunge. "You knew that your father had left very
little money, Imogen."

Imogen, her hands lightly folded in her lap, sat across the table, all mild attention.

"No, I didn't, mama. We never talked about money, he and I."

"No; still--you spent it."

"Papa considered himself only a steward for what he had. He used his money, he did not hoard
it, mama dear. Indeed, I know that his feeling against accumulations of capital, against all
private property, unless used for the benefit of all, was very strong."

"Yes," said Valerie, after a slight pause, in which she did not raise her eyes from the paper
where her pen now drew a few neat lines. "Yes. But he has left very little for Eddy, very little
for you; it was that I was thinking of."

At this Imogen's face from gentle grew very grave.

"Mama dear, I don't think that you and papa would have agreed about the upbringing of a man.
You have the European standpoint; we don't hold with that over here. We believe in equipping
the man, giving him power for independence, and we expect him to make his own way. Papa would
rather have had Eddy work on the roads for his bread than turn him into a faineant."

Valerie drew her lines into a square before saying, "I, you know, with Mr. Haliwell, am one
of your trustees. He tells me that your father gave you a great deal."

"Whatever I asked. He had perfect trust in me. Our aims were the same."

"And how did you spend it? Don't imagine that I'm finding fault."

"Oh, I know that you couldn't well do that!" said Imogen with a smile a little bitter. "I spent
very little on myself." And she continued, with somewhat the manner of humoring an exacting
child: "You see, I helped a great many people; I sent two girls to college; I sent a boy--such
a dear, fine boy--for three years' art-study in Paris; he is getting on so well. There is my
girls' club on the East side, my girls' club in Vermont; there is the Crippled Children's Home,--quite
numberless charities I'm interested in. It's been one thing after another, money has not lacked,--but
time has, to answer all the claims upon me. And then," here Imogen smiled again, "I believe
in the claims of the self, too, when they are disciplined and harmonized into a larger experience.
There has been music to keep up; friends to see and to make things nice for; flowers to send
to sick friends; concerts to send poor friends to; dinners and lunches to give so that friends
may meet--all the thousand and one little things that a large, rich life demands of one."

"Yes, yes," said Valerie, who had nodded at intervals during the list. "I quite see all that.
You are a dear, generous child and love to give pleasure; and your father refused you nothing.
It's my fault, too. My more mercenary mind should have been near to keep watch. Because, as
a, result, there's very little, dear, very, very little."

"Oh, your being here would not have changed our ideas as to the right way to spend money, mama.
Don't blame yourself for that. We should have bled you, too!"

"Oh, no, you wouldn't," Valerie said quickly. "I've too much of the instinctive, selfish mother-thing
in me to have allowed myself to be bled for cripples and clubs and artistic boys. I don't care
about them a bit compared to you and Eddy. But this is all beside the mark. The question now
is, What are we to do? Because that generous, expensive life of yours has come to an end, for
the present at all events."

Imogen at this sat silent for some moments, fixing eyes of deep, and somewhat confused, cogitation
upon her mother's face.

"Why--but--I supposed that you had minded for Eddy and me, mama," she said at last.

"I have very little money, Imogen."

Imogen hesitated, blushing a little, before saying, "Surely you were quite rich when papa married
you."

"Hardly rich; but, yes, quite well off."

"And you spent it all--on yourself?"

Valerie's color, too, had faintly risen. "Not so much on myself, Imogen, though I wish now
that I had been more economical; but I was ignorant of your father's rather reckless expenditure.
In the first years of my marriage, before the selfish mother-thing was developed in me, I handed
a good deal of my capital over to him, for his work, his various projects; in order to leave
him as free for these projects as possible, I educated you and Eddy--that, too, came out of
my capital. And the building of the house in Vermont swallowed a good deal of money."

Imogen's blush had deepened. "Of course," she said, "there is no more reckless expenditure
possible--since you use the term, mama--than keeping up two establishments for one family;
that, of course, was your own choice. But, putting that aside, you must surely, still, have
a good deal left. See how you live; see how you are taken care of, with a maid,--I've never
had a maid, papa, as you know, thought them self-indulgences,--see how you dress," she cast
a glance upon the refinements of her mother's black.

"How I dress, my child! May I ask what that dress you have on cost you?"

"I believe only in getting the best. This, for the best, was inexpensive. One hundred dollars."

"Twenty pounds," Valerie translated, as if to impress the sum more fully on her mind. "I know
that clothes over here are ruinous. Now mine cost only eight pounds and was made by a very
little woman in London."

Imogen cast another glance, now of some helpless wonder, at the dress.

"Of course you are so clever about such things; I shouldn't wish to spend my thought--and I
couldn't spend my time--on clothes. And then the standard of wages is so scandalously low in
Europe; I confess that I would rather not profit by it."

"I am a very economical woman, Imogen," said Valerie, with some briskness of utterance. "My
cottage in Surrey costs me fifty pounds a year. I keep two maids, my own maid, a cook, a gardener;
there's a pony and trap and a stable-boy. I have friends with me constantly and pay a good
many visits. Yet my income is only eight hundred pounds a year."

"Eight hundred--four thousand dollars," Imogen translated, a note of sharp alarm in her voice.
"That, of course, would not be nearly enough for all of us."

"Not living as you have, certainly, dear."

"But papa? Surely papa has left something! He must have made money at his legal practice."

"Never much. His profession was always a by-issue with him. I find that his affairs are a good
deal involved; when all the encumbrances are cleared off, we think, Mr. Haliwell and I, that
we may secure an amount that will bring our whole income to about five thousand dollars a year.
If we go on living in New York it will require the greatest care to be comfortable on that.
We must find a flat somewhere, unless you cared to live in England, where we could be very
comfortable indeed, without effort, on what we have."

Imogen was keeping a quiet face, but her mother, with a pang of helpless pity and compunction,
saw tears near the surface, and that, to control them, she fixed herself on the meaning of
the last words. "Live out of my own country! Never!"

"No, dear, I didn't think that you would want to; I didn't want it for you, either; I only
suggested it so that you might see clearly just where we stand, and in case you might prefer
it, with our limited means."

Imogen's next words broke out even more vehemently. "I can't leave this house! I can't! It
is my home." The tears ran down her face.

"My poor darling!" her mother exclaimed. She rose quickly and came round the table to her,
putting her arm around her and trying to draw her near.

But Imogen, covering her eyes with one hand, held her off. "It's wrong. It's unfair. I should
have been told before."

"Imogen, I did not know. I was not admitted to your father's confidence. I used to speak to
you sometimes, you must remember, about being careful."

"I never thought about it. I thought he made a great deal--I thought you had a great deal of
money," Imogen sobbed.

"It is my fault, in one sense, I know," her mother said, still standing beside her, her hand
on her shoulder. "If I had been here I could have prevented some of it. But--it has seemed
so inevitable." The tears rose in Valerie's eyes also; she looked away to conquer them. "Don't
blame me too much, dear. I shall try to do my best now. And then, after all, it's not of such
tragic importance, is it? We can be very happy with what we have."

Imogen wept on: "Leave my home!"

"There, there. Don't cry so. We won't leave it. We will manage somehow. We will stay on here,
for a time at least--until you marry, Imogen. You will probably marry," and Valerie attempted
a softly rallying smile, "before so very long."

But the attempt was an unfortunately timed one. "Oh, mama! don't--don't--bring your horrible
European point of view into that, too!" cried Imogen.

"What point of view? Indeed, indeed, dear, I didn't mean to hurt you, to be indiscreet--"

"The economic, materialistic, worldly point of view--that money problems can be solved by a
thing that is sacred, sacred!" Imogen passionately declared, her face still hidden.

Her mother now guessed that the self-abandonment was over and that, with recovered control,
she found it difficult to pick up her usual dignity. The insight added to her tenderness. She
touched the girl's hair softly, said, in a soothing voice, that she had meant nothing, nothing
gross or unfeeling, and, seeing that her nearness was not, at the moment, welcome, returned
to her own place at the other end of the table.

Imogen now dried her eyes. In the consternation that her mother's statements had caused her
there had, indeed, almost at once, arisen the consoling figure of Jack Pennington, and she
did not know whether she were the more humiliated by her own grief, for such a mercenary cause,
or by this stilling of it, this swift realization that the cramped life need last no longer,
for herself, than she chose. To feel so keenly the need of escape was to feel herself imprisoned
by the new conditions; for never, never for one moment, must the need of escape weigh with
her in her decision as to Jack's place in her life. She must accept the burden, not knowing
that it would ever be lifted, and with this acceptance the sense of humiliation left her, so
that she could more clearly see that she had had a right to her dismay. Her crippled life would
hurt not only herself, but all that she meant to others--her beneficence, her radiance, her
loving power; so hurt it, that, for one dark moment, had come just a dart of severity toward
her father. The memory of her mother's implied criticism had repulsed it; dear, wonderful,
transcendentalist, she must be worthy of him and not allow her thoughts, in their coward panic,
to sink to the mother's level. This was the deepest call upon her courage that had ever come
to her. Calls to courage were the very breath of the spiritual life. Imogen lifted her heart
to the realm of spirit, where strength was to be found, and, though her mother, with those
implied criticisms, had pierced her, she could now, with her recovered tranquility of soul,
be very patient with her. In a voice slightly muffled and uncertain, but very gentle, she said
that she thought it best to live on in the dear home. "We must retrench in other places, mama.
I would rather give up almost anything than this. He is here to me." Her tears rose again,
but they were no longer tears of bitterness. "It would be like leaving him."

"Yes, dear, yes; that shall be as you wish," said Valerie, who was deeply considering what
these retrenchments should be. She, too, was knowing a qualm of humiliation over self-revelations.
She had not expected that it would be really so painful, in such trivial matters, to adjust
herself to the most ordinary maternal sacrifices. It only showed her the more plainly how fatal,
how almost fatal, it was to the right impulses, to live away from family ties; so that at their
first pressure upon her, in a place that sharply pinched, she found herself rueful.

For the first retrenchment, of course, must be the sending back to England of her dear, staunch
Felkin, who had taken such care of her for so many years. Her heart was heavy with the thought.
She was very fond of Felkin, and to part with her would be, in a chill, almost an ominous way,
like parting with the last link that bound her to "over there." Besides,--Valerie was a luxurious
woman,--unpleasant visions went through her mind of mud to be brushed off and braid to be put
on the bottoms of skirts; stockings to darn-she was sure that it was loathsome to darn stockings;
buttons to keep in their places; all the thousand and one little rudiments of life, to which
one had never had to give a thought, looming, suddenly, in the foreground of one's consciousness.
And how very tiresome to do one's own hair. Well, it couldn't be helped. She accepted the accompanying
humiliation, finding no refuge in Imogen's spiritual consolations.

"Eddy leaves Harvard this spring and goes into Mr. Haliwell's office. He will live with us
here, then. And we can be very economical about food and clothes; I can help little dressmakers
with yours, you know," she said, smiling at her child.

"Everything, mama, everything must be done, rather than leave this house."

"We mustn't let the girls' clubs suffer, either," Valerie attempted further to lighten the
other's gloomy resolution. "That's one of the first claims."

"I must balance all claims, with justice. I have many other calls upon me, dear, and it will
need earnest thought to know which to eliminate."

"Well, the ones you care about most are the ones we'll try to fit in."

"My caring is not the standard, mama. The ones that need me most are the ones I shall fit in."

Imogen rose, drawing a long, sighing breath. Under her new and heavy burden, her mother, in
these suggestions for the disposal of her life, was glib, assured. But the necessity for tenderness
and forbearance was strongly with her. She went round the table to Valerie, pressed her head
to her breast and kissed her forehead, saying, "Forgive me if I have seemed hard, darling."

"No, dear, no; I quite understood all you felt," Valerie said, returning the kiss. But, after
Imogen had left her, she sat for a long time, very still, her hand only moving, as she traced
squares and circles on her paper.

VIII

Jack thought that he had never seen Imogen looking graver than on that night when he came again.
Her face seemed calm only because she so compressed and controlled all sorts of agitating things.
Her mother was with her in the lamp-lit library and he guessed already that, in any case, Imogen,
before her mother, would rarely show gaiety and playfulness. Gaiety and playfulness would seem
to condone the fact that her mother found so little need of help in "bearing" the burden of
her regret and of her self-reproach. But, allowing for that fact, Imogen's gravity was more
than negative. It confronted him like a solemn finger laid on firmly patient lips; he felt
it dwell upon him like solemn eyes while he shook hands with Mrs. Upton, whom he had not seen
since the morning of her arrival.

Mrs. Upton, too, was grave, after a fashion; but her whole demeanor might be decidedly irritating
to a consciousness so burdened with a sense of change as Imogen 'a evidently was. Even before
that finger, those eyes, into which he had symbolized Imogen's manner, Mrs. Upton's gravity
could break into a smile quite undisturbed, apparently, by any inappropriateness. She sat near
the lamp crocheting; soft, white wool sliding through her fingers and wave after wave of cloudy
substance lengthening a tiny baby's jacket, so very small a jacket that Jack surmised it to
be a gift for an expectant mother. He further surmised that Mrs. Upton would be very nice to
expectant mothers; that they would like to have her abound.

Mrs. Upton would not curb her smile on account of Imogen's manner, nor would she recognize
it to the extent of tacitly excluding her from the conversation. She seemed, indeed, to pass
him on, in all she said, to Imogen, and Jack, once more, found his situation between them a
little difficult, for if Mrs. Upton passed him on, Imogen was in no hurry to receive him. He
had, once or twice, the sensation of being stranded, and it was always Mrs. Upton who felt
his need and who pushed him off into the ease of fresh questions.

He was going back to Boston the next day and asked Imogen if he could take any message to Mary
Osborne.

"Thank you, Jack," said Imogen, "but I write to Mary, always, twice a week. She depends on
my letters."

"When is she coming to you again?"

"I am afraid she is not to come at all, now."

"You're not going away?" the young man asked sharply, for her voice of sad acceptance implied
something quite as sorrowful.

"Oh, no!" Imogen answered, "but mama does not feel that I can have my friend here now."

Jack, stranded indeed, looked his discomfort and, glancing at Mrs. Upton, he saw it echoed,
though with, a veiled echo. She laid down her work; she looked at her daughter as though to
probe the significance of her speech, and, not finding her clue, she sat rather helplessly silent.

"Well," said Jack, with attempted lightness, "I hope that I'm not exiled, too."

"Oh, Jack, how can you!" said Imogen. "It is only that we have discovered that we are very,
very poor, and one's hospitable impulses are shackled. Mama has been so brave about it, and
I don't want to put any burdens upon her, especially burdens that would be so uncongenial to
her as dear, funny Mary. Mama could hardly care for that typical New England thing. Don't mind
Jack, mama; he is such a near friend that I can talk quite frankly before him."

For Mrs. Upton was now gathering up her innocent work, preparatory, it was evident, to departure.

"You are not displeased, dear!" Imogen protested as she rose, not angry, not injured--Jack
was trying to make it out--but full of a soft withdrawal. "Please don't go. I so want you and
Jack to see something of each other."

"I will come back presently," said Mrs. Upton. And so she left them. Jack's thin face had flushed.

"She means that she won't talk quite frankly before you, you see," said Imogen. "Don't mind,
dear Jack, she is full of these foolish little conventionalities; she cares so tremendously
about the forms of things; I simply pay no attention; that's the best way. But it's quite true,
Jack; I don't know that I can afford to have my friends come and stay with me any more. Apparently
mama and papa, in their so different ways, have been very extravagant; and I, too, Jack, have
been extravagant. I never knew that I mustn't be. The money was given to me as I asked for
it--and there were so many, so many claims,--oh, I can't say that I'm sorry that it is gone
as it went. 'But now that we are very poor, I want it to be my pleasures, rather than hers,
that are cut off; she depends so upon her pleasures, her comforts. She depends more upon her
maid, for instance, than I do even upon my friends. To go without Mary this winter will be
hard, of course, but our love is founded on deeper things than seeing and speaking; and mama
would feel it tragic, I'm quite sure, to have to do up her own hair."

"Good heaven, my dear Imogen! if you are so poor, surely she can learn to do up her own hair!"
Jack burst out, the more vehemently from the fact that Mrs. Upton's unprotesting, unexplanatory
departure had, to his own consciousness, involved him with Imogen in a companionship of crudity
and inappropriateness. She would not interfere with their frankness, but she would not be frank
with them. She didn't care a penny for what his impression of her might be. Imogen might fit
as many responsibilities upon her shoulders as she liked and, with her long training in a school
of reticences and composures, she would remain placid and indifferent. So Jack worked it out,
and he resented, for Imogen and for himself, such tact and such evasion. He wished that they
had been more crude, more inappropriate. Thank heaven for crudeness if morality as opposed
to manners made one crude. He entrenched himself in that morality now, open-eyed to its seeming
priggishness, to say, "And it's a bigger question than that of her pleasures and yours, Imogen.
It's a question of right and wrong. Mary needs you. Your mother ought not to keep a maid if
other people's needs are to be sacrificed to her luxuries."

Imogen was looking thoughtfully into the fire, her calmness now not the result of mastery;
her own serene assurance was with her.

"I've thought of all that, Jack; I've weighed it, and though I feel it, as you do, a question
of right and wrong, I don't feel that I can force it upon her. It would be like taking its
favorite doll from a child. She is trying, I do believe, to atone; she is trying to do her
duty by making, as it were, une acte de presence; one wants to be very gentle with her; one
doesn't want to make things more difficult than they must already seem. Poor, dear little mama.
But as for me, Jack, it's more than pleasures that I have to give up. I have to say no to some
of those claims that I've given my life to. It's like cutting into my heart to do it."

She turned away her head to hide the quiet tears that rose involuntarily, and by the sight
of her noble distress, by the realization, too, of such magnanimity toward the trivial little
mother, Jack's inner emotion was pushed, suddenly, past all the bolts and barriers. Turning
a little pale, he leaned forward and took her hand, stammering as he said: "Dear, dearest Imogen,
you know--you know what I want to ask--whenever you will let me speak; you know the right I
want to claim--"

It had come, the moment of avowal; but they had glided so quietly upon it that he felt himself
unprepared for his own declaration. It wad Imogen's tranquil acceptance, rather than his own
eagerness, that made the situation seem real.

"I know, dear Jack, of course I know," she said. "It has been a deep, a peaceful joy for a
long time to feel that I was first with you. Let it rest there, for the present, dear Jack."

"I've not made anything less joyful or less peaceful for you by speaking?"

"No, no, dear. It's only that I couldn't think of it, for some time yet."

"You promise me that, meanwhile, you will think of me, as your friend, just as happily as before?"

"Just as happily, dear Jack; I could never, as long as you are you and I am I, think of you
in any other way." And she went on, with her tranquil radiance of aspect, "I have always meant,
you know, to make something of my life before I chose what to do with it."

Jack, too, thought Imogen's life a flower so precious that it must be placed where it could
best bloom; but, feeling in her dispassionateness a hurt to his hope that it would best bloom
in his care, he asked: "Mightn't the making something of it come after the choice, dear?"

Very clear as to what was her own meaning, Imogen shook her lovely, unconfused head. "No, only
the real need could rightly choose, and one can only know the real need when one has made the
real self."

These were Jack's own views, but, hearing them from her lips, they chilled.

"It seems to me that your self, already, is very real," he said, smiling a little ruefully.
And Imogen now, though firm, was very wonderful, for, leaning to him, she put for a moment
her hand on his and said, smiling back with the tranquil tenderness: "Not yet, not quite yet,
Jack; but we trust each other's truth, and we can't but trust,--I do, dear Jack, with all my
heart,--that it can never part us."

He kissed her hand at that, and promised to trust and to be patient, and Imogen presently lifted
matters back into their accustomed place, saying that he must help her with her project for
building a country home for her crippled children. She had laid the papers before him and they
were deep in ways and means when a sharp, imperious scratching at the door interrupted them.

Imogen's face, as she raised it, showed a touch of weary impatience. "Mamma's dog," she said.
"He can't find her. Let him scratch. He will go away when no one answers."

"Oh, let's satisfy him that she isn't here," said Jack, who was full of a mild, though alien,
consideration for animals.

"Can you feel any fondness for such wisps of sentimentality and greediness as that?" Imogen
asked, as the tiny griffon darted into the room and ran about, sniffing with interrogative anxiety.

"Not fondness, perhaps, but amused liking."

"There, now you see he will whine and bark to be let out again. He is as arrogant and as troublesome
as a spoilt child."

"I'll hold him until she comes," said Jack. "I say, he is a nice little beast--full of gratitude;
see him lick my hand." He had picked up the dog and come back to her.

"I really disapprove of such absurd creatures," said Imogen. "Their very existence seems a
wrong to themselves and to the world."

"Well, I don't know." Theoretically Jack agreed with her as to the extravagant folly of such
morsels of frivolity; but, holding the griffon as he was, meeting its merry, yet melancholy,
eyes, evading its affectionate, caressing leaps toward his cheek, he couldn't echo her reasonable
rigor. "They take something the place of flowers in life, I suppose."

"What takes the place of flowers?" Mrs. Upton asked. She had come in while they spoke and her
tone of kind, mild inquiry slightly soothed Jack's ruffled sensibilities.

"This," said he, holding out her possession to her.

"Oh, Tison! How good of you to take care of him. He was looking for me, poor pet."

"Imogen was wondering as to the uses of such creatures and I placed them in the decorative
category," Jack went on, determined to hold his own firmly against any unjustifiable claims
of either Tison or his mistress. He accused himself of a tendency to soften under her glance
when it was so kindly and so consciously bent upon him. Her indifference cut him and made him
hostile, and both softness and hostility were, as he told himself, symptoms of a silly sensitiveness.
The proper attitude was one of firmness and humor.

"I am afraid that you don't care for dogs," Mrs. Upton said. She had gone back to her seat,
taking up her work and passing her hand over Tison's silky back as he established himself in
her lap.

"Oh yes, I do; I care for flowers, too," said Jack, folding his arms and leaning back against
the table, while Imogen sat before her papers, observant of the little encounter.

"But they are not at all in the same category. And surely," Mrs. Upton continued, smiling up
at him, "one doesn't justify one's fondness for a creature by its uses."

"I think one really must, you know," our ethical young man objected, feeling that he must grasp
his latent severity when Mrs. Upton's vague sweetness of regard was affecting him somewhat
as her dog's caressing little tongue had done. "If a fondness is one we have a right to, we
can justify it,--and it can only be justified by its utility, actual or potential, to the world
we are a part of."

Mrs. Upton continued to smile as though she did not suspect him of wishing to be taken seriously.
"One doesn't reason like that before one allows oneself to become fond."

"There are lots of things we must reason about to get rid of," Jack smiled back.

"That sounds very chilly and uncomfortable. Besides, something loving, pretty, responsive--something
that one can make very happy--is useful to one."

"But only that," Imogen now intervened, coming to her friend's assistance with decision. "It
serves only one's own pleasure;--that is its only use. And when I think, mama darling, of all
the cold, hungry, unhappy children in this great town to-night,--of all the suffering children,
such as those that Jack and I have been trying to help,--I can't but feel that your petted
little dog there robs some one."

Mrs. Upton, looking down at her dog, now asleep in a profound content, continued to stroke
him in silence.

Jack felt that Imogen's tone was perhaps a little too rigorous for the occasion. "Not that
we want you to turn Tison out into the streets," he said jocosely.

"No; you mustn't ask that of me," Valerie answered, her tone less light than before. "It seems
to me that there is a place for dear unreasonable things in the world. All that Tison is made
for is to be petted. A child is a different problem."

"And a problem that it needs all our time, all our strength, all our love and faith to deal
with," Imogen returned, with gentle sadness. "You are robbing some one, mama dear."

"Apparently we are a naughty couple, you and I, Tison," Mrs. Upton said, "but I am too old
and you too eternally young to mend."

She had begun to crochet again; but, though she resumed all her lightness, her mildness, Jack
fancied that she was a little angry.

When he was gone, Mrs. Upton said, looking up at her daughter: "Of course you must have Mary
Osborne to stay with you, Imogen,"

Imogen had gone to the fire and was gazing into it. She was full of a deep contentment. By
her attitude toward Jack this evening, her reception of his avowal, she had completely vindicated
herself. Peace of mind was impossible to Imogen unless her conscience were clear of any cloud,
and now the morning's humiliating fear was more than atoned for. She was not the woman to clutch
at safety when pain threatened; she had spoken to him exactly as she would have spoken yesterday,
before knowing that she was poor. And, under this satisfaction, was the serene gladness of
knowing him so surely hers.

Her face, as she turned it toward her mother, adjusted itself to a task of loving severity.
"I cannot think of having her, mama."

"Why not? She will add almost nothing to our expenses. I never for a moment dreamed of your
not having her. I don't know why you thought it my wish."

Imogen looked steadily at her: "Not your wish, mama? After what you told me this morning?"

"I only said that we must be economical and careful."

"To have one's friends to stay with one is a luxury, is not to be economical and careful. I
don't forget what you said of my expensive mode of life, of my clothes--a reproof that I am
very sure was well deserved; I should not have been so thoughtless. But it is not fair, mama,
really it is not fair--you must see that--to reproach me, and my father--by implication, even
if not openly--with our reckless charities, and then refuse to take the responsibility for
my awakening."

Imogen, though she spoke with emotion, spoke without haste. Her mother sat with downcast eyes,
working on, and a deep color rose to her cheeks.

"I do want things to be open and honest between us, mama," Imogen went on. "We are so very
different in temperament, in outlook, in conviction, that to be happy together we must be very
true with each other. I want you always to say just what you mean, so that I may understand
what you really want of me and may clearly see whether I can do it or not. I have such a horror
of any ambiguity in human relations, I believe so in the most perfect truth."

Valerie was still silent for some moments after this. When she did speak it was only of the
practical matter that they had begun with. "I do want you to have your friends with you, Imogen.
It will not be a luxury. I will see that we can afford it."

"I shall be very, very glad of that, dear. I wish I had understood before. You see, just now,
before Jack, I felt that you were hurt, displeased, by my inference from our talk this morning.
You made me feel by your whole manner that you found me graceless, tasteless, to blame in some
way--perhaps for speaking about it to Jack. Jack is very near me, mama."

"But not near me."

"Ah, you made me feel that, too; and that you reproached me with having, as it were, forced
an intimacy upon you."

Valerie was drawing her dark brows together, as though her clue had indeed escaped her. Imogen's
mind slipped from link to link of the trivial, yet significant, matter with an ease and certainty
of purpose that was like the movement of her own sleek needle, drawing loop after loop of wool
into a pattern; but what Imogen's pattern was she could hardly tell. She abandoned the wish
to make clear her own interpretation, looking up presently with a faint smile. "I'm sorry,
dear. I meant nothing of all that, I assure you. And as to 'Jack,' it was only that I did not
care to seem to justify myself before him--at your expense it might seem."

"Oh, mama dear!" Imogen laughed out. "You thought me so wrong, then, that you were afraid of
harming his devotion to me by letting him see how very wrong it was! Jack's devotion is very
clear-sighted. It's a devotion that, if it saw wrongs in me, would only ask to show them to
me, too, and to stand shoulder to shoulder with me in fighting them."

"He must be a remarkable young man," said Valerie, quite without irony.

"He is like most real people in this country, mama," said Imogen, on a graver note. "We have,
I think, evolved a new standard of devotion. We don't want to have dexterous mamas throwing
powder in the eyes of the men who care for us and sacrificing their very conception of right
on the altar of false maternal duty. The duty we owe to any one is our truth. There is no higher
duty than that. Had I been as ungenerous, as unkind, as you, I'm afraid, imagined me this evening,
it would still have been your duty, to him, to me, to bring the truth fearlessly to the light.
I would have been amused, hadn't I been so hurt, to see you, as you fancied, shielding me!
Please never forget, dear, in the future, that Jack and I are truth-lovers."

Looking slightly bewildered by this cascade of smooth fluency, Valerie, still with her deepened
color, here murmured that she, too, cared for the truth, but the current bore her on. "I don't
think you see it, mama, else you could hardly have hurt me so."

"Did I hurt you so?"

"Why, mama, don't you imagine that I am made of flesh and blood? It was dreadful to me, your
leaving me like that, with the situation on my hands."

Valerie, after another little silence, now repeated, "I'm sorry, dear," and, as if accepting
contrition, Imogen stooped and kissed her tenderly.

IX

Mary's visit took place about six weeks later, when Jack Pennington was again in New York,
and Mrs. Wake, returned from Europe, had been for some time established in her little flat
not very far away in Washington Square.

The retrenchments in the Upton household had taken place and Mary found her friend putting
her shoulder to the wheel with melancholy courage. The keeping up of old beneficences meant
redoubled labor and, as she said to Mary, with the smile that Mary found so wonderful: "It
seems to me now that whenever I put my hand out to help, it gets caught and pinched." Mary,
helper and admirer, said to Jack that the way in which Imogen had gathered up her threads,
allowing hardly one to snap, was too beautiful. These young people, like the minor characters
in a play, met often in the drawing-room while Imogen was busy up-stairs or gone out upon some
important errand. Just now, Miss Bocock's lectures having been set going, the organization
of a performance to be given for the crippled children's country home was engaging all her
time. Tableaux from the Greek drama had been fixed on, the Pottses were full of eagerness,
and Jack had been pressed into service as stage-manager. The distribution of roles, the grouping
of the pictures, the dressing and the scenery were in his hands.

"It's really extraordinary, the way in which, amidst her grief, she goes through all this business,
all this organization, getting people together for her committee, securing the theater," said
Mary. "Isn't it too bad that she can't be in the tableaux herself? She would have been the
loveliest of all."

Jack, rather weary, after an encounter with a band of dissatisfied performers in the library,
said: "One could have put one's heart into making an Antigone of her; that's what I wanted--the
filial Antigone, leading Oedipus through the olive groves of Colonus. It's bitter, instead
of that, to have to rig Mrs. Scott out as Cassandra; will you believe it, Mary, she insists
on being Cassandra--with that figure, that nose! And she has fixed her heart on the scene where
Cassandra stands in the car outside the house of Agamemnon. She fancies that she is a tragic,
ominous type."

"She has nice arms, you know," said the kindly Mary.

"Don't I know!" said Jack. "Well, it's through them that I shall circumvent her. Her arms shall
be fully displayed and her face turned away from the audience."

"Jack, dear, you mustn't be spiteful," Mary shook her head a little at him. "I've thought that
I felt just a touch of--of, well--flippancy in you once or twice lately. You mustn't deceive
poor Mrs. Scott. It's that that is so wonderful about Imogen. I really believe that she could
make her give up the part, if she set herself to it; she might even tell her that her nose
was too snub for it--and she would not wound her. It's extraordinary her power over people.
They feel, I think, the tenderness, the disinterestedness, that lies beneath the truth."

"I suppose there's no hope of persuading her to be Antigone?"

"Don't suggest it again, Jack. The idea hurt her so."

"I won't. I understand. When is Rose coming?"

"In a day or two. She is to spend the rest of the winter with the Langleys. What do you think
of for her?"

"Helen appearing between the soldiers, before Hecuba and Menelaus. I only wish that Imogen
had more influence over Rose. Your theory about her power doesn't hold good there."

"Ah, even there, I don't give up hope. Rose doesn't really know Imogen. And then Rose is a
child in many ways, a dear, but a spoiled, child."

"What do you think of Mrs. Upton, now that you see something of her?" Jack asked abruptly.

"She is very sweet and kind, Jack. She is working so hard for all of us. She is going to make
my robe. She is addressing envelopes now--and you know how dull that is. I am sure I used to
misjudge her. But, she is very queer, Jack."

"Queer? In what way queer?" Jack asked, placing himself on the sofa, his legs stretched out
before him, his hands in his pockets.

"I hardly know how to express it. She is so light, yet so deep; and I can't make out why or
where she is deep; it's there that the queerness comes in. I feel it in her smile, the way
she looks at you; I believe I feel it more than she does. She doesn't know she's deep."

"Not really found herself yet, you think?" Jack questioned; the phrase was one often in use
between these young people.

Mary mused. "Somehow that doesn't apply to her--I don't believe she'll ever look for herself."

"You think it's you she finds," Jack suggested; voicing a dim suspicion that had come to him
once or twice of late.

"What do you mean, exactly, Jack?"

"I'm sure I don't know," he laughed a little. "So you like her?" he questioned.

"I think I do; against my judgment, against my will, as it were. But that doesn't imply that
one approves of her."

"Why not?"

"Why, Jack, you know the way you felt about it, the day you and I and Rose talked it over."

"But we hadn't seen her then. What I want to know is just what you feel, now that you have
seen her."

Mary had another conscientious pause. "How can one approve of her while Imogen is there?" she
said at last.

"You mean that Imogen makes one remember everything?"

"Yes. And Imogen is everything she isn't."

"So that, by contrast, she loses."

"Yes, and do you know, Jack," Mary lowered her voice while she glanced up at Mrs. Upton's portrait,
"I can hardly believe that she has suffered, really suffered, about him, at all. She is so
unlike a widow."

"I suppose she felt herself a widow long ago."

"She had no right to feel it, Jack. His death should cast a deeper shadow on her."

As Jack, shamefully, could see Mr. Upton as shadow removed, he only said, after a slight pause:
"Perhaps that's another of the things she doesn't obviously show--suffering, I mean."

"I'm afraid that she's incapable of feeling any conviction of sin," said Mary, "and that wise,
old-fashioned phrase expresses just what I mean as to a lack in her. On the other hand, in
a warmhearted, pagan sort of way, she is, I'm quite sure, one of the kindest of people. Her
maid, when she went back to England the other day, cried dreadfully at leaving her, and Mrs.
Upton cried too. I happened to find them together just before Felkin went. Now I had imagined,
in my narrow way, that a spoilt beauty was always a tyrant to her maid."

"Oh, so her maid's gone! How does she do her hair, then?"

"Do her hair, Jack? What a funny question. As we all do, of course, with her wits and her hands,
I suppose. Any one with common-sense can do their hair."

Jack kept silence, reflecting on the picture that Imogen had drawn for him--the child bereft
of its toy. Had it given it up willingly, or had it been forced to relinquish it by the pressure
of circumstance? Remembering his own stringent words, he felt a qualm of compunction. Had he
armed Imogen for this ruthlessness?

The lustrous folds of Mrs. Upton's hair, at lunch, reassured him as to her fitness to do without
Felkin in that particular, but his mind still dwelt on the picture of the crying child and
he asked Imogen, when he was next alone with her, how the departure of Felkin had been effected.

"You couldn't manage to let her keep the toy, then?"

"The toy?" Imogen was blank.

He enlightened her. "Her maid, you know, who had to do her hair."

"Oh, Felkin! No," Imogen's face was a little quizzical, "it couldn't be managed. I thought
it over, what you said about sacrificing other people's needs to her luxuries, and felt that
you were right. So I put it to her, very, very gently, of course, very tactfully, so that I
believe that she thinks that it was she who initiated the idea. Perhaps she had intended from
the first to send her back; it was so obvious that a woman as poor as she is ought not to have
a maid. All the same, I felt that she was a little vexed with me, poor dear. But, apart from
the economical question, I'm glad I insisted. It's so much better for her not to be so dependent
on another woman. It's a little degrading for both of them, I think."

Jack, who theoretically disapproved of all such undemocratic gauds, was sure that Mrs. Upton
was much better off without her maid; yet something of the pathos of that image remained with
him--the child deprived of its toy; something, too, of discomfort over that echo of her father
that he now and then detected in Imogen's serene sense of rightness.

This discomfort, this uneasy sense of echoes, returned more than once in the days that followed.
Mrs. Upton seemed, as yet, to have made very little difference in the situation; she had glided
into it smoothly, unobtrusively--a silken shadow; when she was among them it was of that she
made him think; and in her shadowed quietness, as of a tranquil mist at evening or at dawn,
he more and more came to feel a peace and sweetness. But it was always in this sweetness and
this peace that the contrasting throb of restlessness stirred.

He saw her at the meals he frequently attended, meals where the conversation, for the most
part, was carried on by Imogen. Mrs. Wake, also a frequent guest, was a very silent one, and
Mary an earnest listener.

If Imogen's talk had ceased to be very interesting to Jack, that was only because he knew it
so well. He knew it so well that, while she talked, quietly, fluently, dominatingly, he was
able to remain the dispassionate observer and to wonder how it impressed her mother. Jack watched
Mrs. Upton, while Imogen talked, leaning her head on her hand and raising contemplative eyes
to her daughter. Those soft, dark eyes, eyes almost somnolent under their dusky brows and half-drooped
lashes,--how different they were from Imogen's, as different as dusk from daylight. And they
were not really sad, not really sleepy, eyes; that was the surprise of them when, after the
downcast mystery, they raised to one suddenly their penetrating intelligence. The poetry of
their aspect was constantly contradicted by the prose of their glance. But she did more than
turn her own poetry into prose, so he told himself; she turned other people's into prose, too.
Her glance became to him a running translation into sane, almost merry, commonplace, of Imogen's
soarings. He knew that she made the translation and he knew that it was a prose one, but its
meaning she kept for herself. It was when, now and then, he felt that he had hit upon a word,
a phrase, that the discomfort, the bewilderment, came; and he would then turn resolutely to
Imogen and grasp firmly his own conception of her essential meaning, a meaning that could bear
any amount of renderings.

She was so beautiful, sitting there, the girl he loved, her pearly face and throat, her coronet
of pale, bright gold, rising from the pathetic blackness, that it might well be that the mother
felt only his own joy in her loveliness and could spare no margin of consciousness for critical
comment. She was so lovely, so young, so good; so jaded, too, with all the labor, the giving
of herself, the long thoughts for others; why shouldn't she be dominant and assured? Why shouldn't
she even be didactic and slightly complacent? If there was sometimes a triteness in her pronouncements,
a lack of humor, of spontaneity, in her enthusiasms, surely no one who loved her could recognize
them with any but the tenderest of smiles. He felt quite sure that Mrs. Upton recognized them
with nothing else. He felt quite sure that the "deepest" thing in Mrs. Upton was the most intense
interest in Imogen; but he felt sure, too, that the thing above it, the thing that gazed so
quietly, so dispassionately, was complete indifference as to what Imogen might be saying. Didn't
her prose, with its unemphatic evenness, imply that some enthusiasms went quite without saying
and that some questions were quite disposed of for talk just because they were so firmly established
for action? When he had reached this point of query, Jack felt rising within him that former
sense of irritation on Imogen's behalf, and on his own. After all, youthful triteness and enthusiasm
were preferable to indifference. In the stress of this irritation he felt, at moments, a shock
of keen sympathy for the departed Mr. Upton, who had, no doubt, often felt that disconcerting
mingling of interest and indifference weigh upon his dithyrambic ardors. He often felt very
sorry for Mr. Upton as he looked at his widow. It was better to feel that than to feel sorry
for her while he listened to Imogen. It did not do to realize too keenly, through Imogen's
echo, what it must have been to listen to Mr. Upton for a lifetime. When, on rare occasions,
he had Mrs. Upton to himself, his impulse always was to "draw her out," to extract from her
what were her impressions of things in general and what her attitude toward life. She must
really, by this time, have enough accepted him as one of themselves to feel his right to hear
all sorts of impressions. He was used to talking things over, talking them, indeed, over and
over; turning them, surveying them, making the very most of all their possible significance,
with men and women to whom his relationship was half brotherly and wholly comradely, and whom,
in the small, fresh, clear world, where he had spent his life, he had known since boyhood.
It was a very ethical and intellectual little world, this of Jack's, where impressions passed
from each to each, as if by right, where some suspicion was felt for those that could not be
shared, and where to keep anything so worth while to oneself was almost to rob a whole circle.
Reticence had the distinct flavor of selfishness and uncertainty of mind, the flavor of laxity.
If one were earnest and ardent and disciplined one either knew what one thought, and shared
it, or one knew what one wanted to think, and one sought it. Jack suspected Mrs. Upton of being
neither earnest, nor ardent, nor disciplined; but he found it difficult to believe that, as
a new inmate of his world, she couldn't be, if only she would make the effort, as clear as
the rest of it, and that she wasn't as ready, if manipulated with tact and sympathy, to give
and to receive.

Wandering about the drawing-room, while, as usual in her leisure moments, she crocheted a small
jacket, Tison in her lap, he wondered, for instance, what she thought of the drawing-room.
He knew that it was very different from the drawing-room in her Surrey cottage, and very different
from the drawing-rooms with which, as he had heard from Imogen, she was familiar in the capitals
of Europe. Mrs. Upton was, to-day, crocheting a blue border as peacefully as though she had
faced pseudo-Correggios and crimson brocade and embossed wall-paper all her life, so that either
her tastes shared the indifference of her intelligence or else her power of self-control was
commendably complete.

"I hope that you are coming to Boston some day," he said to her on this occasion, the occasion
of the blue border. "I'd like so much to show you my studio there, and my work. I'm not such
an idler as you might imagine."

Mrs. Upton replied that she should never for a moment imagine him an idler and that since she
was going to Boston to stay with his great-aunt, a dear but too infrequently seen friend of
hers, she hoped soon for the pleasure of seeing his work. "I hear that you are very talented,"
she added.

Jack, who considered that he was, did not protest with a false modesty, but went on to talk
of the field of art in general, and questioning her, skeptical as to her statement that her
artistic tastes were a mere medley, he put together by degrees a conception of vague dislikes
and sharp preferences. But, in spite of his persistence in keeping her to Chardin and Japanese
prints, she would pass on from herself to Imogen, emphasizing her satisfaction in Imogen's
great interest in art. "It's such a delightful bond between people," And Mrs. Upton, with her
more than American parental discretion, smiled her approval of such bonds.

Jack reflected some moments before saying that Imogen knew, perhaps, more than she cared. He
didn't think that Imogen had, exactly, the esthetic temperament. And that there was no confidential
flavor in these remarks he demonstrated by adding that it was a point he and Imogen often discussed;
he had often told her that she should try to feel more and to think less, so that Valerie might
amusedly have recalled Imogen's explanation to her of the fundamental frankness that made lovers
in America such "remarkable young men." Jack's frankness, evidently, would be restrained by
neither diffidence nor affection. She received his diagnosis of her daughter's case without
comment, saying only, after a moment, while she turned a corner of her jacket, "And you are
of the artistic temperament, I suppose?"

"Well, yes," he owned, "in a sense; though not in that in which the word has been so often
misused. I don't see the artist as a performing acrobat nor as an anarchist in ethics, either.
I think that art is one of the big aspects of life and that through it one gets hold of a big
part of reality."

Mrs. Upton, mildly intent on her corner, looked acquiescent.

"I think," Jack went on, "that, like everything else in life worth having, it's a harmony only
attained by discipline and by sacrifice. And it's essentially a social, not a selfish attainment;
it widens our boundaries of comprehension and sympathy; it reveals brotherhood. The artist's
is a high form of service."

He suspected Mrs. Upton, while he spoke, of disagreement; he suspected her, also, of finding
him sententious; but she continued to look interested, so that, quite conscious of his didactic
purpose and amused by all the things he saw in their situation, he unfolded to her his conception
of the artist's place in the social organism.

She said, finally, "I should have thought that art was much more of an end in itself."

"Ah, there we come to the philosophy of it," said Jack. "It is, of course, a sort of mysticism.
One lays hold of something eternal in all achievement; but then, you see, one finds out that
the eternal isn't cut up into sections, as it were--art here, ethics there--intellect yonder;
one finds out that all that is eternal is bound up with the whole, so that you can't separate
beauty from goodness and truth any more than you can divide a man's moral sense from his artistic
and rational interests."

"Still, it's in sections for us, surely? What very horrid people can be great artists," Mrs.
Upton half questioned, half mused.

"Ah, I don't believe it! I don't believe it!" Jack broke out. "You'll find a flaw in his art,
if you find a moral chaos in him. It must be a harmony!"

The corner was long since turned, and on a simple stretch of blue Mrs. Upton now looked up
at him with a smile that showed him that whether she liked what he said or not, she certainly
liked him. It was here that the slight bewilderment came in, to feel that he had been upholding
some unmoral doctrine she would have smiled in just the same way; and the bewilderment was
greater on feeling how much he liked her to like him. Over the didactic intentions, a boyish,
an answering, smile irradiated his face.

"I'm not much of a thinker, but I suppose that it does all come together, somehow," she said.

"I'm sure that you make a great deal of beauty, wherever you are," Jack answered irrelevantly.
"I've heard that your cottage in England is so charming. Mrs. Wake was telling me about it."

"It is a dear little place."

He remembered, suddenly, that the room where they talked contradicted his assertion, and, glancing
about it furtively, his eye traversed the highly glazed surface of the Correggio. Mrs. Upton's
glance followed his. "I don't think I ever cared, so seriously, about beauty," she said, smiling
quietly. "I lived, you see, for a good many years in this room, just as it is." There was no
pathos in her voice. Jack brought it out for her.

"I am sure you hated it!"

"I thought it ugly, of course; but I didn't mind so much as all that. I didn't mind, really,
so much as you would."

"Not enough to try to have it right?"

He was marching his ethics into it, and, with his question, he felt now that he had brought
Mr. Upton right down from the wall and between them. Mr. Upton had not minded the room at all,
or had minded only in the sense that he made it a matter of conscience not to mind. And aspects
of it Mr. Upton had thought beautiful. And that Mrs. Upton felt all this he was sure from the
very vagueness of her answer.

"That would have meant caring more for beauty than for more important things in life."

He knew that it was in horribly bad taste, but he couldn't help having it out, now that he
had, involuntarily, gone so far. "If you like Chardin, I'm sure that that hurts you," and he
indicated the pseudo-Correggio, this time openly.

She followed his gesture with brows of mildly lifted inquiry, "You mean it's not genuine?"

"That, and a great deal more. It's imitation, and it's bad imitation; and, anyway, the original
would be out of place here--on that wall-paper."

But Mrs. Upton wouldn't be clear; wouldn't be drawn; wouldn't, simply, share. She shook her
head; she smiled, as though he must accept from her her lack of proper feeling, repeating,
"I didn't like it, but, really, I never minded much." And he had to extract what satisfaction
he could from her final, vague summing-up. "It went with the chairs--and all the rest."

X

"Mama," said Imogen, "who is Sir Basil?" She had picked up a letter from the hall table as
she and Jack passed on their way up-stairs after their walk, and she carried it into the library
with the question.

Mrs. Upton was making tea beside the fire, Mrs. Wake and Mary with her, and as Imogen held
out the letter with its English stamp and masculine handwriting a dusky rose-color mounted
to her face. Indeed, in taking the letter from her daughter's hand, her blush was so obvious
that a slight silence of recognized and shared embarrassment made itself felt.

It was Jack who felt it most. After his swiftly averted glance at Mrs. Upton his own cheeks
had flamed in ignorant sympathy. He was able, in a moment, to see that it might have been the
fire, or the tea, or the mere suddenness of an unexpected question that had caused the look
of helpless girlishness, but the memory stayed with him, a tenderness and a solicitude in it.

Imogen had apparently seen nothing. She went on, pulling off her gloves, taking off her hat,
glancing at her radiant white and rose in the glass while she questioned. "I remember him in
your letters, but remember him so little--a dull, kind old country squire, the impression,
I think. But what does a dull, kind old country squire find to write about so often?"

If Mrs. Upton couldn't control her cheeks she could perfectly control her manner, and though
Jack's sympathy guessed at some pretty decisive irritation under it, he could but feel that
its calm disposed of any absurd interpretations that the blush might have aroused.

"Yes, I have often, I think, mentioned him in my letters, Imogen, though not in those terms.
He is a neighbor of mine in Surrey and a friend."

"Is he clever?" Imogen asked, ignoring the coolness in her mother's voice.

"Not particularly."

"What does he do, mama?"

"He takes care of his property."

"Sport and feudal philanthropy, I suppose," Imogen smiled.

"Very much just that," Mrs. Upton answered, pouring out her daughter's tea.

Jack, who almost expected to see Imogen's brow darken with reprobation for the type of existence
so described, was relieved, and at the same time perturbed, to observe that the humorous kindliness
of her manner remained unclouded. No doubt she found the subject too trivial and too remote
for gravity. Jack himself had a general idea that serious friendships between man and woman
were adapted only to the young and the unmated. After marriage, according to this conception,
the sexes became, even in social intercourse, monogamous, and he couldn't feel the bond between
Mrs. Upton and a feudal country squire as a matter of much importance. But, on the other hand,
Mrs. Upton had said "friend" with decision, and though the word, for her, could not mean what
it meant to people like himself and Imogen--a grave, a beautiful bond of mutual help, mutual
endeavor, mutual rejoicing in the wonder and splendor of life--even a trivial relationship
was not a fit subject for playful patronage. It was with sharp disapprobation that he heard
Imogen go on to say, "I should like to meet a man like that--really to know. One imagines that
they are as extinct as the dodo, and suddenly, if one goes to England, one finds them swarming.
Happy, decorative, empty people; perfectly kind, perfectly contented, perfectly useless. Oh,
I don't mean your Sir Basil a bit, mama darling. I'm quite sure, since you like him, that he
is a more interesting variation of the type. Only I can't help wondering what he does find
to write about."

"I think, as I am wondering myself, I will ask you all to excuse me if I open my letter," said
Mrs. Upton, and, making no offer of satisfying Imogen's curiosity, she unfolded two stout sheets
of paper and proceeded to read them.

Imogen did not lose her look of lightness, but Jack fancied in the steadiness of the gaze that
she bent upon her mother a controlled anger.

"One may be useful, Imogen, without wearing any badge of usefulness," Mrs. Wake now observed.
Her bonnet, as usual, on one side, and her hair much disarranged, she had listened to the colloquy
in silence.

Imogen was always very sweet with Mrs. Wake. She had the air of a full, deep river benignly
willing to receive without a ripple any number of such tossed pebbles, to engulf and flow over
them. She had told Jack that Mrs. Wake's dry aggressiveness did not blind her for a moment
to Mrs. Wake's noble qualities. Mrs. Wake was a brave, a splendid person, and she had the greatest
admiration for her; but, beneath these appreciations, a complete indifference as to Mrs. Wake's
opinions and personality showed always in her demeanor toward her. She was a splendid person,
but she was of no importance to Imogen whatever.

"I don't think that one can be useful unless one is actively helping on the world's work, dear
Mrs. Wake," she now said. "Mary, we have tickets for Carnegie Hall to-morrow night; won't that
be a treat? I long for a deep draft of music."

"One does help it on," said Mrs. Wake, skipping, as it were, another pebble, "if one fills
one's place in life and does one's duty."

Imogen now gave her a more undivided attention. "Precisely. And one must grow all the time
to do that. One's place in life is a growing thing, It doesn't remain fixed and changeless--as
English conservatism usually implies. Are you a friend of Sir Basil's, too?"

"I met him while I was with your mother, and I thought it a pity we didn't produce more men
like him over here--simple, unselfconscious men, contented to be themselves and to do the duty
that is nearest them."

"Anglomaniac!" Imogen smiled, sugaring her second cup of tea.

Mrs. Wake flushed slightly. "Because I see the good qualities of another country?"

"Because you see its defects with a glamour over them."

"Is it a defect to do well by instinct what we have not yet learned to do without effort!"

"Ah,--but the danger there is--" Jack here broke in, much interested, "the danger there is
that you merge the individual in the function. When function becomes instinctive it atrophies
unless it can grow into higher forms of function. Imogen's right, you know."

"In a sense, no doubt. But all the same our defect is that we have so little interest except
as individuals."

"What more interest can any one have than that?"

"In older civilizations people may have all the accumulated interest of the deep background,
the long past, that, quite unconsciously, they embody."

"We have the interest of the future."

"I don't think so, quite; for the individual, the future doesn't seem to count. The individual
is sacrificed to the future, but the past is, in a sense, sacrificed for the individual; in
the right sort it's all there--summed up."

Imogen had listened, still with her steady smile, to these heresies and to Jack's over-lenient
dealing with them. She picked up a review, turning the pages and glancing through it while
she said, ever so lightly and gently:

"I think that you would find most aristocrats against you in our country, dear Mrs. Wake. With
all the depth of our background, the length of our past, you would find, in Jack and Mary and
me, for instance, that it's our sense of the future, of our own purposes for it, that makes
our truest reality."

Jack was rather pleased with this apt summing-up, too pleased, in his masculine ingenuousness,
to feel that for Mrs. Wake, with no ancestry at all to speak of, such a summing could not be
very gratifying. He didn't see this at all until Mrs. Upton, folding her letter, came into
the slightly awkward silence that followed Imogen's speech, with the decisiveness that had
subtly animated her manner since Imogen's entrance. She remarked that the past, in that sense
of hereditary tradition handed on by hereditary power, didn't exist at all in America; it was
just that fact that made America so different and so interesting; its aristocrats so often
had the shallowest of backgrounds. And in her gliding to a change of subject, in her addressing
of an entirely foreign question to Mrs. Wake, Jack guessed at a little flare of resentment
on her friend's behalf.

Imogen kept her calm, and while her mother talked to Mrs. Wake she talked to Mary; but that
the calm was assumed she showed him presently when they were left alone. She then showed him,
indeed, that she was frankly angry.

"One doesn't mind Mrs. Wake," she said; "it's that type among us, the type without background,
without traditions, that is so influenced by the European thing; you saw the little sop mama
threw to her--she an aristocrat!--because of a generation of great wealth; that could be her
only claim; but to have mama so dead to all we mean!"

Jack, rather embarrassed by the pressure of his enlightenments, said that he hadn't felt that;
it seemed to him that she did see what they meant, it was their future that counted, in the main.

"A rootless future, according to her!"

"Why, we have our past; it's the way we possess it that's new in the world; that's what she
meant. Any little advantage that you or I may have in our half-dozen or so generations of respectability
and responsibility, is ours only to share, to make us tell more in the general uplifting,"

"You think that you need say that to me, Jack! As for respectability, that homespun word hardly
applies; we do have lineage here, and in the European sense, even if without the European power.
But that's no matter. It's the pressing down on me of this alien standard, whether expressed
or not, that stifles me. I could feel mama's hostility in every word, every glance."

"Hardly hostility, Imogen. Perhaps a touch of vexation on Mrs. Wake's account. You didn't mean
it, of course, but it might have hurt, what you said."

"That! That was a mere opportunity. Didn't you feel and see that it was!"

Jack's aspect now took on its air of serious and reasonable demonstration.

"Well, you know, Imogen, you were a little tactless about her friendship--about this Sir Basil."

He expected wonder and denial, but, on the contrary, after going to the window and looking
out silently for some moments, Imogen, without turning, said, "It's not a friendship I care about."

"Why not?" Jack asked, taken aback.

"I don't like it," Imogen repeated.

"Why under the sun should you dislike it? What do you know about it, anyway?"

Imogen still gazed from the window. "Jack, I don't believe that mama is at all the woman to
have friends, as we understand the word. I don't believe that it is simply a friendship. Yes,
you may well look surprised,"--she had turned to him now--"I've never told you. It seemed unfair
to her. But again and again I've caught her whispers, hints, about the sentimental attachments
mama inspires. You may imagine how I've felt, living here with him, in his loneliness. I don't
say, I don't believe, that mama was ever a flirt; she is too dignified, too distinguished a
woman for that; but the fact remains that whispers of this sort do attach themselves to her
name, and a woman is always to blame, in some sense, for that."

Jack, looking as startled as she had hoped he would, gazed now with frowning intentness on
the ground and made no reply.

"As for this Sir Basil," Imogen went on, "I used to wonder if he were another of these triflers
with the sanctity of love, and of late I've wondered more. He writes to her constantly. What
can the bond between mama and a man of that type be unless it's a sentimental one? And didn't
you see her blush to-day?"

Jack now raised his eyes to her and she saw that he, at all events, was blushing. "I can't
bear to hear you talk like this, Imogen," he said.

Imogen's own cheeks flamed at the implied reproach. "Do you mean that I must lock everything,
everything I have to suffer, into my own heart? I thought that to you, Jack, I could say anything."

"Of course, of course, dear. Only don't think in this way."

"I accuse her of nothing but accepting this sort of homage."

"I know; of course,--only not even to me. They are friends. We have no right to spy upon them;
it's almost as if you had laid a trap for her and then pointed her out to me in it. Oh, I know
that you didn't mean it so."

"Spy on her! I only wanted to know!"

"But your tone was, well, rather offensively--humorous."

"Can you feel that a friendship to be taken seriously? The very kindest thing is to treat it
lightly, humorously, as I did. She ought to be laughed out of tolerating such an unbecoming
relationship. A woman of her age ought not to be able to blush like that."

Looking down again, still with his deep flush, Jack said, "Really, Imogen, I think that you
take too much upon yourself."

Imogen felt her cheeks whiten. She fixed her eyes hard on his downcast face.

"It will be the last touch to all I have to bear, Jack, if mama brings a misunderstanding between
you and me. If you can feel it fitting, appropriate, that a widow of barely four months should
encourage the infatuation of a stupid old Englishman, then I have no more to say. We have different
conceptions of right and wrong, that is all." Imogen's lips trembled slightly in pronouncing
the words.

"I should agree with you if that were the case, Imogen. I don't believe that it is."

"Very well. Wait and see if it isn't the case," said Imogen.

It was Jack who broached another subject, asking her about some concerts she had gone to recently;
but, turned from him again and looking out into the evening, her answers were so vague and
chill, that presently, casting a glance half mournful and half alarmed upon her, he bade her
good-by and left her.

Imogen stood looking out unseeingly, a sense of indignation and of fear weighing upon her.
Jack had never before left her like this. But she could not yield to the impulse to call out
to him, run after him, beg him not to go with a misunderstanding unresolved between them, for
she was right and he was wrong. She had told him to wait and see if it wasn't the case, what
she had said; and now they must wait. She believed that it was the case, and the thought filled
her with a sense of personal humiliation.

Since her summing up of the situation in the library, not three months ago, that first quiet
sense of mastery had been much shaken, and now for weeks there had been with her constantly
a strange gliding of new realizations. This one seemed the last touch to her mother's wrongness--a
wrongness that had threatened nothing, had crushed down on nothing, and that yet pervaded more
and more the whole of life--that she should bring back to her old deserted home not a touch
of penitence and the incense of absurd devotions. Friends of that sort, middle-aged, dull Englishmen,
didn't, Imogen had wisely surmised, write to one every week. It wasn't as if they had uniting
interests to bind them. Even a literary, a political, a philanthropic, correspondence Imogen
would have felt as something of an affront to her father's memory, now, at this time; such
links with the life that had always been a sore upon their family dignity should have been
laid aside while the official mourning lasted, so to speak. But Sir Basil, she felt sure, had
no mitigating interests to write about, and the large, square envelope that lay so often on
the hall-table seemed to her like a pert, placid face gazing in at the house of mourning. To-day,
yes, she had wanted to know, to see, and suspicions and resentments from dim had become keen.

And now, to complete it all, Jack did not understand. Jack thought her unfair, unkind. He had
left her with that unresolved discord between them. A sense of bereavement, foreboding, and
desolation filled her heart. On the table beside her stood a tall vase of lilies that he had
sent her, and as she stood, thinking sad and bitter thoughts, she passed her hand over them
from time to time, bending her face to them, till, suddenly, the tears rose and fell and, closing
her eyes, holding the flowers against her cheek, she began to cry.

That was what she had meant to be like, the pure, sweet aroma of these flowers, filling all
the lives about her with a spiritual fragrance. She did so want to be good and lovely, to make
goodness and loveliness grow about her. It was hard, hard, when that was what she wanted--all
that she wanted--to receive these buffets from loved hands, to see loved eyes look at her with
trouble and severity. It was nothing, indeed,--it was, indeed, only to be expected,--that her
mother should not recognize the spiritual fragrance; that Jack should be so insensible to it
pierced her. And feeling herself alone in a blind and hostile world, she sobbed and sobbed,
finding a sad relief in tears. She was able to think, while she wept, that though it was a
relief she mustn't let it become a weakness; mustn't let herself slide into the danger of allowing
grief and desolation to blur outlines for her. That others were blind mustn't blind her; that
others did not see her as good and lovely must not make her, with cowardly complaisance, forswear
her own clear consciousness of right. She was thinking this, and her sobs were becoming a little
quieter, when her mother, now in her evening tea-gown, came back into the room.

Imogen was not displeased that her grief should have this particular witness. Besides all the
deep, unspoken wrongs, her mother must be conscious of smaller wrongs against her this afternoon,
must know that she had--well--tried to put her, as it were, in her place, first about the letter
and then about Mrs. Wake's lack of aristocratic instinct. She must know this and must know
that Imogen knew it. These were trivial matters, not to be recognized between them; and how
completely indifferent they were to her her present grief would demonstrate. Such tears fell
only for great sorrows. Holding the flowers to her cheek, she wept on, turning her face away.
She knew that her mother had paused, startled, at a loss; and, gravely, without one word, she
intended, in a moment, unless her mother should think it becoming to withdraw, to leave the
room, still weeping. But she had not time to carry this resolution into effect. Suddenly, and
much to her dismay, she felt her mother's arms around her, while her mother's voice, alarmed,
tender, tearful, came to her: "Poor darling, my poor darling, what is it? Please tell me."

Physical demonstrations were never pleasing to Imogen, who, indeed, disliked being touched;
and now, though she submitted to having her head drawn down to her mother's shoulder, she could
not feel that the physical contact in any way bridged the chasm between them. She felt, presently,
from her mother's inarticulate murmurs of compunction and pity, that this was, apparently,
what she had hoped for. It was evidently with difficulty, before her child's unresponsive silence,
that she found words.

"Is it anything that I've done?" she questioned. "Have I seemed cross this afternoon? I was
a little cross, I know. Do forgive me, dear."

Enveloped as she was in her mother's arms, so near that she could feel the warmth and smoothness
of her shoulder through the fine texture of her gown, so near that a fresh fragrance, like
that from a bank of violets, seemed to breathe upon her, Imogen found it a little difficult
to control the discomfort that the contact aroused in her. "Of course I forgive you, dear mama,"
she said, in a voice that had regained its composure. "But, oh no!--it was not at all for that--I
hardly noticed it. It's nothing that you can help, dear."

"But I can't bear to have you cry and not know what's the matter."

"Your knowing wouldn't help me, would it?" said Imogen, with a faint smile, lifting her hand
to press her handkerchief to her eyes.

"No, of course not; but it would help me--for my sake, then."

"Then, if it helps you, it was papa I was thinking of. I miss him so." And with the words,
that placed before her suddenly a picture of her own desolation, a great sob again shook her.
"I'm so lonely now, so lonely." Her mother held her, not speaking, though Imogen now felt that
she, too, wept, and a greater bitterness rose in her at the thought that it was not for her
dead father that the tears fell but in pure weak sympathy and helplessness. She, herself, was
the only lonely one. She alone, remembered. She alone longed for him. In this sharpened realization
of her own sorrow she forgot that it had not been the actual cause of her grief.

"Poor darling; poor child," her mother said at last. "Imogen, I know that I've failed, in so
much. But I want so to make up for things, if I can; to be near you; to fill the loneliness
a little; to have you love me, too, with time."

"Love you, my dear mother? Why, I am full of love for you. Haven't you felt that?" Imogen drew
herself away to look her grieved wonder into her mother's eyes. "Oh, mama, how little you know me!"

Valerie, flushed, the tears on her cheeks, oddly shaken from her usual serenity, still clasped
her daughter's hands and still spoke on. "I know, I know,--but it's not in the way it ought
to be. It's not your fault, Imogen; it's mine; it must be the mother's fault if she can't make
herself needed. Only you can't know how it all began, from so far back--that sense that you
didn't need me. But I shirked; I know that I shirked. Things seemed too hard for me--I didn't
know how to bear them. Perhaps you might have come almost to hate me, if I had stayed, as things
were. I'm not making any appeal. I'm not trying to force anything. But I so want you to know
how I long to have my chance--to begin all over again. I so want you to help."

Imogen, troubled and confused by her mother's soft yet almost passionate eagerness, that seemed
to pull her down to some childish, inferior place, just as her mother's arms had drawn down
her head to an attitude incongruous with its own benignant loftiness, had yet been able, while
she spoke, to gather her thoughts into a keen, moral concentration upon her actual words. She
was accustomed, in moments of moral stress, to a quick lifting of her heart and mind for help
and insight toward the highest that she knew, and she felt herself pray now, "Help me to be
true, to her, for her." The prayer seemed to raise her from some threatened abasement, and
from her regained height she spoke with a sense of assured revelation. "We can't have things
by merely wanting, them. To gain anything we must work for it. You left us. We didn't shut
you out. You were different.--You are different."

But her mother's vehemence was still too great to be thrown back by salutary truths.

"Yes; that's just it; we were different. It was that that seemed to shut me out. You were with
him--against me. And I'm not asking for any change in you; I don't think that I expect any
change in myself,--I am not asking for any place in your heart that is his, dear child; I know
that that can't be, should not be. But people can be different, and yet near. They can be different
and yet love each other very much. That's all I want--that you should see how I care for you
and trust me."

"I do trust you, darling mama. I do see that you are warm-hearted, full of kind impulses. But
I think that your life is confused, uncertain of any goal. If you are to be near me in the
way you crave, you must change. And we can, dear, with faith and effort. When you have found
yourself, found a goal, I shall feel you near."

"Ah, but don't be so over-logical, dear child. You're my goal!" Valerie smiled and appealed
at once.

Imogen, though smiling gravely too, shook her head. "I'm afraid that I'm only your last toy,
mama darling. You have come over here to see if you can make me happy, just as if you were
refurnishing a house. But, you see, my happiness doesn't depend on you."

"You are hard on me, Imogen."

"No; no; I mean to be so gentle. It's such a dangerous view of life--that centering it on some
one else, making them an end. I feel so differently about life. I think that our love for others
is only sound and true when it helps them to power of service to some shared ideal. Your love
for me isn't like that. It's only an instinctive craving. Forgive me if I seem ruthless. I
only want to help you to see clearly, dear."

Valerie, still holding her daughter's hands, looked away from her and around the room with
a glance at once vague and a little wild.

"I don't know what to say to you," she murmured. "You make all that I mean wither." She was
sad; her ardor had dropped from her. She was not at all convicted of error; indeed, she was
trying, so it seemed, to convict her, Imogen, of one.

Imogen felt a cold resistance rising within her to meet this misinterpretation. "On the contrary,
dear," she said, "it is just the poetry, the reality of life, in all its stern glory,--because
it is and must be stern if it is to be spiritual,--it is just that, it seems to me, that you
are trying to reduce to a sort of pretty, facile lyric."

Valerie still held the girl's hands very tightly, as though grasping hard some dying hope.
And looking down upon the ground she stood silent for some moments. Presently she said, not
raising her eyes, "I have won no right, I suppose, to be seen more significantly by you. Only,
I want you to understand that I don't see myself like that."

Again Imogen felt the unpleasant sensation of being made to seem young and inexperienced. Her
mother's very quiet before exhortation; her sad relapse into grave kindliness, a kindliness,
too, not without its touch of severity, showed that she possessed, or thought that she possessed,
some inner assurance for which Imogen could find no ground. In answering her she grasped at
all her own.

"I'm very sure you don't," she said, "for I don't for one moment misjudge your sincerity. And
what I want you to believe, my dear mother, is that I long for the time when any strength and
insight I may have gained through my long fight, by his side, may be of use to you. Trust your
own best vision of yourself and it will some day realize itself. I will trust it too, indeed,
indeed, I will. We must grow if we keep a vision,"

Mrs. Upton now raised her eyes and looked swiftly but deeply at her daughter. It was a look
that left many hopes behind it. It was a look that armed other, and quite selfless, hopes,
with its grave and watchful understanding. The understanding would not have been so clear had
it not been fed by all the springs of baffled tenderness that only so could find their uses.
Giving her daughter's hands a final shake, as if over some compact, perhaps over that of growth,
she turned away. Tison, who had followed her into the room and had stood for long looking up
at the colloquy that ignored him, jumped against her dress and she stooped and picked him up,
pressing her cheek against his silken side.

"You had better dress now, Imogen," she said, in tones of astonishing commonplace. "You've
only time. I've kept you so long." And holding Tison against her cheek she went to the window.

XI

The tableaux were not to come off until the end of April, and Jack, having set things in motion,
was in Boston at the beginning of the month. It was at this time that Mrs. Upton, too, was
in Boston, with her old friend and his great-aunt, and it was at this time that he came, as
he phrased it to himself, really into touch with her.

Jack's aunt lived in a spacious, peaceful house on the hill, and the windows of Jack's large
flat, near by, looked over the Common, the Gardens, the Charles River, a cheerful, bird's-eye
view of the tranquil city, breathed upon now by the first, faint green of spring.

Jack was pleased that Mrs. Upton and his aunt--a mild, blanched old lady with silvery side-curls
under the arch of an old-fashioned bonnet-should often come to tea with him, for in the arrangement
of his rooms-that looked so unarranged--he felt sure that she must recognize a taste as fine
and fastidious as her own. He suspected Mrs. Upton of finding him merely ethical and he was
eager that she should see that his grasp on life was larger than she might imagine. His taste
was fine and fastidious; it was also disciplined and gracefully vagrant; she must see that
in the few but perfect pictures and mezzotints on his walls; the collection of old white Chinese
porcelain standing about the room on black carved stands; in his wonderful black lacquer cabinets
and in all the charming medley of the rare and the appropriate.

Certainly, whatever was Mrs. Upton's impression of him, she frequently expressed herself as
delighted with his rooms, and as they sat in the deep window-seat, which commanded the view
of the city, he felt more and more sure that whatever that impression of him might be, it rested
upon an essential liking. It was pleasant to Jack to feel sure of this, little as he might
be able to justify to himself his gratification. Somehow, with Mrs. Upton, he didn't find himself
occupied with justifying things. The ease that she had always made for him shone out, now,
uninterruptedly, and as they talked, while the dear old aunt sat near, turning the leaves of
a book, joining in with a word now and then, it was, in the main, the soft, sweet sense of
ease, like the breath of violets in the air, that surrounded him. They talked of all sorts
of things, or rather, as he said to himself, they babbled, for real talk could hardly be so
discursive, so aimless, so merely merry. She made him think of a child playing with a lapful
of flowers; that was what her talk was like. She would spread them out in formal rows, arrange
them in pretty, intricate posies, or, suddenly, gather them into generous handfuls which she
gave you with a pleased glance and laugh. It was queer to find a person who took all "talk"
so lightly and who yet, he felt quite sure, took some things hard. It was like the contrast
between her indolent face and her clear, unbiased gaze, that would not flinch or deceive itself
from or about anything that it met. Apparently most of the things that it met she didn't take
solemnly. The world, as far as he could guess, was for her mainly made up of rather trivial
things, whether hours or people; but, with his new sense of enlightenment, he more and more
came to realize that it might be so made up and yet, to her apprehension, be very bad, very
sad, and very worth while too. And after seeing her as a child playing with flowers he could
imagine her in some suddenly heroic role--as one of the softly nurtured women of the French
Revolution, for instance, a creature made up of little gaieties, little griefs; of sprigged
silk and gossamer, powder and patches; blossoming, among the horrors of a hopeless prison,
into courageous graces. She would smile, talk, play cards with them, those doomed ones, she
herself doomed; she would make life's last day livable, in every exquisite sense of the word.
And he could see her in the tumbril, her arm round a terrified girl; he could see her mounting
the steps of the guillotine, perhaps with no upward glance to heaven, but with a composure
as resolute and as serene as any saint's.

These were strange visions to cross his mind as they sat and talked, while she made posies
for him, and even when they did not hover he often found himself dwelling with a sort of touched
tenderness upon something vaguely pathetic in her. Perhaps it was only that he found it pathetic
to see her look so young when, measured beside his own contrasted youth, he felt how old she
was. It was pathetic that eyes so clear should fade, that a cheek so rounded should wither,
that the bloom and softness and freshness that her whole being expressed should be evanescent.
Jack was not given to such meditations, having a robust, transcendental indifference to earthly
gauds unless he could fit them into ethical significances. It was, indeed, no beauty such as
Imogen's that he felt in Mrs. Upton. He was not consciously aware that her loveliness was of
a subtler, finer quality than her daughter's. She did not remind him of a Madonna nor of anything
to do with a temple. But the very fact that he couldn't tabulate and pigeon-hole her with some
uplifting analogy made her appeal the most direct that he had ever experienced. The dimness
of her lashes; the Japanese-like oddity of her smile; the very way in which her hair turned
up from her neck with an eddy of escaping tendrils,--these things pervaded his consciousness.
He didn't like to think of her being hurt and unhappy, and he often wondered if she wasn't
bound to be both. He wondered about her a great deal. He received, on every day they met, hints
and illuminations, but never the clear revealment that he hoped for. The thing that grew surer
and surer for him was her essential liking, and the thing that became sweeter and sweeter,
though the old perplexity mingled with it, was the superficial amusement he caused her. One
of the things that, he began to see, amused her a little was the catholicity of taste displayed
in the books scattered about his rooms, the volumes of French and Italian that the great-aunt
would take up while they talked. They were books that she felt, he was quite sure, as funnily
incongruous with his whole significance, and that their presence there meant none of the things
that in another environment they would have stood for; neither cosmopolitanism nor an unbiased
connoisseurship interested in all the flowers--du mal among the rest--of the human intelligence.
That they meant for him his own omniscient appreciation, unshakenly sure of the ethical category
into which he could place each fruit, however ominous its tainted ripeness; each flower, however
freaked with perverse tints, left her mildly skeptical; so that he felt, with just a flicker
of his old irritation, that the very plentifulness of esthetic corruption that he could display
to her testified for her to his essential guilelessness, and, perhaps, to a blandness and narrowness
of nature that lacked even the capacity for infection. Jack had to own to himself that, though
he strove to make it rigorously esthetic, his seeing of d'Annunzio--to take at random one of
the fleurs du mal--was as a shining, a luridly splendid warning of what happened to decadent
people in unpleasant Latin countries. Such lurid splendor was as far from him as the horrors
of the Orestean Trilogy. In Mrs. Upton's eyes this distance, though a distinct advantage for
him, was the result of no choice or conflict, but of environment merely, and she probably thought
that the problems of Nietzschean ethics were not to be solved and disposed of by people whom
they could never touch. But all the same, and it was here that the atoning softness came in,
he felt that she liked him the better for being able to see a fleur du mal only as if it were
a weird pressed product under a glass case. And if he amused her it was not because of any
sense of superior wisdom; she didn't deny her consciousness of wider contrasts, but she made
no claim at all for deeper insight;--the very way in which she talked over the sinister people
with him showed that,--asking him his opinion about this or that and opening a volume here
and there to read out in her exquisite French or Italian some passage whose full beauty he
had never before so realized. Any criticism or comment that she offered was, evidently, of
the slightest weight in her own estimation; but, there again one must remember, so many things
seemed light to Mrs. Upton, so light, indeed, that he had often with her a sense of pressures
removed and an easier world altogether.

"The trouble with him--with all his cleverness and beauty--is that his picture isn't true,"
Mrs. Upton said of d'Annunzio, standing with a volume in her hand in the clear afternoon light.

"True to him," Jack amended, alert for the displayal of his own comprehension.

"I can't think it. Life is always, for everybody, so much more commonplace than he dares make
it. He is afraid of the commonplace; he won't face it; and the revenge life takes on people
who do that, people who are really afraid, people who attitudinize, is to infect them in some
subtle, mocking way with the very thing they are trying to escape."

"Well, but he isn't commonplace."

"No; worse; he's silly." She had put down the book and taken up another, an older one. "Clough,--how
far one must travel from d'Annunzio to come to him.

  'It fortifies my soul to know
  That though I perish, Truth is so.'"

She meditated the Stoic flavor.

"The last word of heroism, of faith," Jack said, thinking of the tumbril. But Valerie turned
the leaf a little petulantly. "Heroism? Why?"

"Why,"--as usual he was glad to show her that, if she really wanted to see clearly, he could
show her where clearness, of the best sort, lay,--"why, the man who can say that is free. He
has abdicated every selfish claim to the Highest."

"Highest? Why should it fortify my soul to know that truth is 'so' if 'so' happens to be some
man-devouring dragon of a world-power?"

"Clough assumed, of course, that the truth was high--as it might be, even if it devoured one."

"I've no use for a truth that would have no better use for me," smiled Valerie, and on this
he tried to draw her on, from her rejection of such heroism, to some exposal of her own conception
of truth, her own opinions about life, a venture in which he always failed. Not that she purposely
eluded. She listened, grave, interested, but, when the time came for her to make her contribution,
fingering about, metaphorically, in a purse, which, though not at all empty, contained, apparently,
a confused medley of coinage. If she could have found the right coin, she would have tendered
it gladly; but she seemed to consider a vague chink as all that could be really desired of
her, to take it for granted that he knew that he had lost nothing of any value.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes he and Mrs. Upton, Tison trotting at their heels, took walks together, passing down
the steep old streets, austere and cheerful, to the gardens and along the wide avenue with
its lines of trees and broad strip of turf, on and out to the bridge that spanned the river.
They enjoyed together the view of the pale expanse of water, placidly flowing in the windless
sunshine, and, when they turned to come back, their favorite aspect of the town. They could
see it, then, silhouetted in the vague grays and reds of its old houses, climbing from the
purplish maze of tree-tops in the Common, climbing with a soft, jostling irregularity, to where
the dim gold bubble of the State House dome rounded on the sky. It almost made one think, so
silhouetted, of a Durer etching.

"Dear place," Mrs. Upton would sigh restfully, and that she was resting in all her stay here,
resting from the demands, the adjustments, of her new life, he was acutely aware. Resting from
Imogen. Yes, why shouldn't he very simply face that fact? He, too, felt, for the first time,
that Imogen had rather tired him and that he was glad of this interlude before taking up again
the unresolved discord where they had left it. Imogen's last word about her mother had been
that very ominous "Wait and see," and Jack felt that the discord had grown, more complicated
from the fact that, quite without waiting, he saw a great deal that Imogen, apparently, did
not. He had seen so much that he was willing to wait for whatever else he was to see with very
little perturbation of mind, and that, in the meanwhile, as many Sir Basils as it pleased Mrs.
Upton to have write to her should do so.

But Mrs. Upton talked a great deal about Imogen, so much that he came to suspect her of adjusting
the conversation to some supposed craving in himself. She had never asked a question about
his relations with her daughter, accepting merely with interest any signs they might choose
to give her, but insinuating no hint of an appeal for more than they might choose to give.
She probably took for granted what was the truth of the situation, that it rested with Imogen
to make it a definite one. She did not treat him as an accepted lover, nor yet as a rejected
one; she discriminated with the nicest delicacy. What she allowed herself to see, the ground
she went upon, was his deep interest, his deep attachment. In that light he was admitted by
degrees to an intimacy that he knew he could hardly have won so soon on his own merits. She
had observed him; she had thought him over; she liked him for himself; but, far more than this,
she liked him for Imogen. He often guessed, from a word or look, at a deep core of feeling
in her where her repressed, unemphatic, yet vigilant, maternity burned steadily. From her growing
fondness for him he could gage how fond she must be of Imogen. The nearness that this made
for them was wholly delightful to Jack, were it not embittered by the familiar sense, sharper
than ever now, of self-questioning and restlessness. A year ago, six months ago--no, three
months only, just before her own coming--how exquisitely such sympathy, such understanding
would have fitted into all his needs. He could have talked to her, then, by the hour, frankly,
freely, joyously, about Imogen. And the restlessness now was to feel that it was just because
of her coming, because of the soft clear light that she had so unconsciously, so revealingly,
diffused, that things had, in some odd way, taken on a new color, so that the whole world,
so that Imogen especially, looked different, so that he couldn't any longer be frank, altogether.
It would have been part of the joy, three months ago, to talk over his loving perception of
Imogen's little foibles and childishnesses, to laugh, with a loving listener, over her little
complacencies and pomposities. He had taken them as lightly as that, then. They had really
counted for nothing. Now they had come to count for so much, and all because of that clear,
soft light, that he really couldn't laugh at them. He couldn't laugh at them, and since he
couldn't do that he must keep silence over them, and as a result the talks about Imogen with
Imogen's mother were, for his consciousness, a little random and at sea. Imogen's mother confidently
based their community on a shared vision, and that he kept back his real impression of what
he saw was made all the worse by his intuition that she, too, kept back hers, that she talked
from his supposed point of view, as it were, and didn't give him a glimmer of her own. She
loved Imogen, or, perhaps, rather, she loved her daughter; but what did she think of Imogen?
That was the question that had grown so sharp.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the day before he and Mrs. Upton went back together to New York, Jack gave a little tea
that was almost a family affair. Cambridge had been one of their expeditions, in Rose Packer's
motor-car, and there Eddy Upton had given them tea in his room overlooking the elms of the
"Yard" at Harvard. Jack's tea was in some sort a return, for Eddy and Rose both were there
and that Rose, in Eddy's eyes, didn't count as an outsider was now an accepted fact.

Eddy had taken the sudden revelation of his poverty with great coolness, and Jack admired the
grim resolution with which he had cut down expenses while relaxing in no whit his hold on the
nonchalant beauty. Poverty would, to a certain extent, bar him out from Rose's sumptuous world,
and Rose did not seem to take him very seriously as a suitor; but it was evident that Eddy
did not intend to remain poor any longer than he could possibly help it and evident, too, that
his assurance in regard to sentimental ambitions had its attractions for her. They chaffed
and sparred with each other and under the flippant duel there flashed now and then the encounters
of a real one. Rose denied the possession of a heart, but Eddy's wary steel might strike one
day to a defenceless tenderness. She liked him, among many others, very much. And she was,
as she frequently declared, in love with his mother. Jack never took Rose seriously; she remained
for him a pretty, trivial, malicious child; but to-day he was pleased by the evidences of her
devotion.

The little occasion, presided over by Valerie, bloomed for him. Everybody tossed nosegays,
everybody seemed happy; and it was Rose, sitting in a low chair beside Mrs. Upton's sofa, who
summed it up for him with the exclamation, "I do so love being with you, Mrs. Upton! What is
it you do to make people so comfortable?"

"She doesn't do anything, people who do things make one uncomfortable," remarked Eddy, lounging
in his chair and eating sandwiches. "She is, that's all."

"What is she then," Rose queried, her eyes fixed with a fond effrontery on Valerie's face.
"She's like everything nice, I know; nice things to look at, to hear, to taste, to smell, to
touch. Let us do her portrait, Eddy, you know the analogy game. What flower does she remind
you of? and what food? Acacia; raspberries and cream. What musical instrument? What animal?
Help me, Jack."

"The musical instrument is a chime of silver bells," said Jack, while Valerie looked from one
to the other with amused interest. "And the animal is, I think, a bird; a bright, soft-eyed
bird, that flits and poises on tall grasses."

"Yes; that does. And now we will do you, Jack. You are like a very nervous, very brave dog."

"And like a Christmas rose," said Valerie, "and like a flute."

"And the food he reminds me of," finished Eddy, "is baked beans."

"Good," said Rose. "Now, Imogen. What flower is she like? Jack, you will tell us."

Jack looked suddenly like the nervous dog, and Rose handsomely started the portrait with, "Calla
lily."

"That's it," Eddy agreed. "And the food she's like is cold lemon-shape, you know the stuff
I mean; and her animal,--there is no animal for Imogen; she is too loftily human."

"Her instrument is the organ," Rose finished, as if to end as handsomely as she had begun;
"the organ playing the Pilgrims' March from 'Tannhauser.'"

"Excellent," said Eddy.

These young people had done the portrait without help and after the slight pause with which
their analogies were received Jack swiftly summed up Rose as Pate-de-foie-gras, gardenia, a
piano, and a toy Pomeranian.

"Thanks," Rose bowed; "I enjoy playing impudence to your dignity."

"What's Imogen up to just now?" Eddy asked, quite unruffled by Jack's reflections on his beloved.
"When did you see her last, Jack?"

"I went down for a dress-rehearsal the day before yesterday." Jack had still the air of the
nervous dog, walking cautiously, the hair of its back standing upright.

"Oh, the Cripple-Hellenic affair. How Imogen loves running a show."

"And how well she does it," said Rose. "What a perfect queen she would have made. She would
have laid corner-stones; opened bazaars; visited hospitals, and bowed so beautifully from a
carriage--with such a sense of responsibility in the quality of her smile."

"How inane you are, Rose," said Jack. "Nothing less queen-like, in that decorative sense, than
Imogen, can be imagined. She works day and night for this thing in which you pretty young people
get all the sixpences and she all the kicks. To bear the burden is all she does, or asks to do."

"Why, my dear Jack," Rose opened widely candid eyes, "queens have to work like fun, I can tell
you. And who under the sun would think of kicking Imogen?"

"Besides," said Eddy, rising to saunter about the room, his hands in his pockets, "Imogen isn't
so superhuman as your fond imagination paints her, my dear Jack. She knows that the most decorative
role of all is just that, the weary, patient Atlas, bearing the happy world on his shoulders."

Mrs. Upton, in her corner of the sofa, had been turning the leaves of a rare old edition, glancing
up quietly at the speakers while the innocent ripples slid on from the afternoon's first sunny
shallows to these ambiguous depths. It was now in a voice that Jack had never heard from her
before that she said, still continuing to turn, her eyes downcast:

"How excessively unkind and untrue, Eddy."

If conscious of unkindness, Eddy, at all events, didn't resort to artifice as Rose,--Jack still
smarted from it,--had done. He continued to smile, taking, up a small, milky vase to examine
it, while he answered in his chill, cheerful tones: "Don't be up in arms, mama, because one
of your swans gives the other a fraternal peck. Imogen and I always peck at each other; it's
not behind her back alone that I do it. And I'm saying nothing nasty. It's only people like
Imogen who get the good works of the world done at all. If they didn't love it, just; if they
didn't feel the delight in it that an artist feels in his work, or that Rose feels in dancing
better and looking prettier than any girl in a ball-room,--that any one feels in self-realization,--why,
the cripples would die off like anything."

"It's a very different order of self-realization"; Mrs. Upton continued to turn her leaves.

Jack knew that she was deeply displeased, and mingled with his own baffled vexation was the
relief of feeling himself at one with her, altogether at one, in opposition to this implied
criticism of Imogen. Together they shared the conviction--was it the only one they shared about
Imogen?--that she simply cared about being good more than about anything else in the world;
together they recognized such a purpose and such a longing as a high and an ennobling one.

The tone of her last remark had been final. The talk passed at once away from Imogen and turned
on Jack's last acquisitions in white porcelain and on his last piece of work, just returned
from a winter exhibition. Eddy went with him into the studio to see it and Mrs. Upton and Rose
were left alone. It was then that Mrs. Upton, touching the other's shoulder so that she looked
up from the fur she was fastening, said, "You are not a nice little girl, Rose."

The "little girl" stared. Anything so suave yet so firmly intended as unpleasant had never
been addressed to her. For once in her life she was at a loss; and after the stare she flushed
scarlet, the tears rushing to her eyes.

"Oh, Mrs. Upton," she faltered, "what do you mean?"

"Hitting in the dark isn't a nice thing to do."

"Hitting in the dark?"

"Yes. You know quite well."

"Oh, but really, really,--I didn't mean--" Rose almost wailed. There was no escape from those
clear eyes. They didn't look sad or angry; they merely penetrated, spreading dismay within her.

Mrs. Upton now took the flushed face between her hands and gravely considered it. "Didn't you?"
she asked.

Rose could look back no longer. Before that gaze a sense of utter darkness descended upon her.
She felt, helplessly, like a naughty, cowering child. Her eyes dropped and the tears rolled
down her cheeks.

"Please, please forgive me. I didn't dream you'd understand. I didn't mean anybody to understand,
except, perhaps, Eddy. I don't know why, it's odious of me--but Imogen does irritate me, just
a little, just because she is so good, you know--so lovely."

But this, too, Mrs. Upton penetrated. "Whether Imogen is so good and lovely that she irritates
you is another matter. But, whatever you may think of her, don't,"--and here she paused a little
over the proper expressing of Rose's misdeed,--"don't call her a calla lily," she found. And
she finished, "Especially not before her mother, who is not so blind to your meaning as we
must hope that Jack is."

Poor Rose looked now like the naughty child after a deserved chastisement.

"Oh, I am so miserable"; this statement of smarting fact was all she found to say. "And I do
care for you so. I would rather please you than any one.--Can't you forgive me?" These are the starting the
man in possession of his conscience, and having a conscience free, healthy and dignified in
religion, can only have it on moral and political issues.

Another interesting phenomenon that shows in these counties corresponding to the basins of
lakes district in Zurich and the Four-cantons, is the contrast between peoples political traditions
not dissimilar in race, language and religion, and whose borders are in fact imperceptible,
since the topography is smooth. Indeed, they are in contact in these two lake basins of seven or
eight cantons whose institutions have differed and still differ greatly, and the spirit of its
inhabitants. In Lucerne, the trend has prevailed very aristocratic exaggerated and absolute centralization.
In the half-cantons of Nidwalden and Uri, Schwyz and Zug, pure democratic republic, decentralized
to all districts. In Glarus has governed worse than the aristocratic government: the most retrograde
theocracy or stagnant. Finally, Saint-Gall (formerly dominated by abbots and bishops) and district
in Zurich, has predominated tempered liberal spirit: that of the representative republic, which
emanate from any authority Legislative Assembly elected by the people.

How

to explain such marked differences between similar populations that have almost the same history
and play an almost common ground? Explanation will be sought in isolation secular of a trade
and contact with other advanced nations? This explanation is the less admissible because not
square with the facts, which are absolutely contradictory. For more I meditate, I can not find
anything close to both the rational and more general explanation the phenomenon as deduced from the
religious traditions. Lucerne has dominated, as in Glarus, the Catholicism of bad law, the aristocratic,
who fails to earlier traditions of the church and his spirit of equality and fraternity, has made
a dogma hierarchies and the exploitation of consciousness a system, regardless of having the
will of the faithful, which is the symbol of freedom of conscience. In the democratic cantons
Catholicism has been democratic, harmless, aligning their interests with those of society. In
district in Zurich, Protestantism has maintained the notion of personal freedom, opening the way
the republic, but has not gone directly to pure democracy, because the habits Protestant individualism
becomes a believer, not amalgamated but after much time (or in exceptional circumstances, as
in the U.S.) with the habits of action engendering collective Catholicism. Finally, in the canton
of St. Gallen, although Catholics are in the majority, the minority is very strong Reformed and
respectable in terms that both communions are represented in the government almost equal strength.
This political and social coexistence Catholicism, which tends towards democracy, but is complicated
hierarchies, and institutions vicious, and Calvinism, which does not support hierarchies and pastor
of a citizen father family and of free choice and responsibility, - the co-existence, I say, has had
to balance forces of the two communions, debug and emulation, harmonizing by contact intimate
and necessary, and lead to a system of conciliation or transaction which is the the representative
republic.

Returning to the primitive cantons say, to end my brief remarks on
the organization social, that everything I stated about Unterwalden
applies to Uri, Schwyz and Zug, with few minor differences.

As a general are voters and citizens rulers all males over 20 years. There is no legislative assemblies
in the general acceptation of the term. The village governs himself, and around the city, to meet
annually outdoors to choose their leaders of all kinds, to approve bills, vote on budgets,
pass laws and appoint representatives to the federal Diet, and in the districts, running the same
operations on a reduced scale. The people live happy with that noble scheme political and social
fellowship, freedom, equality and autonomy, and each of these citizens manifested in behavior
and acts of his life that is conscious of its rights, the habit of exercising consistently, and modest
pride and loyalty to the traditions independence and freedom that are necessary to all people
worthy of living in the land under the protection of God.

* * * * *

The valley that lies between the Muottas and Lake Zug, enclosed by
the mountains Mythen and corresponding to the group Rigi, is graceful
and peaceful, halfway up Goldau by landslides and some rocky hills.

       The first part, the closest to Schwyz, lies at the bottom of the
valley the small and very funny Lowerz lake, surrounded by inclines
and rolling hills.

The lonely little lake, on whose banks turn two ways road, and whose clear waves lie some
little boats lost in the rush to edge of small harbors that are not without grace, measures
just 5 kilometers in length, as 2 and 1 / 2 wide and 18 meters deep. It is one of many toys
for hydrography Switzerland, to love themselves rather than to serve travelers to trade and
navigation.

At the point that the vast bulk of the Rigi has its eastern flank, facing Rossberg, which stands
opposite an emaciated monster, the valley has a look of desolation to grieve, especially for
the memories awakened by huge naked pedrizcos scattered at the site
in 1806 occupied the town or village of Goldau.

Today there are no but a chapel, a hotel for travelers and forming a street a few houses built in
recent times. As we prepare the horses that we ride to raise the Rigi, we wanted to go on foot, between
rough weeds, rocks shattered and disordered overcrowding the remains of the terrible crash,
the scene of desolation that witnessed the disaster. Still found some burned bed ponds, remnants
of the waters of Lake Lowerz, coming up there and that was violently filled in part by the sudden
fall of a quadroon the Rossberg.

Upstairs has the ugly face of the mountain, whose side came off in a thousand large moles of
rocks and dust, falling over the valley and crushing and grinding the old town Goldau. The huge
red patch that was on the mountain gives you a look of death and horror to tremble, because the traveler
remembers that many Swiss people living under such constant threat
of landslides.

The desolation of Goldau and flank of the mountain makes the most rude contrast to the beautiful
panorama of the valley and the rest of the valley, from the Zug Lake to the banks of Muottas.

It
was three o'clock when we began to ascend the Rigi, in convoy with another ten or twelve hikers.
The mountain was displayed to our eyes full of beauty and majesty in Joint and surprises in
their thanks and relief, his deep gullies, its magnificent forests, the lonely prairies, their
scattered houses and its thousands of interesting features. Suddenly, when the sun was more
sharp and stronger heat, in spite of the high peaks towards ascension,
brought us air bursts threatening blight the sky, and everything changed
in appearance with how quickly a theater decoration is changed.

The storm broke out with violence, Fortunately when we got to stop a house, but after twenty
minutes dissipated with the same swiftness. So are the storms in almost all lakes and mountain
regions Switzerland.

I confess that the accident, far from disappointed, gave us keen pleasure, and because it gave
us chance to see one of those violent weather and interesting transitions Switzerland and
because it presented a spectacle of immeasurable beauty, who had never contemplated under similar
conditions and that can only be found in narrow valleys formed by high mountains and lakes in
the background. By the time the rain fell with more violence and abundance on the height where
we were, the valley was a wonderful theater lighting scene, color
shades and superb contrast.

The valley, green, wet and shiny, perfectly illuminated by the slanting rays of the sun, seemed
an immense carpet of emerald dotted spots and opal jet and waved at the bottom of the lake waves
with Lowerz recent tremors caused by the breath of the storm. The two steep hills Rossberg and
Rigi were still perfectly black, hooded by phalanxes of dark clouds that seemed attached to the crêpe
dark fir forests, the majesty of doubling the naked peaks and precipices timid. Finally, in
the middle of the sidewall of the two opposite mountains, lay the ends of a huge rainbow,
the most perfect and bright I've seen, lying on the valley and lake, from one side to another,
such as an air bridge raised to make way above the abyss of light to a legion of fairies or
invisible spirits. I have not ever seen such a small space in a spectacle of nature witchcraft
so sudden, great and varied as the look there for ten minutes.

The rocky slope, parched and choked a little before the August sun, was intoxicated with the
bathroom of the storm, and when we were barely visible progress in humidity signals the soil,
the green patch of grass beads, braids hair bright liquid Leaves falling from the conical firs,
and doubled flow of some streams that were lost jumping into waterfalls hidden in the depths
of the forest and depths. The air was filled with the richest perfumes thickets of ferns sacudian their
wet manes on the wings of the wind, and wild rumors concert rose the bosom of the deep gullies
or streams would gather the sound of bells waving cows and goats
to roam the broken patch of grass on the mountain, eating with eagerness
and delight the grass wet.

From the hostel where we had defended the storm begins a series of chapels or niches (12 or
13) placed at certain distances in more or less picturesque sites, to the edge the road. If
all the Catholic cantons abound on the roads these signs of worship religious rises in Rigi,
and especially that of Goldau make an important role. On the one hand mark the seasons of the pilgrims
going to visit Our Lady of Snow, on the other to serve as rookeries unhappy begging to disabled
passengers and do during the summer months its full-year provision.

A short distance from the summit of Rigi delay in the middle of forests
and very rough patch of grass Hospice of the famous Notre-Dame, much
revered for the miracles of the Virgin Nieves attributed to him and
inhabited by three or four friars.

At around the chapel and Hospice highlight many inns, some substantial and attractive appearance,
inhabited by a whole population of people nervous and sickly women who are going to be cured with
sera exercise and fresh air. There was less than two hundred people staying there when we pass,
and judging by their warm familiarity ought to be so pleasant residence. Forty minutes after
we got to the eminence of Staffel, a kind of introduction to the higher call Kulm. They bring
together the three main roads that lead opposite points to the top, and the traveler is suddenly
in the presence of a superb picture, leaving the Road closed basin
to a small plateau that records the entire view canton of Lucerne
and part of Unterwalden.

Half an hour later, walking on the back naked from the mountain, we went to get down to the door
of great Rigi-Kulm hotel that is the highest point of the mountain and the end of the excursion.

Nothing
is more curious than European Babel built on such a high summit, amid a swarm of lakes, valleys
and mountains in the center of the free and picturesque Switzerland. There meet in one night all
the European races and even some of the New World, they all speak languages, and they come in
contact not only faces the most diverse but all vanities extravagances, the childishness, the
candideces, notables in excursion and all genres Esplin nuisance and is easy to find in a big
reunion of travelers. More we were three hundred people gathered there, mostly in the Kulm
Hotel and was to see the contrast of faces and ways that offered the married couples in moon
honey (still novices, naive in his soft, sentimental demonstrations), the literati wanderers
and unemployed, to hunt for business to make stories and novels, women tired the world, the
race of the misunderstood, dragging their tails on taffeta or Linon carpet of grass, the men
serious, qualified by character and of itself, with be sure not challenged by their unknown
partners, the English Fancy or moody, or boring, always in the majority
in number or very large, in short, traders withdrawn, determined to
put on airs of counts traveling incognito, and revealing their manners
that beneath his gloves while resisted in the streets against the
years of plebeian work.

Perhaps nowhere are they more ridiculous and obvious vanities and nonsense of Skinny humanity
in those places where nature holds as sovereign nudity caste their thanks or the majesty of
its magnificent forms.

The panorama view ranges from the sublime imponderably Kulm is varied and surprising. Switzerland
appears around with all its contrasts, its huge and horrible ways some places, peaceful and
picturesque in others, wherever beautiful and seductive, or imposing. It was six o'clock when
we watched to the warm setting sun that world mountains and lakes, valleys and plains, forests
and grasslands, and cities and towns Verjel. Nature has its charms every hour different, because each
has its mysteries of life and love, by the way in patting the divine magician called Light. Thus,
we avidity we admire so much in recent afternoon as the first of morning. If the next day we
had seen, by a singular fortune, the three major phenomena Optical and weather that is usually
supplied to the Rigi, in the afternoon, it was clear but full of poetic melancholy, we saw the immense
panorama under the peaceful aspect.

From the high vantage point of Kulm we registered, to the naked eye or through a huge telescope almost
the whole of the east-central Switzerland and a vast region in the south, in direction more
colossal chains to the Alps. We were in sight, in whole or in part, the plains valleys and high
reliefs of thirteen or fourteen cantons of the Confederation under
to the great basin of the Rhine and its tributaries, and saw below,
and to our feet as depths opal and pale blue, and he more or less
considerable distances and with the most diverse forms, twelve major
lakes: the Four-cantons, at parties, Sempach, Baldeg and Hallwyl,
to the west, the Zug, district in Zurich, Greiffertz, Egeria and Pfoeffikon,
to the north, and those of Lowerz and Wallenstatter (Between Glarus
and St. Gallen) to N.-E. With the telescope we could see distinctly
all households, and even small objects from Lucerne, Art, Zug, district
in Zurich and many other localities, and in the circle a hundred leagues
to cover, we were perplexed to choose the most beautiful among so
many beauties.

To the north the sight is lost in the direction of the Rhine, stopping in distant chain of the Forest-Black,
which forms the mountains of the Grand Duchy of Baden and a part the kingdom of Württemberg.
South side of Nidwalden, is also the lake of Sarnen, and the look is confronted with severe mole
Pilate and the magnificent peaks of the Alps. Al west lie the smiling plains of the canton
of Lucerne and the basins of the Reuss and the Aar, whose ripples will give the appearance of
a sea of ​​pale or yellow vegetables. For Finally, the east is developed tumultuous chaos of the
Alps of Glarus, and Appenzel Graubünden, towering towards the S.-E. the most gigantic refrigerators.
That is huge in proportions and prodigiously beautiful!

* * * * *

It was four o'clock when the bagpipes are keen alpine woke us up and put Moving them all. We went
to watch the sunrise, which is one of the most sublime shows that can be seen from a high summit
of the Alps. Our fortune was such that not only had that pleasure for several minutes, but we see
the spectrum solar in all its frightening majesty, and the sudden formation of a lake storm Lucerne.
The dawn was just beginning when more than three hundred people we were at the point peak,
watching the moment when the sun was rising over the Alps.

All the immense panorama in the afternoon before we had seen was in darkness, but not in deep darkness,
but covered with crape vague dark gray ink, something lighter on the spaces of the lakes,
whose breasts were lifted mists and vapors fixed it seems, at first, and then wandering and dispersed.
The stars were still a glow pale and dying, and dead silence reigned in the bottom of all deep.
A lamp of light appeared in the east like a speck of white undecided, then spread at the foot
of the horizon in a huge pink ribbon and light, and the stars dimmed his trembling brilliance.
A few minutes they stopped and the clear and pure light appeared on the heights from heaven,
saw that began to shine the leadership of the highest and distant peaks, whilst that the great
mass of the landscape was covered with deep shadows. Then the huge amphitheater Alpine was
offering a succession of occurrences: the light falling on the alti-plains and valleys in countless
waterfalls, collapsed suddenly, from moment to moment, of a great top to lowest rung of another,
this to a lower, and so on to flood the entire grandstand clearly titanic mountain ranges.

       Then a light closer, like the glow of a fire invisible, appeared on
the first summit of the east, above the Rigi, a minute later appeared
the edge of the solar disk then a fourth, half, finally all astro
sovereign physical creation, huge, red as the gaping mouth of a furnace
full of fire, and as close to under the optical illusion, it seemed
as attached to the back of the mountain and threatening to come upon
us.

All time was flooded with light that sea of ​​blue ocean flowed, all depths were clarified, reverberated
lakes like mirrors, and a shout in unison chord and three hundred throats greeted the appearance
of universal lover! I was tempted to fall on his knees before that majesty supreme beauty
which offered me the best image, the only quite expressive of supreme foresight, wisdom and goodness
and unfailing love of God .... I seemed to feel that the delight of my blood and my soul silent
adoration of summarizing all the thrills of organic life from creation to greet the appearance
of the wondrous star ....

But how little was to take this unique show! While approaching divine appearance, it was lifted
from the bottom of Lake Lucerne, from the foot of Pilate Küssnach to the apex of a terrible
storm, and phenomena happened in the fourth of the time needed to describe quickly.


Imogen's face, bathed in the late sunlight, showed its usual calm; inwardly, she was drawn
tight and tense as an arrow to the bow-head, in a tingling readiness to shoot far and free
at any challenge.

A surface constraint was manifested in Jack's nervous features, but she guessed that his consciousness
had not reached the pitch of her own acuteness, and made him only aware of a difference as
yet unadjusted between them. Indeed, with a quiet interest that she knew was not assumed, he
presently commented to her on the odd disproportion between the streaming humanity and its
enormous frame.

"If one looks at it as a whole it's as inharmonious as a high, huge stage with its tiny figures
before the footlights. It's quite out of scale as a setting for the human form. It's awfully
ugly, and yet it's rather splendid, too."

Imogen assented.

"We are still juggling with our possibilities," said Jack, and he continued to talk on of the
American people and their possibilities--his favorite topic--so quietly, so happily, even,
that Imogen felt suddenly a relaxation of the miserable mood that had held her during all the
afternoon.

His comradely tone brought her the sensation of their old, their so recent, relation, complete,
unflawed, once more. An impulse of recovery rose in her, and, her mind busy with the sweet
imagination, she said presently, reflectively, "I think I will do your Antigone after all."

Completely without coquetry, and sincerely innocent of feminine wiles, Imogen had always known,
sub-consciously as it were, for the matter seldom assumed the least significance for her, that
Jack delighted in her personal appearance. She saw herself, suddenly, in all the appealing
youth and beauty of the Grecian heroine, stamping on his heart, by means of the outer manifestation,
that inner reality to which he had become so strangely blind. It was to this revelation of
reality that her thought clung, and an added impulse of mere tenderness had helped to bring
the words to her lips. In her essential childishness where emotion and the drama of the senses
were concerned, she could not have guessed that the impulse, with its tender mask, was the
primitive one of conquest, the cruel female instinct for holding even where one might not care
to keep. At the bottom of her heart, a realm never visited by her unspotted thoughts, was a
yearning, strangely mingled, to be adored, and to wreak vengeance for the faltering in adoration
that she had felt. Ah, to bind him!--to bind him, helpless, to her! That was the mingled cry.

Jack looked round at her, as unconscious as she of these pathetic and tigerish depths, but
though his eye lighted with the artist's delight in the vision that he had relinquished reluctantly,
she saw, in another moment, that he hesitated.

"That would be splendid, dear,--but, can you go back on what you said?"

"Why not? If I have found reason to reconsider my first decision?"

"What reason? You mustn't do it just to please me, you know; though it's sweet of you, if that
is the reason. Your mother, you see, agreed with you. I hadn't realized that she would mind.
You know what she said, just now."

Jack had flushed in placing his objection, and Imogen, keeping grave, sunlit eyes upon him,
felt a flush rise to her own cheeks.

"Do you feel her minding, minding in such a way, any barrier?" She was able to control the
pain, the anger, that his hesitation gave her, the quick humiliation, too, and she went on
with only a deepening of voice:

"Perhaps that minding of hers is part of my reason. I have no right, I see that clearly now,
to withhold what I can do for our cause from any selfish shrinking. I felt, in that moment
when she and Mrs. Langley debated on the conventional aspect of the matter, that I would be
glad, yes, glad, to give myself, since my refusal is seen in the same category as any paltry,
social scruple. It was as if a deep and sacred thing of one's heart were suddenly dragged out
and exhibited like a thickness of black at the edge of one's note-paper.

"Will you understand me, Jack, when I say that I feel that I can in no way so atone to that
sacred memory for the interpretation that was an insult; in no way keep it so safe, as by making
it this offering of myself. It is for papa that I shall do it. He would have wished it. I shall
think of him as I stand there, of him and of the children that we are helping."

She spoke with her deliberate volubility, neither hesitating nor hurrying, her meaning, for
all its grandiloquence of setting, very definite, and Jack looked a little dazed, as though
from the superabundance of meaning.

"Yes, I see,--yes, you are quite right," he said. He paused for a moment, going over her chain
of cause and effect, seeking the particular link that the new loyalty in him had resented.
And then, after the pause, finding it: "But I don't believe your mother meant it like that,"
he added.

His eyes met Imogen's as he said it, and he almost fancied that something swordlike clashed
against his glance, something that she swiftly withdrew and sheathed. It was earnest gentleness
alone that answered him.

"What do you think she did mean then, Jack? Please help me to see if I'm unfair. I only long
to be perfectly fair. How can I do for her, unless I am?"

His smoldering resentment was quenched by a sense of compunction and a rising hope.

"That's dear of you, Imogen," he said. "You are, I think, unfair at times. It's difficult to
lay one's finger on it."

"But please do lay your finger on it--as heavily as you can, dear Jack."

"Well, the simile will do for my impression. The finger you lay on her is too heavy. You exaggerate
things in her--over-emphasize things."

She was holding herself, forcing herself to look calmly at this road he pointed out to her,
the only road, perhaps, that would lead her back to her old place with him. "Admirable things,
you think, if one saw them truly?"

"I don't know about admirable; but warm, sweet--at the worst, harmless. I'm sure, to-day, that
she only meant it for you, for what she felt must be your shrinking. Of course she had her
sense of fitness, too, a fitness that we may, as you feel, overlook when we see the larger
fitness. But her intention was perfectly,"--he paused, seeking an expression for the intention
and repeated,--"Sweet, warm, harmless."

Imogen felt that she was holding herself as she had never held herself.

"Don't you think I see all that, Jack?"

"Well, I only meant that I, since coming to know her, really know her, in Boston, see it most
of all."

"And you can't see, too, how it must stab me to have papa--papa--put, through her trivial words,
into the category of black-edged paper?"

Her voice had now the note of tears.

"But she doesn't," he protested.

"Can you deny that, for her, he counts for little more than the mere question of convention?"

Jack at this was, perforce, silent. No, he couldn't altogether deny it, and though it did not
seem to him a particularly relevant truth he could but own that to Imogen it might well appear
so. He did not answer her, and there the incident seemed to end. But it left them both with
the sense of frustrated hope, and over and above that Jack had felt, sharper than ever before,
the old shoot of weariness for "papa" as the touchstone for such vexed questions.

XIII

Mrs. Upton expressed no displeasure, although she could not control surprise, when she was
informed of Imogen's change of decision, and Jack, watching her as usual, felt bound, after
the little scene of her quiet acquiescence, to return with Imogen, for a moment, to the subject
of their dispute. Imogen had asked him to help her to see and however hopeless he might feel
of any fundamental seeing on her part, he mustn't abandon hope while there was a stone unturned.

"That's what it really was," he said to her. "You do see, don't you?--to respond to whatever
she felt you wanted."

Imogen stared a little. "Of what are you talking, Jack?"

"Of your mother Antigone--the black edge. It wasn't the black edge."

She had understood in a moment and was all there, as fully equipped with forbearing opposition
as ever.

"It wasn't even the black edge, you mean? Even that homage to his memory was unreal?"

"Of course not. I mean that she wanted to do what you wanted."

"And does she think, do you think, it's that I want,--a suave adaptation to ideals she doesn't
even understand? No doubt she attributes my change to girlish vanity, the wish to shine among
the others. If that was what I wanted, that would be what she would want, too."

"Aren't you getting away from the point a little?" he asked, baffled and confused, as he often
was, by her measured decisiveness.

"It seems to me that I am on the point.--The point is that she cared so little about him--in
either way."

This was what he had foreseen that she would think.

"The point is that she cares so much for you," he ventured his conviction, fixing his eyes,
oddly deepened with this, his deepest appeal, upon her.

But Imogen, as though it were a bait thrown out and powerless to allure, slid past it.

"To gain things we must work for them. It's not by merely caring, yielding, that one wins one's
rights. Mama is a very 'sweet, warm, harmless' person; I see that as well as you do, Jack."
So she put him in his place and he could only wonder if he had any right to feel so angry.

The preparations for the new tableau were at once begun and a few days after their last uncomfortable
encounter, Jack and Imogen were again together, in happier circumstances it seemed, for Imogen,
standing in the library while her mother adjusted her folds and draperies, could but delight
a lover's eye. Mary, also on view, in her handmaiden array,--Mary's part was a small one in
the picture of the restored Alcestis,--sat gazing in admiration, and Jack walked about mother
and daughter with suggestion and comment.

"It's perfect, quite perfect," he declared, "that warm, soft white; and you have done it most
beautifully, Mrs. Upton. You are a wonderful costumiere."

"Isn't my chlamys a darling?" said Valerie happily from below, where she knelt to turn a hem.

"Mama won't let us forget that chlamys," Imogen said, casting a look of amusement upon her
mother. "She is so deliciously vain about it." Imogen was feeling a thrill of confidence and
hope. Jack's eyes, as they rested upon her, had shown the fondest admiration. She was in the
humor, so rare with her of late, of gaiety and light assurance. And she thirsted for words
of praise and delight from Jack.

"No wonder that she is vain," Jack returned. "It has just the look of that heavenly garment
that blows back from the Victory of Samothrace. The hair, too, with those fillets, you did
that, I suppose."

"Yes, I did. I do think it's an achievement. It has the carven look that one wants. Imogen's
hair lends itself wonderfully to those long, sweeping lines."

But, Jack, once having expressed his admiration for Imogen, seemed tactlessly bent on emphasizing
his admiration for the mere craftswoman of the occasion.

"Well, it's as if you had formed the image into which I'm to blow the breath of life. I'm really
uncertain, yet, as to the best attitude." Imogen was listening to this with some gravity of
gaze. "Do take that last position we decided upon, Imogen. And do you, Mary, take the place
of the faltering old Oedipus for a moment. Look down, Imogen; yes, a strong, brooding tenderness
of look."

"Ah, she gets it wonderfully," said Valerie, still at her hem.

"Not quite deep or still enough," Jack objected. "Stand back, Mary, please, while we work at
the expression. No, that's not it yet."

"But it's lovely, so. You would have found fault with Antigone herself, Jack," Mrs. Upton protested.

"Jack is quite right, mama, pray don't laugh at his suggestions. I understand perfectly what
he means." Imogen glanced at herself in the mirror with a grave effort to assume the expression
demanded of her. "Is this better, Jack?"

"Yes--no;--no, you can't get at all what I mean," the young man returned, so almost pettishly
that Valerie glanced up at him with a quick flush.

Imogen's resentment, if she felt any, did not become apparent. She accepted condemnation with
dignified patience.

"I'm afraid that is the best I can do now, though I'll try. Perhaps on the day of the actual
performance it will come more deeply to me. There, mama darling, that will do; it's quite right
now. I can't put myself into it while you sew down there. I can hardly think that I'm brooding
over my tragic father while I see your pins and needles. Now, Jack, is this better?" With perfect
composure she once more took the suggested attitude and expression.

Mrs. Upton, her dusky flush deepened, rose, stumbling a little from her long stooping, and,
steadying herself with her hand on a table, looked at the new effort.

"No,--it's worse. It's complacent--self-conscious," burst from Jack. "You look as if you were
thinking far more about your own brooding than about your father. Antigone is self-forgetting;
absolutely self-forgetting." So his rising irritation found impulsive, helpless expression.
In the slight silence that followed his words he was aware of the discord that he had crashed
into an apparent harmony. He glanced almost furtively at Mrs. Upton. Had she seen--did she
guess--the anger, for her, that had broken into these peevish words? She met his eyes with
her penetrating depth of gaze, and Imogen, turning to them, saw the interchange; saw Jack abashed
and humble, not before her own forbearance but before her mother's wonder and severity.

Resentment had been in her, keen and sharp, from his first criticism; nay, from his first ignoring
of her claim to praise. It rose now to a flood of righteous indignation. Sweeping round upon
them in her white draperies, casting aside--as in a flash she saw it--petty subterfuge and
petty fear, coldly, firmly, she questioned him:

"I must ask you whether this is mere ill-temper, Jack, or whether you intentionally wish to
wound me. Pray let me have the truth."

Speechless, confused, Jack gazed at her.

She went on, gaining, as she spoke, her usual relentless fluency.

"If you would rather that some one else did the Antigone, pray say so frankly. It will be a
relief to me to give up my part. I am very tired. I have a great deal to do. You know why I
took up the added burden. My motives make me quite indifferent to petty, personal considerations.
All that, from the first, I have had in mind, was to help, to the best of my poor ability.
Whom would you rather have? Rose?--Mary?--Clara Bartlett?--Why not mama? I will gladly help
any one of them with all that I have learnt from you as to dress and pose. But I cannot, myself,
go on with the part if such malignant dissatisfaction is to be wreaked upon me."

Jack felt his head rise at last from the submerging flood.

"But, Imogen, indeed,--I do beg your pardon. It was odious of me to speak so. No one can do
the part but you."

"Why say that, Jack, when you have just told me that I do it worse and worse?"

"It was only a momentary impression. Really, I'm ashamed of myself."

"But it's your impression that is the standard in those tableaux. How can I do the part if
I contradict your conception?"

"You can't. I was in a bad temper."

"And why, may I ask, were you in a bad temper?"

The gaze from her serene yet awful brows was bent upon him, but under it, in a sudden reaction
from its very serenity, its very awfulness, a firm determination rose in him to meet it. Turning
very red but eyeing Imogen very straight: "I thought you inconsiderate, ungrateful, to your
mother, as you often are," he said.

For a long moment Imogen was silent, glancing presently at Mary--scarlet with dismay, her hastily
adjusted eye-glasses in odd contrast to her classic draperies--and then turning her eyes upon
her mother who, still standing near the table, was frowning and looking down.

"Well, mama dear," she asked, "what have you to say to this piece of information? Have I, all
unconsciously, been unkind? Have I been ungrateful? Do you share Jack's sense of injury?"

Mrs. Upton looked up as though from painful and puzzling reflection. "My dear Imogen," she
said, "I think that you and Jack are rather self-righteous young people, far too prone to discussing
yourselves. I think that you were a little inconsiderate; but Jack has no call to take up my
defense or to express any opinion as to our relations. Of course you will do the Antigone,
and of course, when he recovers his temper,--and I believe he has already,--he will be very
glad that you should. And now let's have no more of this foolish affair."

None of them had ever heard her make such a measured, and, as it were, such a considered speech
before, and the unexpectedness of it so wrought upon them that it reduced not only Jack but
even the voluble Antigone to silence. But in Jack's silence was an odd satisfaction, even an
elation. He didn't mind his own humiliation--that of an officious little boy put in a corner--one
bit; for there in the corner opposite was Imogen, actually Imogen, and the sight of it gave
him a shameful pleasure.

Meanwhile Mrs. Upton calmly resumed her work at the hem, finished it, turned her daughter about
and pronounced it all quite right.

"Now get into warmer clothes and come down to tea, which will be here directly," she said.

Imogen, by now, was recovered from the torpor of her astonishment.

"Mary, will you come with me, I'll want your help." And then, as Mary, whom alone she could
count as an ally, joined her, she paused before departure, gathering her chlamys about her.
"If I am silent, mama, pray don't imagine that it is you who have silenced me," she said. "I
certainly could not think of defending myself to you. My character, with all its many faults,
speaks for itself with those who understand me and what I aim at. All I ask of you, mama, is
not to imagine, for a moment, that you are one of those."

So Antigone, white, smiling, wrathful, swept away, Mary behind her, round-eyed and aghast,
and Valerie was left confronting the overwhelmed Jack.

He could find not one word to say, and for some moments Valerie, too, stood silent, slipping
her needle back and forth in her fingers and looking hard at the carpet.

"It's all my fault!" Jack burst out suddenly. "Blundering, silly fool that I am! Do say that
you forgive me."

She did not look at him, but, still slipping her needle with the minute, monotonous gesture
back and forth, she nodded.

"But say it," Jack protested. "Scold me as much as you please. It's all true; I'm a prig, I
know. But say that you forgive me."

A smile quivered on her cheek, and putting out her hand she answered: "There's nothing to forgive,
Jack. I lost my temper, too. And it's all mere nonsense."

He seized her hand, and then, only then, realized from something in the quiver of the smile,
something muffled in the lightness of her voice, that she was crying.

"Oh!" broke from him; "oh! what brutes we are!"

She had drawn her hand from his in a moment, had turned from him while she swiftly put her
handkerchief to her eyes, and after the passage of the scudding rain-cloud she confronted him
clearly once more.

"Why, it's all my fault,--don't you know,--from the beginning," she said.

He understood her perfectly. She had never been so near him.

"You know that's not true," he said. And then, at last, his eyes, widely upon her, told her
on which side his sympathies were enlisted in the long-drawn contest between,--not between
poor Imogen and herself, that was a mere result--but between herself and her husband.

And that she understood his understanding became at once apparent to him. He had never seen
her blush as she blushed then, and when the deep glow had passed she became very white and
looked very weary, almost old.

"No, I don't know it, Jack," she said. "And you, certainly, do not. And now, dear Jack, don't
let us speak of this any more. Will you help me to clear this table for the tea-things."

       *       *       *       *       *

So this, for Imogen, was the result of her loving impulse during the frosty walk down Fifth
Avenue. All her sweet, wordless appeals had been in vain. Jack had admired her as he might
have admired a marionette; her beauty had meant less to him than her mother's dressmaking;
and as she sat alone in her room on that afternoon, having gently and firmly sent Mary down
to tea with the ominous message that she cared for none, she saw that the shadow between her
and Jack loomed close upon them now, the shadow that would blot out all their future, as a
future together. And Imogen was frightened, badly frightened, at the prospect of that empty future.

Her fragrant branch of life that had bloomed so fully and freshly in her hand, a scepter and
a fairy wand of beneficence, had withered to a thorny scourge for her own shoulders. She looked
about her, before her. She realized with a new, a cutting keenness, that Jack was very rich
and she very poor. The chill of poverty had hardly reached her as yet, the warm certainty of
its cessation had wrapped her round too closely; but it reached her now, and the thought of
that poverty, unrelieved, perhaps, for all her life, the thought of the comparative obscurity
to which it would consign her, filled her with a real panic; and, as before, the worst part
of the panic was that she should feel it, she, the scorner of material things. Suppose, just
suppose, that no one else came. Everything grew gray at the thought. Charities, friends, admiration,
these were poor substitutes for the happy power and pride that as a rich man's adored wife
would have been hers. And the fact that had transformed her blossoming branch into the thorny
scourge was that Jack's adored wife she would never be. His humbled, his submissive, his chastened
and penitent wife,--yes, on those terms; yes, she could see it, the future, like a sunny garden
which one could only reach by squeezing oneself through some painfully narrow aperture. The
fountains, the flowers, the lawns were still hers--if she would stoop and crawl; and for Imogen
the mere imagining of herself in such a posture brought a hot blush to her forehead. Not only
would she have scorned such means of reaching the life of ample ease and rich benevolence,
but they were impossible to her nature. A garden that one must crouch to enter was a prison.
Better, far better, her barren, dusty, lonely life than such humiliation; such apostasy.

She faced it all often, the future, the panic, during the last days of preparation for the
tableaux, days during which, with a still magnanimity, she fulfilled the tasks that she had
undertaken. She would not throw up her part because her mother and Jack had so cruelly injured
her; it was now for her father and for the crippled children alone that she did it.

Sitting in her bedroom with its many books and photographs, the big framed one of her father
over her bed, she promised him, her eyes on his, that she would have strength to face it all,
for all her life if necessary. "It was too easy, I see that now," she whispered to him. "I
had made no real sacrifices for our thing. The drop of black blood had never yet been crushed
out of my heart,--for when you died, it was submission that was asked of me, not sacrifice.
It was easy, dear, to give myself to the work we believed in--to be tired, and strong, and
glad for it--to live out bravely into the world--when you were beside me and when all the means
of work were in my hand. But now I must relinquish something that I could only keep by being
false to myself--to you--to the right. And I must go uphill--'yes, uphill to the very end'--accepting
poverty, loneliness, the great need of love, unanswered. But I won't falter or forget, darling
father. As long as I live I will fight our fight. Even if the way is through great darkness,
I carry the light in my heart."

The noble pathos of such soliloquies brought her to tears, but the tears, she felt, were strengthening
and purifying. 

The canton of Schwyz is the most important of the primitive for its wealth and population. Account
about 45.600 inhabitants occupying a total area of ​​908 square kilometers, and measures in
greater length, E. to the west, 45 kilometers by 38 at its widest, based limits the cantons
of Uri and Glarus, in S. and S.-E.; of St. Gall and district in Zurich, to the east, of Zug and
Lucerne, to the north, and Unterwalden the west, with banks in the major lakes of Lucerne, Zug
and Zurich. Although the floor of the canton is not usually fertile and is cut in all directions
a chaos of mountains, agriculture is very careful, their varied and important products, and has
some industry, consisting of silk and other items, and exploits some peat bogs and limestone
quarries. HOWEVER, their main wealth is the offspring of excellent gained the valuable manufacture of
cheese, the exploitation of its forests of fir and culture fruits, vegetables, etc.

A remarkable fact stands out in three cantons Schwyz and surrounding small from several sides
and we are entirely homogeneous: I speak of the prerogative that has been reserved districts to
choose their priests or pastors, outstanding advantage that the court of Rome has refused always
at the Catholic peoples. In those counties the priest in charge of managing religious interests
of free flock derives its authority from the believers who place their trust in him and the
bishop does nothing to confirm the election or consecrate. It is the right of patronage of
its rightful owner, the people of faith, or is somewhat reminiscent of the early church. I believe
that to this singular advantage must mainly attributed the phenomenon (which is today and was
not in time) of the coexistence Roman Catholicism with liberty and pure democratic republic in the
cantons of I am speaking Catholicism, practiced as it existed in the first centuries of the church,
is indeed a religion essentially democratic, because it is not only the religion of fraternizing
crowds, but also test the free will of the flock in the acceptance their pastors.


"No? You think that, after the other day? He has stooped, Mary, to other levels. He breathes
a different air from mine now. I cannot follow him into his new world."

"You mean?--you mean?--" Mary faltered.

Imogen's clear eyes told her what she meant; it did not need the slow acquiescence of her head
nor the articulated, "Yes, I mean mama.--Poor mama. A little person can make great sorrows, Mary."

But now Mary's good, limpid eyes, unfaltering and candid as a child's, dwelt on her with a
new hope. "But, Imogen, it's just that: is she so little? She isn't like you, of course. She
can't lift and sustain, as you can. She doesn't stand for great things, as you do and as your
father did. But I seem to feel more and more how much she could be to you.--It only needs-more
understanding; and, if that's all, I really believe, Imogen darling, that you and Jack will
be all right again. Perhaps," Mary went on with a terrible unconsciousness, "perhaps he has
come to understand, already, better than you do,--I thought that, really, the other day,--and
it's that that makes the sense of division. You are at different places of understanding. And
he hasn't to remember, and get over, all the mistakes, the faults in her past; and perhaps
it's because of that that he sees the present reality more clearly than you do. Jack is such
a wonderful person for seeing the real self of people."

Imogen's steady gaze, during this speech, continued to rest unwaveringly upon her; Mary felt
no warning in it and, when she had done, waited eagerly for some echo to her faith.

But when Imogen spoke, it was in a voice that revealed to her her profound miscalculation.

"You do not understand, Mary. You see nothing. Her present self is her past self, unchanged,
unashamed, unatoned for. It is her mistakes, her faults, that Jack now stands for. It is her
mistakes and faults that I must stand for, if I am to be beside him again. That would be the
stooping that I meant. I fear that not only Jack but you are blinded, Mary. I fear that it
is not only Jack but you that she is taking from me." Her voice was calm, but the steely edge
of an accusation was in it.

Mary sat aghast. "Taking me from you! Oh, Imogen, you don't mean that you won't care for me
if I get fond of her!"

The crudely simple interpretation brought the blood to Imogen's cheeks. "I mean that you can
hardly be fond of us both. It is not I who will cease to care." Under the accusation was now
an added note of pain and of appeal. All Mary's faiths rallied to that appeal.

"Imogen!" she said, timidly, like the wrong-doer she felt herself to be, taking the other's
hand; "dear, brave, wonderful Imogen,--how can you--how can you say it! Why there is hardly
any one in the world who has counted to me as you have. Why, your mother is like a sweet child
beside you! She hasn't faiths; she hasn't that healing, strengthening thing that I've always
so felt in you. She could never mean what you do. Oh, Imogen! you won't think such dreadful
things, will you? You do forgive me if I have blundered and hurt you?"

Imogen drew in the fragrant incense with long breaths; it revived her, filled her veins with
new courage, new hope. The two girls kissed solemnly. They were going out together and they
presently went down-stairs hand in hand. But as an after-flavor there lingered for Imogen,
like a faint, flat bitterness after the incense, a suspicion that Mary, in wafting her censer
with such energy, had been seeking to fill her own nostrils, also, with the sacred old aroma,
to find, as well as give, the intoxication of faith.

XIV

"Sir Basil!" Valeria exclaimed.

She rose from the tea-table, where she and Jack and Mrs. Wake were sitting, to meet the unexpected
new-comer.

A gladness that Jack had never seen in her seemed to inundate her face, her figure, her outstretched
hands; she looked young, she looked almost childlike, as she smiled at her friend over their
clasp, and Jack saw, by the light of that transfiguration, how gray these last months must
have been to her, how strangely bereft of response and admiration, how without savor or sweetness.
He saw, and with the insight came a sharp stir of bitterness against the new-comer, who threw
them all like this into a dull background, and, at the same time, a real echo of her gladness,
that she should have it.

He actually, in the sharp, swift twist of feeling, hardly remembered Imogen's forecasts and
warnings, hardly remembered that Mrs. Upton's gladness and Sir Basil's beaming gaze put Imogen
quite dreadfully in the right. He did not think of Imogen at all, nor of the desecration of
the house of mourning by this gladness, so absorbed was he in watching it, in sharing it, and
in being hurt by it.

"Mrs. Wake, of course, is an old friend," Valerie said, leading Sir Basil up to the tea-table;
"and here is a new one--Jack Pennington, whom you must quite know already, I've written so
much about him. Sit down here. Tell me all about everything. Why this sudden appearance? Why
no hint of it? Is it meant as a surprise for us?"

"Well, Frances and Tom were coming over, you knew that--"

"Of course. I wrote Frances a steamer letter the day before yesterday. You got in this morning
with them then? They said not a word of your coming when I last heard from them."

"I only decided to join them at the last minute. I thought that it would be good fun to drop
upon you like this, so I didn't write. It is good to see you again." Sir Basil, while his beam
seemed to include the room and its inmates, included them unseeingly; he had eyes, it was evident,
only for her. He went on to give her messages from the Pakenhams, in New York but for a week
on their way to Canada and eager to see her at once. They would have come with him had they
not been rather knocked up by the early rise on the steamer and by the long wait at the custom-house.

"You must all come with me to-morrow to our tableaux," said Valerie. "Imogen is in them. She
is out this afternoon, so you will see her for the first time at her loveliest. She is to be
Antigone."

"Oh, so I sha'n't see her till to-morrow. I've always been a bit afraid of Miss Upton, you
know," said Sir Basil, with a smile at Jack.

"Well, the first impression will be a reassuring one," said Valerie. "Antigone is the least
alarming of heroines."

"I don't know about that," Sir Basil objected, folding a slice of bread and butter, "A bit
gruesome, don't you think?"

"Gruesome?"

"She stuck so to her own ideas, didn't she? Awfully rough on the poor fellow who wanted to
marry her, insisting like that on burying her brothers."

Valerie laughed. "Well, but that sense of duty is hardly gruesome; it would have been horridly
gruesome to have left her brothers unburied."

"You'll worst me in an argument, of course," Sir Basil replied, looking fondly at her; "but
I maintain that she's a dreary young lady. Of course I don't mean to say that she wasn't an
exceedingly good girl, and all that sort of thing, but a bit of a prig, you must allow."

Jack listened to the bantering colloquy. This man, so hard, yet so kindly, so innocent, yet
so mature, was making him feel by every tone, gesture, glance, oddly boyish and unformed. He
was quite sure that he himself was a great deal cleverer, a great deal more conscious, than
Sir Basil; but these advantages somehow assumed the aspect of schoolboy badges of good conduct
beside a grown-up standard. And, as he listened, he began to understand far more deeply all
sorts of things about Valerie; to see what vacancies she had had to put up with, to see what
fullness she must have missed. And he began to understand what Imogen, Cassandra-like, had
declared, that the unseasonable fragrance of devotions hovered about her widowed mother; to
remember the ominous "Wait and see."

It showed how far he had traveled when he could recall these words with impatience: could answer
them with: "Well, what of it? Doesn't she deserve some compensation?"--could quietly place
Sir Basil as a no longer hopeless adorer and feel a thrill of satisfaction, in the realization.
Yes, sitting here here in the house of mourning he could think these things.

But if he was so wide, so tolerant, the very expansion of his sympathies brought them a finer
sensitiveness. Only a tendril-like fineness could penetrate the complexities of that deeper
vision. He began to think of Imogen, and with a new pity, a new tenderness. How she would be
hurt, and how, more than all, she would be hurt by seeing that he, while understanding, while
sympathizing, should, helplessly, inevitably, be glad that Sir Basil had come. Poor Imogen,--and
poor himself; for where did he stand among all these shiftings of the scene? He, too, knew
the drifting loneliness and desolation, and though his heart ached for the old nearness he
could not put out his hand to her nor take a step toward her. In himself, in her, was the change,
or the mere fate, that held them parted. The wrench had come slowly upon them, but, while he
ached with the pain of it, he could already look upon it as accomplished. Only one question
remained to be asked:--Would nothing, no change, no fate, draw them again together?

For all answer a deep, settled sadness descended upon him.

Sir Basil took himself off before Mrs. Wake seemed to think it tactful to depart, and since,
soon after, she too went, Jack and Valerie were left alone together.

She turned her bright, soft eyes upon the young man and he recognized in them the unseeing
quality that he had found in Sir Basil's--that happy preoccupation with inner gladness. She
made him think of the bird alighted to sing on the swaying blade; and she made him think of
a fountain released from winter and springing through sunlight in a murmur and sparkle of ecstasy.
She was young, very young; he almost felt her as young in her gladness as he in his loneliness
and pain. Smiling a trifle nervously, he said that he was glad, at last, to see something of
her old life. "Of your real life," he added.

"My real life?" she repeated, and her look became more aware of him.

"Yes. Of course, in a sense, all this is something outlived, cast aside, for you. You've only
taken it up for a bit while you felt that it had a claim upon you; but, once you have settled
things, you would,--you would leave us, of course," said Jack, still smiling.

She was thinking of him now, no longer of herself and of Sir Basil, and perhaps, as she looked
at him, at the thin brown face, the light, deep eyes, she guessed at a stir of tears under
the smile. It was then as if the fountain sank from its own happy solitude and became a running
brook of sweetness, sad, yet merry. She didn't contradict him. She was sorry that she couldn't,
yet glad that his statement should be so obviously true.

"You mean that I'll go back to my little Surrey cottage, when I settle things?" she said. "Perhaps,
yes. And you will miss me? I will miss you too, dear Jack. But we will often see each other.
And then it may take a long time to settle all you young people."

Her confidence so startled him, so touched him with pity for its blindness, that, swiftly,
he took refuge in ambiguity.

"Oh, you'll settle us!" he said, wondering in what that settling would consist, wondering what
would happen if Imogen, definitely casting him off, to put the final settling in that form,
were left on her mother's hands. She would have to settle Imogen in America and what, in the
meanwhile, would become of her "real" life?

But from the mother's confidence, her radiance, that accepted his speech in its happiest meaning,
he guessed that she didn't foresee such a contingency; he even guessed that, were she brought
face to face with it, she wouldn't accept its unsettling of her own joy as final. The fountain
was too strong to heed such obstacles. It would find its way to the sunlight. Imogen, in time,
would have to accept a step-father.

XV

Jack did not witness the revelation to Imogen of the ominous arrival, but from her demeanor
at lunch next day he could guess at how it had impressed her. He felt in her an intense, a
guarded, excitement, and knew that the news had fallen upon her with a tingling concussion.
The sound of the thunder-bolt must reverberate all the louder in Imogen's ears from her consciousness
that to Mary's it was soundless, Mary, who had been the only spectator of its falling. Her
mother, too, was unconscious of such reverberations, so that it must seem to her a ghost-like
subjective warning, putting into audible form all her old hauntings.

That she at once sought in him evidences of the same experience, Jack felt, and all through
the early lunch, where they assembled prior to his departure with the two girls for the theater,
he avoided meeting Imogen's eyes. He was too sure that she felt their mutual knowledge as a
bond over the recent chasm. The knowledge in his own eyes was far too deep for him to allow
her to wade into it; she would simply drown. He was rather ashamed of himself, but he resolutely
feigned a cheerful unconsciousness.

"You are going with your friends, later?" he asked Valerie, who, he was quite sure, also feigning
something, said that since Imogen and Mary dressed each other so well, and since he would be
there to see that every detail was right, she, with the Pakenhams and Sir Basil, would get
her impression from the stalls. Afterward, they would all meet here for tea.

"It was a surprise, you know, their coming," Imogen put in suddenly, from her end of the table,
fixing strangely sparkling eyes upon Jack.

"No," said her mother, in tones of leisurely correction, "I expected the Pakenhams, as I told you."

"Oh, yes; it was only Sir Basil's surprise. You didn't expect him. Does he like playing surprises
on people, mama?"

"I don't know that he does."

"He only plays them on you."

"I knew that he was coming, at some time."

"Ah, but you didn't tell me that; it was, in the main, my surprise, then; but not so soon,
I suppose."

"So soon? So soon for what?"

Imogen, at this, allowed her badly adjusted mask of lightness to fall and a sudden solemnity
overspread her features.

"Don't you feel it rather soon for friends to play pranks, mama?"

The words seemed to erect a catafalque before their eyes, but, facing the nodding blackness
with a calm in which Jack detected the glint of steel, Valerie answered: "I am not aware that
they have been playing pranks."

For all the way to the theater Imogen again assumed the mask, talking exclusively to Mary.
She talked of these friends of her mother's, of Sir Basil, Mr. and Mrs. Pakenham, what she
had heard of them; holding up, as if for poor, frightened Mary's delectation, an impartial
gaily sketched little portrait of their oddities. It was as if she felt it her duty to atone
to Mary by her lightness and gaiety for the gloom that had overspread the lunch; as if she
wished to assure Mary that she wouldn't allow her to suffer for other people's ill-temper,--Mrs.
Upton had certainly been very silent for the rest of that uncomfortable meal,--as if it were
for Mary's sake that she were assuming the mask, behind which, as Jack must know, she was in
torture.

"I'm glad you're to see them, Mary darling; they will amuse you. From your standpoint of reality,
the standpoint of Puritan civilization--the deepest civilization the world has yet produced;
the civilization that judges by the soul--you will be able to judge and place them as few of
our people are, as yet, developed enough to do. They are of that funny English type, Mary,
the leisured; their business in life that of pleasure seeking; their social service consisting
in benevolent domination over the servile classes beneath them. Oh, they have their political
business, too; we mustn't be unfair; though that consists, in the main, for people of their
type, in maintaining their own place as donors and in keeping other people in the place of
recipients. In their own eyes, I'm quite sure, they are useful, as upholding the structure
of English civilization. You'll find them absolutely simple, absolutely self-assured, absolutely
indifferent, quite charming,--there's no reason why they shouldn't be; but their good manners
are for themselves, not for you,--one must never forget that with the English. Do study them,
Mary. We need to keep the fact of them clearly before us, for what they represent is a menace
to us and to what we mean. I sometimes think that the future of the world depends upon which
ideal is to win, ours or the English. We must arm ourselves with complete comprehension. Already
they have infected the cruder types among us."

These were all sentiments that in the past, Mary felt sure, Jack must have acquiesced in and
approved of, and yet she felt surer that Imogen's manner of enunciating them was making Jack
very angry. She herself did not find them as inspiring as she might have expected, and looking
very much frightened and flurried she murmured that as she was to go back to Boston next day
she would not have much opportunity for all this observation. "Besides--I don't believe that
I'm so--so wise--so civilized, you know, as to be able to see it all."

"Oh, Imogen will tell you what to see!" said Jack.

"It's very kind of her, I'm sure," poor Mary faltered. She could have burst into tears. These
two!--these beloved two!

Meanwhile, at a little later hour, Valerie and Mrs. Wake made their way to the theater, there
to meet the group of friends from whom they had parted in England six months before.

The Pakenhams, full of question and comment, were intelligently amassing well-assorted impressions
of the country that was new to them. Sir Basil, though cheerfully pleased with all to which
his attention was drawn, showed no particular interest in his surroundings. His concentration
was entirely for his regained friend.

After her welcoming radiance of the day before, Valerie looked pale and weary, and when, with
solicitude, he asked her whether she were not tired, she confessed to having slept badly.

"She's changed, you know," Sir Basil said to Mrs. Pakenham, when they were settled in their
seats, and Valerie, beside him, was engaged in pointing out people to Tom Pakenham. "It's been
frightfully hard on her, all this, I'm sure."

"She's as charming as ever," said Mrs. Pakenham.

"Oh, well, that could never change. But what a shame that she should have had, all along, such
a lot to go through." Sir Basil, as a matter of course, had the deepest antipathy for the late
Mr. Upton.

The tableaux struck at once the note of success. Saved by Jack's skill from any hint of waxwork
or pantomime, their subtle color and tranquil light made each picture a vision of past time,
an evocation of Hellenic beauty and dignity.

Cassandra in her car--her face (oh, artful Jack!) turned away,--awful before the door of Agamemnon;
Iphigenia, sleeping, on her way to the sacrifice; Helen, before her husband and Hecuba; Alcestis,
returning from the grave, and Deianira with the robe. The old world of beauty and sorrow, austere
and lovely in its doom, passed before modern eyes against its background of sky, grove, and
palace steps.

"And now," said Valerie, when the lights sprang out for the interval, "now for your introduction
to Imogen. They have made her the climax, you see."

"He did, you mean. The young man."

"Yes, Jack arranged it all."

"He's the one you wrote of, of course, who admires her so tremendously."

"He is the one."

"In fact he'll carry her off from you some day, soon, eh?" Sir Basil ventured with satisfaction
in his own assurance. He, too, felt that Imogen must be "settled."

"I suppose so," said Valerie. "I couldn't trust her to any one more happily. He understands
her and cares for her absolutely."

Sir Basil at this ventured a little further, voicing both satisfaction and anxiety with: "So,
then, you'll come back--to--to Surrey."

"Yes, then, I think, I can come back to Surrey," Valerie replied.

The heart of her feeling had always remained for him a mystery, and her acquiescence now might
mean a great deal, everything, in fact, or it might mean only her gliding composure before
a situation that she had power to form as she would. He could observe that her color rose.
He knew that she blushed easily. He knew, too, that his own feeling was not hidden from her
and that the blush might be for her recognition only; yet he was occupied with the most hopeful
interpretations when the curtain rose. A moment after its rising Valerie heard him softly ejaculate,
"I say!" She could have echoed the helplessly rudimentary, phrase. She, too, gazed, in a stupor
of delight; a primitive emotion in it. The white creature standing there before them, with
her forward poise, her downcast yet upgazing face, was her child. Valerie, since her return
to her home, had given little time to analysis of her own feeling, the stress of her situation
had been too intense for leisurely self-observation. But in the upwelling of a strange, a selfless,
joy she knew, now, how often she had feared that all the joy of maternity was dead in her;
killed, killed by Imogen.

The joy now was a passing ray. The happy confusion of admiration, wonder, and pride was blotted
out by the falling gloom of reality. It was her child who stood there, but the bond between
them seemed, but for the ache of rejected maternity at her heart, a pictorial one merely. Tears
of bitterness involuntarily filled her eyes as she looked, and Imogen's form seemed to waver
in a dim, an alien atmosphere.

When the curtain fell on the Antigone who kept her pose without a tremor, the uproar of applause
was so great that it had to rise, not only twice, but three times. At the last, a faint wavering
shook slightly the Antigone's sculptured stillness and poor old Oedipus rocked obviously upon
his feet.

"What a shame to make her keep it up for so long!" murmured Sir Basil, his face suffused with
sympathy. The symptom of human weakness was a final touch to the enchantment.

"Well, it makes one selfish, such loveliness!" said Mrs. Pakenham, flushed with her clapping.
"Valerie, dear, she is quite too lovely!"

"Extraordinarily Greek, the whole thing," said Tom Pakenham; "the comparative insignificance
of facial expression and the immense significance of attitude and outline."

"But the face!" Sir Basil turned an unseeing eye upon him, still wrapped, it was evident, in
the vision that, at last, had disappeared. "The figure is perfect; but the face,--I never saw
anything so heavenly."

Indeed, in its slightly downcast pose, the trivial lines of Imogen's nose and chin had been
lost; the up-gazing eyes, the sweep of brow and hair, had dominated and transfigured her somewhat
tamely perfect countenance.

"Do you know, I'm more afraid of her than ever," said Sir Basil to Valerie on their way home
to tea, in the cab. "I wasn't really afraid before. I could have borne up very well; but now--it's
like knowing that one is to have tea with a seraph."

Jack, Imogen, and Mary were not yet arrived when they reached the house; but by the time the
tea was on the table and Valerie in her place behind the urn, they heard the cab drive up and
the feet of the young people on the stairs.

Jack entered alone, saying that Mary and Imogen were gone to take off their wraps. Yes, he
assured Valerie, they had promised to keep on their Grecian robes for tea.

Valerie introduced him to the Pakenhams and led the congratulations on his triumph. "For it
really is yours, Jack, as much as if you had painted the whole series of pictures."

Jack, looking shy, turned from one to the other as they seconded her enthusiasm,--Mrs. Pakenham,
with her elaborately formal head and china-blue eyes; her husband, robust and heavy; Sir Basil,
still with his benignant, unseeing quality. Among them all, in spite of Mrs. Wake's keen, familiar
visage, in spite of Valerie's soft glow, he felt himself a stranger. He even felt, with a little
stab of ill-temper, that there had been truth in Imogen's diagnosis. They were kindly, but
they were tremendously indifferent. They didn't at all expect you to be interested in them;
but that hardly atoned for the fact that they weren't interested in you. For Jack, life was
made up of vigilant, unceasing interest, in himself and in everybody else.

"Ah, were they all taken from your pictures?" Sir Basil asked him, strolling up to the mantelpiece
to examine a photograph of Imogen that stood there.

Jack explained that he could claim no such gallery of achievement. He had made a few sketches
for each tableau; his work had been, in the main, that of stage-manager.

"Oh, I see," said Sir Basil, not at all abashed by his blunder. "Nicer than lay figures to
work with, eh? all those pretty young women."

"I don't use lay figures, at any time. I'm a landscape painter," Jack explained, somewhat stiffly.
He surmised that had he been introduced as Velasquez Sir Basil would have been quite as unmoved,
just as he would have been quite as genially inclined had he been introduced as a scene-painter.

"I used to think I'd go in for something of that sort in my young days," said Sir Basil, holding
Imogen's photograph; "and I dabbled a bit in water-color for a time. Do you remember that little
sketch of the Hall, done from the beech avenue, Mrs. Upton? Not so bad, was it?"

"Not at all bad," said Valerie; "but we can't use such negatives for Jack's work. It's very
seriously good, you know. It's anything but dabbling."

"Oh, yes; I know that you are a real artist," Sir Basil smiled at Jack from the photograph.
"This doesn't do her justice, does it?"

"Imogen? No; it's a frightful thing," said Jack over-emphatically.

Mrs. Pakenham asked to see it and pronounced that, for her part, she thought it excellent.

"You ought to paint her portrait," Sir Basil continued, looking at Jack, who had, once more,
to explain that landscape was his only subject. He guessed from the something at once benign
and faintly quizzical in Sir Basil's regard, that to all these people he was significant, in
the main, as Imogen's lover, and the intuition vexed him still further.

Imogen's entrance, startling in its splendid incongruity, put an end to his self-consciousness
and absorbed him in contemplation.

Imogen revealed herself newly, even to him, to-day. It wasn't the old Imogen of stateliness,
graciousness, placidity, nor the later one of gloom and anger. This Imogen, lovely, with her
flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes, was deeply excited, deeply self-forgetful. She, too, was
absorbed in her intense curiosity, her feverish watchfulness.

She said nothing while her mother introduced her to the new-comers, who all looked a little
taken aback, as though the resuscitated Grecian heroine were indeed among them, and stood silently
alert near the tea-table, handing the cups of tea, the cakes and scones, for Jack and Sir Basil
to pass round. Her arms were bare and her slender bare feet, laced with gold-clasped fastenings,
showed on her white sandals. Jack saw that Sir Basil's eyes were fixed on her with an expression
of wonder.

He asked her, as he took the last cup from her, if she were not cold, and, gentle, though unsmiling,
Imogen replied, "Oh, no!" glancing at the roaring wood fire, that illuminated her whiteness
as if with a sacrificial glow.

"Do sit down and have your tea, Imogen; you must be very tired," her mother said, with something
of the chill that the scene at the lunch-table had diffused still in her voice.

"Not very, thanks, mama dear," said Imogen; and, more incongruous in loveliness than before,
she sat down in a high-backed chair at some little distance from the tea-table. Sir Basil,
as if with a sort of helplessness, remained beside her.

"Yes, it was a great success, wasn't it?" Jack heard her replying presently, while she drank
the tea with which Sir Basil had eagerly supplied her. "I'm so glad."

"You liked doing it, didn't you? You couldn't have done it, like that--looked like that, if
you hadn't cared a lot about it," Sir Basil pursued.

Imogen smiled a little and said that she didn't know that she had liked doing her part particularly,--it
was of her crippled children that she was thinking. "We'll be able to get the Home now," she said.

"It was for cripple children?"

"Didn't you know? I should have thought mama would have told you. Yes, it all meant that, only
that, to me. We gave the tableaux to get enough money to buy a country home for them."

"You go in a lot for good works, I know," said Sir Basil, and Imogen, smiling again, with the
lightness rooted in excitement, answered: "They go in for me, rather. All the appeals of suffering
seem to come to one and seize one, don't they? One never needs to seek causes."

Jack watched them talk, Imogen, the daughter of the dead, rejected husband, and Sir Basil,
her mother's suitor.

Mary had come in now, late from changing her dress, which at the last moment she had felt too
shy to appear in. She was talking to Mrs. Wake and the Pakenhams.

Standing, a somewhat brooding onlooker, becoming conscious, indeed, of the sense, stronger
than ever, of loneliness and bereavement, he heard Mrs. Upton near him say, "Sit down here, Jack."

She showed him a chair beside her, in the corner, between her tea-table, the window, and the
fire. She, too, was for the moment isolated; she, too, no doubt, had been watching; and now
she talked to him, not at all as if she had felt that he were lonely and were making it up
to him, but, once more, like the child happily gathering and holding out nosegays to another child.

A controlled excitement was in her, too; and he felt still that slight strain of the lunch-table,
as if Imogen's catafalque had marred some too-trustful assurance; but a growing warmth was
diffused through it, and, as her eyes turned once or twice on Imogen and Sir Basil, he saw
the cause.

The possibility that her daughter might make friends with her suitor, the solvent, soothing
possibility that, if realized, would so smooth her path, had come to her. And in their quiet
fire-lit corner, shut the closer into their isolation by the talk that made only a confused
murmur about them, he felt a new frankness in her, as though the hope of the hour effaced ominous
memories and melted her reserves and discretions, making it wholly natural to draw near him
in the implied avowal of shared outlooks.

"I believe that Imogen and Sir Basil are going to get on together," she said; "I believe that
she likes him already. I so want them to be friends. He is such a friend of mine."

"They look friendly," said Jack; "I think I can always tell when Imogen is going to like people."
He did not add that, with his new insight about Imogen, he had observed that it was people
over whom she had power that Imogen liked. And already he seemed to see that Imogen would have
some sort of power over Sir Basil.

"And I can always tell when he is going to like people. At least you're logical you apply it to the house
policy to defend the country. Then you indignaréis that priests as I want bring compassion
to the families, and men like those who struggle far from intending to kill here the revolution, spewing
profanities and breeds crime.

- Bringing mercy to families! Do you know what is family? I just love sterile profess to God
prefer selfishness of bliss to the devotion of love, a time Meditation I think it more holy than a
day's work, and crying that starts a shaking I am pleased hysterical
is comforting that the tears shed the pain of others.

- You are more
wicked than I imagined.

- And you more fanatical than I thought.

To win souls to heaven, you bring discord to your parents.

First son, you're a priest.

- Can not find yourself more derogatory name?

The words contained for fear of waking the old, sounded like suffocating, drowning prudence intonations
of anger. Tirso, despite his impetuous character, he knew contained better, to Pepe's voice trembled
in his throat, one quietly sitting at the table playing with beads, Pepe was pouring into
the lips all the fears harbored his soul. The lamp, fainter every moment, was being defeated
by the shadows. The only sound to the Cabinet on the shoots metallic groan the clock, and a silence
reigned in the room for each interruption of the dialogue.

It seems that the objects listened.

- Have you ever lived away from us - continued Pepe - and do not know the love that binds yours
is stronger than the delirium of your faith.

The application with which we serve, is greater than the zeal that inflames you. We will never
be convinced that the wounds of Christ are grieve over the diseased leg of my father.

- Your father will die, and the sacred wounds remain, for ever and ever, Welling streams of
divine grace.

And speaking as a father, I wanted to talk to him because I know
what you have.

I met a man who suffered the same: it is gout.

- Is true, but I warn you that they are being denied for not afflict
him: You have said that is a simple rheumatism.

- Soon will find
relief, if any possible.

- More reason to not needlessly afflict him.

It's late: do you want anything?

Tirso hesitated a moment, like a player who is afraid to venture the game, and then looking
his brother's forehead, asked:

- Do you think you have done everything you owe to your state?

-
Nothing is missing: we pay a doctor perhaps exceeding our resources,
mom or Leo van in person to the pharmacy, no prescription is spared
by the cost side, in the most timely given As is to take ... and what
is more, it breathes an atmosphere of tenderness and love that cast
many more less fortunate.

Now I have hopes of being able to get to ride some evenings in a cab.

- Naturally, those who only believe in the things of the body, do
not come to the soul.

- Why did you say?

- I think bring a doctor
better than yours.

- Who? - Pepe said, suspecting the answer.

-
The Holy Viaticum.

- This will scare a lot and does not alleviate
anything, and therefore refrain from it.



The change in her voice, but controlled, kept down, she answered quickly,

"Ah, but, dear Jack, I don't want to have a side. It's that that I want her to realize. I want
her to feel that my side is hers. I want you to help me in making her feel it."

"But she'll never feel it!" Jack breathed out again. Behind the barrier of the tea-table, in
the flickering dimness, they were speaking suddenly with a murmuring, yet so sharp a confidence;
a confidence that in broad daylight, or in complete solitude, might have seemed impossible.
All sorts of things must steal out in that persuasive, that peopled yet solitary, twilight.

He knew that Valerie's eyes dwelt on him with anxiety and that it was with a faint, forced
smile that she asked him: "She doesn't think that I'll ever reach her side?"

"I don't believe you ever will," said Jack. Then, for he couldn't bear that she should misunderstand
him for another moment, misunderstanding when they had come so far was too unendurable, he
went on in a hurried undertone: "You aren't on her side, really. You can never be on her side.
You can never be like her, or see like her. And I don't want you to. It's you who see clearly,
not she. It's you who are all right."

Her long silence, after this, seemed to him like the hovering of hands upon him; as though,
in darkness, she sought by touch to recognize some strange object put before her.

"But then,--" she, too, only breathed it out at last,--"but then,--you are not on her side."

"That's just it," said Jack. He did not look at her and she was silent once more before his
confession.

"But," she again took up the search, "that is terrible for her, if she feels it."

"And for me, too, isn't it?" he questioned, as if he turned the surfaces of the object beneath
her fingers.

The soft, frightened hover seemed to go all over it, to recognize it finally, and to draw back,
terrified, from recognition.

"Most terrible of all for me, if I have come between you," she said.

Her pain pierced him so, that he put out his hand and took hers. Don't think that; you mustn't
think that, not for a moment. It's not that you came between us. It's only that, because of
you, I began to see things--as I hadn't seen them. It was just,--well, just like seeing one
color change when another is put beside it. Imogen's blue, now that your gold has come, is
turned to green; that's all that has happened."

"All that has happened! Do you know what you are saying, Jack! If my gold were gone, would
the blue come back again?"

"The blue will never come back," said Jack.

He felt, as her hand tightened on his, that he would have liked to put his head down on her
knees and sob like a little boy; but when she said, "And the green you cannot care for?" his
own hand tightened as if they clutched some secret together, some secret that neither must
dare look at. "You mustn't think that--you mustn't. And I mustn't." He said it with all the
revolt and all the strength of his will and loyalty; with all his longing, too. "The real truth
is that the green can't care for me unless I will see it back to blue again--and as I can't
do that, and as it won't accept my present vision, there is a sort of dead-lock."

For a long moment her hand continued to grasp his, before, as if taking in the ambiguous comfort
of his final definiteness, it relaxed and she drew it away.

"Perhaps she will care enough," she said.

"To accept my vision? To forego blue? To consent that I shall see her as green?"

"Yes, when she has taken up all the threads."

"Perhaps she will," said Jack.

XVI

It was a few days after this, just before Jack's return to Boston--and the parting now was
to be until they met in Vermont--that he and Imogen had another walk, another talk together.

The mid-May had become seasonably mild and, at Jack's suggestion, they had taken the elevated
cars up to Central Park for the purpose of there seeing the wistaria in its full bloom.

They strolled in the sunlight under arbors rippling all over with the exquisite purple, dark
and pale, the thin fine leaves of a strange olive-green, the delicate tendrils; they passed
into open spaces where, on gray rocks, it streamed like the tresses of a cascade; it climbed
and heaped itself on wayside trellises and ran nimbly, in a shower of fragile color, up the
trunks, along the branches, of the trees. Jack always afterward associated the soft, falling
purple, the soft, languorous fragrance, the almost uncanny beauty of the wistaria, with melancholy
and presage.

Imogen, for the first time since her father's death, showed a concession to the year's revival
in a transparent band of white at her neck and wrists. Her little hat, too, was of transparent
black, its crape put aside. But, though she and the day shared in bloom and youthfulness, Jack
had never seen her look more heavily bodeful; had never seen her eyes more fixed, her lips
more cold and stern. The excitement that he had felt in her was gone. Her curiosity, her watchfulness,
had been satisfied, and grimly rewarded. She faced sinister facts. Jack felt himself ready
to face them, too.

They had spoken little in the clattering car, and for a long time after they reached the park
and walked hither and thither among its paths, following at random the beckoning purple of
the wistaria, neither spoke of anything but commonplaces; indicating points of view, or assenting
to appreciations. But Imogen said at last, and he knew that with the words she led him up to
those facts: "Do you remember, Jack, the day we met mama, you and I, on the docks?"

Jack replied that he did.

"What a different day from this," said Imogen, "with its frosty glory, its challenge, its strength."

"Very different."

"And how different our lives are," said Imogen.

He did not reply for some moments, and it was then to say gently that he hoped they were not
so different as, perhaps, they seemed.

"It is not I who have changed, Jack," said Imogen, looking before her. And going on, as though
she wished to hear no reply to this: "Do you remember how we felt as the steamer came in? We
determined that she should change nothing, that we wouldn't yield to any menace of the things
we were then united in holding dear. It's strange, isn't it, to see how subtly she has changed
everything? It's as if our frosty, sparkling landscape, all wind and vigor and discipline,
were suddenly transformed to this,--" Imogen looked about her at the limpid day,--"to soft
yielding, soft color, soft perfume,--it's like mama, that fragrance of the wistaria,--to something
smiling, languid, alluring. This is the sort of day on which one drifts. Our past day was a
day of steering."

As much as for the meaning of her careful words, Jack felt rising in him an anger against the
sense of a readiness prepared beforehand. "You describe it all very prettily, Imogen," he answered,
mastering the anger. "But I don't agree with you."

"You seldom do now, Jack. Perhaps it's because I've remained in my own climate while you have
been borne by the 'warm, sweet, harmless' current into this one."

"I am not conscious of any tendency to drift, Imogen. I still steer. I intend, very firmly,
always to steer."

"To what, may I ask?"

He was silent for a moment; then said, lifting eyes in which she read all that new steeliness
of opposition, with, yet, in it, through it, the sadness of hopeless appeal: "I believe in
all our ideals--just as I used to."

To this Imogen made no rejoinder.

"Do you like Sir Basil?" she asked presently, after, for some time, they had turned along the
windings of a long path in a heavy silence.

"I've hardly seen him." Jack's voice had a forced lightness, as though for relief at the change
of subject; but he guessed that the change was only apparent. "He is very nice; very delightful
looking."

"Yes; very delightful looking. Do you happen to remember what I said to you about him, long
ago, in the winter? About him and mama?"

"Yes"; Jack flushed; "I remember."

"I told you to wait."

"Yes; you told me to wait."

"You will own now, I hope, that I was right."

"Right in thinking that he--that they were more than friends?"

"Right in thinking that he was in love with her; that she allowed it."

"I suppose you were right."

"I was right. And it's more than that now. I have every reason to believe that she intends
to marry him."

He ignored her portentous pause and drop of the voice, walking on with downcast eyes. "You
mean, it's an accepted thing?"

"Oh, no! not yet accepted. Mama respects the black edge, you know. But I heard Mrs. Wake and
Mrs. Pakenham talking about it."

"Heard? How could you have heard?" Jack's eyes, stern with accusation, were now upon her.

It was impossible for Imogen to lie consciously, and though she had not, in her eagerness that
he should own her right and share her reprobation, foreseen this confrontation, she held, before
it, all the dignity of full sincerity.

"You are changed, indeed, Jack, when you can suspect me of eavesdropping! I was asleep on the
sofa in the library, worn out with work, and I woke to hear them talking in the next room,
with the door ajar. I did not realize, for some moments, what was being said. And then they
went out."

"Of course I don't suspect you; of course I don't think that you would eavesdrop; though I
do hate--hearing," Jack muttered.

"I hope you realize that I share your hatred," said Imogen. "But your opinion of me is not,
here, to the point. I only wish to put before you what I have now to bear, Mrs. Pakenham said
that she wagered that before the year was out Sir Basil would have married mama." Imogen paused,
breathing deeply.

Jack walked on beside her, not knowing what to say. "I think so, too, and wish her joy," would
have been the truest rendering of his feeling.

He curbed it to ask cautiously, "And you mind so much?"

"Mind!" she repeated, a thunderous echo.

"You dislike it so?"

"Dislike? You use strangely inapt words."

He had another parenthetic shoot of impatience with her dreadful articulateness; had Imogen
always talked so much like the heroine of a novel with a purpose?

"I only meant--can't you put up with it?"

"Put up with it? Can I do anything else? What power have I over her? You don't seem to understand.
I have passed beyond caring that she makes herself petty, ridiculous; as a woman of her age
must in marrying again--the clutch of fading life at the happiness it has forfeited. Let her
clutch if she chooses; let her marry if she chooses, whom she chooses, yes, when she chooses.
But don't you see how it shatters my every hope of her,--my every ideal of her? And don't you
see how my heart is pierced by the presence of that man in my father's house, the house that
she abandoned and cast a shadow upon? How filled with bitter shame and anguish I am when I
see him there, in that house, sacred to my grief and to my memories--making love to my mother?"

No, really, never, never had he heard Imogen so fluent and so dramatically telling; and never
had he been so unmoved by the feeling under the fluency. It was as if he could believe in none.

He remained silent and Imogen continued: "When she came back, I believed that it was with an
impulse of penitence; with the wish, shallow though I knew that it must be in such a nature,
to atone to me for the ruin that she had made in his life. I was all tenderness and sympathy
for her, all a longing to help and sustain her--as you must remember. But now! It fulfils all
that I had feared and suspected in her--and more than all! She left England, she came here,
that the conventions might be observed; and, considering them observed enough for her purpose,
she receives her suitor, eight months after my father's lonely death,-in the house where my
heart breaks and bleeds for him, where I mourn for him, where I--alone, it seems--feel him
flouted and betrayed! And she talks of her love for me!"

Jack was wondering that her coherent passion did not beat him into helpless acquiescence; but,
instead, he found himself at once replying, "You don't see fairly. You exaggerate it all. She
was unhappy with your father. For years he made her unhappy. And now, if she can care for a
man who can make her happy, she has a right, a perfect right, to take her happiness. As for
her loving you, I don't believe that any one loves you more truly. It's your chance, now, to
show your love for her."

Imogen stood still and looked at him from the black disk of her parasol.

"I think I've suspected this of you, too, Jack," she said. "Yes, I've suspected, in dreadful
moments of revelation, how far your undermining has gone. And you say you are not changed!"

"Would you ask your mother never to marry again?"

"I would--if she were in any way to redeem her image in my eyes. But, granting to the full
that one must make concessions to such creatures of the senses, I would ask her, at the very
least, to have waited."

"Creatures of the senses!" Jack repeated in a helpless gasp; such words, in their austere vocabulary,
were hardly credible. "Do you know what you are saying, you arrogant, you heartless girl?"

Her face seemed to flash at him like lightning from a black cloud, and with the lightning a
reality that had lacked before to leap to her voice:

"Ah! At last--at last you are saying what you have felt for a long time! At last I know what
you think of me! So be it! I don't retract one jot or tittle of what I say. Mama is a perfectly
moral woman, if you actually imagine some base imputation; but she lives for the pleasant,
the pretty, the easy. She doesn't love this man's soul--nor care if he has one. Her love for
him is a parody of the love that my father taught me to understand and to hold sacred. She
loves his love for her; his 'delightful' appearance. She loves his place and name and all the
power and leisure of the life he can give her. She loves the world--in him; and in that I mean
and repeat that she is a creature of the senses. And if, for this, you think me arrogant and
heartless, you do not trouble in one whit my vision of myself, but you do, forever, mar my
vision of you."

They stood face to face in the soft sweet air under an arch of wistaria; it seemed a place
to plight a troth, not to break one; but Jack knew that, if he would, he could not have kept
the truth from her. It held him, looked from him; he was, at last, inevitably, to speak it.

"Imogen," he said, "I don't want to talk to you about your mother; I don't want to defend her
to you; I'm past that. I'll say nothing of your summing up of her character,--it's grotesque,
it's piteous, such assurance! But I do tell you straight what I've come to feel of you--that
you are a cold-blooded, self-righteous, self-centered girl. And I'll say more: I think that
your bringing-up, the artificiality, the complacent theory of it, is your best excuse; and
I think that you'll never find any one so generous and so understanding of you as your mother.
If this mars me in your eyes, I can't help it."

For a moment, in her deep anger,--horror running through it, too, as though the very bottom
had dropped out of things and she saw emptiness beneath her,--she thought that she would tell
him to leave her there, forever. But Imogen's intelligence was at times a fairly efficacious
substitute for deeper promptings; and humiliation, instead of enwrapping her mind in a flare
of passionate vanity, seemed, when such intellectual apprehension accompanied it, to clarify,
to steady her thoughts. She saw, now, in the sudden uncanny illumination, that in all her vehemence
of this afternoon there had been something fictitious. The sorrow, the resentment on her father's
account, she had, indeed, long felt; too long to feel keenly. Her disapproval of the second
marriage was already tinctured by a certain satisfaction; it would free her of a thorn in the
flesh, for such her mother's presence in her life had become, and it would justify forever
her sense of superiority. It was all the clearest cause for indignation that her mother had
given her, and, seeing it as such, she had longed to make Jack share her secure reprobation;
but she hadn't, really, been able to feel it as she saw it. It solved too many problems and
salved too many hurts. So now, standing there under the arch of wistaria, she saw through herself;
saw, at the very basis of her impulse, the dislocation that had made its demonstration dramatic
and unconvincing. Dreadful as the humiliation was, her lips growing parched, her throat hot
and dry with it, her intelligence saw its cause too clearly for her to resent it as she would
have resented one less justified. There was, perhaps, something to be said for Jack, disastrously
wrong though he was; and, with all her essential Tightness, there was, perhaps, something to
be said against her. She could not break, without further reflection, the threads that still
held them together.

So, at the moment of their deepest hostility, Jack was to have his sweetest impression of her.
She didn't order him away in tragic tones, as he almost expected; she didn't overwhelm him
with an icy torrent of reproach and argument. Instead, as she stood there against her halo
of black, the long regard of her white face fixed on him, her eyes suddenly filled with tears.
She didn't acquiesce for a moment, or, for a moment, imply him anything but miserably, pitiably
wrong; but in a voice from which every trace of anger had faded she said: "Oh Jack, how you
hurt me!"

The shock of his surprise was so great that his cheeks flamed as though she had struck him.
Answering tears sprang to his eyes. He stammered, could not speak at first, then got out: "Forgive
me. I'd no business to say it. It's lovely of you, Imogen, not just to send me off."

She felt her triumph, her half-triumph, at once. "Why, Jack, if you think it, why should I
forgive you for saying what, to you, seems the truth? You have forgotten me, Jack, almost altogether;
but don't forget that truth is the thing that I care most for. If you must think these things
of me--and not only of me, of a dearer self, for I understand all that you meant--I must accept
the sorrow and pain of it. When we care for people we must accept suffering because of them.
Perhaps, in time, you may come to see differently."

He knew, though she made him feel so abashed, that he could take back none of the "things"
he thought; but as she had smiled faintly at him he answered with a wavering smile, putting
out his hand to hers and holding it while he said: "Shall we agree, then, to say nothing more
about it! To be as good friends--as the truth will let us?"

He had never hurt her as at that moment of gentleness, compunction, and inflexibility, and
thought, for a moment, was obscured by a rush of bitter pain that could almost have cast her
upon his breast, weeping and suppliant for all that his words shut the door on--perhaps forever.

But such impulses were swiftly mastered in poor Imogen. Gravely pressing his hand, she accepted
the cutting compact, and, over her breathless sense of loss, held firm to the spiritual advantage
of magnanimity and courage. He judged himself, not her, in letting her go, if he was really
letting her go; and she must see him wander away into the darkness, alone, leaving her alone.
It was tragic; it was nearly unendurable; but this was one of life's hard lessons; her father
had so often told her that they must be unflinchingly faced, unflinchingly conquered. So she
triumphed over the weak crying out of human need.

They walked on slowly again, both feeling a little "done." Neither spoke until, at the entrance
of the park, and just before leaving its poetry for the screaming prose of the great city,
Imogen said: "One thing I want to tell you, Jack, and that is that you may trust mama to me.
Whatever I may think of this happiness that she is reaching out for, I shall not make it difficult
or painful for her to take it. My pain shall cast no shadow on her gladness."

Jack's face still showed its flush and his voice had all the steadiness of his own interpretation,
the steadiness of his refusal to accept hers, as he answered, "Thanks, Imogen; that's very
right of you."

XVII

Imogen and Sir Basil were walking down a woodland path under the sky of American summer, a
vast, high, cloudless dome of blue. Trees, tall and delicate, in early June foliage, grew closely
on the hillside; the grass of the open glades was thick with wild Solomon's-seal, and fragile
clusters of wild columbine grew in the niches and crannies of the rocks, their pale-red chalices
filled with fantastically fretted gold.

Imogen, dressed in thin black lawn, fine plaitings of white at throat and wrists, her golden
head uncovered, walked a little before Sir Basil with her long, light, deliberate step. She
had an errand in the village two miles away, and her mother had suggested that Sir Basil should
go with her and have some first impressions of rural New England. He had only arrived the night
before. Miss Bocock and the Pottses were expected this afternoon, and Mrs. Wake had been for
a fortnight established in her tiny cottage on the opposite hillside.

"Tell me about your village here," Sir Basil had said, and Imogen, with punctual courtesy and
kindness, the carrying out of her promise to Jack, had rejoined: "It would be rather uneventful
annals that I should have to tell you. The people are palely prosperous. They lead monotonous
lives. They look forward for variety and interest, I think, to the summer, when all of us are
here. One does all one can, then, to make some color for them. I have organized a kindergarten
for the tiny children, and a girls' club for debates and reading; it will help to an awakening
I believe. I'm going to the club this afternoon. I'm very grateful to my girls for helping
me as they do to be of use to them. It's quite wonderful what they have done already. Our village
life is in no sense like yours in England, you know; these people are all very proud and independent.
It's as a friend, not as a Lady Bountiful, that I go among them."

"I see," said Sir Basil, with interest, "that's awfully nice all round. I wish we could get
rid of a lot of stupid ways of thought at home. I'll see something of these friends of yours
at the house, then. I'm immensely interested in all these differences, you know."

"You won't see them at the house. Our relation is friendly, not social. That is a froth that
doesn't count."

"Oh! and they don't mind that--not having the social relation, I mean--if they are friends?"

"Why should they? I am not hurt because they do not ask me to their picnics and parties, nor
are they because I don't ask them to my dinners and teas. We both understand that all that
is a matter of manner and accident; that in essentials we are equal."

"I see; but," Sir Basil still queried, "you wouldn't care about their parties, I suppose, and
don't you think they might like your dinners? At least that's the way it would work out, I'm
afraid, at home."

"Ah, it doesn't here. They are too civilized for that. Neither of us would feel fitted to the
superficial aspects of the others' lives."

"We have that sort of thing in England, too, you know; only perhaps we look at it more from
the other side, and recognize difference rather than sameness."

"Very much more, I think," said Imogen with a slight smile. "I should think that there was
very little resemblance. Your social structure is a wholesome, natural growth, embodying ideals
that, in the main, are unconscious. We started from that and have been building ever since
toward conscious ideals."

"Well,"--Sir Basil passed over this simile, a little perplexed,--"it's very wonderful that
they shouldn't feel--inferior, you know, in our ugly sense of the word, if they only get one
side of friendship and not the other. Now that's how we manage in England, you see; but then
I'm afraid it doesn't work out as you say it does here; I'm afraid they do feel inferior, after
a fashion."

"Only the truly inferior could feel inferiority, since they get the real side of friendship,"
said Imogen, with gentle authority. "And I can't think that, in our sense of the word, the
real side is given with you. That was the only stop I made on the road. Pius is also a witness. Let now the
case. Like I said, when I got home from Gomez, who you know is far away, against the wall,
I found all the people gathered. Madrazo was me, Mañero came later. Sama, Martiartu, Abrisqueta,
Suarez Argudín and La Hera, Lombillo nephew because the uncle had gone from his coffee run attempt
in the Gate of Guira, Martinez Carballo, Azopardo and several others, while not immediately interested
in the shipment of the Fast, as main importers are slaves, they wanted information to bottom
of what happened in Mariel and how we thought the horse out of the impasse. Carricarte was
moving clothes in the mezzanine of the house of Gomez, and went and we were all together. We
were regular court in the lower hall. Captain deposited papers on the coffee table, and then, without
ceremony, began the account of what had happened from the coast Africa to those of our island
says that since coming off the Gallinas, at the end of September, bowline and sea sailed Bonanca
to recognize Puerto Rico. There, however, a candle made him suspicious to leeward course vary. During
the night, always with fresh wind, returned to his defeat, hoping to spot the Pan de Matanzas
next day afternoon. To the dark, in fact, spotted him, but the candle itself before it appeared
in the narrowest Bahama Channel, starting after the game. He says that his first intention Carricarte
Arcos was Canasí enter. It was not possible: the British cruiser, because it turned out to be, as
straight line bearing and more immediate to the coast of Cuba, despite the good feet brig, always
appeared at his side, mostly at the level of Camarioca Tits. Night fell again, the sea became
Veloz off and then turned with the intention of getting into Cojimar in Jaimanitas in Banes,
in Mariel, in Cabañas, at the first port on which will dawn. Loosened the wind, unfortunately the
breeze was not, so when turned to give sight to the earth, and looked out the sun and cruising
menaced the windward beat. Carricarte then saw that he could not escape but miracles, so decided
to play the all out. Ordered thus clearing the bridge, to facilitate the maneuver and lighten
the ship so that he could, and did as he said.
 "We don't think in the same way or see things in the same way and, though
we are so fond of each other, we are not interested in the same things. Perhaps that is why
I don't interest her particular friends. They would not find much in common between mama and
me"; but her smile was now a little humorous and she was quite prepared for his "Oh, but, I
assure you, I am interested in you."

Already, with her unerring instinct for power, Imogen knew that Sir Basil was interested in
her. There was only, to be sure, a languid pleasure in the sense of power over a person already,
as it were, so bespoken, so in bondage to other altars; but, though without a trace of coquetry,
the smile quietly claimed him as a partial, a damaged convert. Imogen always knew when people
were capable of being, as she expressed it to herself, "Hers." She made small effort for those
who were without the capacity. She never misdirected such smiles upon Rose, or Miss Bocock,
or Mrs. Wake. And now, as Sir Basil went on to asseverate, just behind her shoulder, his pleasant
tones quite touched with eagerness, that the more he saw of her the more interested he became,
she allowed him to draw her into a playful argument on the subject.

"Yes, I quite believe that you would like me--if you came to know me"--she was willing to concede
at last; "but, no, indeed no, I don't think that you would ever feel much interest in me."

"You mean because I'm not sufficiently interesting myself? Is that it, eh?" Sir Basil acutely
asked, reflecting that he had never seen a girl walk so beautifully or dress so exquisitely.
The sunlight glittered in her hair.

"I don't mean that at all," said Imogen; "although I don't fancy that you are interested so
deeply, and in so many things, as I am."

"Now, really! Why not? You haven't given me a chance to show you. Of course I'm not clever."

"I meant nothing petty, like cleverness."

"You mean that I don't take life seriously enough to please you?"

"Not that, exactly. It's that we face in opposite directions, as it were. Life isn't to you
what it is to me, it isn't to you such a big, beautiful thing, with so many wonderful vistas
in it--such far, high peaks."

She was very grave now, and the gravity, the assurance, and, with them, the sweetness, of this
young girl were charming and perplexing to Sir Basil. Girls so assured he had found harsh,
disagreeable and, almost always, ugly; they had been the sort of girl one avoided. And girls
so lovely had usually been coy and foolish. This girl walked like a queen, looked at one like
a philosopher, smiled at one like an angel. He fixed his mind on her last words, rallying his
sense of quizzical paternity to meet such disconcerting statements.

"Well, but you are very young; life looks like that--peaks, you know, and vistas, and all the
rest--when one is young. You've not had time to find it out, to be disappointed," said Sir Basil.

Imogen's calm eye rested upon him, and even before she spoke he knew that he had made a very
false step. It was as if, sunken to the knees in his foolish bog, he stood before her while
she replied:

"Ah, it's that that is shallow in you, or, let us say, undeveloped, still to be able to think
of life in those terms. They are the thoughts of an unawakened person, and some people, I know,
go all through life without awaking. You imagine, I suppose, that I think of life as something
that is going to give me happiness, to fulfil sentimental, girlish dreams. You are mistaken.
I have known bitter disappointments, bitter losses, bitter shatterings of hope. But life is
wonderful and beautiful to me because we can be our best and do our best in it, and for it,
if we try. It's an immense adventure of the soul, an adventure that can disappoint only in
the frivolous sense you were thinking of. Such joys are not the objects of our quest. One is
disappointed with oneself, often, for falling so short of one's vision, and people whom we
love and trust may fail us and give us piercing pain; but life, in all its oneness, is good
and beautiful if we wake to its deepest reality and give our hearts to the highest that we know."

She spoke sadly, softly, surely, thinking of her own deep wounds, and to speak such words was
almost like repeating a familiar lesson,--how often she had heard them on her father's lips,--and
Sir Basil listened, while he looked at the golden head, at the white hand stretched out now
and then to put aside a branch or sapling--listened with an amazement half baffled and wholly
admiring. He had never heard a girl talk like that. He had heard such words before, often,
of course, but they had never sounded like this; they seemed fresh, and sparkling with a heavenly
dew, spoken so quietly, with such indifference to their effect, such calmness of conviction.
The first impression of her, that always hovered near, grew more strongly upon him. There was
something heavenly about this girl. It was as though he had heard an angel singing in the woods,
and a feeling of humility stole over him. It was usual for Sir Basil, who rarely thought about
himself, to feel modest, but very unusual for him to feel humble.

"You make me believe it, when you say it," he murmured. "I'm afraid you think me a dreadfully
earthy, commonplace person."

Imogen, at the change of note in his voice, looked round at him, more really aware of him than
she had been at all, and when she met his glance the prophet's calm fervor rose in her to answer
the faith that she felt in him. She paused, letting him come abreast of her in the narrow path,
and they both stood still, looking at each other.

"You are not earthy; you are not commonplace," said Imogen, then, as a result of her contemplation.
"I believe that you are a very big person, Sir Basil."

"A big person? How do you mean?" He absolutely flushed, half abashed, half delighted.

Imogen continued to gaze, clearly and deeply. "There are all sorts of possibilities in you."

"Oh, come now! At my age! Why, any possibilities are over, except for a cheerful kind of vegetating."

"You have vegetated all your life, I can see that. No one has ever waked you. You have hardly
used your soul at all. It's with you as it is with your country, whose life is built strongly
and sanely with body and brain but who has not felt nationally, as a whole, its spirit. Like
it, you have a spirit; like it, you are full of possibilities."

"Miss Upton, you aren't like anybody I've ever known. What sort of possibilities?"

She walked on now, feeling his thrill echo in herself, symptomatic of the passing forth of
power and its return as enrichment of life and inspiration to helpfulness. "Of service," she
said. "Of devotion to great needs; courage in great causes. I don't think that you have ever
had a chance."

Sir Basil, keeping his eyes on her straight, pale profile, groping and confused in this new
flood of light, wondered if he had.

"You are an extraordinary young woman," he said at last. "You make me believe in everything
you say, though it's so awfully queer, you know, to think in that way about myself. If you
talk to me often like this, about needs and causes, will it give me more of a chance, do you
think?"

"We must all win to the light for ourselves," said Imogen very gently, "but we can help one
another."

They had come now to the edge of the wood and out upon the white road that curved from the
village up to the blue of the hills they had descended. A tiny brook ran with a sharp, silvery
tinkle on its farther edge and it was bordered by a light barrier of white railing. Beyond
were spacious, half-cultivated meadows, stretched out for miles in the lap of low-lying hills.

Serene yet inhuman the landscape looked, a background to the thinnest of histories, significant
only of its own dreaming solitude; and the village, among its elms, a little farther on, suggested
the barest past, the most barren future. The road led on into its main street, where the elms
made a stately avenue, arching over scattered frame houses of buff and gray and white. Imogen
told Sir Basil that some of these houses were old, and pointed out an austere classic facade
with pediment and pillars; explained to him, too, the pathetic condition of so much of abandoned
New England. Sir Basil was thinking more of her last words in the woods than of local color,
but he had, while he listened, a fairly definite impression of pinchbeck shops; of shabby awnings
slanting in the sunlight over heaps of tumbled fruit and vegetables; of "buggies," slip-shod,
with dust-whitened wheels, the long-tailed, long-maned, slightly harnessed horses hitched to
posts along the pavements. The faces that passed were indolent yet eager. The jaws of many
worked mechanically at some unappeasing task of mastication.

Sir Basil had traveled since his arrival in America, had seen the luxuries of the Atlantic
seacoast, the purposeful energy of Chicago, California's Eden-like abundance, and had seen
other New England villages where beauty was cherished and made permanent. He hardly needed
Imogen's further comments to establish his sense of contrast.

"This was always a poor enough little place. Any people who made it count left it long ago.
But even here," she went on, "even in its stagnation, one can find some of the things we care
for in our country, some of the things we live for."

Some of these things seemed personified in the figure of the young woman who met them in the
girls' club, among the shelves of books and the numerous framed photographs from the old masters.
Imogen introduced Sir Basil to her and he watched her with interest while she and Imogen discussed
some business matters. She was slender and upright, perhaps too upright; she was, in manner,
unaffected and assured, perhaps too assured, but that Sir Basil did not observe. He found her
voice unpleasant and her pronunciation faulty, but thought that she expressed herself with
great force and fluency. Her eyes were bright, her skin sallow, she smiled gravely, and her
calmness and her smile reminded Sir Basil a little of Imogen; perhaps they were racial. She
was dressed in a simple gray cotton frock with neat lawn collar and cuffs, and her hair was
raised in a lustrous "pompadour," a wide comb traversing it behind and combs at the sides of
her head upholding it in front. Toward Sir Basil she behaved with gracious stateliness of demeanor,
so that he wondered anew at the anomalies of a country of ideals where a young person so well-appearing
should not be asked to dinner.

Several other girls came in while they were there, and they all surrounded Imogen with eager
familiarity of manner; all displayed toward himself, as he was introduced, variations of Miss
Hickson's stateliness. He thought it most delightful and interesting and the young women very
remarkable persons. One discordant note, only, was struck in the harmony, and that discord
was barely discerned by his untrained ear. While Imogen was talking, a girl appeared in the
doorway, hesitated, then, with an indifferent and forbidding manner, strolled across the room
to the book-shelves, where she selected a book, strolling out again with the barest nod of
sullen recognition. She was a swarthy girl, robust and ample of form, with black eyes and dusky
cheeks. Her torn red blouse and untidy hair marked her out from the sleek and social group.
Sir Basil thought her very interesting looking. He asked Imogen, as they walked away under
the elms, who she was. "That artistic young person, with the dark hair."

"Artistic? Do you mean Mattie Smith?--the girl with the bad manners?" asked Imogen, smiling
tolerantly.

"Yes, she looked like a clever young person. She belongs to the club?"

"She hardly counts as one of its members, though we welcome everyone, and, like all the girls
of the village, she enjoys the use of our library. She is not clever, however. She is an envious
and a rather ill-tempered girl, with very little of the spirit of sisterhood in her. And she
nurses her defect of isolation and self-sufficiency. I hope that we may win her over to wider,
sweeter outlooks some day."

Mattie Smith, however, was one of the people upon whom Imogen wasted no smiles. On the Uptons
first coming to spend their summers near Hamborough, Imogen had found this indolent yet forcible
personality barring her path of benignant activity. Mattie Smith, unaided, undirected, ignorant
of the Time Spirit's high demands upon the individual, had already formed a club of sorts,
a tawdry little room hung with bright bunting and adorned with colored pictures from the cheaper
magazines, pictures of over-elegant, amorously inclined young couples in ball-rooms or on yachts
and beaches. Here the girls read poor literature, played games, made candy over the stove and
gossiped about their young men. Imogen deeply disapproved of the place; its ventilation was
atrocious and its moral influence harmful; it relaxed and did not discipline,--so she had expressed
it to her father. It soon withered under her rival beams. Mattie Smith's members drifted by
degrees into the more advantageous alliance. Mattie Smith had resented this triumphant placing
of the higher standard and took pains, as Imogen, with the calm displeasure of the successful,
observed, to make difficulties for her and to treat her with ostentatious disregard. Imogen
guessed very accurately at the seething of anger and jealousy that bubbled in Mattie Smith's
breast; it was typical of so much of the lamentable spirit displayed by rudimentary natures
when feeling the pressure of an ideal they did not share or when brought into contact with
a more finished manner of life from which they were excluded. Imogen, too, could not have borne
a rival ascendancy; but she was ascendant through right divine, and, while so acutely understanding
Mattie Smith's state of mind, she could not recognize a certain sameness of nature. She hoped
that Mattie Smith would "grow," but she felt that, essentially, she was not of the sort from
which "hers" were made.

XVIII

It was almost four o'clock by the time that Imogen and Sir Basil reached the summit of one
of the lower hills, and, among the trees, came upon the white glimmer of the Upton's summer
home. It stood in a wide clearing surrounded on three sides by the woods, the higher ranges
rising about it, its lawn running down to slopes of long grass, thick with tall daisies and
buttercups. Farther on was an orchard, and then, beyond the dip of a valley, the blue, undulating
distance, bathed in a crystalline quivering. The house, of rough white stucco, had lintels
and window-frames of dark wood, a roof of gray shingles, and bright green shutters. A wide
veranda ran around it, wreathed in vines and creepers, and borders of flowers grew to the edges
of the woods. Sir Basil thought that he had never seen anything prettier. Valerie, dressed
in thin black, was sitting on the veranda, and beside her Miss Bocock, still in traveling dress,
looked incongruously ungraceful. She had arrived an hour before with the Pottses, who had gone
to their rooms, and said, in answer to Imogen's kindly queries, that the journey hadn't been
bad, though the train was very stuffy. Then it appeared that Miss Bocock and Sir Basil were
acquainted; they recollected each other, shook hands heartily, and asked and answered local
questions. Miss Bocock's people lived not so many miles from Thremdon Hall, and, though she
had been little at home of late years, she and Sir Basil had country memories in common. She
said presently that she, too, would like to tidy for the tea, and Imogen, taking her to her
room, sat with her while she smoothed out one section of her hair and tonged the other, and
while she put on a very stiff holland skirt and a blouse distressing to Imogen's sensitive
taste, a crude pink blouse, irrelevantly adorned about the shoulders with a deep frill of imitation
lace. While she dressed she talked, in her high-pitched, cheerful voice, of the recent very
successful lectures she had given in Boston and the acquaintances she had made there.

"I hope that my letters of introduction proved useful," said Imogen. She considered Miss Bocock
her protegee, but Miss Bocock, very vexatiously, seemed always oblivious of that fact; so that
Imogen, though feeling that she had secured a guest who conferred luster, couldn't resist,
now and then, trying to bring her to a slightly clearer sense of obligation.

Miss Bocock said that, yes, they had been very useful, and Imogen watched her select from the
graceful nosegay on her dressing-table two red roses which she pinned to her pink blouse with
a heavy silver brooch representing, in an encircling bough, a mother bird hovering with outstretched
wings over a precariously placed nest.

"Let me get you a white rose," Imogen suggested; but Miss Bocock said, no, thanks, she was
very fond of that shade of red.

"So you know Sir Basil," said Imogen, repressing her sense of irritation.

"Know him? Yes, of course. Everybody in the county knows him. He is the big man thereabouts,
you see. The old squire, his father, was very fond of my father, and we go to a garden-party
at the hall once a year or so. It's a nice old place."

Imogen felt some perplexity. "But if your father and his were such friends why don't you see
more of each other?"

Miss Bocock looked cheerfully at her. "Why, because he is big and we aren't. We are middle-class
and he very much upper; it's a very old family, the Thremdons,--I forget for how many generations
they have been in Surrey. Now my dear old dad was only a country doctor," Miss Bocock went
on, seated in a rocking-chair--she liked rocking-chairs--with her knees crossed, her horribly
shaped patent-leather shoes displayed and her clear eyes, through their glasses, fixed on Imogen
while she made these unshrinking statements; "and a country doctor's family hasn't much to
do with county people."

"What an ugly thing," said Imogen, while, swiftly, her mind adjusted itself to this new seeing
of Miss Bocock. By its illumination Miss Bocock's assurance toward herself grew more irritating
than before, and the fact that Miss Bocock's flavor was very different from Sir Basil's became
apparent.

"Not at all," said Miss Bocock. "It's a natural crystallization. You are working toward the
same sort of thing over here--only not in such a wholesome way, I think."

Imogen flushed a little. "Our crystallizations, when they aren't artificially brought about
by apings of your civilization, take place through real superiority and fitness. A woman of
your intellectual ability is anybody's equal in America."

"Oh, as far as that goes, in that sense, I'm anybody's equal in England, too," said Miss Bocock,
unperturbed and unimpressed.

Imogen rather wished she could make her feel that, since crystallizations were a fact, the
Uptons, in that sense, were as much above her as the Thremdons. Idealist democrat as she counted
herself, she had these quick glances at a standard kept, as it were, for private use; as if,
from under an altar in the temple of humanity, its priest were to draw out for some personal
reassurance a hidden yard-measure.

Tea, when they went down again, was served on the veranda and Imogen could observe, during
its progress, that Miss Bocock showed none of the disposition to fawn on Sir Basil that one
might have expected from a person of the middle-class. She contradicted him as cheerfully as
she did Imogen herself.

Mr. and Mrs. Potts had gone for a little ramble in the lower woods, but they soon appeared,
Mr. Potts seating himself limply on the steps and fanning himself with his broad straw hat--a
hat that in its very largeness and looseness seemed to express the inflexible ideals of non-conformity--while
Mrs. Potts, very firmly busked and bridled, her head very sleek, her smile very tight, took
a chair between Mrs. Upton and Sir Basil, and soon showed, in her whole demeanor, a consciousness
of the latter's small titular decoration that placed her more definitely for Imogen's eye than
she had ever been placed before. The Pottses were middle-class with a vengeance. Imogen's irritation
grew as she watched these limpet-like friends, one sprawling and ill-at-ease for all his careful
languor, the other quite dreadfully well-mannered, sipping her tea, arching her brows and assuming
all sorts of perilous elegancies of pronunciation that Imogen had never before heard her attempt.
It was an additional vexation to have them display toward herself, with even more exaggeration
than usual, their tenacious tenderness; listening, with a grave turning of head and eye when
she spoke, and receiving each remark with an over-emphasis of feeling on their over-mobile
features.

There was, indeed, an odd irony in the Pottses being there at all. They had, in her father's
lifetime, only been asked with a horde of their kind, the whole uplifted batch thus worked
off together, and Imogen had really not expected her mother to agree to her suggestion that
they should be invited to pay the annual visit during Sir Basil's stay. She would not own to
herself that her suggestion had been made from a vague wish to put her mother to a test, to
force her into a definite declaration against the incongruous guests; she had thought of the
suggestion, rather, as an upholding of her father's banner before the oncoming betrayal; but,
instead of refusal, she had met with an instant, happy acquiescence, and it was now surely
the climax of irony to see how her mother, for her sake, bore with them. More than for her
sake, perhaps. Imogen detected in those seemingly indolent, yet so observant, eyes a keen reading
of the Pottses' perturbed condition, and in her manner, so easy and so apt, the sweetest, lightest
kindness. She turned corners and drew veils for them, spread a warm haze of interest and serenity
about their clumsy and obtruding personalities. Imogen could even see that the Pottses were
reconsidering, with some confusion of mind, their old verdict on her mother.

This realization brought to her brooding thoughts a sudden pang of self-reproach. It wouldn't
do for the Pottses to find in her mother the cordiality they might miss in herself. She confessed
that, for a moment, she had allowed the banner to trail in the dust of worldly thoughts, the
banner to which the Pottses, poor dears, had rallied for so many loyal years. She summoned
once more all her funds of spiritual appreciation and patience. As for Miss Bocock, she made
not the slightest attempt to talk to the Pottses. She had come up with them from the station,--they
had not found each other on the train,--and she had probably had her fill of them in that time.
Once or twice, in the act of helping herself plentifully to cake, she paused to listen to them,
and after that looked away, over their heads or through them, as if she finally dismissed them
from the field of her attention. Mrs. Potts was questioning Sir Basil about his possible knowledge
of her own English ancestry. "We came over in the Mayflower, you know," she said.

"Really," said Sir Basil, all courteous interest.

"The Claremonts, you know," said Mrs. Potts, modestly, yet firmly, too. "My father was in direct
descent; we have it all worked out in our family tree."

"Oh, really," said Sir Basil again.

"I've no doubt," said Mrs. Potts, "that your forebears and mine, Sir Basil, were friends and
comrades in the spacious times of good Queen Bess."

Imogen, at this, glanced swiftly at her mother; but she caught no trace of wavering on that
mild countenance.

"Oh, well, no," Sir Basil answered. "My people were very little country squires in those days;
we didn't have much to do with the Dukes of Claremont. We only began to go up, you see, a good
bit after you were on the top."

Imogen fixed a calm but a very cold eye upon Mrs. Potts. She had heard of the Dukes of Claremont
for many years; so had everybody who knew Mrs. Potts; they were an innocent, an ingrained illusion
of the good lady's, but to-day they seemed less innocent and more irritating than usual. Imogen
felt that she could have boxed Mrs. Potts's silly ears. In Sir Basil's pleasant disclaimers,
too, there was an echo of Miss Bocock's matter-of-fact acknowledgments that seemed to set them
both leagues away from the Pottses and to make their likeness greater than their difference.

"Well, of course," Mrs. Potts was going on, her pince-nez and all her small features mingled,
as it were, in the vividest glitter, "for me, I confess, it's blood, above all and beyond all,
that counts; and you and I, Sir Basil, know that it is in the squirearchy that some of the
best blood in England is found. We don't recognize an aristocracy in our country, Sir Basil,
but, though not recognized, it rules,--blood must rule; one often, in a democracy, feels that
as one's problem."

"It's only through service that it rules," Mr. Potts suddenly ejaculated from where he sat
doubled on the steps looking with a gloomy gaze into the distance. "Service; service--that's
our watchword. Lend a hand."

Imogen saw a latent boredom piercing Sir Basil's affability. Great truths uttered by some lips
might be made to seem very unefficacious. She proposed to him that she should show him the
wonderful display of mountain-laurel that grew higher up among the pine-woods. He rose with
alacrity, but Mrs. Potts rose too. Imogen could hardly control her vexation when, nipping the
crumbs from her lap and smoothing the folds at her waist, she declared that she was just in
the humor for a walk and must see the laurel with them.

"You mustn't tire yourself. Wouldn't you rather stay and have another cup of tea and talk to
me?" Mrs. Upton interposed, so that Imogen felt a dart of keen gratitude for such comprehension;
but Mrs. Potts was not to be turned aside from her purpose. "Thank you so much, dear Mrs. Upton,"
she answered; "we must have many, many talks indeed; but I do want to see my precious Imogen,
and to see the laurel with her. You are one of those rare beings, darling Imogen, with whom
one can share nature. Will you come, too, Delancy, dear?" she asked her husband, "or will you
stay and talk to Mrs. Upton and Miss Bocock? I'm sure that they will be eager to hear of this
new peace committee of ours and zestful to help on the cause."

Mr. Potts rather sulkily said that he would stay and talk to Mrs. Upton and Miss Bocock about
the committee, and Imogen felt that it was in a manner of atonement to him for her monopolization
of a lustrous past that Mrs. Potts presently, as they began the steep ascent along a winding,
mossy path, told Sir Basil that her husband, too, knew the responsibility and burden of "blood."
And as, for a moment, they went before her, Imogen fancied that she heard the murmur of quite
a new great name casting its agis about Mr. Potts. Very spiritual people could, she reflected,
become strangely mendacious when borne along on the wings of ardor and exaltation.

Mrs. Potts's presence was really quite intolerable, and, as she walked behind her and listened
to her murmur, Imogen bethought her of an amusing, though rather ruthless, plan of elimination.
Imogen was very capable of ruthlessness when circumstances demanded it. Turning, therefore,
suddenly to the right, she led them into a steep and rocky path that, as she well knew, would
eventually prove impassable to Mrs. Potts's short legs and stiff, fat person. Indeed, Mrs.
Potts soon began to pant and sigh. Her recital of the family annals became disconnected; she
paused to take off and rub her eyeglasses and presently asked, in extenuated tones, if this
were the usual path to the laurel.

"It's the one I always take, dear Mrs. Potts; it's the one I wanted Sir Basil to see, it's
so far the lovelier. One gets the most wonderful, steep views down into far depths of blue,"
Imogen, perched like a slender Valkyrie on the summit of a crag above, thus addressed her perturbed
friend.

She couldn't really but be amused by Mrs. Potts's pertinacity, for, not yet relinquishing her
purpose, she continued, in silence now, her lips compressed, her forehead beaded with moisture,
to scale the difficult way, showing a resolute nimbleness amazing in one so ill-formed for
feats of agility. Sir Basil gave her a succoring hand while Imogen soared ahead, confident
of the moment when Mrs. Potts, perforce, must fall back.

"Tiresome woman!" she thought, but she couldn't help smiling while she thought it, and heard
Mrs. Potts's deep breath laboring up behind her. It was, perhaps, rather a shame to balk her
in this way; but, after all, she was to have a full fortnight of Sir Basil and she, Imogen,
felt that on this day, the day of a new friendship, Sir Basil's claim on her was paramount.
She had something for him, a light, a strengthening, and she must keep the hour sacred to that
stir of awakening. Among the pines and laurels she would say a few more words of help to him.
So that Mrs. Potts must be made to go.

The moment came. A shoulder of rock overhung the way and the only passage was over its almost
perpendicular surface. Imogen, as if unconscious of difficulty, with a stride, a leap, a swift
clutch of her firm white hand, was at the top, smiling down at them and saying: "Now here the
view is our very loveliest. One looks down for miles."

"But--my dear Imogen--is there no other way, round it, perhaps?" Mrs. Potts looked desperately
into the thick underbrush on either side.

"No other way," said Imogen. "But you can manage it. This is only the beginning,--there's some
real climbing farther on. Put your foot where I did--no, higher--near the little fern--your
hand here, look, do you see? Take a firm hold of that--then a good spring--and here you are."

Poor Mrs. Potts laid a faltering hand on the high ledge that was only a first stage in the
chamois-like feat, and Imogen saw unwilling relinquishment in her eye.

"I don't see as I can do it," she murmured, relapsing, in her distress, into a helpless vernacular.

"Oh, yes, this is nothing. Sir Basil will give you a push. I'll pull you and he will push you,"
Imogen, with kindest solicitude, suggested.

"Oh, I don't see as I can," Mrs. Potts repeated, looking rather wild at the vision of such
a push. She didn't at all lend herself to pushes, and yet, facing even the indignities of that
method, she did, though faltering, place herself in position; did lay a desperate hold of the
high ledge, place her small, fat, tightly buttoned foot high beside the fern; allow Sir Basil,
with a hand under each armpit, to kindly count "One-two-three--now for it!"--did even, at the
word of command, make a passionate jump, only to lose hold, scrape lamentably down the surface
of the rock, and collapse into his arms.

"Oh, I'm so sorry!" said Imogen, looking down upon them while Sir Basil placed Mrs. Potts upon
her feet, and while Mrs. Potts, angered almost to tears, rubbed with her handkerchief at the
damage done to her dress. "I'm so very sorry, dear Mrs. Potts. I see that it is a little too
steep for you. And I did so want you to see this view."

"I shall have to go back. I am very tired, quite exhausted," said Mrs. Potts, in a voice that
slightly shook. "I wish you had taken the usual path. I never dreamed that we were setting
out on such a--such a violent expedition."

"But this is my usual path," said Imogen, opening her eyes. "I've never found it hard. And
I wanted you and Sir Basil to see my view. But, dear Mrs. Potts, let me go back with you. Sir
Basil won't mind finding his way alone, I'm sure."

"Oh, no, thanks! No, I couldn't think of spoiling your walk. No, I will go back," and Mrs.
Potts, turning away, began to retrace her steps.

"Be sure and lie down and rest; take a little nap before dinner," Imogen called after her.

Mrs. Potts disappeared, and Imogen, when she and Sir Basil stood together on the fortunate
obstacle, said: "Poor, excellent creature. I am sorry. She is displeased with me. I ought to
have remembered that this was too rough for her and taken the other path." Indeed, she had
felt rather guilty as Mrs. Potts's back, the ridge of its high stays strongly marked by the
slanting sunlight, descended among the sylvan scenery.

"Yes, and she did so want to come, awfully keen on it," said Sir Basil; "but I hope you won't
think me very brutal if I confess that I'm not sorry. I want to talk to you, you see," Sir
Basil beamed.

"I would rather talk to you, too," Imogen smiled. "My good old friend can be very wearisome.
But it was thoughtless of me to have brought her on this way."

They rested for a little while on their rock, looking down into the distance that was, indeed,
worth any amount of climbing. And afterward, when they reached the fairyland where the laurel
drifted through the pine woods, and as she quoted "Wood-Notes" to him and pointed out to him
the delicate splendors of the polished green, the clear, cold pink, on a background of gray
rock, Imogen could but feel her little naughtiness well justified. First, lance shake
did not like the coachman Aponte. And just was not serious and frightening man but belonged
to the spoiled son of the house, which would not delegate to anyone the right to chastise.

Neither did Don Meliton evil deeds or bad words for Dolores. Far from it, for it reserved their
smiles, their kindness and hospitality. From time to time the gift was scarves and trinkets,
that she accepted without hesitation, although use had to lie their girls, because, after all,
no little vanity flattered that a white man employ her such compliments.

These distinctions were not origin of Dolores Butler for the fact I was the maid of the ladies
of the house, treated it with some considerations by the whole family, no, they had different
origins, came from the merits of the girl as a woman: young, shapely and attractive to black.

That day for being late for his commitment to the brig Speedy, Don Meliton lunch the head of
the table in the dining room, with all the airs of master, carefully served by Tirso, happened
to pass by Dolores and stumble with his elbow at times to be wearing a cup of wine in your mouth.
Whatever happened to that thought or deed, the Butler took advantage the opportunity to hit a
pinch in the nude and shapely arm.

- Oh, Don Meliton! she said without raising his voice, even touching
his sore spot.

- Ay, Dolores! mimicked him, full of laughter.

-
It hurts, he said the girl.

- Ca! Never mind.

If you still have to deliver.

Dolores made noise with his mouth onomatopoeic called fry an egg, as if he did not believe iota
in the sincerity of the last words of Butler. However, sick sweet the name of freedom for the
slave girl shut your ears to the promise and the heart hope to see it done, whatever it was
the sacrifice that required the donor. Anyway, he followed her with his eyes until he passed the
arch of the courtyard, and then murmured

- This is still home to rogue Aponte. It would be a shame!

María de Regla, mentioned at the beginning of this story, their marriage was legitimate Pains
with Dionysius the cook, fifteen years before the present time. Dona was simultaneously Rosa
Adela, his youngest daughter, which he gave to Mary Rule to be the lactase, not feel able to
play it then that, the sweetest of duties mother.

Her friendship with Sir Basil, his devotion to her, must be, though by no means humiliating,
something of a coal of fire laid on Jack's traitorous head; and she saw at once that he was
pleased, touched, but perplexed, by what must seem to him an unforeseen smoothing of her mother's
path. He was there, she guessed, far more to see that her mother's path was made smooth than
to try and straighten out their own twisted and separate ways. He had come for her mother,
not for her; and Imogen did not know whether it was more pain or anger that the realization
gave her.

What puzzled him, what must have puzzled her mother, must puzzle, indeed, anyone who perceived
it,--except, no doubt, the innocent Sir Basil himself,--was that this friendship took up most
of Sir Basil's time.

To Sir Basil she stood for something lofty and exquisite that did not, of course, clash with
more rudimentary, if deeper, affections, but that, perforce, made them stand aside for the
little interlude where it soared and sang. There was, for Imogen, a sharp sweetness in this
fact and in Jack's bewildered appreciation of it, though for her own consciousness the triumph
was no satisfying one. After all, of what use was it to soar and sing if Sir Basil were to
drop to earth so inevitably and so soon? Outwardly, at all events, this unforeseen change in
the situation gave her all the advantage in her meeting with Jack. She was not the reproved
and isolated creature that he might have expected to find. She was not the helpless girl, subjugated
by an alien mother and cast off by a faithless lover. No; calm, benignant, lovely, she had
turned to other needs; one was not helpless while one helped; not small when others looked
up to one.

Under her calm was the lament; under her unfaltering smile, the loneliness and the burning
of that bitter indignation; but Jack could not guess at that, and if both felt difficulty in
the neatly balanced friendship pledged under the wisteria, if there was a breathlessness for
both in the tight-rope performance,--where one false step might topple one over into open hostility,
or else, who knew, into complete surrender,--it was Imogen who gained composure from Jack's
nervousness, and while he walked the rope with a fluttering breath and an anxious eye she herself
could show the most graceful slides and posturings in midair.

It was evident enough to everybody that the relation was a changed, a precarious one, but all
the seeming danger was Jack's alone.

Imogen, while she swung and balanced, often found her mother's eye fixed on her with a deep
preoccupation, and guessed that it was owing to her mother's tactics that most of her tete-a-tetes
with Jack were due. Her poor mother might imagine that she thus secured the solid foundation
of the earth for their footsteps, but Imogen knew that never was the rope so dizzily swung
as when she and Jack were thus gently coerced into solitude together.

It was, however, a few days after Jack's arrival, and a few days before the Pottses' departure,
that an interest came to her of such an absorbing nature that it wrapped her mind away from
the chill or scorching sense of her own wrongs. It was with the Pottses that the plan originated,
and though the Pottses were proving more trying than they had ever been, they caught some of
the radiance of their own proposal. As instruments in a great purpose, she could look upon
them more patiently, though, more than ever, it would need tact to prevent them from shadowing
the brightness that they offered. The plan, apparently, had been with them for some time, its
disclosure delayed until the moment suited to its seriousness and sanctity, and it was then,
between the three, mapped out and discussed carefully before they felt it ripe for further
publicity. Then it was Imogen who told them that the time had come for the unfolding to her
mother, and Imogen who led them, on a sunny afternoon, into her mother's little sitting-room
where she sat writing at her desk.

Jack was there, reading near the window that opened upon the veranda, but his presence was
not one to make the occasion less intimate, and Imogen was glad of it. It was well that he
should be a witness to what she felt to be a confession of faith, a confession that needed
explicit defining, and of a faith that he and all the others, by common consent, seemed banded
together to ignore.

So, with something of the air of a lovely verger, she led her primed pair into the room and
pointed out two chairs to them.

Valerie, in her thin black draperies, looked pale and jaded. She turned from her desk, keeping
her pen in her hand, and Imogen detected in her eye, as it rested upon the Pottses, a certain
impatience.

Tison, suddenly awakening, broke into passionate barking; he had from the moment of Mr. Potts's
arrival shown toward him a pronounced aversion, and, backed under the safe refuge of his mistress's
chair, his sharp hostility disturbed the ceremonious entrance.

"Please put the dog out, Jack," said Imogen; "we have a very serious matter to talk over with
mama." But Valerie, stooping, caught him up, keeping a soothing hand on his still defiant head,
while Mr. Potts unfolded the plan before her.

The wonderful purpose, the wonderful project, was that Mr. Potts, aided by Imogen, should write
the life of the late Mr. Upton; and as the curtain was drawn from before the shrined intention,
Imogen saw that her mother flushed deeply.

"His name must not be allowed to die from among us, Mrs. Upton. His ideals must become more
widely the ideals of his countrymen." Mr. Potts, crossing his knees and throwing back his shoulders,
wrapped one hand, while he spoke, in a turn of his flowing beard. "They are in crying need
of such a message, now, when the tides of social materialism and political corruption are at
their height. We may well say, to paraphrase the great poet's words: 'Upton! thou shouldst
be living at this hour; New York hath need of thee.' And this need is one that it is our duty,
and our high privilege, to satisfy." Mr. Potts's eye, heavy with its responsibility, dwelt
on Valerie's downcast face. "No one, I may say it frankly, Mrs. Upton, is more fitted than
I to satisfy that need and to hand on that message. No one had more opportunity than I for
understanding that radiant personality in its public aspects. No one can feel more deeply than
I that duty and that privilege. Every American child should know the name of Upton; every American
man and woman should count him among the prophets of his generation. He did not ask for fame,
and we, his followers, ask none for him. No marble temple, no effulgent light of stained glass;--no.
But the violets and lilies of childhood laid upon his grave; the tearful, yet joyous whisper
of those who come to share his spirit:--'I, too, am of his race. I, too, can with him strive
and with him achieve.'" Mr. Potts's voice had risen, and Tison, once more, gave a couple of
hoarse, smothered barks.

Imogen, though reared on verbal bombast, had found some difficulty in maintaining her expression
of uplifted approbation while Mr. Potts's rhetoric rolled; her willingness that Mr. Potts should
serve the cause did not blind her to his inadequacy unless kept under the most careful control;
and now, though incensed by Tison's interjection, she felt it as something of a relief, seizing
the opportunity of Mr. Potts's momentary confusion to suggest, in a gentle and guarded voice:--"You
might tell mama now, Mr. Potts, how we want her to help us."

"I am coming to that, Miss Imogen," said Mr. Potts, with a drop from sonority to dryness;--"I
was approaching that point when the dog interrupted me"; and Mr. Potts cast a very venomous
glance upon Tison.

"Had not the dog better be removed, Mrs. Upton?" Mrs. Potts, under her breath, murmured, leaning,
as if in a pew and above prayer books, forward in her chair. But Mrs. Upton seemed deaf to
the suggestion.

Mr. Potts cleared his throat and resumed somewhat tersely:--"This is our project, Mrs. Upton,
and we have come this afternoon to ask you for your furtherance of it. You, of course, can
provide me and Miss Imogen with many materials, inaccessible otherwise, for this our work of
love. Early letters, to you;--early photographs;--reminiscences of his younger days, and so
on. Any suggestion as to the form and scope of the book we will be glad, very glad, to consider."

Valerie had listened without a word or gesture, her pen still held in one hand, Tison pressed
to her by the other, as she sat sideways to the writing-table. Imogen read in her face a mingled
embarrassment and displeasure.

"I am sure we must all be very grateful to Mr. Potts for this great idea of his, mama dear,"
she said. "I thought of it, of course, as soon as papa died; I knew that we all owed it to
him, and to the country that he loved and served so well; but I did not see my way, and have
not seen it till now. I've so little technical knowledge. But now I shall contribute a little
memoir to the biography and, in any other way, give Mr. Potts all the aid I can. And we hope
that you will, too. Papa's name is one that must not be allowed to fade."

"I would rather talk of this at some other time, and with Mr. Potts alone," Valerie now said,
not raising her eyes.

"But mama, this is my work, too. I must be present when it is talked of."

"No, Jack, don't go," said Valerie, looking up at the young man, who had made a gesture of
rising. "You and I, Imogen, will speak of this together, and I will find an hour, later, when
I will be free to talk to Mr. Potts."

"Mama darling," said Imogen, masking her rising anger in patient playfulness, "you are a lazy,
postponing person. You are not a bit busy, and this is just the time to talk it over with us
all. Of course Jack must stay; we want his advice, too, severe critic as we know him to be.
Come, dear, put down that pen." She bent over her and drew the pen from her hand while Mr.
Potts watched the little scene, old suspicions clouding his countenance.

"My time is limited, Mrs. Upton," he observed; "Mrs. Potts and I take our departure to-morrow
and, if I have heard aright, you expect acquaintances to dinner. Therefore, if you will pardon
me, I must ask you to let us have the benefit, here and now, of your suggestions."

Valerie had not responded by any smile to Imogen's rather baleful lightness, nor did she, by
any penitence of look, respond to Mr. Potts's urgency. She sat silent for a moment, and when
she spoke it was in a changed voice, dulled, monotonous. "If you insist on my speaking, now--and
openly,--I must say to you that I altogether disapprove of your project. You will never," said
Valerie, with a rising color, "gain my consent to it."

A heavy silence followed her words, the only sound that of Tison's faint sniffings, as, his
nose outstretched and moving from side to side, he cautiously savored the air in Mr. Potts's
direction. Mrs. Potts stirred slightly, and uttered a sharp, "Tht--tht." Mr. Potts, his hand
still stayed in his beard, gazed from under the fringed penthouse of his brows with an arrested,
bovine look.

It was Imogen who broke the silence. Standing beside her mother she had felt the shock of a
curious fulfilment go through her, as if she had almost expected to hear what she now heard.
She mastered her voice to ask:--"We must demand your reasons for this--this very strange attitude,
mama."

Her mother did not raise her eyes. "I don't think that your father was a man of sufficient
distinction to justify the publishing of his biography."

At this Mr. Potts breathed a deep, indignant volume of sound, louder than a sigh, less articulate
than a groan, through the forests of his beard.

"Sufficient distinction, Mrs. Upton! Sufficient distinction! You evidently are quite ignorant
of how great was the distinction of your late husband. Ask us what that distinction was--ask
any of his large circle of friends. It was a distinction not of mind only, nor of birth and
breeding--though that was of the highest that this country has fostered--but it was a distinction
also of soul and spirit. Your husband, Mrs. Upton, fought with speech and pen the iniquities
of his country, the country that, as Miss Imogen has said, he loved and served. He served,
he loved, with mind and heart and hand. He was the moving spirit in all the great causes of
his day, the vitalizing influence that poured faith and will-power into them. He founded the
cooperative community of Clackville; he organized the society of the 'Doers' among our young
men;--he was a patron of the arts; talent was fostered, cheered on its way by him;--I can speak
personally of three young friends of mine--noble boys--whom he sent to Paris at his own expense
for the study of music and painting; when the great American picture is painted, the great
American symphony composed, it will be, in all probability, to your husband that the country
will owe the unveiling of its power. And above all, Mrs. Upton, above all,"--Mr. Potts's voice
dropped to a thunderous solemnity,--"his character, his personality, his spirit, were as a
light shining in darkness to all who had the good fortune to know him, and that light cannot,
shall not, be cribbed, cabined and confined to a merely private capacity. It is a public possession
and belongs to his country and to his age."

Tison, all unheeded now, had leapt to the floor and, during this address, had stood directly
in front of the speaker, barking furiously until Imogen, her lips compressed, her forehead
flushed, stooped, picked him up, and flung him out of the room.

Mrs. Upton had sat quite motionless, only lifting her glance now and then to Mr. Potts's shaking
beard and flashing eye. And, after another pause, in which only Mr. Potts's deep breathing
was heard,--and the desperate scratching at the door of the banished Tison,--she said in somber
tones:--"I think you forget, Mr. Potts, that I was never one of my husband's appreciators.
I am sorry to be forced to recall this fact to your memory."

It had been in all their memories, of course, a vague, hovering uncertainty, a dark suspicion
that one put aside and would not look at. But to have it now placed before them, and in these
cold, these somber tones, was to receive an icy douche of reality, to be convicted of over-ready
hope, over-generous confidence.

It was Imogen, again, who found words for the indignant deputation: "Is that lamentable fact
any reason why those who do appreciate him should not share their knowledge with others?"

"I think it is;--I hope so, Imogen," her mother replied, not raising her eyes to her.

"You tell us that your own ignorance and blindness is to prevent us from writing my father's life?"

"My opinion of your father's relative insignificance is, I think, a sufficient reason."

"Do you quite realize the arrogance of that attitude?"

"I accept all its responsibility, Imogen."

"But we cannot accept it in you," said Imogen, her voice sinking to the hard quiver of reality
that Jack well knew;--"we can't fail in our duty to him because you have always failed in yours.
We are in no way bound to consider you-who never considered him."

"Imogen," said her mother, raising her eyes with a look of command; "you forget yourself. Be
still."

Imogen's face froze to stone. Such words, such a look, she had never met before. She stood
silent, helpless, rage and despair at her heart.

But Mr. Potts did not lag behind his duty. His hand still wrapped, Moses-like, in his beard,
his eyes bent in holy wrath upon his hostess, he rose to his feet, and Mrs. Potts, in recounting
the scene--one of the most thrilling of her life--always said that never had she seen Delancy
so superbly true, never had she seen blood so tell.

"I must say to you, Mrs. Upton, with the deepest pain," he said, "that I agree with Miss Imogen.
I must inform you, Mrs. Upton, that you have no right, legal or moral, to bind us by your own
shortcoming. Miss Imogen and I may do our duty without your help or consent."

