Gen. Benjamin F. Butler, whom we preferred to call “Silver Spoons” Butler from his New Orleans
experiences during the war, had a lot of money invested, we were told, in the First National
bank at Northfield, Minnesota, as also had J. T. Ames, Butler’s son-in-law, who had been the
“carpet-bag” governor of Mississippi after the war.

Butler’s treatment of the Southerners during the war was not such as to commend him to our
regard, and we felt little compunction, under the circumstances, about raiding him or his.

Accordingly, about the middle of August we made up a party to visit Northfield, going north
by rail.  There were Jim, Bob and myself, Clell Miller, who had been accused of the Gad’s Hill,
Muncie, Corydon, Hot Springs and perhaps other bank and train robberies, but who had not been
convicted of any of them; Bill Chadwell, a young fellow from Illinois, and three men whose
names on the expedition were Pitts, Woods and Howard.

We spent a week in Minneapolis, seeing the sights, playing poker and looking around for information,
after which we spent a similar period in St. Paul.

I was accounted a fairly good poker player in those days, and had won about $3,000 the winter
I was in Florida, while Chadwell was one of the best that ever played the game.

We both played our last game of poker in St. Paul that week, for he was soon to die at Northfield,
and in the quarter of a century that has passed since such a change has come over me that I
not only have no desire to play cards, but it disgusts me even to see boys gamble with dice
for cigars.

This last game was at a gambling house on East Third street, between Jackson and Robert streets,
about half a block from the Merchants’ hotel, where we were stopping.  Guy Salisbury, who has
since become a minister, was the proprietor of the gambling house, and Charles Hickson was
the bartender.  It was upstairs over a restaurant run by Archie McLeod, who is still in St. Paul.

Chadwell and I were nearly $300 ahead of the game when Bob came along and insisted on sitting
in, and we left the table.  I never would play in a game where Bob was.

Early in the last week in August we started on the preliminary work for the Northfield expedition.

27. HORACE GREELEY PERRY

When we split up in St. Paul Howard, Woods, Jim and Clell Miller were to go to Red Wing to
get their horses, while Chadwell, Pitts, Bob and myself were to go to St. Peter or Mankato,
but Bob and Chadwell missed the train and they had me in a stew to know what had happened to
them.  We watched the papers, but could find nothing about any arrest, and Pitts and I bought
our horses at St. Peter.  I was known as King, and some of the fellows called me Congressman
King, insisting that I bore some resemblance to Congressman William S. King of Minneapolis.
I bought two horses, one from a man named Hodge and the other from a man named French, and
while we were breaking them there at St. Peter I made the acquaintance of a little girl who
was afterward one of the most earnest workers for our parole.

A little tot then, she said she could ride a horse, too, and reaching down I lifted her up
before me, and we rode up and down.  I asked her name and she said it was “Horace Greeley Perry,”
and I replied:

“No wonder you’re such a little tot, with such a great name.”

“I won’t always be little,” she replied.  “I’m going to be a great big girl, and be a newspaper
man like my pa.”

“Will you still be my sweetheart then, and be my friend?” I asked her, and she declared she
would, a promise I was to remind her of years later under circumstances of which I did not
dream then.

Many years afterward with a party of visitors to the prison came a girl, perhaps sixteen, who
registered in full “Horace Greeley Perry.”

