I still remember the first time I ever entered the presence of that man. The boat had backed
out from St. Louis and was 'straightening down;' I ascended to the pilot-house in high feather,
and very proud to be semi- officially a member of the executive family of so fast and famous
a boat.  Brown was at the wheel.  I paused in the middle of the room, all fixed to make my
bow, but Brown did not look around. I thought he took a furtive glance at me out of the corner
of his eye, but as not even this notice was repeated, I judged I had been mistaken. By this
time he was picking his way among some dangerous 'breaks' abreast the woodyards; therefore
it would not be proper to interrupt him; so I stepped softly to the high bench and took a seat.

There was silence for ten minutes; then my new boss turned and inspected me deliberately and
painstakingly from head to heel for about--as it seemed to me--a quarter of an hour. After
which he removed his countenance and I saw it no more for some seconds; then it came around
once more, and this question greeted me--

'Are you Horace Bigsby's cub?'

'Yes, sir.'

After this there was a pause and another inspection.  Then--

'What's your name?'

I told him.  He repeated it after me.  It was probably the only thing he ever forgot; for although
I was with him many months he never addressed himself to me in any other way than 'Here!' and
then his command followed.

'Where was you born?'

'In Florida, Missouri.'

A pause.  Then--

'Dern sight better staid there!'

By means of a dozen or so of pretty direct questions, he pumped my family history out of me.

The leads were going now, in the first crossing.  This interrupted the inquest.  When the leads
had been laid in, he resumed--

'How long you been on the river?'

I told him.  After a pause--

'Where'd you get them shoes?'

I gave him the information.

'Hold up your foot!'

I did so.  He stepped back, examined the shoe minutely and contemptuously, scratching his head
thoughtfully, tilting his high sugar-loaf hat well forward to facilitate the operation, then
ejaculated, 'Well, I'll be dod derned!' and returned to his wheel.

What occasion there was to be dod derned about it is a thing which is still as much of a mystery
to me now as it was then. It must have been all of fifteen minutes--fifteen minutes of dull,
homesick silence-- before that long horse-face swung round upon me again--and then, what a
change! It was as red as fire, and every muscle in it was working. Now came this shriek--

'Here!--You going to set there all day?'

I lit in the middle of the floor, shot there by the electric suddenness of the surprise.  As
soon as I could get my voice I said, apologetically:--'I have had no orders, sir.'

'You've had no ORDERS!  My, what a fine bird we are!  We must have ORDERS! Our father was a
GENTLEMAN--owned slaves--and we've been to SCHOOL. Yes, WE are a gentleman, TOO, and got to
have ORDERS!  ORDERS, is it? ORDERS is what you want!  Dod dern my skin, I'LL learn you to
swell yourself up and blow around here about your dod-derned ORDERS! G'way from the wheel!'
(I had approached it without knowing it.)

I moved back a step or two, and stood as in a dream, all my senses stupefied by this frantic
assault.

'What you standing there for?  Take that ice-pitcher down to the texas- tender-come, move along,
and don't you be all day about it!'

The moment I got back to the pilot-house, Brown said--

'Here!  What was you doing down there all this time?'

'I couldn't find the texas-tender; I had to go all the way to the pantry.'

'Derned likely story!  Fill up the stove.'

I proceeded to do so.  He watched me like a cat. Presently he shouted--

'Put down that shovel!  Deadest numskull I ever saw--ain't even got sense enough to load up
a stove.'

All through the watch this sort of thing went on.  Yes, and the subsequent watches were much
like it, during a stretch of months. As I have said, I soon got the habit of coming on duty
with dread. The moment I was in the presence, even in the darkest night, I could feel those
yellow eyes upon me, and knew their owner was watching for a pretext to spit out some venom
on me. Preliminarily he would say--

'Here!  Take the wheel.'

Two minutes later--

'WHERE in the nation you going to?  Pull her down! pull her down!'

After another moment--

'Say!  You going to hold her all day?  Let her go--meet her! meet her!'

Then he would jump from the bench, snatch the wheel from me, and meet her himself, pouring
out wrath upon me all the time.

George Ritchie was the other pilot's cub.  He was having good times now; for his boss, George
Ealer, was as kindhearted as Brown wasn't. Ritchie had steeled for Brown the season before;
consequently he knew exactly how to entertain himself and plague me, all by the one operation.
Whenever I took the wheel for a moment on Ealer's watch, Ritchie would sit back on the bench
and play Brown, with continual ejaculations of 'Snatch her! snatch her! Derndest mud-cat I
ever saw!'  'Here!  Where you going NOW? Going to run over that snag?'  'Pull her DOWN!  Don't
you hear me? Pull her DOWN!'  'There she goes!  JUST as I expected! I TOLD you not to cramp
that reef.  G'way from the wheel!'

So I always had a rough time of it, no matter whose watch it was; and sometimes it seemed to
me that Ritchie's good-natured badgering was pretty nearly as aggravating as Brown's dead-earnest
nagging.

I often wanted to kill Brown, but this would not answer. A cub had to take everything his boss
gave, in the way of vigorous comment and criticism; and we all believed that there was a United
States law making it a penitentiary offense to strike or threaten a pilot who was on duty.

Brown was ALWAYS watching for a pretext to find fault; and if he could find no plausible pretext,
he would invent one. He would scold you for shaving a shore, and for not shaving it; for hugging
a bar, and for not hugging it; for 'pulling down' when not invited, and for not pulling down
when not invited; for firing up without orders, and for waiting FOR orders.  In a word, it
was his invariable rule to find fault with EVERYTHING you did; and another invariable rule
of his was to throw all his remarks (to you) into the form of an insult.

One day we were approaching New Madrid, bound down and heavily laden. Brown was at one side
of the wheel, steering; I was at the other, standing by to 'pull down' or 'shove up.'  He cast
a furtive glance at me every now and then.  I had long ago learned what that meant; viz., he
was trying to invent a trap for me.  I wondered what shape it was going to take. By and by
he stepped back from the wheel and said in his usual snarly way--

'Here!--See if you've got gumption enough to round her to.'

This was simply BOUND to be a success; nothing could prevent it; for he had never allowed me
to round the boat to before; consequently, no matter how I might do the thing, he could find
free fault with it.  He stood back there with his greedy eye on me, and the result was what
might have been foreseen: I lost my head in a quarter of a minute, and didn't know what I was
about; I started too early to bring the boat around, but detected a green gleam of joy in Brown's
eye, and corrected my mistake; I started around once more while too high up, but corrected
myself again in time; I made other false moves, and still managed to save myself; but at last
I grew so confused and anxious that I tumbled into the very worst blunder of all--I got too
far down before beginning to fetch the boat around. Brown's chance was come.

His face turned red with passion; he made one bound, hurled me across the house with a sweep
of his arm, spun the wheel down, and began to pour out a stream of vituperation upon me which
lasted till he was out of breath. In the course of this speech he called me all the different
kinds of hard names he could think of, and once or twice I thought he was even going to swear--but
he didn't this time. 'Dod dern' was the nearest he ventured to the luxury of swearing, for
he had been brought up with a wholesome respect for future fire and brimstone.

That was an uncomfortable hour; for there was a big audience on the hurricane deck.  When I
went to bed that night, I killed Brown in seventeen different ways--all of them new.

Chapter 19 Brown and I Exchange Compliments

Two trips later, I got into serious trouble.  Brown was steering; I was 'pulling down.'  My
younger brother appeared on the hurricane deck, and shouted to Brown to stop at some landing
or other a mile or so below. Brown gave no intimation that he had heard anything.  But that
was his way:  he never condescended to take notice of an under clerk. The wind was blowing;
Brown was deaf (although he always pretended he wasn't), and I very much doubted if he had
heard the order. If I had two heads, I would have spoken; but as I had only one, it seemed
judicious to take care of it; so I kept still.

Presently, sure enough, we went sailing by that plantation. Captain Klinefelter appeared on
the deck, and said--

'Let her come around, sir, let her come around. Didn't Henry tell you to land here?'

'NO, sir!'

'I sent him up to do, it.'

'He did come up; and that's all the good it done, the dod-derned fool. He never said anything.'

'Didn't YOU hear him?' asked the captain of me.

Of course I didn't want to be mixed up in this business, but there was no way to avoid it;
so I said--

'Yes, sir.'

I knew what Brown's next remark would be, before he uttered it; it was--

'Shut your mouth! you never heard anything of the kind.'

I closed my mouth according to instructions.  An hour later, Henry entered the pilot-house,
unaware of what had been going on. He was a thoroughly inoffensive boy, and I was sorry to
see him come, for I knew Brown would have no pity on him. Brown began, straightway--

'Here! why didn't you tell me we'd got to land at that plantation?'

'I did tell you, Mr. Brown.'

'It's a lie!'

I said--

'You lie, yourself.  He did tell you.'

Brown glared at me in unaffected surprise; and for as much as a moment he was entirely speechless;
then he shouted to me--

'I'll attend to your case in half a minute!' then to Henry, 'And you leave the pilot-house;
out with you!'

It was pilot law, and must be obeyed.  The boy started out, and even had his foot on the upper
step outside the door, when Brown, with a sudden access of fury, picked up a ten-pound lump
of coal and sprang after him; but I was between, with a heavy stool, and I hit Brown a good
honest blow which stretched-him out.

I had committed the crime of crimes--I had lifted my hand against a pilot on duty!  I supposed
I was booked for the penitentiary sure, and couldn't be booked any surer if I went on and squared
my long account with this person while I had the chance; consequently I stuck to him and pounded
him with my fists a considerable time--I do not know how long, the pleasure of it probably
made it seem longer than it really was;--but in the end he struggled free and jumped up and
sprang to the wheel: a very natural solicitude, for, all this time, here was this steamboat
tearing down the river at the rate of fifteen miles an hour and nobody at the helm!  However,
Eagle Bend was two miles wide at this bank-full stage, and correspondingly long and deep; and
the boat was steering herself straight down the middle and taking no chances.  Still, that
was only luck--a body MIGHT have found her charging into the woods.

Perceiving, at a glance, that the 'Pennsylvania' was in no danger, Brown gathered up the big
spy-glass, war-club fashion, and ordered me out of the pilot-house with more than Comanche
bluster. But I was not afraid of him now; so, instead of going, I tarried, and criticized his
grammar; I reformed his ferocious speeches for him, and put them into good English, calling
his attention to the advantage of pure English over the bastard dialect of the Pennsylvanian
collieries whence he was extracted.  He could have done his part to admiration in a cross-fire
of mere vituperation, of course; but he was not equipped for this species of controversy; so
he presently laid aside his glass and took the wheel, muttering and shaking his head; and I
retired to the bench. The racket had brought everybody to the hurricane deck, and I trembled
when I saw the old captain looking up from the midst of the crowd. I said to myself, 'Now I
AM done for!'--For although, as a rule, he was so fatherly and indulgent toward the boat's
family, and so patient of minor shortcomings, he could be stern enough when the fault was worth it.

I tried to imagine what he WOULD do to a cub pilot who had been guilty of such a crime as mine,
committed on a boat guard-deep with costly freight and alive with passengers.  Our watch was
nearly ended.  I thought I would go and hide somewhere till I got a chance to slide ashore.
So I slipped out of the pilot-house, and down the steps, and around to the texas door--and
was in the act of gliding within, when the captain confronted me! I dropped my head, and he
stood over me in silence a moment or two, then said impressively--

'Follow me.'

I dropped into his wake; he led the way to his parlor in the forward end of the texas.  We
were alone, now.  He closed the after door; then moved slowly to the forward one and closed
that.  He sat down; I stood before him. Now go--and mind you, not a word of this to anybody.
Clear out with you!--you've been guilty of a great crime, you whelp!'

I slid out, happy with the sense of a close shave and a mighty deliverance; and I heard him
laughing to himself and slapping his fat thighs after I had closed his door.

When Brown came off watch he went straight to the captain, who was talking with some passengers
on the boiler deck, and demanded that I be put ashore in New Orleans--and added--

'I'll never turn a wheel on this boat again while that cub stays.'

The captain said--

'But he needn't come round when you are on watch, Mr. Brown.

'I won't even stay on the same boat with him.  One of us has got to go ashore.'

'Very well,' said the captain, 'let it be yourself;' and resumed his talk with the passengers.

During the brief remainder of the trip, I knew how an emancipated slave feels; for I was an
emancipated slave myself.  While we lay at landings, I listened to George Ealer's flute; or
to his readings from his two bibles, that is to say, Goldsmith and Shakespeare; or I played
chess with him--and would have beaten him sometimes, only he always took back his last move
and ran the game out differently.

Chapter 20 A Catastrophe

WE lay three days in New Orleans, but the captain did not succeed in finding another pilot;
so he proposed that I should stand a daylight watch, and leave the night watches to George
Ealer. But I was afraid; I had never stood a watch of any sort by myself, and I believed I
should be sure to get into trouble in the head of some chute, or ground the boat in a near
cut through some bar or other. Brown remained in his place; but he would not travel with me.
So the captain gave me an order on the captain of the 'A. T. Lacey,' for a passage to St. Louis,
and said he would find a new pilot there and my steersman's berth could then be resumed. The
'Lacey' was to leave a couple of days after the 'Pennsylvania.'

The night before the 'Pennsylvania' left, Henry and I sat chatting on a freight pile on the
levee till midnight. The subject of the chat, mainly, was one which I think we had not exploited
before--steamboat disasters.  One was then on its way to us, little as we suspected it; the
water which was to make the steam which should cause it, was washing past some point fifteen
hundred miles up the river while we talked;--but it would arrive at the right time and the
right place. We doubted if persons not clothed with authority were of much use in cases of
disaster and attendant panic; still, they might be of SOME use; so we decided that if a disaster
ever fell within our experience we would at least stick to the boat, and give such minor service
as chance might throw in the way. Henry remembered this, afterward, when the disaster came,
and acted accordingly.

The 'Lacey' started up the river two days behind the 'Pennsylvania.' We touched at Greenville,
Mississippi, a couple of days out, and somebody shouted--

'The "Pennsylvania" is blown up at Ship Island, and a hundred and fifty lives lost!'

At Napoleon, Arkansas, the same evening, we got an extra, issued by a Memphis paper, which
gave some particulars. It mentioned my brother, and said he was not hurt.

Further up the river we got a later extra.  My brother was again mentioned; but this time as
being hurt beyond help. We did not get full details of the catastrophe until we reached Memphis.
This is the sorrowful story--

It was six o'clock on a hot summer morning.  The 'Pennsylvania' was creeping along, north of
Ship Island, about sixty miles below Memphis on a half-head of steam, towing a wood-flat which
was fast being emptied. George Ealer was in the pilot-house-alone, I think; the second engineer
and a striker had the watch in the engine room; the second mate had the watch on deck; George
Black, Mr. Wood, and my brother, clerks, were asleep, as were also Brown and the head engineer,
the carpenter, the chief mate, and one striker; Captain Klinefelter was in the barber's chair,
and the barber was preparing to shave him.  There were a good many cabin passengers aboard,
and three or four hundred deck passengers --so it was said at the time--and not very many of
them were astir.  The wood being nearly all out of the flat now, Ealer rang to 'come ahead'
full steam, and the next moment four of the eight boilers exploded with a thunderous crash,
and the whole forward third of the boat was hoisted toward the sky! The main part of the mass,
with the chimneys, dropped upon the boat again, a mountain of riddled and chaotic rubbish--and
then, after a little, fire broke out.

Many people were flung to considerable distances, and fell in the river; among these were Mr.
Wood and my brother, and the carpenter. The carpenter was still stretched upon his mattress
when he struck the water seventy-five feet from the boat.  Brown, the pilot, and George Black,
chief clerk, were never seen or heard of after the explosion.  The barber's chair, with Captain
Klinefelter in it and unhurt, was left with its back overhanging vacancy--everything forward
of it, floor and all, had disappeared; and the stupefied barber, who was also unhurt, stood
with one toe projecting over space, still stirring his lather unconsciously, and saying, not
a word.

