                  "When the fight of grace is fought--
                  When the marriage vest is wrought--
                  When Faith hath chased cold Doubt away,
                  And Hope but sickens at delay--

                 "When Charity, imprisoned here,
                  Longs for a more expanded sphere,
                     Doff thy robes of sin and clay;
                     Christian, rise, and come away."

The strain was solemn and affecting, sustained as it was by the pathetic warble of a voice
which had naturally been a fine one, and which weakness, if it diminished its power, had improved
in softness. Archibald, though a follower of the court, and a pococurante by profession, was
confused, if not affected; the dairy-maid blubbered; and Jeanie felt the tears rise spontaneously
to her eyes. Even the nurse, accustomed to all modes in which the spirit can pass, seemed considerably
moved.

The patient was evidently growing weaker, as was intimated by an apparent difficulty of breathing,
which seized her from time to time, and by the utterance of low listless moans, intimating
that nature was succumbing in the last conflict. But the spirit of melody, which must originally
have so strongly possessed this unfortunate young woman, seemed, at every interval of ease,
to triumph over her pain and weakness. And it was remarkable that there could always be traced
in her songs something appropriate, though perhaps only obliquely or collaterally so, to her
present situation. Her next seemed the fragment of some old ballad:

                 "Cauld is my bed, Lord Archibald,
                      And sad my sleep of sorrow;
                  But thine sall be as sad and cauld,
                     My fause true-love! to-morrow.

                "And weep ye not, my maidens free,
                 Though death your mistress borrow;
                     For he for whom I die to-day
                     Shall die for me to-morrow."

Again she changed the tune to one wilder, less monotonous, and less regular.

Her voice died away with the last notes, and she fell into a slumber, from which the experienced
attendant assured them that she never would awake at all, or only in the death agony. 

Dear me, but this be awful! I have come to tell ye that seven of your pet sheep have escaped drowning
in the water; for Corrie, sae quiet and sae gentle yestreen, is rolling and dashing frae bank to
bank this morning. Dear me, woman, dinna let the loss of the world's gear bereave ye of your
senses.

I would rather make ye a present of a dozen mug-ewes of the Tinwald
brood myself; and now I think on 't, if ye'll send over Elphin, I
will help him hame with them in the gloaming myself.

So, Phemie, woman, be comforted.'

"At the mention of her brother's
name she cried out, 'Where is he?

                 Oh, where is he?' gazed
                 wildly round, and, shuddering from head
                 to foot, fell senseless on the floor.
                        It was in vain that Jeanie protested against any
delay. The Duke of Argyle's man of confidence was of course consequential; and as he had been
bred to the medical profession in his youth (at least he used this expression to describe his
having, thirty years before, pounded for six months in the mortar of old Mungo Mangleman, the
surgeon at Greenock), he was obstinate whenever a matter of health was in question.

In this case he discovered febrile symptoms, and having once made a happy application of that
learned phrase to Jeanie's case, all farther resistance became in vain; and she was glad to
acquiesce, and even to go to bed, and drink water-gruel, in order that she might possess her
soul in quiet and without interruption.

Mr. Archibald was equally attentive in another particular. He observed that the execution of
the old woman, and the miserable fate of her daughter, seemed to have had a more powerful effect
upon Jeanie's mind, than the usual feelings of humanity might naturally have been expected
to occasion. Yet she was obviously a strong-minded, sensible young woman, and in no respect
subject to nervous affections; and therefore Archibald, being ignorant of any special connection
between his master's prote'ge'e and these unfortunate persons, excepting that she had seen
Madge formerly in Scotland, naturally imputed the strong impression these events had made upon
her, to her associating them with the unhappy circumstances in which her sister had so lately
stood. He became anxious, therefore, to prevent anything occurring which might recall these
associations to Jeanie's mind.

Archibald had speedily an opportunity of exercising this precaution. A pedlar brought to Longtown
that evening, amongst other wares, a large broad-side sheet, giving an account of the "Last
Speech and Execution of Margaret Murdockson, and of the barbarous Murder of her Daughter, Magdalene
or Madge Murdockson, called Madge Wildfire; and of her pious conversation with his Reverence
Archdeacon Fleming;" which authentic publication had apparently taken place on the day they
left Carlisle, and being an article of a nature peculiarly acceptable to such country-folk
as were within hearing of the transaction, the itinerant bibliopolist had forthwith added them
to his stock in trade. He found a merchant sooner than he expected; for Archibald, much applauding
his own prudence, purchased the whole lot for two shillings and ninepence; and the pedlar,
delighted with the profit of such a wholesale transaction, instantly returned to Carlisle to
supply himself with more.

The considerate Mr. Archibald was about to commit his whole purchase to the flames, but it
was rescued by the yet more considerate dairy-damsel, who said, very prudently, it was a pity
to waste so much paper, which might crepe hair, pin up bonnets, and serve many other useful
purposes; and who promised to put the parcel into her own trunk, and keep it carefully out
of the sight of Mrs. Jeanie Deans: "Though, by-the-bye, she had no great notion of folk being
so very nice. Mrs. Deans might have had enough to think about the gallows all this time to
endure a sight of it, without all this to-do about it."

Archibald reminded the dame of the dairy of the Duke's particular charge, that they should
be attentive and civil to Jeanie as also that they were to part company soon, and consequently
would not be doomed to observing any one's health or temper during the rest of the journey.
With which answer Mrs. Dolly Dutton was obliged to hold herself satisfied. On the morning they
resumed their journey, and prosecuted it successfully, travelling through Dumfriesshire and
part of Lanarkshire, until they arrived at the small town of Rutherglen, within about four
miles of Glasgow. Here an express brought letters to Archibald from the principal agent of
the Duke of Argyle in Edinburgh.

He said nothing of their contents that evening; but when they were seated in the carriage the
next day, the faithful squire informed Jeanie, that he had received directions from the Duke's
factor, to whom his Grace had recommended him to carry her, if she had no objection, for a
stage or two beyond Glasgow. Some temporary causes of discontent had occasioned tumults in
that city and the neighbourhood, which would render it unadvisable for Mrs. Jeanie Deans to
travel alone and unprotected betwixt that city and Edinburgh; whereas, by going forward a little
farther, they would meet one of his Grace's subfactors, who was coming down from the Highlands
to Edinburgh with his wife, and under whose charge she might journey with comfort and in safety.

Jeanie remonstrated against this arrangement. We had an exquisite from St Mary Hall, a pea-coated
Brazenose boatman, a philosophical water-drinker and union-debater from Balliol, and a two bottle
man from Christ Church. When we first met, it was like oil and water; it seemed as if we might
be churned together for a century, and never coalesce: but in time, like punch-making, it turned
out that the very heterogeneousness of the ingredients was the zest of the compound.
I had never heard of such a place as Glyndewi, nor had I an idea
how to get there.

The groom of the chambers exchanged a look with his female companion, which seemed so full
of meaning, that Jeanie screamed aloud--"O Mr. Archibald--Mrs. Dutton, if ye ken of onything
that has happened at Saint Leonard's, for God's sake--for pity's sake, tell me, and dinna keep
me in suspense!"

"I really know nothing, Mrs. Deans," said the groom of the chambers.

"And I--I--I am sure, I knows as little," said the dame of the dairy, while some communication
seemed to tremble on her lips, which, at a glance of Archibald's eye, she appeared to swallow
down, and compressed her lips thereafter into a state of extreme and vigilant firmness, as
if she had been afraid of its bolting out before she was aware.

Jeanie saw there was to be something concealed from her, and it was only the repeated assurances
of Archibald that her father--her sister--all her friends were, as far as he knew, well and
happy, that at all pacified her alarm. From such respectable people as those with whom she
travelled she could apprehend no harm, and yet her distress was so obvious, that Archibald,
as a last resource, pulled out, and put into her hand, a slip of paper, on which these words
were written:--

"Jeanie Deans--You will do me a favour by going with Archibald and my female domestic a day's
journey beyond Glasgow, and asking them no questions, which will greatly oblige your friend,
'Argyle & Greenwich.'"

Although this laconic epistle, from a nobleman to whom she was bound by such inestimable obligations,
silenced all Jeanie's objections to the proposed route, it rather added to than diminished
the eagerness of her curiosity. The proceeding to Glasgow seemed now no longer to be an object
with her fellow-travellers. "As the traveller continued to gaze, the figure suddenly rose, and,
wringing the rain from her long locks, paced round and round the tree, chanting in a wild and melancholy
manner an equally wild and delirious song.

THE FAIRY OAK OF CORRIEWATER.


"You are not for gaun intill Glasgow then?" said Jeanie, as she observed that the drivers made
no motion for inclining their horses' heads towards the ancient bridge, which was then the
only mode of access to St. Mungo's capital.

"No," replied Archibald; "there is some popular commotion, and as our Duke is in opposition
to the court, perhaps we might be too well received; or they might take it in their heads to
remember that the Captain of Carrick came down upon them with his Highlandmen in the time of
Shawfield's mob in 1725, and then we would be too ill received.* And, at any rate, it is best
for us, and for me in particular, who may be supposed to possess his Grace's mind upon many
particulars, to leave the good people of the Gorbals to act according to their own imaginations,
without either provoking or encouraging them by my presence."

* In 1725, there was a great riot in Glasgow on account of the malt-tax. Among the troops brought
in to restore order, was one of the independent companies of Highlanders levied in Argyleshire,
and distinguished, in a lampoon of the period, as "Campbell of Carrick and his Highland thieves."
It was called Shawfield's Mob, because much of the popular violence was directed against Daniel
Campbell, Esq. of Shawfield, M. P., Provost of the town.

To reasoning of such tone and consequence Jeanie had nothing to reply, although it seemed to
her to contain fully as much self-importance as truth.

