No requirement of GOD'S Word is more clear than the command to honour and obey our earthly
parents; but even for his father or mother a Nazarite might not defile himself: "he that loveth
father or mother more than ME, is not worthy of ME."

But let no young Christian think lightly of the requirements of parents, when these do not
conflict with GOD'S written Word. Young Christians are sometimes distressed because their desire
to preach the Gospel to the heathen has been opposed by parents: such should be encouraged
to thank GOD for the obstacle; and to seek by prayer its removal. When they have learnt to
move man through GOD at home, they will be the better prepared to do the same thing in the
mission-field. Where there is fitness for the work, the way will probably be made plain after
a time of patient waiting.

These verses teach us that mere contact with death is defiling: how vain then is the imagination
of the unconverted that by dead works--the best efforts of those who are themselves dead in
trespasses and sins--they can render themselves acceptable to GOD! The good works of the unsaved
may indeed benefit their fellow-creatures; but until life in CHRIST has been received, they
cannot please GOD.

UNWITTING DEFILEMENT: verses 9-12. And he shall
    consecrate unto the LORD the days of his separation, and shall
    bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass-offering: but the
    days that were before shall be lost, because his separation was
    defiled."

A most important truth is here taught--that even unwitting contact with death might bring sin
upon the Nazarite. Sometimes we are tempted to excuse ourselves, and to forget the absolute
sinfulness of sin, apart altogether from the question of premeditation, or even of consciousness,
at the time, on our part. The one who became defiled, was defiled, whether intentionally or
not; GOD'S requirement was absolute, and where not fulfilled the vow was broken; the sin-offering
had to be offered, and the service recommenced.

THE HEINOUSNESS OF SIN.

The teaching here, and that of offerings for sins of ignorance, is much needed in this day,
when there is a dangerous tendency in some quarters to regard sin as misfortune, and not as
guilt. The awful character of sin is shown to mankind by its consequences. Man's heart is so
darkened by the Fall, and by personal sinfulness, that otherwise he would regard sin as a very
small matter. But when we think of all the pain that men and women have endured since the Creation,
of all the miseries of which this world has been witness, of all the sufferings of the animal
creation, and of the eternal as well as temporal consequences of sin, we must see that that
which has brought such a harvest of misery into the world is far more awful than sin-blinded
men have thought it to be.

The highest evidence, however, of the terrible character of sin is to be found at the Cross;
that it needed such a sacrifice--the sacrifice of the SON of GOD--to bring in atonement and
everlasting salvation, is surely the most convincing proof of its heinous character.

Death was brought into the world by sin; and, like all the other consequences of sin, it is
loathsome and defiling. Man seeks to adorn death; the pageantry of the funeral, the attractiveness
of the cemetery, all show this. The Egyptian sought in vain to make the mortal body incorruptible
by embalming it. But we have to bury our dead out of our sight, and the believer is taught
to look forward to the resurrection.

CLEANSING ONLY THROUGH SACRIFICE.

Let us not lose sight of the fact that the accidental death of any one near the Nazarite--that
the thoughtless putting forth of the hand even--might violate his vow of consecration as truly,
if not as guiltily, as an act of deliberate transgression; in either case all the previous
time was lost, and the period of consecration had to be recommenced after his cleansing. And
that cleansing could only be brought about through sacrifice; the sin-offering must die; the
burnt-offering must die; without shedding of blood there could be no remission. So serious
was the effect of transgression--and yet, thank GOD, it was not irremediable.

The bearing of this on the life of consecration to GOD in the present day is important. Nearness
to GOD calls for tenderness of conscience, thoughtfulness in service, and implicit obedience.
If we become conscious of the slightest failure, even through inadvertence, let us not excuse
it, but at once humble ourselves before GOD, and confess it, seeking forgiveness and cleansing
on the ground of the accepted sacrifice of CHRIST. This cleansing must be accepted by faith,
and a walk "in the light" be at once resumed. And shall we not reverently ask and trust the
HOLY SPIRIT to guard and keep us from inadvertence, and to bring to our remembrance those things
which we may be in danger of forgetting?

ACCEPTANCE ONLY IN CHRIST: verses 13-15.

Having seen the character of the vow of the Nazarite, and of the ordinances to be observed
should the vow be violated, the case of a Nazarite who has duly fulfilled his vow is next dealt
with. He has carried out all GOD'S requirements, and his conscience is void of offence: before
GOD and man he is blameless. May he not now congratulate himself, and claim some measure of
merit, seeing he has rendered to GOD an acceptable service, and among men has borne a consistent
testimony? The offerings to be made on the conclusion of his vow give an impressive answer
to this question, and bring out the important difference between being blameless and being
sinless. Having fulfilled the ordinances he was blameless; but the necessity alike for sin-offering,
for burnt-offering, and for peace offering, remind us of the sin of our holy things; and that
not our worst, but our best, is only acceptable to GOD through the atonement of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

While, however, the best services of the believer can neither give full satisfaction to his
own enlightened conscience, nor be acceptable to GOD save through JESUS CHRIST, it is very
blessed to know how fully all his needs are met in CHRIST, and how truly he is accepted in
Him, and enabled to give very real joy to GOD our FATHER, which issues in the bestowal of His
richest blessings. Very imperfect--sometimes worse than useless, is the attempt of a little
child to please and serve its parent; but where the parent sees an effort to do his will, and
to give him pleasure, is not the service gladly accepted, and the parent's heart greatly rejoiced?
Thus it is our privilege to be Nazarites, only and always Nazarites, and through CHRIST JESUS
to give joy and satisfaction by our imperfect service to our heavenly FATHER. The following
anonymous lines, taken from a leaflet,[A] beautifully illustrate this thought:--

  I was sitting alone in the twilight,
    With spirit troubled and vexed,
  With thoughts that were morbid and gloomy,
    And faith that was sadly perplexed.

  Some homely work I was doing
    For the child of my love and care;
  Some stitches half-wearily setting
    In the endless need of repair.

  But my thoughts were about "the building,"
    The work some day to be tried;
  And that only the gold and the silver,
    And the precious stones should abide;

  And, remembering my own poor efforts,
    The wretched work I had done,
  And, even when trying most truly,
    The meagre success I had won;

  "It is nothing but wood, hay, and stubble,"
    I said; "it will all be burned--
  This useless fruit of the talents
    One day to be returned;

  "And I have so longed to serve Him,
    And sometimes I know I have tried;
  But I'm sure, when He sees such a building,
    He will never let it abide."

  Just then, as I turned the garment
    That no rent should be left behind,
  My eye caught an odd little bungle
    Of mending and patchwork combined.

  My heart grew suddenly tender,
    And something blinded my eyes,
  With one of those sweet intuitions
    That sometimes makes us so wise.

  Dear child, she wanted to help me;
    I knew 'twas the best she could do;
  But oh, what a botch she had made it--
    The grey mis-matching the blue!

  And yet--can you understand it?
    With a tender smile and a tear,
  And a half-compassionate yearning,
    I felt her grown more dear.

  Then a sweet voice broke the silence,
    And the dear Lord said to me--
  "Art thou tenderer for the little child
    Than I am tender for thee."

  Then straightway I knew His meaning,
    So full of compassion and love;
  And my faith came back to its Refuge,
    Like the glad returning dove.

  For I thought when the Master Builder
    Comes down His temple to view,
  To see what rents must be mended,
    And what must be builded anew;

  Perhaps, as He looks o'er the building,
    He will bring my work to the light,
  And, seeing the marring and bungling,
    And how far it all is from right,

  He will feel as I felt for my darling,
    And will say as I said for her--
  "Dear child, she wanted to help me,
    And love for me was the spur;

  "And, for the real love that was in it,
    The work shall seem perfect as mine;
  And because it was willing service,
    I will crown it with plaudit divine."

  And there, in the deepening twilight,
    I seemed to be clasping a Hand,
  And to feel a great love constraining me,
    Stronger than any command.

  Then I knew, by the thrill of sweetness,
    'Twas the hand of the Blessed One,
  Which would tenderly guide and hold me,
    Till all the labour is done.

  So my thoughts are never more gloomy,
    My faith no longer is dim:
  But my heart is strong and restful,
    And mine eyes are unto HIM.

[A: Published under the title, "The Voice in the Twilight," by Holness, 14, Paternoster Row,
6d. per hundred, post free.]

THE PRESENTATION OF THE NAZARITE.

Let us now look into the law of the Nazarite when the days of his separation were fulfilled.
The first thing that strikes our notice is, "He shall be brought," not, he shall come. Why
is this? and why is it that the law is so explicit as to every detail of ritual and service,
scarcely leaving any room for voluntary action?--we say scarcely, because in the twenty-first
verse there is one little clause, "Beside that that his hand shall get," which does leave room
for additional tokens of gratitude and love.

The answer seems to be, that the voluntary part of Nazarite service lay first and chiefly in
the surrender to become a Nazarite. In that position he was not his own, as we have pointed
out, and the MASTER whom he served naturally and consistently directed the service.

Again, does not, "He shall be brought" imply that, Nazarite as he was, he still needed priestly
ministration to present himself, and his finished service, before the LORD? And our HIGH PRIEST,
who is now able to keep us from falling to the end of our surrendered service, waits to present
us with exceeding joy, "faultless before the presence of His glory"--"holy and unblameable
and unreproveable in His sight."

THE LAW OF THE OFFERINGS.

When we come to the offerings enumerated in v. 14, we notice that they are mentioned in the
almost invariable order of enumeration--first the burnt-offering, then the sin-offering, and
lastly the peace offering; but when in v. 16 we come to the offering up of the sacrifices,
we notice that as always the sin-offering is the first to be offered.

It is somewhat remarkable that the actual order of offering, and the order of enumeration should
not correspond; and it is likewise noteworthy that the sacrifice which was always offered first,
when offered at all, was comparatively insignificant in point of value, and much less frequently
called for in the services of the Levitical ritual. For instance, in Numbers xxviii, xxix,
the daily offering was a burnt-offering of a he-lamb morning and evening, with the corresponding
accompaniments of fine flour mingled with oil, and a drink-offering of wine. On the Sabbath
Day an additional burnt-offering of two lambs with their meat-offering and drink-offering was
required. At the time of the new moon, the additional offering was of two bullocks, one ram,
and seven lambs, with their meat and drink-offerings, for a burnt-offering, while one he-goat
sufficed for a sin-offering. The same offerings were offered at the Feasts of Passover and
Pentecost. On several other occasions the offerings were nearly of the same proportions; while
during the Feast of Tabernacles the offerings commenced with thirteen bullocks, two rams, and
fourteen lambs for a burnt-offering to one he-goat for a sin-offering.

The same disproportion of number and value may be noticed on many occasions between the sin-offering
and the peace offering. A striking example of this was the sacrifice of peace-offerings made
by Solomon on the dedication of the temple to the number of 22,000 oxen, and 120,000 sheep.

We cannot but see that teaching of the most important character is to be gathered from these
facts; and is it not clear that while the need of forgiveness and cleansing is never to be
lost sight of, it is not intended that a sense of the presence and defilement of sin should
be the prominent feature of the service of GOD? On the great Day of Atonement Israel's sin
was confessed and put away; and thenceforward the daily and the Sabbath worship was that of
whole burnt-offering. At the special festivals a he-goat was sacrificed for sin; but, as we
have seen, the burnt-offerings, which speak of acceptance by, and devotion to, GOD were the
principal features. In JESUS CHRIST there is no condemnation. In JESUS CHRIST, the law of the
SPIRIT of life hath set me "free from the law of sin and of death."

THE BURNT-OFFERING.

To return to the order of enumeration: the burnt-offering is always mentioned first, because
it is the highest in character, and gave most pleasure to GOD. It was wholly the LORD'S; no
part of it was eaten by the priest who offered it, nor by the offerer who presented it, it
was all and only for GOD'S satisfaction. When Noah offered his burnt-offering, the LORD smelled
a sweet savour, and blessed him and his posterity.

The burnt-offering tells us of the perfect and accepted righteousness of CHRIST, in virtue
of which the imperfect believer and his imperfect service are accepted by GOD. But it also
reminds the believer of his privilege to surrender himself as a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto GOD, which is to be the reasonable (intelligent) service (that is, ritual or
worship) of each day and hour.

THE SIN-OFFERING AND THE PEACE-OFFERING.

The sin-offering, as its name indicates, recognized the offerer as guilty and defiled, but
obtaining forgiveness and cleansing through the death of the victim in his stead. We see CHRIST
as our sin-offering in Isa. liii. 4-10. But guilt removed still leaves the believer needing
the imputed righteousness of CHRIST, and acceptance before GOD, which are the aspects of CHRIST'S
death foreshadowed, as we have seen by the burnt-offering.

Lastly, the peace-offering--part of which was consumed on the altar, while part was the portion
of the priest, and the remainder furnished a feast to the offerer and his friends--shows us
GODS and man feasting together on the perfect work of CHRIST. He that sanctifieth and those
who are sanctified, find their full satisfaction in Him, and in Him alone. He has made peace
by the blood of His cross. He has given us His own peace. We are called to let His peace rule
in our hearts. And if we will but bring our burdens and cares to Him, we are promised that
the peace of GOD shall guard and garrison our hearts and thoughts in CHRIST JESUS!

PART II.

The Blessing of GOD.

NUMB. VI. 22-27.

We have already seen the grace of GOD making provision that His people, who had lost the privilege
of priestly service, might draw near to Him by Nazarite separation and consecration. And not
as the offence was the free gift: those who had forfeited the privilege of priestly service
were the males only, but women and even children might be Nazarites; whosoever desired was
free to come, and thus draw near to GOD.

We now come to the concluding verses of Numb. vi, and see in them one of the fullest forms
of benediction to be found in the whole Word of GOD. The thought naturally arises,

WHY IS IT FOUND HERE?

And the reply is twofold. There is the Divine side. Flowing from GOD'S heart of love first
came the privilege of Nazarite consecration; and then, by the act of consecration, His loving
heart is so gladdened that it further overflows in these rich benedictions.

Looking, on the other hand, at the human side, we may learn that the soul which is fully consecrated
always receives the blessing of GOD. Where that blessing is not enjoyed, there is always something
unreal or defective in the consecration. It may be that we have separated ourselves to carry
out our own will, or thought, or plan of service, instead of surrendering ourselves and our
will, to learn and to do His will. But it is real consecration to GOD that puts us into the
position in which He can pour out His richest blessings upon us.

The prodigal was a son of the father all the time; but when he preferred his will to the will
of his father, his way to the way of his father, his management of his share in the property
to his father's management, it issued but in ruin and misery--in hunger and nakedness and shame.
The fact that he was a son was of no avail to him in the "far country," in the place of self-will
and self-management. But as soon as he arose, and with true repentance and submission came
back to the father's house, willing to serve, and to do his father's will, he found himself
restored to his father's heart, and to all the privileges of sonship: the fatted calf was killed,
the best robe was put upon him, once more he had shoes on his feet and a ring on his hand,
and joy and gladness filled the home.

How many Christians there are who, in their self-will and attempted
self-management, find themselves day by day full of sorrow, or full of
care. Trying to keep themselves they are not kept; trying to be happy
they are often unhappy; trying to succeed they fail; and they can but
confess that their life is very different from that ideal life described
in Ps. lxxxix.
  For Thou art the glory of their strength;
  And in Thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
  For the LORD is our defence;
  And the HOLY ONE of Israel is our KING."

Instead of this many practically know very little of peace "which passeth all understanding,"
of joy that is literally "unspeakable"; adjectives far more moderate would be found strong
enough to express all they know of oft-troubled peace and intermittent satisfaction and happiness.
Many there are who fail to see that there can be but one lord, and that those who do not make
GOD Lord of all do not make Him Lord at all. The slightest reservation in our consecration
shows that we hold ourselves as our own, and consequently at liberty to give Him as much or
as little as we think fit. If we recognize Him as LORD and MASTER, we have nothing to withhold,
and nothing of our own, for we, and all we have, are already His. But then, in return, all
He has, and all He is, become ours. Oh! blessed PORTION! Who would not wish henceforth to have
no private property in himself--in his members--in his possessions--in his family--in his affections;
but, in fullest consecration, to acknowledge and recognize GOD'S right and to be no longer
a robber of GOD?

    "And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and unto
    his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel
    ... And they shall put My Name upon the children of Israel; and I
    will bless them."

Here we have the blessing that GOD delights to give to those who have dedicated themselves
and their all to Him. Before considering it in detail, let us notice, first, how spontaneous
and unsought is this blessing from GOD--the LORD commanded Aaron and his sons to bless Israel,
to put His Name upon them; and declared His own unalterable purpose, "I will bless them." And
then, let us ask ourselves the question, what is

THE REAL MEANING OF BLESSING?

We frequently use the word so vaguely as to lose much of its preciousness, and to overlook
the primary meaning in some of its secondary significations. For instance, we use it frequently
as a synonym of praise, and in speaking of blessing GOD, we think of praising Him. But blessing
does not merely mean praise, for GOD blesses us. Again, sometimes we use it for some gracious
gift, as when we speak of the blessing of peace or of plenty. But blessing does not only signify
gift, for when we bless GOD we do not give to Him peace or plenty. Blessing is the moving of
the heart towards an object of affection and complacency. The out-going of the heart is naturally
accompanied by gift or ascription, as the case may be. When our hearts bless the LORD, we sing
a song of praise to Him for the great love wherewith He hath loved us; but the blessing is
not the song--it is the feeling that prompts it. When the LORD blesses His people with peace
and plenty, it is His open Heart that moves His loving Hand.

Again, blessing is always accompanied with joy; it is a joy, and it gives joy, both to the
giver and the receiver. A little child playing with his toys may be both happy and satisfied.
But it hears the mother's footsteps, it sees the mother open the door, and instantly the toys
are dropped and forgotten; the little arms are stretched out, and the little feet are running
to meet the welcome mother. Nor is this all; the great, motherly arms are as quickly stretched
forth towards the child, and with longer steps the mother hastens to meet the little one, and
clasps it to her bosom, the loving little arms entwining themselves around her neck.

But whose heart is the more glad? The little one's heart is full; and the mother's heart is
also full; but her capacity is greater, and so her joy is deeper. And is not this true of our
HEAVENLY FATHER? When His heart blesses ours, and ours blesses HIM, we are full of joy; but
His heart is infinitely greater than ours, and His joy in His people as far exceeds all their
joy in Him, as the infinite exceeds the finite.

Let us always remember in connection with blessing that the deep heart-feeling is the primary
thought. "Bless the LORD, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy Name." The praise
of the lip may be insincere; the blessing of the heart cannot be.

THE THREE-FOLD BENEDICTION: verses 24-26.

We have dwelt upon the meaning of blessing--the moving of the heart towards an object of affection
and complacency, and noticed that this is naturally accompanied by gift or ascription, as the
case may be. When love overflows, loving words, loving embraces, or loving gifts instinctively
follow.

In the light of the fuller revelation of the New Testament we can scarcely fail to see in this
three-fold benediction the overflow in blessing of the FATHER, of the SON, and of the SPIRIT;
and we may read it as follows:--

    "JEHOVAH, THE FATHER, BLESS THEE, AND KEEP THEE:

    "JEHOVAH, THE SON, THE BRIDEGROOM, MAKE HIS FACE SHINE UPON THEE,
    AND BE GRACIOUS UNTO THEE:

    "JEHOVAH, THE SPIRIT, LIFT UP HIS COUNTENANCE UPON THEE, AND GIVE
    THEE PEACE."

So read, we see in these words fuller beauty and appropriateness. Let us now notice the first
clause in particular.

THE BLESSING OF THE FATHER.

Considered as a father's blessing could anything be more appropriate than "The LORD bless thee,
and keep thee"? Is not this just what every loving father seeks to do--to bless and keep his
children? He does not find it an unwelcome task, but his greatest delight. Offer to relieve
him of the responsibility and to adopt his child, and see what his reply will be! Nor may we
confine ourselves to paternal love in thinking of this subject; but rather take it as parental
love, embracing also the love of the mother, for "Thus saith the LORD, ... As one whom his
mother comforteth, so will I comfort you." We all know how the mother-love delights to lavish
itself on the objects of its care. With a patience that never tires, and an endurance almost
inexhaustible, and a care all but unlimited, how often has the mother sacrificed her very life
for the welfare of her babe. But strong as is a mother's love, it may fail; GOD'S love never.
"Can a woman forget her suckling child that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee."

It was one of the objects of our SAVIOUR'S mission to reveal to us that, in CHRIST JESUS, GOD
is also our FATHER. How He delighted in bringing out this precious truth the Sermon on the
Mount bears witness: "Glorify your Father." "Love ... bless ... do good, that ye may be the
children of your FATHER." Be "perfect, even as your FATHER." "Thy FATHER ... seeth." "Your
FATHER knoweth," etc., etc. And well may our hearts rest in the thought which so satisfied
His heart, that GOD is indeed our FATHER.

And what a glorious FATHER He is! the source of all true fatherhood and motherhood. We have
often walked in the fields in the early morning, and have noticed how the rising sun has turned
each dewdrop into a glittering gem; one ray of its own bright light makes a little sun of each
of the million drops that hang from the pendent leaflets and sparkle everywhere. But it is
helpful to remember that the glorious orb itself contains infinitely more light than all the
dewdrops ever did or ever will reflect. And so of our heavenly FATHER: Himself the great Source
of all that is noble and true, of all that ever has been loving and trust-worthy--each beautiful
trait of each beautiful character is but the dim reflection of some ray of His own great perfection.
And the sum-total of all human goodness, and tenderness, and love is but as the dewdrops to
the sun. How blessed then to confide in the infinite and changeless love of such a FATHER--our
FATHER in heaven!

How safe too! Ofttimes where the love of earthly parents has not failed, yet have they been
powerless to bless and to keep. The cruel tyrant has tortured the parent in torturing the child;
while there has been no power to deliver. And in the presence of human want or suffering how
impotent has the strongest human love oft proved to be! Not so the love of our heavenly FATHER:
His resources and His power are as inexhaustible as His love; and they are blest and kept indeed
whom He deigns to bless and keep.

May we not add "they only"? The foolish prodigal imagines that he can secure greater happiness
for himself when no longer curbed by his father's presence and will; such always come to want,
and, alas! do not always return quickly to the home where reconciliation and blessing alone
are to be found. He is poorly kept who tries to keep himself; and though the pleasures of sin
may for a season gratify, they can never satisfy![B]

