THE KENTUCKY RANGER

By

EDWARD T. CURNICK, A.M.

Author of A Catechism on Christian Perfection.

The Christian Witness Co. Chicago, Ill.

AUTHOR'S NOTE

The story, "The Kentucky Ranger," to a large extent is built around the life and character
of one of the most famous early pioneer preachers of the West.

Many of the incidents in his career are recorded, but have been treated as to time, place and
authorship according to the demands of the work with the freedom belonging to the writer of
fiction.

A number of years ago some of the chapters in the narrative were printed in "The Epworth Era,"
of Nashville, Tennessee. Thanks are hereby extended to the paper for releasing the copyright.

Copyright 1922 THE CHRISTIAN WITNESS CO.

Transcriber's Note: The Table of Contents was not contained in the text. It has been generated
for the convenience of the reader.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.
    The Ranger.

CHAPTER II.
    An Old Time Camp Meeting.

CHAPTER III.
    Swapping Stories.

CHAPTER IV.
    The Trail of the Serpent.

CHAPTER V.
    Rowdies in Camp.

CHAPTER VI.
    Under the Pine Trees.

CHAPTER VII.
    The Horse Race.

CHAPTER VIII.
    Prayer In a Dance Hall.

CHAPTER IX.
    Wanted, a Mission School.

CHAPTER X.
    The Mission School Established.

CHAPTER XI.
    A Kentucky Feud.

CHAPTER XII.
    The Shameful Plot.

CHAPTER XIII.
    Into a Pit (or Pitch).

CHAPTER XIV.
    Returning Thanks.

CHAPTER XV.
    Cupid's Chariot.

CHAPTER XVI.
    Horse Thieves.

CHAPTER XVII.
    Lynch Law or the Gospel.

CHAPTER XVIII.
    Apple Blossoms.

CHAPTER XIX.
    A Proposal Without Words.

CHAPTER XX.
    Kidnapped.

CHAPTER XXI.
    The Search.

CHAPTER XXII.
    The Rescue.

CHAPTER XXIII.
    A Battle With Moonshiners.

CHAPTER XXIV.
    "I Thee Wed."

THE KENTUCKY RANGER

CHAPTER I.

The Ranger.

"Glory to God! another sinner's down! Glory! Hallelujah! Amen; Pray on, brother; you'll soon
be through. Glory! Glory!"

These words were shouted by two young men and a young woman who were returning through the
Kentucky woods from a camp meeting. They were riding in a smart spring wagon drawn by two good
horses. The young man who was not driving would fall into the wagon, crying for mercy, and
the driver shouted: "Glory to God! another sinner's down!" and the young lady added: "Keep
on praying, brother; you'll soon be saved. Glory! Glory to God!" Then the young men would change
places, and the other would shout: "You'll soon get through, brother; pray on. Glory!"

These persons acted thus to tantalize a camp meeting preacher who was riding on horseback ahead
of them. He detected their mockery and tried to outride them; but his horse being somewhat
lame he could not escape them.

The preacher remembered that at a little distance beyond the road ran through a swamp but that
a bridle path wound around it. Putting spurs to his horse he made for this path but the driver,
keeping on the road, whipped up his horses. Driving into the swamp in his haste and excitement
he did not notice a stump at the side of the road. Crash! went the fore wheel against the stump,
and mounting to its top over went the wagon into the mud and water. The two young men took
a flying leap into the swamp, and the young lady was thrown out. She was almost smothered before
she was rescued by the young men. While they were in this predicament the preacher rode up
to the edge of the morass. Hallelujah! Glory! Glory!" Then he added: "Now you poor, miserable
sinners, take this as a judgment from God upon you for your meanness, and repent of your wicked
ways before it is too late." With this he left them, covered with mud and shame, to their reflections.

Jasper Very (for this was the preacher's name) continued on his way, now laughing at the sorry
plight of his mockers, again singing a hymn with such power that the leaves of the trees seemed
to tremble with the melody, and anon lifting his heart in prayer to his Maker. The object of
his ride through the woods was to visit a settler who a short time before had been caught by
a falling tree and suffered the fracture of his leg. The man of God brought the consolations
of religion to the injured man and his family. After partaking of their plain but hospitable
fare, he went to the barn for his faithful horse. While he is preparing to mount him we shall
attempt to describe this backwoods preacher's appearance.

We see at once that he is a splendid type of Kentucky manhood. He stands six feet two inches
in his heavy rawhide boots, but his frame is so well proportioned that he does not seem so
tall. His head is massive and his hair as thick and disheveled as a lion's mane; it cannot
be kept in order. His eyes are dark blue, and can twinkle with merriment or blaze with indignation.
His mouth is of medium size, mobile, yet strong; when closed the drooping corners give the
face a set expression. Great firmness and decision are shown by the broad but rounded chin,
which forms a base for a smooth-shaven countenance. His frame is large and powerful and is
overlaid with muscles hard as iron and elastic as steel. His hands are large and have a Samsonlike
grip in them. A long coat of homespun cloth is well fitted to his body, with waistcoat and
trousers of the same material. A black stock loosely tied about his neck sets off a white shirt
of coarse linen. His whole make-up gives one the impression of fearlessness, determination
and energy, mixed with gentleness, kindness and charity. Humor shines in his face like heat
lightning in a summer cloud.

Jasper Very's parents were pioneers from the State of Virginia. Hearing of the fertility and
beauty of Kentucky they, like many others, decided to emigrate to that land of promise. In
1785 they, with their infant son Jasper, started out to brave the perils of the wilderness.
Perils there were in plenty. Kentucky at that time was the scene of repeated Indian raids,
ambuscades, burning of homes, scalpings, and other atrocities. The Red Man was determined that
his choicest Hunting Ground should not be possessed by the White Man. The Indians were met
by such hardy and invincible scouts and frontiersmen as Daniel Boone, Simon Kenton and George
Rogers Clark. For years the conflict was carried on until finally the savages were driven out
of the state and its marvelous valleys and hills were left to the white man there to fulfil
his destiny as the aborigines had theirs before him. The Very family escaped the horrors of
battle, massacre and captivity. They settled on a site of great natural beauty in Lincoln County,
near the Tennessee line.

While the physical surroundings of the Verys were fairly entrancing, we are sorry to confess
that the moral environment was anything but elevating and desirable. In fact the neighborhood
was considered one of the worst in all the newly settled country. It received the name of Rogues'
Harbor and well deserved the title. Many of the settlers had committed crimes in the Eastern
States and had fled to the wilderness to escape punishment. They composed a majority of the
people of the district, and when arrested for breaking the law swore one another clear in the
courts of justice. At last the respectable people combined for their own protection in an organization
called the Regulators. Several bloody encounters took place between the Regulators and the
outlaws before order was established in the community.

Jasper Very was a lively youngster from the start, and surely Rogues' Harbor was not the best
place in which to bring up a vigorous and vivacious boy. He early showed elements of power
and leadership, having a remarkably strong and well developed body, being a stranger to fear,
a wit and a wag, and loving the rude sports and pastimes of the period. Apart from the home
there were few opportunities for mental or religious training. Schools were few and scarcely
worthy of the name. No newspapers were published in that section.

It is little wonder that Jasper became a wild and wicked boy. He was a leader among his fellows
in the rough sports of the time. His father gave him a race-horse and he became renowned among
his companions for fearless riding. At card-playing he was skillful and lucky. But Jasper had
one blessed, restraining influence which doubtless kept him from going the full course of sin
and folly--a devout, humble, praying, Christian mother.

Happy the boy who in the slippery paths of youth can lean upon the loving arm of a godly mother.

When sixteen years of age Jasper experienced a great change of heart and conduct. It was the
turning point of his life. With his father and brother he attended a wedding in the neighborhood.
With others he took part in the uproarious merriment of the occasion. Returning home he began
to think of his wicked ways, and at once felt condemned. His mind became so agitated that his
body was affected. His heart palpitated in a very violent manner, his sight left him, and he
thought death was at hand. Very sure was he that he was not prepared to die. Falling on his
knees he cried to God to have mercy on his soul. Though it was late at night his mother heard
his cries, sprang from her bed, and was soon at his side praying for her son, and exhorting
him to look to Christ for mercy. They prayed together a long time, and little sleep came to
them that night. Jasper resolved from that time to be a Christian. He asked his father to sell
the racehorse, and gave his pack of cards to his mother, who threw them into the fire.

However, it was many days before Jasper really felt that he was converted. Finally he found
peace of mind at a camp meeting. He went on his way rejoicing, and before he reached his majority
became a backwoods preacher. He had been ranging over the hills and valleys of Kentucky for
four years, preaching the gospel in many places, when he is introduced to our readers.

Jasper Very was known early in his ministry as a great camp meeting preacher. He was always
partial to such gatherings, partly because at one of them he had found religion. These meetings
in the woods, "God's first temples," are of enough importance to merit description in another
chapter.

CHAPTER II.

An Old Time Camp Meeting.

To Kentucky belongs the honor of originating the modern camp meeting. This is no small distinction,
when we consider how these institutions have spread over the land and the great good they have
done. Camp meetings grew out of the needs of the times. When they providentially sprang up
in Kentucky, the frontier was sparsely settled, most people living miles away from any church.
Such churches as were built were small and could accommodate only a few persons, and preaching
services were often weeks apart.

The revivals of genuine religion which usually attended these gatherings were much needed in
the backwoods. Most of the settlers were honest, law-abiding persons, who had sought to improve
their means by emigrating to this western country; but many of the vicious off-scouring of
the older settlements also went west to hide their crimes or to commit new ones. Rogues' Harbor
was only an extreme type of many law-defying places. Murderers, thieves, gamblers, defaulters
and their kind put life in peril, and threatened the moral and social order of the state. These
camp meetings strengthened and encouraged good people, reformed many bad men and women, and
thus became a saving leaven of righteousness.

And what a place for a camp meeting was the Kentucky forest. What nature poet can do justice
to such sylvan loveliness as we find in the "Blue Grass Region?" The pen must be dipped in
the juices of that Edenic vegetation and tinted with the blue of that arching sky to record
such beauty. What stately trees! They seemed like pillars in God's own temple. The rich, warm
limestone soil gave birth to trees in form and variety scarce equaled in the world. Here grew
in friendly fellowship and rivalry the elm, ash, hickory, walnut, wild cherry, white, black
and read oak, black and honey locust, and many others. Their lofty branches interlocking formed
a verdant roof which did not entirely shut out the sun's rays but caused a light subdued and
impressive as the light in a Saint Paul's Cathedral.

In such a forest was pitched the camp to which Jasper Very returned. Let me describe this old-fashioned
camp ground. A large, rough shed was erected, capable of protecting five thousand persons from
wind and rain. It was covered with clapboards and furnished with puncheon seats. At one end
a large stand was built, from which sermons were preached. A few feet in front of this stand
a plain altar rail was set, extending the full length of the preachers' stand. This altar was
called the "mourners' bench." All around the altar a liberal supply of fresh straw was placed
upon which the worshippers knelt. On three sides of the large shed camps or cabins of logs
were built for the use of the attendants. In the rear of the preachers' stand was a large room
which accommodated all the ministers who labored in the meeting. The effect at the camp at
night was very striking. At intervals of several rods log fires were kept burning and the bright
light they threw was contrasted with the deep darkness beyond.

It is astonishing to read how great an attraction these camps became to the hardy pioneers
of the Kentucky wilderness. People gathered from all quarters in all kinds of vehicles, some
traveling thirty or forty miles. Many came in covered wagons in which they slept at night.
History records, that at Cane Ridge, Kentucky, a camp meeting was held attended by twenty thousand
people.

It is ten o'clock Sunday morning at Oak Grove Camp Meeting, where our hero Jasper Very is laboring.
Thousands are in the great wooden structure, filling every seat and standing many deep beyond
the edges of the building. The preachers' stand contains twenty-five or thirty ministers gathered
from many parts of the State. The crowd has even overflowed this stand, and all available room
is occupied.

The Christians present have been prepared for this service by the cabin meetings held at six
o'clock in the morning and a prayer and testimony meeting in the tabernacle at eight. And now
the service begins. A stalwart son of the prophets arises and announces the hymn:

    "Come, sinners, to the gospel feast,
    Let every soul be Jesus' guest:
    There need not one be left behind,
    For God hath bidden all mankind."

He starts the first note, and thousands take up the inspiring strain, and the glorious music
rolls through the forest like the sound of many waters. A passage of Scripture is read and
a fervent prayer offered. A second hymn is sung: "There is a fountain filled with blood," and
far away the cadence is heard rising and falling, thrilling waves of sound.

The song is ended. A rustling noise is heard as the people settle themselves in their places,
and then a deep quiet ensues as they look expectantly toward the preachers' stand. One whispers
to another: "Who is to be the preacher this morning?" They are not left long in doubt. Slowly
the minister arises. It is Jasper Very, the star preacher of the camp meeting. He comes before
his audience with a humble self-possession which is reflected in the composure of his face.
How did he obtain this self-possession? Reader, we must lift the veil somewhat and let you see.

In the morning he had gone into the deep woods to study and pray, as was the wont of the forest
preachers. Here he had prayerfully and carefully completed the outline of his sermon. Then
a great burden of unfitness and helplessness came upon him. Like his Master he threw himself
prone upon the ground and poured out his soul to the Father. "O God," he cried, "who am I,
that I should be thy ambassador to beseech sinners to be reconciled to thee? Who am I that
I should stand between the living and the dead and offer life and immortality to men? Thou,
O God, only art my sufficiency, my hope, my expectation. Stand by my side and help me in this
hour, for my need is great. This I ask in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen."

He began by describing the way of the wicked. He unmasked sin, showing its hideous deformity,
how it pollutes the soul, and makes man unfit for fellowship with a holy God. Then he passed
on to show the guilt of sin, the awful misery coming to a man when he is face to face with
his iniquities. With great skill he pointed out condemnation arising from particular transgressions,--the
defaulter fleeing from his country, the murderer with his victim's bloody form ever before
his mind's eye, the lustful man tortured and consumed with the rewards of his own folly. Continuing,
he proceeded to tell the final punishment of these sinners. In those days ministers at camp
meetings preached a literal hell; and as the speaker uncovered the pit of destruction and compelled
his hearers to look into it many felt that they were "hair hung and breeze shaken" over the
mouth of perdition.

Now his manner changed. His voice, instead of being loud and startling like thunder, producing
awe and terror, became sweet, tender, and appealing, like a shepherd calling his sheep to the fold.

Having opened the wounds of sin, he poured into them the cordial of gospel grace. He dwelt
upon the words, "abundantly pardon," showing how God had planned to put away sin by the gift
of his Son and had promised forgiveness to all guilty mortals who with hearty repentance and
true faith looked to Christ for salvation.

As he exalted the world's Redeemer from one plane to another his soul was lifted up with indescribable
joy and exultation. His voice and form were in attune with his soul. We have read that this
man's voice could be heard a mile, and on this occasion it surely reached to the utmost bounds
of that great assembly. Extending his arms, as though he would enfold the multitude and present
them to the Savior, he besought sinners to flee from impending wrath, to come to the altar
and be saved from sin so that they might "read their titles clear to mansions in the skies."

The effect was tremendous. At once a rush was made for the mourners' bench and it was soon
filled. Many were stricken where they sat in the congregation and fell on their knees imploring
mercy. Around the mourners gathered the saints of God, counseling, advising, quoting suitable
passages of Scripture, praying with the penitents. When the meeting finally closed long after
the dinner hour, scores professed conversion, and a great victory for morality and religion
in Kentucky had been won.

CHAPTER III.

Swapping Stories.

The ministers were in the preachers' room on the afternoon of this camp meeting day. They were
scattered about in delightful abandon. Some had thrown themselves on rough cots; others were
lounging on rude benches which served as seats; the few plain chairs which the place boasted
were also occupied. Most of the men were regaling themselves with the fragrant Kentucky tobacco,
and the blue smoke ascended in widening spirals to the rafters above. They felt they must unbend
after the severe mental tension of the morning.

What a fine spirit of comradeship is found among a group of preachers of one heart and mind.
Can anything on earth surpass it? Here we find the hearty handshake, the contagious laugh,
faces bright with smiles, a free flow of talk. We see hilarity without vulgarity, wit that
sparkles, but does not burn, as when a bright sally directed at some brother's foibles is met
with a quick repartee. We listen to anecdotes which cheer and enliven the senses without hurting
the conscience or debasing the mind.

"Brother Larkin, give us a bit of wit or philosophy from 'Poor Richard' or tell us one of your
good anecdotes."

The man addressed was John Larkin. He was about thirty-five years old and was known as the
"square man" both as to body and mind. His head seemed more square than round, and was set
upon a strong neck which rested upon square shoulders. From shoulders to the ground he was
in the form of a parallelogram. His hands were wide and short, the fingers being of nearly
equal length, giving the hands a blunt, square appearance. His gray eyes were wide apart, having
a sly and merry cast in them, while crow lines in their corners gave them a laughing expression.
His firm mouth and square chin showed that he could mingle seriousness with mirth. He was considerably
under the average height, but thickset and strong.

John Larkin was of New England descent. When a small boy he had moved with his parents from
"'way down East" to far-famed Kentucky. There he helped his father clear the wilderness and
make a comfortable home. At twenty-three years of age he was powerfully converted, and soon
after became a traveling preacher.

John had stored his mind with the homely proverbs of Benjamin Franklin and many bright sayings
of other writers. He saw the ludicrous side of things and was fond of telling anecdotes. Hence
the request which a brother minister made of him.

"About two months ago," said Larkin, "I had an appointment to preach in a private house. The
boys of the family had a pet sheep which they had taught to butt. Going near him, they would
make motions with their heads, and the sheep would back out and dart forward at the boys; but
they would jump aside and so escape. A drunken man came into the congregation and sat on the
end of a bench near the door. He had caroused the whole night before and presently began to
nod. As he nodded and bent forward, the sheep came along by the door and seeing the man moving
his head up and down, took it as a banter and backed and then sprang forward, and gave the
sleeper a severe jolt right on the head, and over he tilted him. The whole congregation laughed
outright and I joined in with them."

The preachers laughed at the story as heartily as those who saw the occurrence. One stout parson
remarked: "The tipsy man surely was the butt of that joke." A clergyman from down Cumberland
River way said: "I hope the sheep knocked drunkenness out of him and common sense and decency
into him."

Larkin, his face wreathed in smiles, turned to a great strapping Kentuckian, and said: "Now
Brother Harvey, let us hear from you."

The man addressed was well known by the company. Naturally strong he grew up on a farm, where
his out-of-doors life added to temperate habits gave him a finely developed body. He lived
with his wife and five grown up children on a splendid quarter section of land bordering on
the Cumberland River. He was a lay preacher, cultivating his farm week days and preaching on
Sunday.

"Well, brethren," began David Harvey, "I could tell you stories of wild Indians, panthers and
wild cats that I saw in my youth, and some tolerably trying experiences I have been through
since becoming a preacher, but today I am going to repeat a tale I heard not long ago concerning
Jasper Very. He seems comfortable there sitting on one bench with his feet on another, and
if my story lacks anything he can supply the missing links.

"Brother Very was attending a camp meeting in the edge of Tennessee when an incident of thrilling
interest occurred. Two young men, distantly related, sons of respectable and wealthy parents,
lived in the settlement. They were both paying attention to a very wealthy young lady. Soon
a rivalship for her hand sprang up between them, which created a bitter jealousy in the heart
of each. After quarreling and fighting they both armed themselves, and each bound himself by
a solemn oath to kill the other. Armed with pistols and dirks they attended the camp meeting.
Brother Very was acquainted with the young men, and had been told of the unfortunate affair.
On Sunday he was preaching to a large congregation on the terrors of the law. Many fell under
the preaching of the word. He called for mourners to come to the altar and the two young men,
deeply convicted of sin, came and knelt before God. One entered on the right and the other
on the left, each being ignorant of the act of the other. The preacher went deliberately to
each of them, took their deadly weapons from their bosoms, and carried them into the preachers'
room. Returning he labored faithfully with them and others nearly all the afternoon and night.
These young men cried hard for mercy, and while he was kneeling by the side of one of them,
just before the break of day, the Lord spake peace to his soul. He arose, and gave some thrilling
shouts. Jasper then hurried to the other young man, at the other side of the altar, and he
was saved in less than fifteen minutes and, standing upright, shouted victory. As these young
men faced about they saw each other, and starting simultaneously, met about midway of the altar,
and instantly clasped each other in their arms. What a shout went up to heaven that night from
these young men, and from almost all the number present."

This narrative strongly affected the group of ministers, and some more emotional than others
shouted: "Praise the Lord! Hallelujah!"

"Brother Very, did I tell the story right?" said Harvey.

"You told it about as it was," responded Very, "only there is this sequel to add: one of these
young men made an able and successful preacher. After traveling a few years his health failed,
and he died triumphantly."

A sallow-faced parson from the river-bottoms remarked: "Jasper Very has been through many trying
experiences, and I am going to ask him to tell us how he conquered that cantankerous woman
by tact and muscles."

Thus appealed to, Very told the following anecdote: "Some time ago I crossed the Ohio River
into the State of Illinois where I had some preaching engagements. On one of my tours I met
a local preacher who was a small, good natured, pious and withal a useful preacher. He had
a wife who was a noted virago. She was high tempered, overbearing and quarrelsome. She opposed
her husband's preaching, and was unwilling he should ask a blessing at the table or conduct
family prayers. If he persisted in his effort to pray she would run noisily about the rooms
and overturn the chairs. If unable to stop him any other way she would catch a cat and throw
it in his face while he was kneeling and trying to pray. The little man had invited several
preachers to his home to talk with the woman and bring her to a better frame of mind, but she
cursed them to their face and raged like one possessed. Several times he invited me to go home
with him, but I was afraid to trust myself. I pitied the poor little man so much that finally
I yielded, and went home with him one evening. When we arrived I saw she was mad, and the devil
was in her as big as an alligator. So I determined on my course. After supper her husband said
very kindly: 'Come, wife, stop your little affairs, and let us have prayers.' To this she replied:
'I will have none of your praying about me.' Speaking mildly, I expostulated with her, but
to no use; for the longer I spoke the more wrathful she became, and she cursed me most bitterly.
Then I spoke sternly and said: 'Madam, if you were a wife of mine, I would break you of your
bad ways, or I would break your neck.'

"'The devil you would!' she said. With this she poured upon me such a torrent of curses as
was almost beyond endurance.

"'Be still,' said I, 'we must and will have prayer.' Again she declared we should not.

"'Now,' I remarked to her, 'if you do not be still, and behave yourself, I'll put you out of
doors.' At this she clenched her fist, swore at me, and told me I could not put her out. I
caught her by the arm, and swinging her round in a circle brought her up to the cabin door,
and shoved her out. She jumped up, tore her hair, foamed, all the time swearing in a terrible
way. The door was made very strong to keep out hostile Indians. I shut it tightly, barred it,
and went to prayer. Under such conditions praying was difficult, I assure you, but I was determined
to conquer or die.

"While she was raging, foaming and roaring on the outside I was singing with a loud voice spiritual
hymns on the inside to drown her words as much as possible. At last she became perfectly exhausted
and panted for breath. Then she became calm and still, and knocking at the door said: 'Mr.
Very, please let me in.'

"'Will you behave yourself, if I let you in?' said I.

"'O yes,' replied she, 'I will.' With this I opened the door, took her by the hand, led her
in, and seated her by the fire-place. She was in a high perspiration, and looked pale as death.
After she was seated she said: 'What a fool I am.' 'Yes,' said I, 'about one of the biggest
fools I ever saw in my life. Now, you have to repent of all this or your soul will be lost.'
She sat silent, and I said 'Brother C., let us pray again.' We kneeled down and both prayed.
His wife was as quiet as a lamb. And what is better, in less than six months this woman was
soundly converted, and became as bold in the cause of God as she had been in the cause of the
wicked one.'"

CHAPTER IV.

The Trail of the Serpent.

While these ministers of grace were engaged in pleasant conversation a different kind of a
crowd had met not far away. They were moonshiners. Their rendezvous was a cave near the top
of a hill about one mile back from the Cumberland River. A motley company of about a dozen
men they were, dressed in cheap trousers supported by "galluses," coarse shirts, and wide-brim
straw hats.

Sam Wiles was leader of this band. As these pages are often to be burdened with his name, we
shall now take his measure. He belonged to that part of the population called "poor whites."
His parents had come to the settlement when Sam was a little boy. They were poor, shiftless,
improvident, ignorant, and, worse than all, apparently contented with their lot. They dwelt
in a log cabin in the hills, and in a haphazard way cultivated a few acres of half-barren land,
raising a little corn, tobacco, hay, fruit, and a few vegetables. There were six children in
the family, of whom Sam was the oldest. Five dogs guarded the house and helped to make the
inmates poor. "Tige," the coon dog, was the favorite of this quintette.

Sam Wiles was the brightest of the children, his mind being naturally active; but he had little
disposition for study and very meager opportunities, for "school kept" only a few weeks in
a year. At the time of this story he had just passed his majority, was somewhat above medium
height, solidly built, with broad, square shoulders. His brown hair hung several inches below
a coonskin cap he wore, and was supplemented by a large mustache of which he was very proud.

Behold this leader of the moonshiners as he stirs the fire of logs under the still and speaks
to his pals:

"That war a mighty fine trick I played on Dick Granger, the revenue deputy t'other night. He
was after me with his dorgs, and saw me as I was crossin' the road near Franklin Schoolhouse.
'Halt, there!' he hollored; but I was not in the haltin' bizness, and I made tracks fur Pigeon
Crick close by. In Glarus has
governed worse than the aristocratic government: the most retrograde theocracy or stagnant. Finally,
Saint-Gall (formerly dominated by abbots and bishops) and district in Zurich, has predominated tempered
liberal spirit: that of the representative republic, which emanate from any authority Legislative
Assembly elected by the people.

How to explain such marked differences between similar populations that have almost the same
history and play an almost common ground? Explanation will be sought in isolation secular
of a trade and contact with other advanced nations? This explanation is the less admissible
because not square with the facts, which are absolutely contradictory. For more I meditate, I can
not find anything close to both the rational and more general explanation the phenomenon as deduced
from the religious traditions. Lucerne has dominated, as in Glarus, the Catholicism of bad law, the
aristocratic, who fails to earlier traditions of the church and his spirit of equality and fraternity,
has made a dogma hierarchies and the exploitation of consciousness a system, regardless of
having the will of the faithful, which is the symbol of freedom of conscience. In the democratic
cantons Catholicism has been democratic, harmless, aligning their interests with those of society.
In district in Zurich, Protestantism has maintained the notion of personal freedom, opening the
way the republic, but has not gone directly to pure democracy, because the habits Protestant
individualism becomes a believer, not amalgamated but after much time (or in exceptional circumstances,
as in the U.S.) with the habits of action engendering collective Catholicism. Finally, in the canton
of St. Gallen, although Catholics are in the majority, the minority is very strong Reformed and respectable
in terms that both communions are represented in the government almost equal strength. This political
and social coexistence Catholicism, which tends towards democracy, but is complicated hierarchies,
and institutions vicious, and Calvinism, which does not support hierarchies and pastor of a citizen
father family and of free choice and responsibility, - the co-existence, I say, has had to balance
forces of the two communions, debug and emulation, harmonizing by contact intimate and necessary,
and lead to a system of conciliation or transaction which is the the representative republic.

Returning
to the primitive cantons say, to end my brief remarks on the organization social, that everything
I stated about Unterwalden applies to Uri, Schwyz and Zug, with few
minor differences.

As a general are voters and citizens rulers all males over 20 years. There is no legislative assemblies
in the general acceptation of the term. The village governs himself, and around the city, to meet
annually outdoors to choose their leaders of all kinds, to approve bills, vote on budgets,
pass laws and appoint representatives to the federal Diet, and in the districts, running the same
operations on a reduced scale. The people live happy with that noble scheme political and social
fellowship, freedom, equality and autonomy, and each of these citizens manifested in behavior
and acts of his life that is conscious of its rights, the habit of exercising consistently, and modest
pride and loyalty to the traditions independence and freedom that are necessary to all people
worthy of living in the land under the protection of God.

* * * * *

The valley that lies between the Muottas and Lake Zug, enclosed by
the mountains Mythen and corresponding to the group Rigi, is graceful
and peaceful, halfway up Goldau by landslides and some rocky hills.

       The first part, the closest to Schwyz, lies at the bottom of the
valley the small and very funny Lowerz lake, surrounded by inclines
and rolling hills.

The lonely little lake, on whose banks turn two ways road, and whose clear waves lie some
little boats lost in the rush to edge of small harbors that are not without grace, measures
just 5 kilometers in length, as 2 and 1 / 2 wide and 18 meters deep. It is one of many toys
for hydrography Switzerland, to love themselves rather than to serve travelers to trade and
navigation.

At the point that the vast bulk of the Rigi has its eastern flank, facing Rossberg, which stands
opposite an emaciated monster, the valley has a look of desolation to grieve, especially for
the memories awakened by huge naked pedrizcos scattered at the site
in 1806 occupied the town or village of Goldau.

Today there are no but a chapel, a hotel for travelers and forming a street a few houses built in
recent times. As we prepare the horses that we ride to raise the Rigi, we wanted to go on foot, between
rough weeds, rocks shattered and disordered overcrowding the remains of the terrible crash,
the scene of desolation that witnessed the disaster. Still found some burned bed ponds, remnants
of the waters of Lake Lowerz, coming up there and that was violently filled in part by the sudden
fall of a quadroon the Rossberg.

Upstairs has the ugly face of the mountain, whose side came off in a thousand large moles of
rocks and dust, falling over the valley and crushing and grinding the old town Goldau. The huge
red patch that was on the mountain gives you a look of death and horror to tremble, because the traveler
remembers that many Swiss people living under such constant threat
of landslides.

The desolation of Goldau and flank of the mountain makes the most rude contrast to the beautiful
panorama of the valley and the rest of the valley, from the Zug Lake to the banks of Muottas.

It
was three o'clock when we began to ascend the Rigi, in convoy with another ten or twelve hikers.
The mountain was displayed to our eyes full of beauty and majesty in Joint and surprises in
their thanks and relief, his deep gullies, its magnificent forests, the lonely prairies, their
scattered houses and its thousands of interesting features. Suddenly, when the sun was more
sharp and stronger heat, in spite of the high peaks towards ascension,
brought us air bursts threatening blight the sky, and everything changed
in appearance with how quickly a theater decoration is changed.

The storm broke out with violence, Fortunately when we got to stop a house, but after twenty
minutes dissipated with the same swiftness. So are the storms in almost all lakes and mountain
regions Switzerland.

I confess that the accident, far from disappointed, gave us keen pleasure, and because it gave
us chance to see one of those violent weather and interesting transitions Switzerland and
because it presented a spectacle of immeasurable beauty, who had never contemplated under similar
conditions and that can only be found in narrow valleys formed by high mountains and lakes in
the background. By the time the rain fell with more violence and abundance on the height where
we were, the valley was a wonderful theater lighting scene, color
shades and superb contrast.

The valley, green, wet and shiny, perfectly illuminated by the slanting rays of the sun, seemed
an immense carpet of emerald dotted spots and opal jet and waved at the bottom of the lake waves
with Lowerz recent tremors caused by the breath of the storm. The two steep hills Rossberg and
Rigi were still perfectly black, hooded by phalanxes of dark clouds that seemed attached to the crêpe
dark fir forests, the majesty of doubling the naked peaks and precipices timid. Finally, in
the middle of the sidewall of the two opposite mountains, lay the ends of a huge rainbow,
the most perfect and bright I've seen, lying on the valley and lake, from one side to another,
such as an air bridge raised to make way above the abyss of light to a legion of fairies or
invisible spirits. I have not ever seen such a small space in a spectacle of nature witchcraft
so sudden, great and varied as the look there for ten minutes.

The rocky slope, parched and choked a little before the August sun, was intoxicated with the
bathroom of the storm, and when we were barely visible progress in humidity signals the soil,
the green patch of grass beads, braids hair bright liquid Leaves falling from the conical firs,
and doubled flow of some streams that were lost jumping into waterfalls hidden in the depths
of the forest and depths. The air was filled with the richest perfumes thickets of ferns sacudian their
wet manes on the wings of the wind, and wild rumors concert rose the bosom of the deep gullies
or streams would gather the sound of bells waving cows and goats
to roam the broken patch of grass on the mountain, eating with eagerness
and delight the grass wet.

From the hostel where we had defended the storm begins a series of chapels or niches (12 or
13) placed at certain distances in more or less picturesque sites, to the edge the road. If
all the Catholic cantons abound on the roads these signs of worship religious rises in Rigi,
and especially that of Goldau make an important role. On the one hand mark the seasons of the pilgrims
going to visit Our Lady of Snow, on the other to serve as rookeries unhappy begging to disabled
passengers and do during the summer months its full-year provision.

A short distance from the summit of Rigi delay in the middle of forests
and very rough patch of grass Hospice of the famous Notre-Dame, much
revered for the miracles of the Virgin Nieves attributed to him and
inhabited by three or four friars.

At around the chapel and Hospice highlight many inns, some substantial and attractive appearance,
inhabited by a whole population of people nervous and sickly women who are going to be cured with
sera exercise and fresh air. There was less than two hundred people staying there when we pass,
and judging by their warm familiarity ought to be so pleasant residence. Forty minutes after
we got to the eminence of Staffel, a kind of introduction to the higher call Kulm. They bring
together the three main roads that lead opposite points to the top, and the traveler is suddenly
in the presence of a superb picture, leaving the Road closed basin
to a small plateau that records the entire view canton of Lucerne
and part of Unterwalden.

Half an hour later, walking on the back naked from the mountain, we went to get down to the door
of great Rigi-Kulm hotel that is the highest point of the mountain and the end of the excursion.

Nothing is more curious than European Babel built on such a high summit, amid a swarm of lakes,
valleys and mountains in the center of the free and picturesque Switzerland. There meet in
one night all the European races and even some of the New World, they all speak languages, and
they come in contact not only faces the most diverse but all vanities extravagances, the childishness,
the candideces, notables in excursion and all genres Esplin nuisance and is easy to find in
a big reunion of travelers. More we were three hundred people gathered there, most of the
Kulm Hotel and was to see the contrast of faces and ways that offered the married couples in
moon honey (still novices, naive in his soft, sentimental demonstrations), the literati wanderers
and unemployed, to hunt for business to make stories and novels, women tired the world, the
race of the misunderstood, dragging their tails on taffeta or Linon
carpet of grass, the men serious, qualified by character and of itself,
with be sure not challenged by their unknown partners, the English
Fancy or moody, or boring, always in the majority in number or very
large, in short, traders withdrawn, determined to put on airs of counts
traveling incognito, and revealing their manners that beneath his
gloves while resisted in the streets against the years of plebeian
work.

Perhaps nowhere are they more ridiculous and obvious vanities and nonsense of Skinny humanity
in those places where nature holds as sovereign nudity caste their thanks or the majesty of
its magnificent forms.

The panorama view ranges from the sublime imponderably Kulm is varied and surprising. Switzerland
appears around with all its contrasts, its huge and horrible ways some places, peaceful and
picturesque in others, wherever beautiful and seductive, or imposing. It was six o'clock when
we watched to the warm setting sun that world mountains and lakes, valleys and plains, forests
and grasslands, and cities and towns Verjel. Nature has its charms every hour different, because each
has its mysteries of life and love, by the way in patting the divine magician called Light. Thus,
we avidity we admire so much in recent afternoon as the first of morning. If the next day we
had seen, by a singular fortune, the three major phenomena Optical and weather that is usually
supplied to the Rigi, in the afternoon, it was clear but full of poetic melancholy, we saw the immense
panorama under the peaceful aspect.

From the high vantage point of Kulm we registered, to the naked eye or through a huge telescope almost
the whole of the east-central Switzerland and a vast region in the south, in direction more
colossal chains to the Alps. We were in sight, in whole or in part, the plains valleys and high
reliefs of thirteen or fourteen cantons of the Confederation under
to the great basin of the Rhine and its tributaries, and saw below,
and to our feet as depths opal and pale blue, and he more or less
considerable distances and with the most diverse forms, twelve major
lakes: the Four-cantons, at parties, Sempach, Baldeg and Hallwyl,
to the west, the Zug, district in Zurich, Greiffertz, Egeria and Pfoeffikon,
to the north, and those of Lowerz and Wallenstatter (Between Glarus
and St. Gallen) to N.-E. With the telescope we could see distinctly
all households, and even small objects from Lucerne, Art, Zug, district
in Zurich and many other localities, and in the circle a hundred leagues
to cover, we were perplexed to choose the most beautiful among so
many beauties.

To the north the sight is lost in the direction of the Rhine, stopping in distant chain of the Forest-Black,
which forms the mountains of the Grand Duchy of Baden and a part the kingdom of Württemberg.
South side of Nidwalden, is also the lake of Sarnen, and the look is confronted with severe mole
Pilate and the magnificent peaks of the Alps. Al west lie the smiling plains of the canton
of Lucerne and the basins of the Reuss and the Aar, whose ripples will give the appearance of
a sea of ​​pale or yellow vegetables. For Finally, the east is developed tumultuous chaos of the
Alps of Glarus, and Appenzel Graubünden, towering towards the S.-E. the most gigantic refrigerators.
That is huge in proportions and prodigiously beautiful!

* * * * *

It was four o'clock when the bagpipes are keen alpine woke us up and put Moving them all. We went
to watch the sunrise, which is one of the most sublime shows that can be seen from a high summit
of the Alps. Our fortune was such that not only had that pleasure for several minutes, but we see
the spectrum solar in all its frightening majesty, and the sudden formation of a lake storm Lucerne.
The dawn was just beginning when more than three hundred people we were at the point peak,
watching the moment when the sun was rising over the Alps.

All the immense panorama in the afternoon before we had seen was in darkness, but not in deep darkness,
but covered with crape vague dark gray ink, something lighter on the spaces of the lakes,
whose breasts were lifted mists and vapors fixed it seems, at first, and then wandering and dispersed.
The stars were still a glow pale and dying, and dead silence reigned in the bottom of all deep.
A lamp of light appeared in the east like a speck of white undecided, then spread at the foot
of the horizon in a huge pink ribbon and light, and the stars dimmed his trembling brilliance.
A few minutes they stopped and the clear and pure light appeared on the heights from heaven,
saw that began to shine the leadership of the highest and distant peaks, whilst that the great
mass of the landscape was covered with deep shadows. Then the huge amphitheater Alpine was
offering a succession of occurrences: the light falling on the alti-plains and valleys in countless
waterfalls, collapsed suddenly, from moment to moment, of a great top to lowest rung of another,
this to a lower, and so on to flood the entire grandstand clearly titanic mountain ranges.

       Then a light closer, like the glow of a fire invisible, appeared on
the first summit of the east, above the Rigi, a minute later appeared
the edge of the solar disk then a fourth, half, finally all astro
sovereign physical creation, huge, red as the gaping mouth of a furnace
full of fire, and as close to under the optical illusion, it seemed
as attached to the back of the mountain and threatening to come upon
us.

All time was flooded with light that sea of ​​blue ocean flowed, all depths were clarified, reverberated
lakes like mirrors, and a shout in unison chord and three hundred throats greeted the appearance
of universal lover! I was tempted to fall on his knees before that majesty supreme beauty
which offered me the best image, the only quite expressive of supreme foresight, wisdom and goodness
and unfailing love of God .... I seemed to feel that the delight of my blood and my soul silent
adoration of summarizing all the thrills of organic life from creation to greet the appearance
of the wondrous star ....

But how little was to take this unique show! While approaching divine appearance, it was lifted
from the bottom of Lake Lucerne, from the foot of Pilate Küssnach to the apex of a terrible
storm, and phenomena happened in the fourth of the time needed to describe quickly.
 A fine female boarding school then existed at Cincinnati, Ohio,
to which she was sent, and there she remained three years, gaining that knowledge deemed best
for young ladies in those days: the common branches of education and the higher accomplishments
of music and drawing. At the time of which we write she was in her nineteenth year, and was
known far and near for her beauty of mind and person. She was a perfect blonde. A bright light
sparkled in her blue eyes; her golden hair was simply arranged over temples and brows beautifully
formed. The color of her face was like a delicate peach, white with a blending of red. Her
nose was of Grecian type, mouth firmly chiseled and of medium size, while the cherry red lips
when parted showed two rows of pearl-like teeth. Her chin was pear-shaped, and revealed decision
of character. Her whole appearance gave one the impression of intelligence, purity, and benevolence.
She was of medium height, and her figure would have served as a model for the skill of a Phidias.
Her greatest accomplishment was music. Her voice was a high soprano, and its naturally pure
tone was improved by cultivation under the best teachers.

Jasper Very's preaching appointments included the home of Judge LeMonde, and he was given a
hearty welcome from the first to his house. Naturally he had seen the daughter Viola and had
conversed with her several times at the mansion and at church. He soon found that she was superior
to all the young ladies in the neighborhood both in strength of mind and education. To this
she added a bright and deep religious experience. We must confess that the ranger's frequent
visits to "Mt. Pisgah" were not wholly on church business.

On a bright afternoon appeared a select company of preachers, including Jasper Very and John
Larkin, sitting under the lovely pine trees fronting Judge LeMonde's mansion.

The judge had invited them to his house to rest a day or two after the labors of the camp meeting.

The host and his beautiful daughter had joined the group of ministers.

They were a happy and merry lot as they looked over the tall, green fields of corn, and beyond
to the glorious trees lining the river bank, and the sparkling stream seen between the trunks
of the trees.

John Larkin was in his best mood, and the different subjects of conversation reminded him of
many stories. They were talking of a sallow-cheeked preacher who was leaving his church located
on Salt River.

"That makes me think of the illiterate preacher I heard of, who lived in the northern part
of the State," said Larkin. "He was about to give up his church, and so delivered a farewell
address thus: 'My dear bretherin-ah and sisterin-ah, I am about to leave you-ah, and I feel
solemncholy-ah, I can tell you-ah. This mornin' as I was ridin' to this appintment-ah I looked
up to the leaves of the trees-ah, and they seemed to be sayin', 'Good-by, Brother Crawford-ah.'
And then I see the little birds singin' in the woods, and I fancied they said, 'Good-by, good-by,
Brother Crawford-ah.' Then I gazed at the purty squirrels runnin' along the ground and climbin'
up the trees, and they 'peared to be barkin', 'Good-bye, O good-bye, Brother Crawford-ah!'
After awhile I come to a lot of pigs awallerin' in mud by the roadside. When my hoss-ah got
just opposite, they got up and gave some loud grunts--whoo! whoo! whoo!--and that scart my
hoss-ah, and he threw me in the dirt and ran away-ah. I ris my eyes to look at my hoss-ah,
and there he was a-gallopin' down the road with his mane and tail a-flyin', and he looked back
at me and seemed to be sayin', 'Good-by, Brother Crawford-ah; good-by, Brother Crawford-ah.'"

"It is a great pity," remarked Judge LeMonde, "that religion sometimes must run through such
rough channels to water the soil of morality and piety when it deserves the best training of
mind and voice."

"God can use very ignorant Hardshell preachers in building up his kingdom if their own hearts
are right before him," said Jasper Very; "but if they are imposters, they are a disgrace and
injury to the sacred calling.

"I met a fellow once across the Ohio River whose name was Sargent. He assumed the name of Halycon
Church, and proclaimed himself the millennial messenger. He professed to see visions, fall
into trances, and to converse with angels. We had a camp meeting near Marietta, and this fellow
came to it. He wanted to preach, and upon being refused pretended to swoon away. One night
he lit a cigar and got some powder, and walked away about one hundred yards where stood a large
stump. He put the powder on the stump and touched it with his cigar. The flash was seen by
many in the camp, and they came up to find Sargent lying on the ground. After a long time he
came to, and told the people he had a message from God for them. Seeing so many there, I lit
a lantern and went down to investigate. Stepping up to the stump, I smelled the sulphur and
saw the mark of the burnt powder, and near the stump lay the cigar. As he was talking to the
people, I stepped up to him and asked him if an angel had appeared to him in a flash of light.
He said, 'Yes.' 'Sargent,' said I, 'did not that angel smell of brimstone?' 'Why,' said he
'do you ask such a foolish question?' 'Because,' said I, 'if an angel has spoken to you, he
was from the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone;' and, raising my voice, I said, 'I
smell sulphur now.' I walked to the stump and showed the people his wicked trick. They were
very indignant and called him a vile imposter, and soon he left, and we were no more troubled
with him and his brimstone angels."

"What a shame that men will take the livery of heaven in which to serve the evil one," said
Viola LeMonde. "Hypocrisy is like a counterfeit coin: it is not only worthless in itself, but
it also makes men suspect the genuine money."

"Poor Richard says, 'Honesty is the best policy,' and that holds good in preaching as in other
things," remarked Larkin.

Jasper Very added: "Men who are dishonest cheat themselves. They narrow their souls. They grasp
after a substance and find a shadow. A sure Nemesis follows the present gain. The great poet
says: 'Who steals my purse steals trash.'"

"Sam Wiles is a case in point," said Judge LeMonde. "He surely is cheating himself. But what
gave him the disposition he possesses? Heredity and environment; and not one man in a thousand
will rise out of these. The fellow has some good in him; but it is strangled by his bent and
surroundings, like good seed choked by thorns. What say you, Mr. Larkin?"

"There is only one hope for him, that is religion, which he seems to despise and reject. His
superior gifts, making him a leader of the moonshine gang, constitute him a greater menace
to law-abiding people. The Bengal tiger kills more prey than the common wild-cat which sometimes
roams these surrounding woods. I am told that Wiles is the ring leader in many reckless acts,
and will stop at nothing to gain his ends. Zibe Turner, called the monster dwarf, is his right-hand
man, who will pick his chestnuts from the fire, though he burn his impish fingers in so doing."

"You remember, papa," said Viola, "when we and a few friends had that picnic two weeks ago
on 'Silver Knob' we passed by the cabin where Sam Wiles lives? I felt sad to see his poor mother
in her faded and torn calico dress in the little front yard. She was stirring some food in
an iron kettle which was over a fire of logs. Her eyes had such a dull, discouraged look in
them. The children were dirty and half dressed, and how the dogs barked as we came near! The
lot of the 'poor whites' in Kentucky is indeed unfortunate. Even the slaves look down upon them.

"When I saw the Wiles family and other families like them in their low condition I said in
my heart: 'Cannot something be done for the comfort and uplift of these people?' Gentlemen,
I put the question to you this afternoon."

After a silence of some duration Jasper Very spoke:

"I am sure something ought to be done and can be done to brighten the lives of these poor folks.
They live in the hills remote from church and Sunday School, which they never attend, and exist
as heathen in a Christian country. Their forefathers in England were among the best yeomen
of the land, and I believe many of these have the making of good, honest, upright citizens."

"I think it is possible to organize a community school--a combination of Sunday School and
day school--for these dwellers in the hills," added John Larkin. "As I was riding down 'Sinex
Knob' the other day I passed a settler's cabin, larger and better built than most dwellings
in that section. The owner's name is Mart Spink. He has a wife and several bright-looking children.
Perhaps he would grant the use of his living-room for school purposes. The Wiles family and
a number of other families live near enough to attend."

"My thought coincides with the suggestion of Mr. Larkin," said Viola LeMonde. "We ought to
have such a school. In it we should teach the truths of religion and also the common branches
of learning. Moreover, we should help the whole community--the farmers to better cultivate
their lands and their minds; the farmers' wives to improve their housekeeping, to get out of
the ruts, and to take a wider interest in developing their own intellects and those of their
children; the sons to have noble ambitions in life and to prepare to achieve them; the daughters,
besides the moral and intellectual training they receive, to learn sewing, knitting, cooking,
and other forms of domestic science. Yes, and I would have a primitive dispensary, that the
neighbors might have at least first aid in case of sickness or accident. Tomorrow I will have
my servant Mose Williams to drive me in the phaeton to David Hester's house. There I will talk
with his daughter Henrietta, and I am sure I can induce her to join me in the project. Together
we will explore the ground and make a beginning.

"I shall ask you gentlemen to aid us in every way in your power by sympathy, advice, prayer,
and work."

"Most gladly will I do so on one condition," Very responded with a laugh, "that is, that we
now adjourn to the parlor, and you will favor us with music both instrumental and vocal."

"Would you have me to be so selfish as to be the whole show?" rejoined Viola. "I will do nothing
of the kind, sir; but I will play and sing if the company will unite with me in singing the hymns."

This demand was heartily accepted, and the group at once left the shade of the pine trees for
the parlor.

Christianity is said to be the only religion that can be sung. It began with the angels' song,
and its music will continue on earth till it is transferred to the song of redemption in heaven.

The hymns of Christendom are among its most cherished and valuable possessions. They sound
the depths of the human heart. They express the varied emotions of the soul.

It is no wonder that Jasper Very requested Viola LeMonde to play and sing.

We behold this queen of song seated at the piano, while around her stood her father and her
mother (the mother having just come in) and the preachers.

First Viola favored them with several instrumental selections from the great masters. It was
interesting to watch her hands. They were perfect in size, shape and color. The slender fingers
were tipped with nails curved like almonds. They struck the keys with a precision, force and
grace, leaving nothing to be desired. The quick interplay of mind and muscle interpreted the
music to her hearers in a way almost to produce tears.

After a rest during which some bright, witty remarks, like sparks, passed from one to another,
they prepared to sing some of the great hymns of the church. They were well equipped for their
task. Viola's voice was pure, sweet, soulful, and high. She might have been a sister of Jenny
Lind. Her mother sang also in a rich and expressive manner. Jasper Very possessed a fine deep
bass voice. John Larkin sang an acceptable tenor. All the rest were able to use their voices
in song.

As by common understanding they began with songs of adoration and praise.

The persons here were advanced agents in bringing civilization to Kentucky. They had the heroic
spirit. These preachers had endured hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. They had climbed
mountains, crossed valleys, forded streams, slept in the open, encountered wild beasts and
base and desperate men. Songs to cheer, encourage, and strengthen their faith and zeal were
needed and provided. Naturally they desired to sing on this occasion. So the company sang with
zest Luther's great battle hymn:

    "A mighty fortress is our God,
    A bulwark never failing:
    Our helper he, amid the flood
    Of mortal ills prevailing."

The pioneers of that day had an exultant experience of the religion they professed and taught.
Viola next turned to hymns expressing this state. She and those gathered around her sang them
with joyous, even ecstatic, acclamation:

      "O happy day, that fixed my choice
      On thee, my Savior and my God!
      Well may this glowing heart rejoice,
    And tell its rapture all abroad."

And:

    "Love divine, all love excelling,
    Joy of heaven, to earth come down;
    Fix in us thy humble dwelling,
    All thy faithful mercies crown."

After they had sung a number of other hymns, Jasper Very said to Viola LeMonde: "I have heard,
Miss LeMonde, that you have composed the music to a new paraphrase of the Ninety-First Psalm.
I am sure we should all be delighted to hear you sing your music to the words. Will you kindly
favor us by so doing?"

Viola LeMonde replied: "I am not an adept at composing music, but the words of this poem impressed
me, and I joined them to an air which came to me almost spontaneously. I shall take pleasure
in singing this melody, if you will be charitable in criticism." Thus speaking she sang the
following words simply but with much feeling:

    The Saint's Refuge.

    Dwelling in God's secret place,
    Safe doth his beloved lie,
    Shaded by his sovereign grace
    From the tempests fierce and high.
    Love Divine will hear his prayer,
    Be his refuge and defense;
    Save him from the fowler's snare,
    And the noisome pestilence.
    Sheltered 'neath the Father's wings,
    Covered with his pinions wide,
    Truth the ransomed homeward brings,
    Shielding him on every side.

    Fear recedes from terror's night,
    Harmless flies the dart by day;
    In the darkness or the light
    Wasting death shall flee away.
    Sees he, falling in their pride,
    Twice five thousand wicked men;
    But destruction's wrathful tide
    Shall not touch his garments then.
    Angels, ministrant, shall fly
    From their dazzling upper zones,
    Charged by heaven's Majesty
    Him to keep from crushing stones.
    On the lion, bold and dread,
    Seeking ever to devour,
    And the hissing serpent's head,
    He shall tread with victor's pow'r.
    God will wipe away his tears;
    Grant him honor and release;
    Crown his life with length of years;
    Save, and keep in perfect peace.

CHAPTER VII.

The Horse Race.

We left Sam Wiles, Zibe Turner and other disturbers of the peace in the county jail. In due
time they were brought before Judge LeMonde for trial. They were found guilty and sentenced
to prison for one month.

A few days after their liberation the following conversation took place:

    Turner: "Most all de folks on de hills and in de valleys air
    goin' to de races tomorrer, and I look for a gay o' time."

    Wiles: "Yes, and all de niggers that can get off'n work will be
    there too."

    Turner: "Dat feller from Lexington has a right smart of a hoss.
    You know he wants me to ride him in de last race, and I'm bound to
    beat George LeMonde, if beat is in de critter. His hoss stands
    seventeen hands high, is rangy in de legs, has a deep chest, and
    has a will to go. He can easily bear my weight, and you know dat
    dey count me de best jockey in de whul county. If I can't win by
    far (fair) means, I will by foul."

    Wiles: "I hearn dat Jack Ketcham's sorrel goes like de wind, and
    Jack's hoss is goin' to be in de big race."

    Turner: "George LeMonde has been speeding his bay over de track
    for days, and he will get every bit of go out of him. His mother
    and sister are dead set agin hoss-racin' and dey are begging him
    not to ride; but George likes de sport too well to please dem."

    Wiles: "Mr. Rawlins, of Lexington, swears by his black, and will
    put up a great deal of money. George will try to match it, and ol'
    farmer Ketcham won't be slow with his cash."

    Turner: "It will be an excitin' time, and I low, as many will see
    de races as went to de big camp meetin'."

    Wiles: "Well, Zibe, you must stick to your hoss like a monkey,
    and do your best to win de money and down that upstart, George
    LeMonde."

With this remark the two men separated.

George LeMonde was a youth about seventeen years of age, well-built, good-looking, full of
life and vigor, and at this time engaged in that serious occupation, common to many young men,
sowing his wild oats. He was boisterous and rather reckless, but not vicious. His moral nature
was touched by evil, but not yet corrupted. However, he had begun to walk in the broad way
of youthful folly, and was in great danger of going its full length. He was restrained from
drinking the full cup of unlawful indulgence more by the prayers, example, and love of his
mother and sister than by the correct moral life of his father.

The greatest danger to that priceless thing, character, which confronted him was his association
with the hillside young men. They never felt that he was one in desire and purpose with them;
but sometimes he would meet them on the big road by Franklin Schoolhouse or occasionally go
to their cabins on the hills. Then he would sip lightly their moonshine whiskey, join in their
coarse talk, and share in their few pastimes.

George LeMonde probably inherited his love for horses. His father, Judge LeMonde, for many
years had raised his own colts from the best stock he could procure. On his broad acres they
had every chance to develop their physical powers. His fields produced an abundance of the
best corn and hay. Skirting the hill which bounded his farm on the north were extensive meadows
rich with grass. Here his blooded stock browsed, ran and grew. It was under similar conditions
that many Kentucky horses were raised early in the nineteenth century, becoming sires of the
greatest racing stock in the world.

At the time of which we write Judge LeMonde owned a bay, of his own raising, which was his
pride and joy. The horse, Velox by name, was far and away better than any other he had ever
possessed. He was known throughout the entire county as a splendid specimen of horseflesh,
and for beauty and utility had won the blue ribbon at a number of surrounding fairs.

When George LeMonde reached his sixteenth birthday his father gave him this fine animal. The
son was delighted with the gift, and took the best care of Velox, often feeding him with his
own hand. George rode his horse so much that he learned all the traits and peculiarities of
his steed; for horses, like men, have their own individual make-up and notions. On the other
hand, Velox got to know, trust, love and obey his master. He would come at his call, and could
be guided when on a journey nearly as well by the motions of his owner's body as by the rein.

George LeMonde decided to enter Velox for the race which was soon to take place, and many times
did he ride his willing steed over the race course to prepare for the great event.

Horse racing then, as now, was one of the most popular diversions of multitudes in Kentucky,
but the preparations then were quite primitive. The track was laid in a level piece of ground
some miles from Judge LeMonde's farm. It was in the form of a circle, and was one mile in circumference.
The inclosure was protected by a rough fence, hewn out of logs. Within the course, near the
starting place, and on the inside of the track, was a stand upon which the judges of the races
sat. Some rough seats were provided for a part of the spectators, but most of the people stood
during the races.

Saturday dawned clear and beautiful. It was a perfect day to bring out the speed of the racers.
The time selected was near the last of August, and a crispness in the air gave a faint indication
of coming autumn. People from far and wide had come to enjoy the sport. They made the occasion
a holiday. Many came on horseback and by team, and families brought well-filled baskets of
fried chicken, corn pone, blackberry pie, and other good things to refresh the inner man.

A number of minor races were run by horses in harness and under the saddle, which only increased
the people's appetite for the grand event of the day. At four in the afternoon the three horses
were called for the two-mile race. Their riders soon brought them from their stalls to a position
in front of the grand stand and judges. The steeds were all in perfect condition, their glossy
coats shining with bright luster in the afternoon sun. The horses seemed to feel the meaning
of the occasion. They champed their bits and moved about restlessly as though impatient to
be off. Their riders, however, had them under good control, and now the judges tossed the coin
for choice of position on the track. Zibe Turner secured the inside place, George LeMonde came
next, and Hiram Ketcham, Farmer Ketcham's son of eighteen, was on the outer rim of the circle,
next to the fence.

The grand stand, composed of rough boards, was filled with the best dressed citizens of the
county: while far down the track, and separated from it by a frail line of fence, stood a great
company of tall Kentucky pioneers with their wives and children. Many negroes were also in
the crowd, interested spectators, and the small boy was much in evidence.

A silence fell upon the waiting throng as the three horses, bearing their riders, proceeded
up the track a few rods to make a dash for the line. The signal was given, and they came like
three thunderbolts to the starting place; but reaching this they were not abreast, and another
start must be made. They tried four times before they got away in line, when some one shouted:
"Now they are off!" For a few paces they were neck and neck; but then Hiram Ketcham's sorrel,
though on the outer circle forged ahead. When the half-mile point was reached, the sorrel was
several lengths in the lead, and Zibe Turner's black was leading George LeMonde's bay by a
dozen feet. They came in this position down the home stretch, and as they crossed the line
a great cheering rose from the crowd. Turner's friends from the hills were there in large numbers,
and were the loudest in their shouts. "Go it, Zibe; you'll beat, old boy!" "Hurrah for de black!
push him along!" "I'll bet my money on de Lexington hoss!" were some of the words that were
shouted at Turner as he dashed past the starting point for the second mile. Hiram Ketcham did
not lack for admirers, who encouraged him with cheers and waving of hats and handkerchiefs.
Many of the farmers living in the rich river bottom seemed to be partial to the sorrel horse.
George LeMonde's friends were plentiful in the grand stand and, in fact, throughout the crowd.
They were somewhat disappointed to behold him the last in the race; but they saw that Velox
was going well, and they had hopes for his winning during the next mile.

As for young LeMonde, he saw nothing and gave heed to nothing except the business in hand.
Only once did he raise his eyes from looking straight ahead between the ears of his noble horse,
and that was when he was passing the grandstand. Then he gave a swift look in that direction,
and was repaid by seeing a young girl of some sixteen years of age, Stella Nebeker by name,
dressed in a pure white muslin gown with short sleeves, waving a delicate handkerchief toward
him. For an instant their eyes met, then he looked along the race course as before.

LeMonde had a method in his racing which he was now working. He knew the reserved powers which
were in his horse, and he purposely held him back from putting forth his greatest speed at
the beginning. Turner, the monster dwarf, was also using all his skill in horse racing. His
monkeyish face was lighted up with a look of more intelligence than usual, which made his ugly
features more forbidding and repulsive. His eyes shone with excitement, determination, and
reckless courage. His teeth were clenched, and the muscles of his lips drawn over them gave
him an expression half laughing, half demoniac. On the first round his cap had fallen off,
and the shaggy hair of his head and face streamed in the wind, adding greatly to the fierceness
of his looks. He had perfect control of himself and horse, and rode like a centaur, ready to
take any advantage which circumstances or guile threw in his way. He also had held in his horse
with bit and bridle, reserving his best efforts for the closing part of the race.

During the first half of the second mile Turner knew that it was necessary for him to lessen
the distance between himself and Hiram Ketcham, and LeMonde realized that he must soon close
the gap separating Turner and himself. Almost at the same time they gave their horses more
rein, and they sprang to their work with increased speed. Ketcham had taken advantage of his
lead by crossing the track and taking the narrow arc of the circle. The three horses were trotting
in a line, all hugging the inside track. Very soon the distance between the sorrel and the
black was diminished, and before the half mile point was reached the monster dwarf turned his
horse toward the center of the track to pass Ketcham. Just beyond the half-mile point Turner's
black passed Ketcham's sorrel, and LeMonde's bay was neck and neck with the black. A few rods
more, and it was plain to be seen that the bay was forging ahead of the black.

The monster dwarf saw at once the advantage of his rival, and hissing through his teeth in
a low voice the words: "Dat's my holt," brought his short cowhide whip down with force upon
the withers of Velox. It was the act of a jockey utterly without principle, an act execrated
by every true Kentucky sportsman.

The splendid animal never before had felt the lash of a whip. The blow had the effect desired
by the dwarf. It broke the gait of the bay horse. The stroke was so unexpected and painful
that the horse gave a bound forward and upward that almost unseated the rider. Then he plunged
along the track with irregular strides, sometimes rushing to the sides and then to the center.

Though taken by surprise George LeMonde acted with decision and judgment. He held his mount
with a firm hand, and added to the strength of his arm the soothing effect of his voice: "Steady,
steady, Velox! Your master did not strike you. He loves you. Steady, steady, good horse! Velox!
Velox! Velox!" By these means young LeMonde renewed the race, though the other horses were
a considerable distance in advance.

In the meantime a large number of the spectators had seen the despicable act and roared their
disapproval. Some shook their fists at the monster dwarf, and cried for speedy punishment for
his vile trick. This outburst of indignation made him fear again to molest the bay horse.

Now George knew that the time had come for Velox to use his utmost powers. He knew that the
horse had great reserved fountains of strength in him, and believed he could still win the
race. As for the horse, he seemed alive to the situation. Perhaps he felt a proud resentment
at the insult and injury put upon him. His eyes flashed fire. His nostrils were dilated until
the red blood showed through his veins. Man and horse gave to each other courage and confidence;
they appeared no longer to be two creatures, but had been merged into a single unit of astonishing
force and capacity. LeMonde's whole soul was absorbed with one thought--to pass the other horses
and to cross the line first. He leaned farther front in the saddle, lowering his head to reduce
the resistance of the air. His face almost touched the flying mane of his horse.

Again he spoke to his mount: "Steady, my Velox boy; we are nearing the end. It will soon be
over; but you must pass these horses, and win the race." With this remark LeMonde gave free
rein to his horse, pressed his knees a little tighter against the animal's sides, and gave
him a light touch with the whip. The noble horse instantly responded to his master's urge.
He released fold after fold of knotted muscle, his stride increased, and when his hoofs descended,
they seemed to spurn the ground. Now as steady as a Corliss engine this ultimate unit of the
animal and mechanical world rushed on, and was seen to be gaining on the other horses.

At a quarter of a mile from the home stake the sorrel horse was passed, but still the result
seemed uncertain. Then young LeMonde appeared as a Jehu incarnate. He pressed the horse's flanks
with his heels and shouted into the very ears of his mount: "Velox, we must win, we will win,
we are going to win." With this remark, for the first time in his life he brought the whip
down hard upon the glossy hide of his steed. The animal increased his speed, and went thundering
down the home stretch after the black. It is a case of blood against time and space. The bay
gains! He has closed the distance between them! His head is on a line with the other's shoulder!
They are only one hundred yards from the goal! The grand stand is wild with shouting! Those
standing near the track, unconscious of what they do, are throwing hats, handkerchiefs and
umbrellas into the air, and yelling like mad men! The judges are sighting the line! They see
a horse's brown head and shoulders pass the line, then a black head appears, and Velox has
won by a neck's length.

CHAPTER VIII.

Prayer In a Dance Hall.

When the three horses crossed the finishing line, covered with sweat and foam, LeMonde and
Ketcham soon brought their mounts to a stop. Not so the monster dwarf. Fearing that the crowd
might do him personal injury he rode the black horse directly to the stable. He was almost
beside himself with rage and disappointment. He ground his teeth together, and froth showed
upon his lips. His face was hideous in expression. He shook his fist in the direction of the
race course, and cursed the victorious horse and rider with terrible oaths.

To Sam Wiles, who had come up, he said: "Anudder chance will come. I'll git even wid dat proud
aristocrat yit. I'm goin' to git back all de money I lost today, and mo' too."

A different scene was taking place near the grand stand. When George LeMonde, with flushed
face and bright eyes, dismounted from his horse, he was at once surrounded by an admiring crowd
who showered him with congratulations. They praised his skill as a horseman, his coolness in
a time of danger and emergency, and his good nature under great provocation. Many were the
admirers of Velox. They patted his shoulders, stroked his head and commented on his beauty
of color and form. The horse took it in good part, and seemed to consider it a proper tribute
to the steed who won the race.

Among the rest who shook George heartily by the hand was a stout, broad-featured man of about
forty, who was dressed in a good suit of blue jeans and wore what was uncommon in those days,
a large diamond pin in his shirt front. His name was Costello Nebeker, and he was a tavern
keeper on a country road not many miles away. The girl with a white dress and shapely arm whom
George saw as he flashed past the grand stand was Stella Nebeker, the sixteen-year-old daughter
of this tavern keeper. She came forward, and in a happy way congratulated him upon his success.
They had known each other for some time; for we are sorry to say, George on various occasions,
having been at the tavern with some of his young friend, had indulged in the liquors which
Nebeker kept for sale. While at this tavern George had become acquainted with Stella Nebeker,
and she soon found a place in his affections. She was comely, vivacious and sensible, fond
of society, a natural leader among her set, having most of the accomplishments furnished by
the schools and social gatherings of their neighborhood.

Nebeker said to George in his loud and hearty way: "LeMonde, today you have covered yourself
and horse with glory, and incidentally have put a good many dollars into my jeans pocket. Now
you and your friends must celebrate this victory by a layout (feast) and dance at my house.
Next Saturday will be moonlight, and Stella and I will invite our friends and you must ask
yours to come, and we will have a jolly supper, and wash it down with some first-class Kentucky
whisky, and wind up the meeting with a party dance."

George agreed to this proposal; and after bidding the tavern keeper and his lovely daughter
a kind adieu, he departed to the stable, whither his faithful servant, Mose, had led his horse.

Costello Nebeker lived about ten miles from Mr. LeMonde's plantation in rather a rough and
hilly country. For a number of years he had kept a public house; and as his place was the only
one of this kind for many miles around, and as it fronted on a much-traveled county road, he
had many customers at his bar and guests in his tavern. His house was a large frame structure,
the lower part of which was used for a bar and lounging place and the rear for a dance hall.
On the second floor were several sleeping rooms, some of which were occupied by the keeper
and his family, and the rest were prepared for travelers.

The sky was clear and the woods beautiful on the following Saturday evening. As the sun began
to hide his brilliant rays behind the noble hills covered with regal forests, and the moon,
nearing its full, was already throwing a silvery light over the scene, those invited to the
supper and dance were making their way, some in buggies along the main road, but most on horseback,
coming down hills and across valleys, all moving to a central point, the tavern house.

It is not our design to dwell upon that feast, which consisted of most of the good things then
in season in Kentucky, but to come at once to the dance and to a striking incident which occurred
there.

Rather late in the evening, after dancing had been going on for some time, Jasper Very rode
up to the tavern. He had been on a long preaching tour, and was tired and hungry. When he had
dismounted, he asked the proprietor if he could lodge there for the night. Mr. Nebeker politely
told him he could stay, but he was afraid he would not enjoy himself very well, as a dance
was in progress. Jasper then inquired how far it was to a suitable house where he could put
up for the night, and was told seven miles. He felt in his present condition that this was
too far, and said that if the tavern keeper would treat him civilly and feed his horse well
by his leave he would stay. This was promised him, and Very dismounted and went in. He quietly
took a seat in one corner of the room, and the dancing continued. While musing upon many things
and wishing in his heart he could do those people good, and having finally made up his mind
to ask the privilege of preaching there the next day, he was surprised to see a beautiful and
ruddy young lady, who was no other than Stella Nebeker, walk gracefully up to him, drop a handsome
courtesy, and pleasantly, with a winning smile, invite him to dance with her. Jasper Very in
his life had been in many strange situations, but this was an experience unlike any he had
hitherto passed through. He could hardly understand his thoughts or feelings, but in a moment
he resolved on a desperate experiment. He arose as gracefully as he could, with many emotions
crowding upon his mind. Stella with much grace moved to his right side. Jasper grasped her
right hand with his left hand, while she leaned her left arm on his right arm. In this position
they walked on the floor.

The whole company seemed pleased at this act of politeness in a young lady shown to a stranger.
The colored musician began to put his fiddle in the best order. Jasper here asked the fiddler
to hold a minute, and, addressing the company, said: "Friends, for several years I have not
undertaken any matter of importance without first asking the blessing of God upon it, and I
desire now to ask God's blessing upon this beautiful young lady, who has shown such an act
of politeness to a total stranger, and upon the whole company."

Here he grasped the young lady's hand tightly and said: "Let us all kneel down and pray." With
this he dropped upon his knees, and began praying with all the power he possessed. Stella tried
to get loose from him, but he held her tightly.

This unexpected act threw the whole company into excitement and disorder. Stella seized by
an emotion which she could not control, fell upon her knees. Some of the dancers kneeled, some
stood, some sat still with curious looks upon their faces, while others fled as in terror.
The fiddler ran off into the kitchen saying: "Lord a marcy, what de matter. What's dat mean?
Prayin' in a dance hall! Dis beats anyting dis niggar ever saw."

Jasper Very continued to pray with loud voice and great unction. Some soon began weeping softly,
others cried out aloud in their deep feeling, and some asked God for mercy. After a while Jasper
arose from his knees and commenced an exhortation, after which he sang a hymn.

Stella Nebeker was so affected by the service and by the deep convictions of her heart that
she remained for a long time prostrate on the floor, crying earnestly for pardon. This strange
meeting continued nearly all night; and when it was ended, fifteen of those dancers had obtained
pardon for their sins. Stella was one of them, George LeMonde was another and the tavern keeper
was a third. From this dance room a great revival spread throughout that part of the country.

CHAPTER IX.

Wanted, a Mission School.

Let us follow Miss Viola LeMonde and Miss Henrietta Harvey in their effort to organize a Sunday
School among the "Poor Whites."

It was a beautiful day in September when the two young ladies seated in the phaeton drawn by
Velox and Dolly and driven by faithful Mose made their way into the hill country. Their object
was to visit as many families in a remote section as possible, and try to get their consent
to join the proposed school.

After riding a number of miles they came to the family of Mart Spink. The two-room cabin in
which they lived had the distinction of being built of hewn logs. It also had a "lean-to,"
or low ell, attached to the larger part.

Fortunately they found the "old man," Mart Spink, at home. He seemed surprised to behold such
a fine turnout stop at his door, but showed a native gallantry as he came to the carriage.

"Howdy, ladies, I'se glad to see you. Won't you 'light, and walk into de house?"

"Thank you," replied Viola. "My name is Viola LeMonde, and this is my friend, Miss Henrietta
Harvey. We have come to consult you on some important business, and shall be glad to step into
your cottage."

With this remark they both dismounted from the phaeton, and passed into the house.

Here they found the whole family, and Mr. Spink introduced them in order to the ladies--his
wife, Lucinda, his oldest daughter, Susanna, then Elmira, Robert and Jonathan.

Mart Spink invited the ladies to be seated, and they sat down on splint-bottom chairs.

Viola LeMonde opened the business in hand: "Mr. Spink, some of us living in the bottoms, knowing
that you dwell so far away from any church that you and your neighbors cannot well attend public
religious services, have decided to start a Sunday School in this locality, if we can find
a suitable place, and if the people are willing to come to it.

"Not long ago Rev. John Larkin, whom perhaps you have seen, suggested your house as the best
place in these hills in which to begin a school. What do you say to the proposition?"

Mart Spink replied: "Well, I was born in Nashville, Tennessee, and lived thar with my parents
till I was eight years old. I went to school thar and learned how to read and write a little.
I also went to church and Sunday School some.

"Then they took up land here in de backwoods, and since that time I have had mighty little
chance to larn out of books and to go to meetin'.

"Yes, I would be rale glad to have you start a school in my house, if Lucinda is willin'. What
do you say, wife?"

Lucinda: "Let us have de school by all means; de sooner de better. I want it for your sake,
Mart, and mine, but specially for our boys and girls."

So the consent was given and the matter settled.

Susanna Spink, the oldest child, sat opposite Viola LeMonde during the conversation. She was
fourteen years old, and was of such striking beauty that both the visitors were impressed by
it. Her chief attraction was her eyes. Once seen they could never be forgotten. The eyebrows
were dark and of medium size. The lashes were black and long. Her eyes were large, clear, deep
blue in color. One could look down into their wondrous depths and imagine one could see the
very soul of the child.

Susanna was all attention during the talk about the school. She spoke no word, but the look
of her eyes spoke volumes to Viola. She knew that the child was intensely interested in the
project. That hour by an invisible and mysterious power the souls of the woman and child were
welded together into a union of friendship and devotion which death itself could not part.
Neither suspected at this time what a test of this devotion was to appear in the future.

Highly pleased with the success of their first visit the ladies entered the carriage, and Viola
directed Mose to drive to the home of the Wiles family. Arriving there they were greeted by
the furious barking of a pack of dogs and by the staring looks of some of the children. Mrs.
Wiles was in the front yard hanging out some faded and frayed clothing on the line.

We must give the names of this interesting family. Those at home were Mrs. Deborah Wiles and
her children Ephraim, Priscilla, Martha, and Ruth. The father, Simon, was absent, and also
his precious son, Sam, whose acquaintance we have already made. The remaining son, Reuben,
was visiting a near neighbor about three miles distant. However much of original depravity
existed in this family the parents were determined that they should be fortified with biblical
names.

Mrs. Wiles showed small courtesy to the strangers, for she did not call off the dogs or speak
to the visitors till she had hung out to dry the last remaining piece of washing.

Then she turned to the carriage, and inquired of the ladies what they wanted. Viola and Henrietta
without any invitation stepped down from the vehicle, and made known their mission.

Mrs. Wiles expressed herself unfavorable to the idea. She said they were gittin' along well
enough without any church meetin's, and they did not want any of de high-toned people from
de bottoms to come up there, putting on airs, treating them as ignorant, and no 'count white
trash, and making fun of their farms and houses.

But different words sprang from the lips of Ephraim and Priscilla.

Ephraim, the boy who a few years before had discovered Wind Cave, now grown to a good sized
youth, said: "You are wrong, ma. Most of us around here are a low down set without books or
religion. If these ladies are willin' to spend their time to come all this way and teach us
larnin' and de Bible, I say we ought to thank them, and help them to start de school."

Priscilla said she agreed with her brother and thought it was time they "were gittin' out of
their pore way of livin'," and she would be glad "to jine de school" if her mother would let her.

Mrs. Wiles gave a cold consent, and the carriage drove away, the ladies thankful that they
had secured at least two more advocates of their scheme.

Mose spoke to his mettled steeds and soon they were drawing the carriage over an unfrequented
road through a deep forest to the cabin of Harrop Sneath. He and his house were typical of
the poorest of the "poor whites." His cabin consisted of one room, about fourteen feet square,
with one door and no windows. It was made of unhewn logs plastered with clay. The only daylight
which entered the cabin came through the door when open and down the chimney. On the inside
stood a bedstead made of poles stuck between the logs of the angle, the outside corner supported
by a crotched stick. The table was a huge hewn log, standing on four pegs. A log bench or two
took the place of chairs. The cooking utensils consisted of an iron pot, which hung in the
big chimney, a kettle and skillet and a few pewter and tin dishes. The loft was the sleeping
place of most of the children. It was reached by a ladder of wooden pins driven into the logs.

Harrop Sneath was too lazy and shiftless to work much. He cultivated in a careless way a small
piece of cleared ground around his cabin on which he raised a little Indian corn. The meat
for his family was provided by his rifle, for the woods abounded in game--deer, wild turkeys, etc.

It was in such a cabin that Abraham Lincoln was born in another part of Kentucky about this time.

When Viola and Henrietta entered the clearing Sneath was sitting in the sun on a log bench
in front of his cabin. He was a man in middle life and like most of the hillside settlers was
the father of several children.

The young ladies addressed him pleasantly, and asked after his family and his crops.

He replied, that "de old woman and de kids war right peart; that de crops were most a dead
failure because of de dry spell." He "'lowed a dry spell war mighty bad for crops on hillside
farms." In this he was quite right.

By this time the "old woman" and some of the kids had come into the yard. Among them was Jemima
Sneath, the oldest daughter. She was apparently about twenty years of age, and was a large,
healthy young woman.

Henrietta Harvey was the speaker this time, and in a clear and emphatic manner made their mission
known. She told them about the school, what a blessing it would be to the community, the families
and each one. It would improve their minds, help to remove the evils which all knew existed
in the hills, help to put the farmers on their feet by showing them how to raise better crops.

Trying to awaken a greater interest in the father she said: "Mr. Sneath, when you are not working
on your place or hunting, how do you pass the time?"

He answered with a slow drawl: "Well, most ginerally I sot on de bench in shade in summer and
in de sun in winter. Sometimes I sot and think, and sometimes I jest sot."

Such a man they felt it difficult to arouse, but when Viola added her invitations and arguments
to those of her friend, poor Sneath awoke enough to the situation to hold his head up higher
and widen his shoulders a trifle.

The one most interested was Jemima, the oldest daughter. She promised to attend the first meeting
and to become a member of the school.

Viola now directed Mose to drive them still farther through the woods to the home of Zibe Turner,
the monster dwarf. They would not have dared to beard this lion in his den, but knowing he
had left the county for the time being, they wished, if possible, to interest his mother and
sister in the school.

As they drew up to the house the dwarf's mother stood in the doorway, her daughter looking
over her shoulder. The mother might have been a twin sister of Sycorax, the dam of Caliban.
She was tall and slim, dressed in a coarse, hand-woven dress. Her long, scant hair fell down
over her shoulders. Her face was that of a hag. Her few teeth were stained yellow with tobacco.

As soon as Viola spoke of the school, this vixen, raising her right arm to its greatest height
and clenching her hand, broke out in wild vituperation:

"What do de like of ye, comin' into our hills in yer fine carriage to see how pore we air and
to look down on us? Woud you uns larn us to be good in yer school? We uns air as good as you
uns even if we don't live in big houses and drive fast hosses. Away with you! Me and mine will
have nuthin' to do with yer mission."

In a similar vein she continued to pour out a volley of loud and abusive words, interlarding
them with such oaths and curses as would have surprised a Billinsgate fishwoman.

Viola tried for a brief time to reason with her, and present their plea for the mission school,
but, finding it was useless to remain longer, told Mose to drive away. When they had reached
the shelter of the woods the slave said: "Ah neber hurd a deck han' on de ribber cuss and swear
lak dat po' white woman."

Still these noble ladies, inspired with a high resolve to help the lowly, undismayed continued
their work. In the course of two or three days a sufficient number of persons had agreed to
attend the school to warrant its being opened with much promise.

CHAPTER X.

The Mission School Established.

The time set for beginning the mission school was the first Sunday in October. The place, Mart
Spink's sitting-room.

Mr. Spink had added to the seating capacity of his cabin by taking some long slabs and with
an auger drilling holes in their round sides. Into these holes he drove wooden pegs, and thus
provided serviceable benches without backs. These together with his other benches and his chairs
gave sufficient seating accommodation for those who came.

It was a motley but interesting crowd that assembled in the sitting-room at two o'clock that
Sunday afternoon. Of course the Spinks were there, and some members of the Wiles and Sneath
families were present, and others from different homes in that section. Fourteen girls, ten
boys and a few adults had come to the meeting. Besides these there were the preacher, John
Larkin, Viola and George LeMonde, Henrietta Harvey, and Stella Nebeker in attendance. Jasper
Very wished much to be present, but a preaching engagement kept him away.

The children were dressed somewhat better than on week days but at that their clothing was
nothing to boast of. The girls were shy and ill at ease, the boys half shy and half bold.

John Larkin called the school to order, and made a few remarks.

"Dear friends, we are met here today to worship God and to study his Holy Word. I am sure you
want me in your behalf to thank the ladies who visited your homes and invited you to help in
starting this school, and to thank Mr. Spink and family who have so kindly opened their house
for our meetings. Miss Viola LeMonde has had some hymn books placed on the benches, and she
will lead us in song."

Viola knew that most of those present were not acquainted with a single religious hymn, but
she thought the older ones might be able to sing some of the old favorites of the church. So
she led them in singing:

"Rock of Ages, cleft for me," and "All hail the power of Jesus' name."

Those who had come to help in the school carried the tunes along very well, and Viola was surprised
and pleased to hear some of the farmers and their wives join in singing these sweet songs of Zion.

Then Viola sang as a solo a beautiful and appropriate "Children's Hymn," containing these words.

    "Hosanna! be the children's song,
    To Christ, the children's King;
    His praise, to whom our souls belong,
    Let all the children sing.
    Hosanna! sound from hill to hill,
    And spread from plain to plain,
    While louder, sweeter, clearer still,
    Woods echo to the strain."

Then John Larkin said: "Let us pray." He closed his eyes, and began an earnest supplication
at the throne of grace. But it might have been better for him and the school, if he had kept
his eyes open while he offered his petition, and thus obeyed the Bible command: "Watch and
pray." When he closed his eyes the little imps in divers parts of the room saw their chance
for mischief, and were quick to embrace it.

A Sneath boy put his straw hat on the head of a boy next him, and then knocked it off with
no gentle blow. This angered the other youngster and he hit back with his clenched fist. So
they had it back and forth, to the amusement of all the chaps around them. Another boy got
possession of a pin--a rather scarce article in that neighborhood--and at one of the most fervent
parts of the preacher's prayer stuck it into the lad sitting in front of him. The punctured
youth gave a yell which could not be construed into an Amen on account of the petition. It
raised the lad off his seat, and made him jump forward with an impetus which was both amusing
and pathetic. The hurt of the pin seemed to swallow up every feeling save that of distress,
and he "boo-hooed" aloud.

Such proceedings made Brother Larkin bring his prayer to an abrupt conclusion, and Viola LeMonde
hurried to the sobbing child, and tried to comfort him.

After the devotions the school was divided into classes. John Larkin took the adults of both
sexes; Viola LeMonde, the larger girls; Henrietta Harvey, the smaller; George LeMonde, the
older boys; and Stella Nebeker, the younger.

These teachers that day occupied places of responsibility which taxed every particle of their
skill, ingenuity, tact, patience and forbearance. Many of those sitting around them could not
read or write a word. So first they had to be taught words and sentences. Their knowledge of
the Bible was pitifully small. Yet they possessed the redeeming feature of wanting to learn,
and most of them showed an eager desire to improve their minds.

Let us, as unbidden guests, in spirit sit down in Viola LeMonde's class and listen to what
is said. These girls' minds were bright but undeveloped. It was their teacher's object to educate--lead
out--her pupils' intellects into the broad fields of Scriptural knowledge.

"Girls," said Viola, "we are going to study the book, copies of which we are holding in our
hands. It is called the Bible. Let me ask some questions about it, and you try to answer them."

"Have you seen the Bible before today?"

Susanna Spink replied: "I seed one onct, when I went to a camp meetin' near Honey Crick. A
man read out of a book he called de Bible, and then he talked and talked a long, long time."

"The Bible tells us a lot about many good men and women. Perhaps you have heard of some of
these. Who was Moses?"

"Was he nigger Mose's dad?" asked one of the girls.

"No, he lived many years ago, and was a great leader of the Hebrew people. Did you ever hear
of David?"

Profound silence.

"He was a mighty king of the Jews, and also a man who wrote many beautiful songs. One of his
songs millions of children know. It begins: 'The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.' Have
any of you ever heard it?"

One or two raised their hands indicating they had heard it.

"Let us turn to it, the twenty-third psalm, and we shall read it together."

This they did, and Viola said: "I want you children to learn this psalm by heart and each one
say it to me next Sunday. Will you do it?"

Every hand was raised in consent.

"The Bible is divided into two parts. Can any one tell me what they are?"

"Yes'm, de front an' de back."

"They are called the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Old Testament tells of God's
dealings with his chosen people the Hebrews (or Jews). It also points to the coming of God's
Son into the world."

"The New Testament tells how God's Son Jesus Christ came upon earth to be the Friend of little
children and all people; how he lived a good life, always helping those around him; how wicked
men at last put him to death, and his friends buried him. But the grave could not hold him,
and on the third day he arose from it, and soon went up to heaven. The day of his birth is
called Christmas. Have you heard of it?"

"Yes, teacher, we have all heard something about Christmas."

"Well, well learn more about it, for it is a sweet story, and next Christmas the mission school
will have a fine time, with songs, and pieces to speak, and giving of presents. I hope my girls
will take part in this glad time."

Thus the minutes sped by while in simple words Viola tried to impart some Bible truths to her
willing scholars.

After closing exercises the school was dismissed.

The teachers remained a while to compare notes. George LeMonde reported having had an interesting
time with his boys. He said he spoke to them about the sin of making moonshine whisky, and
tried to set them against the practice. He was surprised at the answer that was made to one
of his questions: "If any one were to ask you to take a drink of moonshine whisky, what would
you say?"

"Thank you," piped up a small boy.

The first session of the Mission Sunday School was considered a success and those responsible
for it were encouraged to continue the work.

Some change in the teaching force was necessary, for John Larkin's duties as preacher would
not permit him to serve as a permanent teacher.

It is a pleasure to say that this school increased in numbers and influence, and not only in
its Sunday meeting, but also in its social and educational work in the community, became a
strong agent to uplift the surrounding hill people in every way.

CHAPTER XI.

A Kentucky Feud. And to another. At home, where
neatness prevailed, he looked evil eye and was often the victim for his aversion to that precious
quality, not only of parental correction, but the cruel and unthinkable onslaught of her older
sister Eulalia, a young sixteen Aprils not too flowery chaste, clean, industrious, diligent, full,
in short, domestic virtues, the care of their parents and the target of hatred of Henry and
cousin Michael.

- Listen, Miguel - Enrique said quietly, as they descended the stairs
cautiously the yard, - why do you want dad?

- To tell me that my
dad is getting married - Miguel replied, shrugging his shoulders with
indifference.

- Who?

- With a lady.

- So you'll have mom soon?

Miguel did not consider it necessary to reply.

- Are you happy?

-
What do I care?

- Are not you afraid you have?

... (Enrique nodded expressive thrashing.)

Michael looked a little
embarrassed.

- Why?

- Moms always hit more than dads - sententiously
said Enrique.

Michael paused for a moment and then said:

- If pegase me, I would
stick to her dad.

Henry would not insist.

In this crossed the courtyard and entered the garage.

What is there to spot did not and least reported, a number of pranks,
all in flagrant opposition to the integrity and cleaning of costumes:
suffice it to say that came late in the stable, mounted the horses,
cribs were filled with straw, they swept the dirt, not yet satisfied,
taking brush and scraper, began to dust them out (and throw it over
themselves.) When it was approaching lunchtime, they were both disgusted
to watch, so much so that Enrique, who, as we have said, had no inclination
toward cleaning up well determined, was thought for a moment looking
at and looking at his cousin.

- Do you know that we are pigs, Miguel?

He nodded, looking and looking at his cousin too.

- If we go to the dining room so mom gives me a gig ... Recontras what gig!

Miguel, with whom he was to be the case, was content to shake a bit the dust.

- Look, we go to bed and Eulalia, the second floor, and there we can
wash ... I with these hands do not go to the dining room.

Indeed, Henry's hands at that time were not visible.

They came up with the same caution that had come down the stairs,
threw a Enrique look at the cabinet of his mother, and learning that
Eulalia was there, and without fear rose whatsoever to the second
floor of the room and took possession of that lady.

The first thing they did was put on the door latch so that not surprised.

Then they began to use and abuse of media copious grooming that there existed, dipped both hands
in the basin, which trasvertía the clearest water; apoderáronse a wonderful bar of soap almonds,
and within minutes, by dint of rubbing with her, fell by almost one third hand, took the sponges,
soaked in water in the jar and passed them repeatedly Sometimes the face and head, not content
with this, they took their sacrilegious hands to the jar the ointment, the oil bottle and the
bottles of essences, marinated and perfumed to all without any mourning, not satisfied yet, dared
to take the same powder puff Rice who served the sultan pulcrísima to hide certain importunate
rosettes that erysipelas had been born in his face and smeared her in the midst of rude laughter;
then took his audacity to still using a bottle of rouge, lipstick, noses and our ears, as pigs
were unclean, then turned to wash with the sponge and dry with towels hanging from both of
pristine sides of the toilet; finally washed their teeth and teeth with brushes esmeradísimamente
that this effect were there first by rubbing a box of tooth powders. This magnificent and
scrupulous washing of braces, crowned, according to both the work of grooming that so successfully had
been undertaken, and decided to go down to dinner. But before leaving, they thought had happened
to his pants covered in dust and filth; back to dip the sponge, because they found no brushes,
and rub it till cover stains. The boots were too, and even more than the pants, in a state
of merit, and Miguel went solicitous with sponge to clean them, but Henry, not finding the
means quite adequate, entered the bedroom of his sister and they are cleaned well with the quilt
of the bed. Aha! and are arranged one pair of birds, they look in the wardrobe mirror and let
out a sigh of satisfaction. However, Michael ponders for a moment and says:

- Look, you, if Eulalia come now! ...

- It does not rise until bedtime ... Can not you see we eat now? And if it comes, What, recontra?
The day I hit again, I give in the face with the shovel (here Enrique took a bronze ad hoc
had hidden in the lining of the jacket). She does not have what hit me, against! Is my mother
in case? Ah, recontra; paste to get a word because he knows Dad!

When mom before, and saved it to touch my hair, clothes.

And it say! Coscorron Menudo has sucked yesterday! ... And mom told me: "Do not be silly, Henry,
the day you hit your sister, throw it in the head with whatever's at hand. "Here's the shovel; Come,
come! ... Go, man, that is no longer suffering! All day hits you wilt, like I was an artillery
mule! ...

- But boy, if you give the shovel to kill it!

- That the mate, recontra! What is in the world that sow? Always getting where do not call! Caciplándolo
everything!

Nose poking in the things of his brothers ... I no longer take it
anymore, recontra!

Despite the provisions of Henry bellicose about their sister, remained
a moment suspense and pale heard footsteps in the corridor, which
proved his cousin Miguel still had not entirely abandoned the self-preservation.

The steps are away at last without the disastrous result that was feared, and Enrique calmer
voice said:

- I think it's time to eat. We go down before we call.

Indeed, when the two cousins ​​came to the main floor, the family was already in the dining room
it was a spacious room, furnished also to the former. In the center a large table carved oak
covered with tablecloth and cluttered with plates, cups, fruit and confectionery, judging by the
number of diners, there were guests. On the table burned a hanging bronze lamp the ceiling. The
cupboards were almost touching it and were also carved oak, chairs also oak, all of oak. This
hardwood, solid and stern, seemed the symbol of that respectable family.

Sitting at the table and reading a newspaper, was the owner of the house, D. Bernardo Rivera
hideously wrinkled his forehead, not because he was upset, but because this was his habit
whenever I read something, kept in front of the newspapers and books attitude hostile prevented
and does not want to be the plaything of glittering sophistry or phrases. Dona Martina, his wife,
was spinning around the room, anxious that nothing should be wanting, or on, the board and
dressers. She was a woman of about forty, of medium height, plump, would not have been ugly
to twenty, open and friendly face, but ordinary, the size and the most ordinary yet, because the
womb had grown in recent years much most of the bill and had no brace that holds it, the shrill
voice and out of tune, gestures looking sharp and sweet and rosy, wore a brown velvet, which
that time was the most luxurious among the ladies of quality, but warned that this velvet was
not as well attached to their flesh as expected, given the imposing appearance and taste and elegance
concluded that reigned in the house. Was this (let's say in secret the reader, because in
secrecy and heard it said the family friends when they played this issue), in which Mrs. Martin
had been ironing in his youthful years, ironing the house of her husband, or rather, the parents
of her husband. How D. Bernardo Rivera had fallen so low and Dona Martina had risen so high,
it was not easy to explain At that time, years ago there was no such difficulty for those who appreciate
at its true value, solid pink meat and the good lady. This purpose there were a thousand stories
more or less funny that all the attention on her eulogy, Mrs. Martin had been in their flowering
times, an impregnable fortress, the fortress of Figueras and the citadel of Santona were castles
of cards at his side, their conditions had led to resistance happy conclusion that we see
today. True or false these sayings malicious, the result is that D. Bernardo was married and his wife
had to save himself from a blow huge gap between his humility and grandeur and authority that
had accompanied Mr. de Rivera from his earliest years. Does this lady actually saved? In concept
D. Bernard did not, and this was the most painful thorn in his life, which galled him many
satisfaction that the company had provided .. However, it must be admitted that she had done all
that was on their side, if he had not succeeded, acháquese all least in the absence of goodwill.
And we still believe her husband who was somewhat exaggerated in this point, for Dona Martina
knew very well, after a few years, get your friends husband with dignity and not with distinction,
and knew also prepare a table with elegance and ride in a carriage along the Castellana without
going stiff and uncomfortable in the seat, also learned not to fall asleep at the Teatro Real
and greet their friends from afar repeated opening and closing Sometimes the hand, offered
the house pretty well, but always with the same phrases he learned of the latest trends and applications;
was put rice powder and painted eyebrows when went to a soiree, and finally, though with strong Spanish
accent, had come to speak moderately French.

Despite all this, Mr. Rivera was not satisfied. Not that he should report it foolishly and the first
to arrive, as the caution was one of his predominant qualities, but betrayed him to his close friends.
Bernardo was wife scolded her face too with raised voices and that
its polite phrases were always the same and pronounced in string as
a lesson, which gave confidence to any friend without hesitation and
began in domestic affairs, who did not observe, in short, people who
frequented the house, that dignity and reserve, this impressive calm
themselves a perfect lady.

This chapter charges that Mr. Rivera was kept against his wife, had caused serious trouble marriage.

Sitting
in a chair working with ivory needle in a blanket of yarn was Eulalia whose features greatly resembled
that of his dad, was also long face, aquiline of eyebrows and lips hanging expressing a deep contempt
for everything ranging his eyes as he had almost always wrinkled forehead, which gave his face
an expression hostile, fortunately not very common in the daughters of his years, for Eulalia
was in age of love, illusions, tenderness, redness and innocence, even though no these things were
noted in it.

When the two cousins ​​stepped on the chair, raised his head and stuck
them an intense look searching, by tacit agreement they pretended
not to notice.

But against what they expected, instead of converting back to work, followed ever more fixed and
more searching on them to the point of upsetting them. To avoid influence fascinating approached
the gentlemen who were there, which they were greeted with pats on the face. Dona Martina, Miguel
after giving a resounding kiss on her forehead, asked them where they had been: Miguel said aloud,
to hear him Eulalia, who had spent the afternoon in Carlos Enrique room and play with map
puzzles. Upon hearing this Charles, who had a year older than Henry, flew into a madman, saying
that if he again tangled with its maps, was to make in the face of
his brother and cousin as they were sounded, but that reassured him
at once, expressing so low that it had gone with his puzzles, but
Eulalia bottles: not only quieted, but had a real satisfaction because
to hate Eulalia were unanimous in the house, unless his father and
mother.

Carlitos was the handsome son of Mr. Rivera had, and most also applied. Face round, pink, regular
features, expressive black eyes and long lashes villages. All his studies at the school were
crowned with flattering success; diplomas border colors, books, silvered metal medal, even
a laurel wreath with silk ribbons mourn and runny made abundantly Dona Martina, when in the
hands of the teacher was Solemnly down the head of his son. But his favorite study was always
geography especially astronomy. The globes and armillary spheres which had been purchased his
father, can not easily be counted, in spite of being a man of science, these artifacts lasted
a short time in full in his hands, and that Charlie was not limited to study the lesson, like
any ordinary boy, but the loftiness of his thought drew him to search out the secrets of our planet's
topography, for which major roads devised communication was careful to note in ink on the globe,
crossing the mountains Higher seas and lakes and saving through amazing
bridges that no engineer world would have dared even to imagine.

Many times, however, the ink ran on the skin that was covered and the balloon was a mess, and
repurchased another father, so that the fire of passion is not extinguished geographic in children.
Well concerning the areas, passed the same. Charlie did not see the celestial spaces the astonishment
of the ignorant man or properly respected the immutable laws that determine revolutions of the
stars, familiar with every movement of rotation and translation was when it seemed new planetary
systems, making a simple satellite to the moon, verbi and grace, star fixed and rotating around all
the planets, including land, or imagining new and capricious eclipses, showing both stars ever seen,
or possible, in such a position. All of which was often that more astounded when his work was Charlie,
the device did crash! jumped some of the most important dislocábanse with it a few more, and the
sky was suffering complete disorder, as if it arrived the day of reckoning. But as stated Carlitos
so decided to call the Great Architect of the Universe and dad did not want in any way otherwise,
the next day was another area in which to continue their astronomical experiences.

Henry had managed to appease his brother, not of the same fate Eulalia, who, after often lift
their heads and swallow it to look, it was decided to get out of chair and stealthily approaching
him and his cousin, with great dissimulation also put the nose on head of both, and ensuring
that gave off an aromatic smell very strong, sudden left and rushed from the room. Miguel
Enrique and looked shocked, but drawing strength of weakness, came to Vincent, the first of
the sons of Mr. de Rivera, and began to examine carefully the watch chain that recently bought his
father.

Vicente was three years older than Charles, that is, thirteen, but looked like being ten and six
height, and thirty for his extraordinary gravity. He was a boy long face and yellow meat dry
and angular, opaque gaze, gestures, head up and rested, man mature.
 If he did yield, said the tempter, he
would soon fall away, and that would be worse than not to start at all.

Thus the crucial battle of his life was fought while Wiles sat in that little church. Such
a struggle comes into many a life. Angels must look upon it with the deepest interest and attention.
The crisis may arrive at church or at home, on the high sea or on the land, in a storied mansion
or in a little cottage, at the midnight hour or in the open day--the place or time counts for
little, but the result is as wide as eternity.

This hour was propitious for Sam Wiles. A proper choice would have revolutionized his character,
would have gladdened the angels in heaven, and written his name deep in the "Book of Life."
But alas! alas! before the sermon was ended he had resisted God's Holy Spirit, and, instead
of one devil, seven devils had entered into his soul. A hard expression spread over his face,
his eyes flashed with a dangerous fire, and he cast a look of defiance and contempt upon the
speaker that (so subtle, strong, and swift are the laws of mind) Very, seeing it, would have
been confused and perhaps overcome in his discourse if the shield of Almighty God had not protected
him.

As for Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, the services had no more effect for good upon him than
a strong fortress would be affected by shooting white beans at it. When his favorite business,
illicit distilling, was denounced by Very, the dwarf's wrath grew so hot that he could not
refrain from muttering under his breath: "I wish I could drown you uns and all yer pious hypercrits
in whisky. Dat's my holt."

As the last hymn was being sung Sam Wiles left the church and walked out into the moonlight.
He was joined by Turner and a few more of the clan. For a few minutes they held a whispered
conversation, and then separated.

When the meeting broke up a half hour later, it was found that the girths on the horses belonging
to the preachers, the Costello family and others had been cut and destroyed. Also the traces
of Judge LeMonde's harness.

CHAPTER XII.

The Shameful Plot.

The moonlight showed a look of blank amazement and concern upon the faces of the victims of
this dastardly trick, especially the women; but John Larkin's unfailing good temper and witty
sayings relieved the situation. "There is no use crying over spilled milk," said he, "and I
am sure, as Poor Richard remarks, 'God helps them that help themselves.' So we must find some
way to remedy this trouble, for we cannot stand here gazing into the moon's face all night,
and the distance to our homes is too great to walk. Let us look about among the trees, and
perhaps we can find pieces of the girths and harness."

This was done, and presently several pieces were found. With these the traces of the carriage
were repaired and a number of the saddles made fit for service. By some of the men riding double
on horseback the mischief was tolerably mended and all returned to their lodgings in safety.

While one injury was being remedied another more serious was being planned. When Sam Wiles
and Zibe Turner had cut the saddle girths and traces, they and three of their pals quickly
mounted their horses and rode rapidly to Wiles' house. Arriving there they found the old folks
and children in bed. Being afraid to talk over their infamous scheme in the cabin, they betook
themselves to the barn some distance away. In this building they lighted a tallow dip and,
throwing themselves down on some hay to rest and warm their bodies, they at once began talking
of what was uppermost in their minds.

"Now fellers," said Wiles, "let us go over keerfully what we uns war sayin' as we rode along.
That cursed preacher made a last break with me when he fit our bizness in such an all-fired
strong way and throwed insults on my family. I say he oughter be punished for his sass in the
way we spoke of."

"Sure nuff," broke in Turner, the monster dwarf, "tar and feathers and ridin' in a rail is
too good fer de likes of him. If he got his just dues, we oughter lay for him some night and
pick him off as he is ridin' hossback."

"We must not kill him," said the more cautious leader, "for they would 'spect us at once, and
we would soon be put in de jug (jail), if they didn't make us stretch hemp without trial. But
a good thick coat of tar and feathers will become his style of beauty fust-rate; and if we
uns ride him on a rail, he will dance a jig with his feet in de air and will look more cute
than ary Injun you uns ever see daubed with his war paint and feathers."

The five men laughed heartily at this remark, and seemed to anticipate with delight the fulfillment
of their foul plot.

"We owe him a good one fer capturin' Long Tom and makin' him pious and an enemy of our bizness,"
said Bert Danks, captain of the Honey Crick band, "and I hope you uns won't be sparin' of de
tar ner easy with de rail. Get one of them three-cornered hickory rails, and that'll do the
thing up brown."

"Whar is de best place to s'prise him?" asked Wiles.

"I'll tell yer," spoke Zibe Turner, and his monkeyish face lit up with a smile almost diabolical
and his piercing black eyes shot a keen and excited look into the group, "I hearn that he has
an appintment next Chewsday night at de top of Bald Knob, and to go there from his home he
will have to take de Pigeon Crick road, cross de crick at Farley's and then branch off inter
de big woods before he climbs de knob. Now de level place jest by de foot of de knob is a lonely
spot, away from de big road, de trees air mighty high and large, and few people pass that way.
I say let's strip and dress him thar."

"Agreed!" shouted the rest in concert.

"Bert," spoke Wiles, "we'll look to you to git de tar, and I'll bring a pot from mammy's kitchen
to heat it in. I'll also take without her knowin' it some feathers from her feather bed. You,
Zibe, are to furnish de rail, and see that you git a sharp and strong one."

"'Pend on me for dat, and if he don't cry for marcy, it'll not be my fault."

As a parting caution Wiles remarked: "All you fellers keep mum on this subject, for we don't
want to miss de fun ner be cotched in it."

Now it happened that Mose Williams, Judge LeMonde's most faithful negro servant, was attending
to an affair of his own that Sunday evening not strictly demanded by his obligations to his
master. In other words, he was courting a sprightly and good-looking quadroon girl, by name
Euphemia Jackson ("Femy" for short). This buxom lass was a house servant on a plantation situated
about five miles from Judge LeMonde's. What were five miles to a lusty young negro fellow who
had a good pair of legs, a bracing atmosphere and bright moonlight in which to exercise them,
and a sweetheart at the journey's end?

Mose, arrayed in his best clothes, had gone early and stayed late. He left the plantation happy
with himself and all the world. For had he not that very night popped the all-important question
and had not Femy given an answer which warmed the very depths of his darkey heart and made
the face of nature shine with a double light? To shorten the distance home, as the hour was
late and the bright moon threw some light even among the thick trees, he determined to take
a footpath among the hills. This course led him close to the cabin of Simon Wiles, Sam Wiles'
father. He was walking in a zigzag path, now watching the moonlight as it lilted down through
the leafy canopy, making a dim but peaceful light around him; now listening to the sounds which
exist in Kentucky forests in winter, the flight of nocturnal birds and moving of animals; seeing
the raccoon crossing his track like a shadow in search of food; hearing the mournful hooting
of owls in various directions.

Suddenly he was startled by seeing a light shining through the chinks of a building. At once
Mose determined to discover its meaning. He had no fine-spun theories as to the wrong of eavesdropping.
Besides, there might be robbers planning to steal neighbor Wiles' horse or produce. So he crept
up to the barn, making so little noise that neither the watchful dogs nor the plotting men
heard him.

He arrived in time to hear the conversation we have recorded. When he had learned all, he stealthily
retraced his steps to the foot-path and, making a wide detour around the house, went on his
way. While he walked he thus soliloquized: "Ho! Ho! dat's yo' game, is it? Well, dis niggah
will try to spile yo' purty plan. But, Mose, ef yo' squeal on dem men an' dey hears about it,
dey'll give yo' wusser t'ings dan tar an' fedders. Kain't help dat; mus' run de resk. Mas'r
Very am mighty pop'lar wid de Jedge, and I believes dat Miss Viola am lookin' on him wid more'n
common feelin's. Mose, yo's gwine to be a married man one of dese days yo'self, an' yo' wants
a little cabin of yo' own; and ef yo' hoe dis row to de end an' circumwent dese 'spiring men,
p'haps Mas'r LeMonde gwine give yo' de cabin an' Miss Viola gwine put lots o' nice tings in
it. Dat's de proposition; an', Mose, yo' got to keep yo' wooly head mighty cool an' calc'lating.
Chewsday will soon be hyar, an' what is done mus' be done in a hurry. It's a pity de Jedge
an' Mas'r George is gwine to start early to Lexinton tomorrer, so dey can't 'tend to de mattah;
but I'll jes inform Miss Viola of de situwation."

When the slave had reached this wise and satisfactory conclusion he had also reached the end
of his journey, and with much self-complacency retired to his humble cot to dream of his dusky
sweetheart.

Early the next morning Mose called at the mansion to see Miss Viola, telling her that he had
"sumpin' of special 'portance" to make known. For the sake of privacy, she took him into the
large drawing-room and, seating herself in that beautiful bay window overlooking the stately
lawn and the broad cornfield now shining white under their coverlet of snow and farther on
the lovely river, she beckoned him to proceed. With much earnestness and an air of importance
he related what he had heard at the barn the night before.

Mose was so absorbed in his recital that he did not notice the full effects of his words on
his mistress. As his story continued, a great change came over her. Her breathing quickened
until it came in short and labored gasps. First a deeper color of red suffused her cheeks,
then a crimson overspread her face and neck, which was soon followed by a paleness which marked
her face with an ashen hue. How that poor heart was troubled! Now its violent beatings force
the hot blood to face and hands and feet; then with the cruel news it takes into itself the
torrid currents of blood, leaving the face and extremities cold and bloodless and a feeling
of suffocation in the lungs. By a supreme effort of will, which God has made sovereign over
the emotions, she calmed her beating heart and considered what was best to be done.

"Mose, you are quite sure you have told me all you heard?"

"Yes, Miss Viola, I is, kase de wo'ds made such a 'pression on mah mind dat I 'members dem zackly."

"You are certain they selected Tuesday night for their wicked acts?"

"Dey spoke of Chewsday night, and tuk it bekase Mas'r Very is to go dat way dat night."

"You can leave me now for an hour, but at eight o'clock come back and I will send by you a
message to Mr. Very."

When the negro had left, Viola LeMonde retired to her own room and seating herself at her writing
desk, wrote the following communication:

    "Mount Pisgah, January 6, 181--.

    The Rev. Jasper Very,

    Dear Mr. Very:

    Our servant, Mose Williams, has just made known to me a plot which
    some base men have devised to treat you with indignity and to bring
    the cause of religion into contempt. Mose was returning home late
    last night from Mr. St. Claire's plantation when, seeing a light
    in Simon Wiles' barn, he crept near and, looking through a chink
    in the wall, saw Sam Wiles, Bert Danks, Zibe Turner, and two other
    men lying on some hay. He overheard them planning to administer
    to Rev. Jasper Very a coat of tar and feathers and to complete
    the performance by riding him on a rail. This disgraceful act
    is to take place next Tuesday night. The spot is that dark and
    unfrequented place at the foot of Bald Knob through which you must
    pass on the way to your preaching service.

    "As 'to be forewarned is to be forearmed,' I hasten to notify you
    of the plot, feeling sure you will adopt measures to thwart it.
    Father and George would aid you in the matter but they went early
    this morning to Lexington, and will not return till Wednesday
    evening.

    "I feel that I am able to do little in such an emergency as this;
    but if I can be of any help, I will most gladly endeavor to
    preserve the respect of our community and to assist a friend.

    "No one knows of this plot except the instigators, myself, and
    Mose. By him I send this note to you.

    Most sincerely yours,

    Viola LeMonde."

At eight o'clock Mose made his appearance, and Viola gave him the message, telling him to ride
Velox as fast as possible to Mr. Nebeker's tavern, where Mr. Very had spent the night, and
to give it to the preacher.

Mose was doubly willing that the news should get to the parson by means of the note; for if
trouble came his way, he could swear that he did not inform Very of the plot; and, secondly,
he thought Viola would be pleased to help the preacher.

Jasper Very was still at the home of the tavern keeper, as were also several other preachers,
including the "square man," John Larkin. Jasper was standing on the porch, and was surprised
to see the colored man riding up fast to the house, his horse wet with sweat and steaming in
the wintry air.

Mose, dismounting, lifted his cap to those present, and said to Jasper Very: "I has a message
of 'portance to you, sir." With this he handed him the note, and then, on request of Mr. Nebeker,
put Velox in the barn to cool off and rest.

Jasper Very took the missive to the end of the porch and, breaking the seal, read it. When
he had finished, his mobile face showed the conflicting emotions within. A flush of anger reddened
his dark features, his lips were pressed close together, his eyes flashed with unwonted fire,
and his hands involuntarily became clenched until the finger nails indented the palms. Soon
his look softened, the fire left his eyes, and they appeared as gentle as twin lakes in lovely
Switzerland. The proud lines in his lips gave place to a curve like a Cupid's bow and a smile
lighted up his face. Looking out over the wintry landscape, he said to himself: "It is worth
the danger of an attack like this to receive such a note from Viola LeMonde. How kind and thoughtful
of her to warn me of the plot so quickly. I will see how best I can circumvent this scheme."
With these reflections he retraced his steps to his friends.

In the meantime the pity which Viola LeMonde felt for the preacher did not tend to weaken that
strange sensation, born in Eden, which was tugging at her heart.

CHAPTER XIII.

Into a Pit (or Pitch).

Jasper very addressed Costello Nebeker, the tavern keeper, thus: "Brother Nebeker, I have a
matter of importance to consider with you and a few friends. Can you furnish us with a private
room?"

"Certainly, Brother Very," replied his genial host. "You can have the sitting-room, just back
of our large reception-room." (The dance hall had been changed into these two rooms.)

In a few minutes a select company was gathered there. It consisted of Jasper Very, John Larkin,
Ezra Thompson, the old, grizzled preacher, Nathaniel Grimes, a smart minister who formerly
had been a lawyer, Costello Nebeker, and his wife. Jasper Very read Viola LeMonde's note to
the group, and striking was the effect it produced. One cried, "The despicable villains!" another,
"The vile sinners." a third, "Shame on Kentucky manhood, to what depths can humanity sink!"
For once John Larkin could not find a quotation from Poor Richard or any other source which
met the case. But soon surprise and indignation gave way to a cool consideration of the situation
and the best means of circumventing this well-laid plot and bringing its instigators to punishment.

Very was the first to offer a suggestion. "Friends," he said, "let us call Mose into the room
and hear in detail his account of what he overheard." This was thought good advice, and accordingly
Mose was invited into the sitting-room.

At first the cautious darkey was loath to commit himself; but when he was informed that Miss
LeMonde already had told the tale in substance and that all present, would keep secret his
remarks, he repeated what he had seen and heard with more fullness than we have written down.

After Mose had been dismissed, Nathaniel Grimes, the lawyer-preacher, spoke in these words:
"I believe I have a plan by which this plot can be frustrated. It is this: Let Brother Very
prepare for his journey tomorrow as though nothing unusual was expected; let us notify two
or more constables to enter the woods from a different direction just after dark tomorrow evening,
and at a convenient distance from where the plotters post themselves behind great trees. Let
Friend Nebeker, Brother Larkin, and myself steal into the woods as best we can and join the
constables in season. At the proper time let Brother Very ride slowly along, and when he is
met by the ruffians and the parley takes place, we will suddenly rush upon the scene and capture
them in their base act."

The plan was discussed for some time and, being found simple and practicable, was adopted.
Costello Nebeker was to engage the services of the constables. Being a layman, he could do
so without exciting suspicion.

Tuesday evening the sky was partly covered with clouds. About the time Jasper Very started
from his home the moon rose in beauty. Sometimes she threw the full glory of her beams upon
the white earth as she rode in a clear place in the heavens; at others her light was obscured
by passing clouds which covered her fair face. We can follow the gospel ranger as he left his
humble boarding place.

Mounted on trustworthy Bob, Jasper Very started to his appointment. He turned his horse's head
toward the east and rode for half a mile along a farm road when, coming to a gate, he opened
it and came into a broader county road. Just opposite this gate stood the immense barn on Judge
LeMonde's estate, in which was stored his hay and grain and in which were kept his many horses.
Up a gradual ascent a few hundred feet beyond stood the Judge's mansion. The man of God gazed
upon it as its outlines were visible in the moonlight. He thought of the fair daughter who
lived there and who had taken such an interest in his welfare. Was it fact or fancy which showed
him a female figure dressed in white standing by the west bay window? The distance was too
great to see clearly; but perhaps that intercommunication of minds which in later times we
call telepathy was the thing which caused his heart to beat with a stronger stroke and fired
his spirit with greater courage.

Yes, there was a woman's form standing at that window. Viola was watching for Jasper to pass
along. Her white face was pressed against the window pane, and she strained her eyes to see.
Her effort was rewarded, for she could well perceive the outline of horse and man as they went
along the road. Although Jasper had sent a reply to her note by Moses, thanking her for her
interest in his welfare and telling her of the conference at the tavern, with a woman's supersensitiveness
she was most anxious as to the result; and as she saw him ride away into danger, she put her
hand to her heart and, raising her eyes to heaven, prayed most fervently that he might be protected
from harm.

Jasper Very proceeded on his way along the country road. Soon he passed the little schoolhouse
on his right, then Bethlehem Church on his left. Next he crossed the rude bridge spanning the
brook, and rode on a half mile farther. Leaving the large road, he turned to the left, going
northwest through the deep woods toward the base of Bald Knob.

As he neared the spot selected for the attack he heard faint whistles on both sides of the
road which were signals before agreed upon that his aids were present. Passing along to the
place where he knew the outlaws were concealed, he began singing a camp meeting hymn.

Suddenly the ruffians sprang from the roadside, one seizing his horse's bridle, who proved
to be Bert Danks.

"Good evenin', parson, you uns seem to be in a happy frame of mind, or air ye singin' to keep
yer courage up?" The speaker was Sam Wiles, who was holding his right boot.

"Much courage is not needed when a man is among friends or cowards, and you must be one or
the other," replied Very.

"We'll show yer what sort of friends we air," spoke up Zibe Turner; "so jest obleege we uns
by gittin' down off'n that 'er hoss, or we'll help yer down."

"I have an engagement up the knob tonight, and I have not time to tarry with you now," said
the preacher.

"Well, parson, we uns have fixed up a leetle meetin' on our own account, and there ain't much
singin' nor prayin' in it, nuther. I reckon we'll pay yer back for tryin' to spile our bizness
and hurt our reputations. If you won't come down far (fair), we uns must help yer off," growled
Turner.

"Men, I seem to be in your power, and surely I would rather dismount of my own accord than
be pulled off." With these words Very threw his foot over Bob's back and lighted on the ground.

Instantly he was surrounded by Wiles, Turner, and two other ruffians. Bert Danks still held
Bob by the bit.

Very looked about him as best he could, and saw a smouldering fire beneath a large pot. In
this pot was a large quantity of tar which had been somewhat heated to soften it, and close
by lay a gunny bag containing feathers, while still beyond was a long fence rail which had
been taken from a zigzag fence not far away.

"Now, if you'll be so kind, please take off yer preacher's coat and shirt; and if you find
de weather too cold for comfort, we uns will put on anudder coat which will keep out de air,"
remarked Wiles.

"A matter of necessity need not be discussed," said the traveler, and with this remark he pulled
off his long clerical outer garment.

Very did this for a double purpose: first, to free himself from incumbrance when he needed
to use his arms; and, secondly, by removing suspicion of resistance, to take his enemies off
their guard.

No sooner had he slipped his coat off than he gave a loud whistle, and shooting out his right
fist with all his strength, struck Wiles squarely on the jaw and sent him sprawling on the
ground several feet away. This was the beginning of a strenuous fight. The moment his chief
was knocked down Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, sprang upon Very, and putting one of his apelike
arms around his neck, cried: "Dat's my holt." With the other arm he began hitting the parson
about the head and body. At the same time the other men were trying to throw him off his feet.
Very, knowing help was near at hand, made almost superhuman efforts to stand his ground, though
he was half suffocated and stunned by the dwarf's hug and blows.

Very's whistle was answered by a shout down the road, and almost instantly the forms of five
men appeared. The outlaws, though surprised, were not panic-stricken, and they met the attack
of the constables and preachers with reckless bravery. For a quarter of an hour things were
in a strange mix-up. Wiles, rising from the ground, was making for Very, when a burly constable
hurrying up caught the outlaw and together they fell squirming, rolling, twisting, fighting
over the ground.

Another officer made a break for Bert Danks. Letting go of Bob's bridle, he clenched with his
man, and they were fighting like two possessed. Nathaniel Grimes, the great red-headed, raw-boned,
lawyer-preacher, was as good in a fight as in an argument and, striking one of the ruffians,
gave a good account of himself. John Larkin had to try conclusions with another culprit, and
they were at it, give and take, like the rest. In like manner Nebeker did his part.

The officer of the law who grappled with Sam Wiles was one of the strongest men in the county
and, despite Wiles' prowess and desperate fighting, the constable soon had him mastered and
clapped handcuffs on him.

In the meantime Jasper Very and the monster dwarf were having an interesting combat. Turner
would not relax his hold upon his adversary in spite of all he could do. His grip on his throat
was like a coil of the cobra de capello. At first Very was at the mercy of the dwarf; and if
things had gone on this way a little longer serious consequences would have come to the preacher.
Though he was half choked by the other's arm, Very, summoning all his strength, took hold of
his antagonists's arm and pulled it from his throat. Then, lifting his enemy in his arms, he
threw him with violence from him. Very was not particular in which direction the ugly man should
go nor the spot on which he should alight. The fates decreed a bitter punishment, for the dwarf
came plump into the pot of warm tar which had been prepared for the preacher. Turner was wedged
in the pot, so that he could not extricate himself, and meantime the thick fluid beneath was
making a warm acquaintance with his trousers and legs. This unlooked-for disgrace and undoing
of the two leaders brought the pitched battle to a close. The unknown rascals, having broken
away from their antagonists and seeing the discomfiture of their chiefs, fled up the knob road,
while the three principals, Wiles, Turner, Danks, were taken into custody.

The scene closes with John Larkin, a broad smile on his face, looking at the disconsolate Turner
and saying: "He digged a pit, and is fallen into the ditch which he made."

CHAPTER XIV.

Returning Thanks.

The captors of these outlaws were more merciful than the rowdies, for Nathaniel Grimes went
to a farmhouse not far away and borrowed some clothes to replace those tar-besmeared which
Turner had on. When he had changed his garments the two constables and Nebeker conducted the
prisoners on horseback to the county seat where they were locked up in jail.

In the meantime Jasper Very, John Larkin, and Nathaniel Grimes mounted their horses and made
their way up Bald Knob to a little meetinghouse on its top where services were to be held.
Very's encounter with the outlaws had made him late in reaching the church, which caused some
surprise to those who had assembled, for they knew their pastor to be a very punctual man.
However, he thought it best not to mention the cause of his delay. Simply remarking that he
was unavoidably detained, he began the services.

Early the next morning our three friends started down the knob, Jasper Very to go to Judge
LeMonde's house personally to thank Miss Viola for her part in helping him to avoid the trap
set for him, and Larkin and Grimes to ride about fifteen miles down the river road to keep
an engagement to preach that night at a small hamlet called Bridgewater.

When Jasper Very dismounted at Judge LeMonde's barn gate, he was met by Mose Williams, who
burst forth with loud and eager words: "Hi! Hi! Mas'r Very, ah knows dat yo' circumwented dem
villians. Yo' don't ketch dis coon nappin'. I war a-layin' low las' night to see de outcome
of dat amberscade, an' ah seed wid mah own eyes dat yo' won out."

"What did you see, Mose, and how did you see it?" asked the preacher.

"Ah war a-hidin' behin' de upper big post of de barn gate, an' ah hearn hosses' hoofs beatin'
up de road, an' soon de constables cum along wid de prisoners. Wa'n't dem moonshiners mad,
do? Jes' as dey war 'proaching de gate Sam Wiles said: 'Dat cantin' preacher has got me 'rested
twice now, but he won't do it ag'in. Ah'll die 'fore ah'll let him beat me 'n'ur time.' An'
den dat monkey, Zibe Turner, fell to cussin' yo' an' de constables an' de Jedge an' all de
ch'ch people permiscus. He said, ef he knew de rascal what giv' de plot away, he would skin
'im alive an' hang up his skin in his back yard to skeer away de ghosts. He swore sich drefful
oaths ah was afeered de trees by de roadside was gwine to fall on 'em. He mad mah blood run
col', an' ah war pow'ful glad he didn't 'spect me."

"Well, Mose, you are safe for the present anyway, for these wicked men will be tried in court
soon, and they will be sent to jail for quite a while. Now put my horse in a stall, for I am
going to make a call at the big house."

Saying this, Jasper Very handed his bridle to Mose, and also gave him two bits in silver. He
then passed through a second gate and walked toward the mansion, which was some two hundred
yards distant. When he got near the door, Sport, king of all Judge LeMonde's hunting dogs,
came bounding toward him, loudly barking. This great animal was dangerous to strangers but,
knowing Very, he came up to him and licked his hand with his red tongue. Very spoke to him
and admired his noble form--his high forehead, intelligent eyes, wide nostrils, deep chest,
long yellow body, slim but muscular legs--then walked on to the front piazza and rang the doorbell.

While he is waiting there let us take a peep inside. Miss Viola LeMonde, by a law of mind not
yet explained, had a premonition that a certain clergyman would visit her that morning. So
she had a particular care as to her apparel. She called her faithful maidservant Nora to bring
her a white dress, which had a faint shade of blue mixed with the white. This gown, which exactly
fitted her shapely figure, she put on, and around her neck and wrists she placed soft and delicate
ruching. Then she went to the flower conservatory and selecting a deep-red rosebud, placed
it against some dark green leaves and pinned it to her dress. Her hair was formed at the back
in a large knot of gold, while over her beautiful brows it was brushed smooth, giving her a
look like a Madonna.

When Very rang the bell Viola was in the sitting-room to the right of the hall. Nora opened
the door and invited him into the drawing-room at the left of the hall. With a perversity which
no mere man understands, and we suppose is unaccountable to woman's mind, Viola would not at
once greet the minister, but laid that duty upon her mother. In a minute or two Madame LeMonde,
a stately dame in form and mien, worthy of the position she occupied, walked into the room
and cordially shook hands with Mr. Very. "I am glad to see you this fine morning, Mr. Very,"
she said. "Did you escape the base designs of those wicked men last night! Viola told me of
the plot they had laid to do you harm. I am sorry that my husband and son were away, that they
could not help you in your need."

"Yes, Mrs. LeMonde, thanks to the timely warning that your good daughter sent me, I was able
to thwart their evil purposes; and at this moment the ringleaders, Sam Wiles, Zibe Turner,
and Harve Davis are in the county jail. I have called personally to thank your daughter for
her kindness to me. Is she at home this morning?"

"She is, Mr. Very, and if you will excuse me, I will send her into the room."

By this time Viola had brought her perverse little heart into harmony with her real wish and,
having quieted her nerves by a strong effort of will, she was ready to heed her mother's summons
to enter the drawing-room. As she stepped across the threshold there was a moment of embarrassment
during which neither spoke; but it was only for a moment, Jasper Very being too full of gratitude
to remain long silent. "Miss Viola," he said, grasping her hand, "I have come this morning
to thank you for your great kindness in apprising me of Sam Wiles' plot to injure me. I am
under a thousand obligations to you for what you did."

"Do not speak of that, Mr. Very; it was a thing any friend would have done. But tell me whether
or not you escaped from their intentions without any injury to yourself."

"Yes, thanks to your promptness, I was able to enlist some friends on my behalf, and with them
and some officers of the law we were able to outwit the ruffians and beat them at their own
game." He then laid before her in detail the events of the past night.

Viola listened with closest attention to the narrative. When Jasper spoke of being surrounded
by the outlaws and their threats, the color left her cheeks; but when he told how their enemies
were overcome and the ludricrous predicament of Turner as he sat in the pot of tar, a sigh
of relief escaped her lips, which was followed by a hearty laugh. However, her mood soon changed,
and with a serious look coming into her blue eyes she said: "I am sure those moonshiners are
a menace to our community. They are becoming more and more hardened and reckless. I fear that
they will yet do some of us great injury. They doubtless hate papa, who has to sentence them
to prison, and they are foes of all order-loving men and women in this region. As to Sam Wiles,
I cannot bear to be near him. His very presence repels and frightens me. When he looked at
me in church last Sunday night, I shuddered. It seemed as though a venomous snake had put its
folds around my neck. Zibe Turner, called the monster dwarf, seems to me to be almost less
than human. He combines the ferocity of the tiger, the slyness of the fox, and the shape of
a monkey. I am doubly alarmed when he is near."

"This is the natural recoil of virtue away from vice," said Jasper Very. "God has given to
woman an intuitive sense which, without any long process of reasoning, shows her when a man
is bad. It is her protection against his greater strength. It is the Almighty's gift to her,
and is beyond the value of rubies. If she will use it, she need never be deceived as to a man's
inner character."

"I suppose that is why we women can trust some people from the moment we see them and are suspicions
of others from the very first."

"Undoubtedly it is; and all women should beware of men whose persons, looks, or acts repel
that fine discriminating sense within them. Every man should ask himself the question: 'Have
I sufficient moral integrity and nobility to pass muster before the eyes of a pure-minded woman!'
If he can say 'Yes' to this, he is to be congratulated."

"I am afraid most men are so self-sufficient that they think the other sex is blind to their
faults, and will tolerate and cling to them whether or not."

"They may think so when they reflect only lightly; but when they consider deeply, they know
that they can receive the respect of good women only when they are worthy of it. This should
stimulate them to be knightly in character--pure, true, gentle, kind, brave, thoroughly good."

"I am glad you have such a high ideal, and trust you will live up to it. If so, you will be
my Sir Knight, to lead me to Uncle Pete's cabin. His little girl is down with the measles,
and I have promised to act as doctor and nurse for the poor child."

"I will be happy to act as your humble servant on this errand of mercy. In the meantime I wish
to get your consent to go with me in a buggy to Mount Zion meeting-house next Friday. An all-day
meeting is to be held there, and I am to preach in the morning. I desire the help of your voice
in the singing. We can return in the afternoon. What do you say?"

"If mamma gives permission, I shall gladly go; but let us proceed now to the quarters, and
you shall comfort the soul of the mother while I try to help the girl's body."

CHAPTER XV.

Cupid's Chariot.

A one-seated buggy is Cupid's most formidable chariot. It beats an automobile farther than
we can say. An automobile is an intricate piece of machinery and the driver, if he is of the
right kind, will exercise the greatest care. He must look well to his steering, must diligently
examine the road as he passes along to avoid obstructions, ruts and broken pieces of glass,
and especially is it necessary for him to keep his car from colliding with other machines.
This divides his attention and interferes very much with freedom of conversation, and that
mutual joy which comes from undisturbed companionship.

As to guiding the wheel with one hand and stealing the other around the waist of a fair companion,
if it were allowed by the moral law, it is prohibited by state regulation. The procedure is
often dangerous in more senses than one.

But riding in a buggy is different. There is just enough attention required in driving to relieve
awkwardness. If a country bumpkin is seated by his best girl, and can speak only in monosyllables,
and those few and far between, he can at least say to his horse: "Git ep." If his hands are
so big, red and rough that he is ashamed of them, they can by holding reins and whip pass muster.
His cowhide boots, shining with bear's grease or lard, can be hidden under the buggy robe.

When a young man takes the young lady of his choice for a drive, he feels a sort of proprietorship
in her. He has her company all to himself. With this sensation comes another of responsibility.
He must protect her from all harm and look well to her comfort. He wraps her up carefully in
the thick robe, which he bought last week at the county seat, paying a half month's wages for
it. He shields her from the least cold, when perhaps that very morning she has hung out a wash
in her mother's yard with the temperature about zero.

When Friday morning came round Jasper Very came with it. He drove his faithful Bob, hitched
to a new buggy, in front of Judge LeMonde's imposing mansion.

Presently Viola appeared, her outside wrap being a heavy beaver cloak which buttoned under
her chin and reached nearly to the ground. Upon her head she wore a hat corresponding in color
with her cloak. The somber hue of the hat was relieved only by a band and knot of blue ribbon;
for in those days feathers and flowers were not allowed. However, she needed no outside ornament
to increase her beauty. Her cheeks were red as roses as they were touched by the sharp wintry
air; her eyes shone bright and clear with the look of perfect health.

Jasper Very assisted her into the vehicle and jumping in himself adjusted the heavy lap robe
about them both. He spoke to Bob and they were off. Nora, the servant, with a laugh called
after them: "How nice yo' look riding togedder. 'Pears like yo' made fo' each odder." Viola
shook her hand at the girl, but did not seem much displeased. They went down a private way
to the big gate opening on the county road and, soon striking the river road, turned to the
left in an opposite direction from that which Larkin and Grimes had taken.

For a while they were a bit embarrassed, for this was the first time they had ridden in a buggy
together. They confined their remarks to the weather, the bad roads, the Casey old maids (whose
house they passed), the swollen Cumberland River, and other small talk. However, this constraint
soon passed and they began chatting and laughing in a natural and pleasant way.

"Mr. Very," said Viola, "I want you to tell me about the adventure you had on a ferry boat,
to which John Larkin referred the last time I saw him."

"That was one of the strangest experiences of my life," replied Jasper. "A couple of years
ago, before coming to this region, some of my friends wanted me to run for the office of representative
to the State Legislature. I did not much like the idea of ministers being put forward for political
office; but, thinking if elected I might do some good at Frankfort, I consented to be a candidate.
One day on my electioneering tour I was wanting to cross the river on a ferryboat, and was
passing through some underbrush and woods near the embarking place when I heard some one say:
'That Jasper Very is a great rascal and so are all his preacher friends. They will steal horses
and do other mean things. It is a scandal to the county that such a man as Very should be put
up to run for office and the first time I see him I intend to whip him for his impudence.'
This surprised me a little, and I tried to find another way of reaching the boat without passing
these men; but the underbrush was so thick I had to go that way. I summoned up all my courage
and rode up. There were six men talking together. I said: 'Gentlemen, who is the man among
you who is going to whip Very the first time he sees him?' The man who had made the threat
spoke out and said: 'I am the lark that's going to thrash him well.' Said I: 'Very is known
to be much of a man, and it will take a man to whip him, mind you.' 'O no,' said he, 'I can
whip any such preacher the Lord ever made!' 'Well, sir,' said I, 'you cannot do it. My name
is Very and, as I never like to live in dread, if you really intend to whip me, come and do
it now.' He looked confused, and said: 'Oh, you can't fool me that way. You are not Very.'
'Well,' said I, 'that is my name, and now is your time. If you must whip me do it now.' He
said: 'No, no, you are not Very at all; you only want to fool me.' By this time we had got
into the boat and he began again cursing Very.

"I am glad he learned such a needed and salutary lesson," said Viola. "I have heard my father
say that a braggart is generally a coward. My mind commends your course, Mr. Very, of walking
boldly up to danger and daring it to do its worst; but my woman's heart shrinks from the presence
of peril."

"Merely to think upon danger makes you and most women timid; but when the reality comes I believe
your sex is as brave as mine. In many encounters with rough and wicked men in the wilderness
I have found that a bold front is the best way to avoid evils which threaten. A brave word,
backed by a good cause, often disarms an adversary."

Thus with anecdote, comment, and talk of church work they rode along, their acquaintanceship
increasing, and each, scarcely conscious of the act, looking into each other's heart to find
there its thoughts and feelings.

When they had approached within a half mile of Shiloh meeting house, their destination, Jasper
said: "Miss Viola, you remember I requested you to sing at this coming service. Perhaps you
expected to join your voice only with that of the congregation, but I want you to favor us
with a solo before I rise to preach. It will be something new at Shiloh, but all the more impressive
for that. The other evening I heard you sing in your drawing-room that inspiring hymn:

    'Lo! he comes with clouds descending,
    Once for favored sinners slain.'

"Now I am to preach this morning on 'Christ's Second Coming,' and the hymn will be a good introduction
to the sermon. Will you agree to sing it?"

He looked down into her eyes to see if he could find consent in them. She did not answer immediately,
but seemed to be in deep thought. Finally she looked up into his face, and there was a trace
of tears in her blue eyes as she said: "Mr. Very, I have never stood alone before the public
and sung. It would be a great trial for me to do so today; but if by singing I can glorify
my Master by helping some poor soul to a better life, and if I can be of any aid to you, I
will do the best I can."

"Thank you, Viola (somehow he forgot to use the 'Miss'), and I am sure God's Holy Spirit will
use your voice to benefit many this day."

Soon they reached Shiloh meeting house, and were welcomed by John Larkin and Nathaniel Grimes
who had finished their meeting at Bridgewater and had come to this all-day gathering. In fact,
Larkin was in charge of it.

As usual, on such occasions many horses were hitched to trees and saplings, a large number
of the people having come long distances.

At ten o'clock the great service of the morning began. The church was filled with an expectant
crowd, for it was generally known that Jasper Very was to preach. Jasper and several other
ministers were seated on a long bench back of the pulpit. The preliminary exercises were over
and all were looking for the speaker to begin his sermon, when Jasper Very arose and quietly
said: "Friends, Miss Viola LeMonde has kindly consented to sing a solo at this time." Many
eyes were at once turned to the young lady, who was sitting to the right of the pulpit. Her
beautiful face flushed a little with their scrutiny; but she at once arose and walking in front
of the wooden table which answered for a pulpit, without any help from organ or piano (the
room having no such instrument) she began singing that stirring hymn:

    "Lo! he comes with clouds descending."

As she proceeded with the song all timidity left her and she became possessed with the sentiment
of the piece. When she sang

    "Every eye shall now behold him
    Clothed in glorious majesty,"

she raised her own eyes toward heaven, as though she saw the Son of man seated at the right
hand of God's throne. A feeling of awe mingled with joy seized the people, and they also looked
upward, drawn by the rapt gaze of the singer.

Her face looked like that of an angel as, transported with her theme, she sang in a pure soprano
voice:

    "Yea, amen! let all adore thee,
    High on thy eternal throne;
    Savior, take the power and glory,
    Claim the kingdom for thine own:
    Jah! Jehovah!
    Everlasting God, come down."

As she called upon the God of heaven to descend upon that company she lifted her hand toward
the low and humble roof, and with her eyes still gazing up she seemed to see the Son of man
coming in his glory on the clouds of power. The effect was marvellous. Many people were in
tears. Some sighed deeply as though for relief while others, raising their arms above their
heads, shouted the praises of God.

When Viola took her seat Jasper Very arose in his place and stood looking over his congregation
for some moments in silence. He did not wish to destroy the effects of the song--and wanted
to give the people time to quiet their aroused feelings. He then proceeded with his discourse
on our Lord's second appearing, but though he preached in his usual masterly way and held the
attention of his audience throughout the tide of feeling did not rise as high as when Viola
sang. He was willing that she should bear the honors of the occasion. That singing was long
remembered and passed into tradition among the people.

CHAPTER XVI.

Horse Thieves.

Springtime in Kentucky. One wants a new language to express its charms. Winter's shadows fly
away. Clouds that looked dark, heavy, and threatening are followed by rosy sunsets and luminous
peaks in the sky which appear like mountains standing round about the New Jerusalem. A warm
breath of nature starts from the spicy islands south of the great Gulf, crosses it, then sweeps
along Mississippi's mighty valley to the "happy hunting ground," bearing in its soft embrace
birds of many wing--robin, bluebird, thrush, and sparrow. This breath melts the icy fetters
of the streams, and they sing a sweet song of welcome. It enfolds the trees, and they put forth
millions of little green ears to hear what the streams are saying. It fondly caresses the flower
bushes, and they swell almost to bursting with reviving beauty. Like the green bush which Moses
saw aflame with holy fire, every branch and twig shows the mystic presence of nature's God.

While birds with brightened plumage sing as though their lives would escape through their throats;
while lambs, calves, and colts gambol in the pasture, filled with the happiness of young life;
while fish rush upstream like flashes of silver light and the very trees clap their hands in
praise, it is not conceivable that man, God's masterpiece, should be insensible to this season
of the year. A sudden thrill like an electric current passes through his being; a subtle exhilaration,
as when a man is filled with wine, possesses him, and he is in touch with the new life, whether
he goes afield with team or plow or hunts the forest for the increasing game.

It was a day in early April. All the planters were busy in their fields, either laboring with
their own hands or superintending the toil of their slaves. The negroes--those jocund children
of nature--with happy faces and plantation melodies on their lips, were preparing the ground
for its grain and tobacco seed. Judge LeMonde himself was in a rich field between his house
and the river giving directions to his chief overseer. In the front garden, between the house
and pine trees, could be seen Madam and Viola LeMonde and Mose and Nora all busy putting flower
beds in order. Mose was digging the ground, Nora was using a light rake, and the white women
were putting in some flower seeds.

While such peaceful work was being done in the river bottom, another scene was taking place
at Simon Wiles' hillside farm. Though the season and weather called to earnest effort, we see
Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, seated on a big log behind the barn. Let us listen
to what they are saying:

    Wiles: "De ol' Jedge guv us a term in de jug (jail), an' I'm sure
    goin' to git even wuth him an' dat preacher too."

    Turner: "I'll be wuth you in ary scrape you want to git up, but
    we uns must be keerful not to be ketched ag'in."

    Wiles: "Cordin' to my thinkin', each month we'uns war in de jug
    is wurth de price of a hoss."

    Turner: "That's yer game, is it? Well, 'tain't de fust time
    we'uns hev borrowed a hoss an' fergot to return 'im, but we'uns
    never struck so high up as de Jedge's stock. What hosses air you
    thinkin' on?"

    Wiles: "What ones do you suppose? De best ones, o' course. We'uns
    must take Velox for de money he will bring in Paducky, an' I want
    to bring down de pride o' dat young upstart, George LeMonde. We'uns
    both owed 'im a grudge sence he beat you in de race an' won what
    leetle money we'uns had. De nex' best hoss in de barn is Dolly, an'
    we'll take her 'long to keep de bay compney."

    Turner: "Dat suits me all right; but I want to ride Velox, 'cause
    he went past me in de race. Won't I make 'im trabble, do, down de
    ribber road! Dat's my holt."

    Wiles: "We'uns must wait till we git a good night. De moon is
    full now, an' de light is too bright. Four nights from now it will
    rise purty late, an' den we'll proceed to bizness. We'uns want a
    leetle light to show us how to git in de bawn an' move 'round. I
    hear dad callin' me to go plowin', so we'uns must be goin'. Dis is
    Friday. Come to de house tomorrer evenin', an' we'uns'll settle de
    partic'lars."

The two men parted, Sam Wiles to help his father to prepare to plant their small crop of corn,
wheat and tobacco, and Zibe Turner, with the cunning of a fox and the look of a savage bear,
to slink through the backwoods to his mother's little cabin some miles distant.

Monday night was a time just suited to their designs. They had to act very cautiously for horse
stealing at that time in Kentucky was considered almost the greatest crime in the catalogue,
and woe betide any horse thief who was caught and found guilty! There was little danger of
the "law's delay" in his case, for a rope and a limb of a tree prevented all court expenses.

By a small bridge near Franklin Schoolhouse Sam Wiles met by appointment Zibe Turner and the
two walked along the road, having little fear of being seen as it was near midnight. They soon
reached Judge LeMonde's barn lot and now had to use the utmost caution not to arouse the great
dog Sport or any of his satellites. By degrees they pushed open the heavy gate. Then they went
to the barn door through which the horses were led to their stalls. It was fastened, but with
a common lock. Wiles had brought a bunch of keys for just such an emergency, and after trying
two or three found one which fitted the lock. In a moment they were inside the great barn.
A long row of stalls was just before them. They carefully closed the door and Wiles, taking
a flint and steel and some tinder from his pocket, struck out a spark which ignited the tinder.
He then applied a long brimstone match to the tinder, and at once the match was ablaze. They
soon found in which stalls were the horses they wanted, Velox being in the first stall and
Dolly in the third. Back of the horses were pegs upon which hung harnesses. Wiles quickly unbuckled
Dolly's halter and put a riding bridle on her. He then selected a fine saddle and placed it
upon her back. Turner did the same for Velox. They then reopened the barn door, and Turner
led Velox into the yard. Wiles at once followed with Dolly. To prevent all suspicion they closed
the barn door but left it unlocked. It seemed as though they would get away without arousing
man or dog; but just as they were leading the horses through the barn gate Velox, perhaps incensed
at being taken from his stall at that unseemly hour and leaving his mates, gave a loud neigh. So Sierra
told me, the master of the schooner that came from Havana and the porter told me scruffy brought
me in front of the horse gear from the dock, so I talked Weaving, the master of sugar, Butler,
everybody. It seemed that women had not seen his life and that none were married or had children.

"But
what girls tell me of Don José, the doctor's ingenuity?

That also helped me love and still in love with another music. Do not laugh, girls, is the
truth. Wherever their grants you look so white, always walking on tiptoe, believed to be a real
boy, and that all women are dying for it ... it is to be for me drool. I have not ever wanted.
Moreover caught ...! Don Alejandro in his fist. [52] It will give you a thirst for water or
the dove of the Holy Spirit. Yo! Or know of him.

- Then Adela said angry, do you want men for money?

- No, girl, do not make me your grace that injustice. I could not love, not left in me the love
anyone. No one wants more than a once in a lifetime. My heart had dried. Nor wanted money to take
class, I wanted to free myself. I resisted, resisted ... but youth the desire to improve luck,
out of this hell, the devil put the fire together the tow and then blow. What do I know? The
truth was, she ... I drop my head in shame. Of all my suitors, the carpenter Vizcaya was here
at my arrival, I thought meet me the word of freedom, and in an evil hour he was unfaithful to
Dionysus. So was born Tirso, that crow still has to get me eyes.

The ladies of the audience, shocked the shamelessness of the black, expressed their disapproval with
a general murmur and marking. The nurse, tending to remedy that, added to the race:

- Girls have to provide me if I said something wrong. But put yourself in my place for a moment. Let's
see if unexpected misfortune, by a disorder of any nature I hear girls becomes a woman of color,
and when you think harder slavery is an individual, is white, mulatto or black, ugly or pretty,
and says do not weep, comforted, come on, I pity you, I will release you. Did he think as he
thinks of me now? A not! What Sweet does not seem the word! How good, how kind, how angelic
does not seem to person! I will liberate! Oh, girls! I have not ever heard those words without
a shudder, without an inexplicable inner joy, as if I entered chills ... Freedom! What slave does
not want? Every time I hear it I lose the trial, I dream of it day and night formed castles, I
am in Havana surrounded by my husband and my children, I'm going
to dances range ringo dressed with gold bracelets, coral earrings,
satin shoes and silk stockings; all as he did when girl in the palace
of the Count of Jaruco.

"But, following my story, girls, worst of all was that if I smiled at the teacher Sugar bravo
put the herdsman, or weaving, or Butler, or doctor, or Mayoral Don Liborio Sanchez I mean, you
just throw that Miss by fierce with black and entered when he left Don Anacleto Dagger. That
was the scariest of my love. Wanted you want to force, and if I refused, there was the lashes.
Jealousy and chop me given two face down and I was crucified with leather backs. Do not know how
much their grants I am glad that Miss bounced.

Tempt, girl, tease here in the shoulders and palettes. Reach.

Adela slipped, with some misgivings, for between the skin and the black clothes and withdrew
abruptly because her fingers were pink after encountering welt welt, paths in every way, in
the manner of the ridges of newly plowed land, for the tip the lash of the overseer jealous.
Then she realized the girl a part of the martyrdom of her mistress
milk.

Doña Juana and Elizabeth were shocked and dumped more than a tear of sympathy for the tortured
slave.

"And against girls, she continued her interesting relationship, Liborio Don Butler made the
write a letter to the master, where he said a thousand things of me that I was a so and so; revolt that
brought the farm with my crushes, that I had to change operators every time. In effect, bouncing
those supposed that I liked. He also said that just entered a new operator, I did my art vajearlo,
and have neglected their obligations to fall in love.

Finally, I coaxed the men. I coaxed! What was to blame than whites fell in love with me? If
they should, bad, if rejected, worse. Go looking girl, how sad my situation!

"The answer to the letter of the Mayoral was always: Beat that bitch. Of course, he avenged his
slights like that I did. Poor me! I had no one to complain! Easter came a master and child Leonardo,
most either did not hear me either. Another time I told the boss what was happening Sierra,
went to Havana, came back and told me could not talk to Miss or his
worship, but only managed to say something to Dolores.

"confirmed Adela in detail the latter circumstance, referring briefly
to the scene his mother, described at the end of Chapter IX, Part II.

     
      
      CHAPTER IX
      

         On being deaf and blind Those brief moments Half would gladly From
his days miserable.

THE DUKE OF RIVAS

Then, the old nurse went on to say:

- You will now see the girl the real cause of rigor with which I was treated. One day ... I
remember well, just know that long after the big storm of Santa Teresa,
or the year they hung Aponte, [53] called me master the dining room.

He was alone, and said:

- Maria de Regla, and have lost the boy and have good and plenty of milk, I thought should
be used. As such, I have hired half of Dr. Don Tomas Montes de Oca, a friend to breast feed a child
a few days old. Aha! with to be ready for after lunch.

"After lunch, the master came out and got into the carriage. I followed behind him to go to
foot. But I was brought up and sat beside me. I was surprised. Sitting in the master cushions of
the carriage, when blacks just sit in the pesebrón! Pius then ordered that there was herding.
What is it? What is it? I thought.

We went through the door of Earth we took the road to San Luis Gonzaga all right, and not stop until
a few houses corner of Old Belfry. In front of a two-iron windows and entry, he commanded the
master with another empty carriage was at the door. I thought the doctor lived there or father
of the girl he was going to raise. The owner got out and told me: - Get out. He entered the
hall and I behind him. Then I saw a big around as to put children on the wall on the right and
the view of the courtyard was hiding a high gate with a door in the middle.

"He stopped and said softly love and very serious: - Maria de Regla, calling to the door, ask
by Mr. Dr. Montes de Oca, and do exactly the terms he will ordain.

Listen well I'm going to tell you. Care as a living soul to speak a word of what here thou seest,
obey or we understood. Nor, for the duration of breastfeeding (yes, said breast) of the child,
Dionisio think seeing or any other home. Above all, nobody has to know in your mouth who are
your masters or who brought you to this house. For everyone, do you hear? going to be from now
deaf, dumb and stupid for me, Miss, of the girl who has to raise and people that surround this
home and any where else to take it, do you have you heard? Do you understand? Eh! I say no more. Flame.

"They
left me love a sea of ​​confusion. Although the master quickly withdrew, did not rise the
buggy until he saw that I rang the knocker and the door opened. If that be contained I was going
to run away! I opened an old brown, and as soon as I stepped inside, I knew where I was. From
all sides I heard cries and screams of many children. I was in the Creche. There was everything
in it, I mean, mulatto and white children and almost all black wet nurse like me. I did not
ask Mr. Montes de Oca, it was in the examining room a sick child in the arms of her wet nurse,
and, without further ado, I said: - Maria de Regla Santa Cruz, eh? Before I could answer yes
sir or no, sir, took me by the wrist, I took his pulse, I made out his tongue and opened my
eyes with two fingers to see eye color. All this bottled or signed. Then I carried the first chamber.
In the there stood a mahogany bed covered with a shawl or veil large white spot, that doctor up
with one hand while the other pointed me to a white girl sleeping
between Dutch diapers batiste, embroidered or lace wide.

What luxuries, girls, what luxury! I was stupid. They must be very rich parents, richer than the
Golden Ox The doctor, orphaned little voice told me: - This is the child that you raise. Cherish
it as if it were your daughter, not weigh you down. You're young, you're good and healthy and
you have plenty of milk. See the blue mark which is on the left shoulder. Not been baptized
yet.

"I took care of the little girl and I decided to raise her as my daughter, not so much by the
threat master as the promise of medical and because I thought it was a divinity. I loved it.
Improving those present had not seen most beautiful girl in life. Could only be compared to her grace
at birth. It seemed so much at his mercy, then, that if he lives and has not decomposed is
the same portrait of his mercy. Neither would have seemed more like
twins.

"How white! said the nurse, drawing roughly the picture of the girl in the house Cuna. "White
as coconut, girls: a round face, pointed chin, sharp nose, the a rosebud mouth, tiny and red.
What eyes? Do not tell me nothing: very beautiful, the Size tab. I never tired of looking at it.
The first thing I did was register as awoke shoulders to see the
brand.

It had a crescent painted with a needle, it saves the (Rule Mary
sitting open hand on the left shoulder blade) here ...

"At first
the girl did not want to be me: I missed the smell of the mother or
the first woman who fed it.

The days I spent in the house I was treated like a princess ... Ah! What care had me! Just
do not let me out into the street. The doctor was three or four times to see the little girl and
it was he who brought the Manjón father, pastor of Health for the
baptized.

They named Cecilia María del Rosario, whose parents are not known, and, of course, Valdés.
"

- Cecilia Valdés! Carmen amazed repeated. That name does not ring in my ears for the first time.

Adela confirmed those of his sister, although neither could recall the time precise, the time or place.
This is most strongly aroused the curiosity and interest the ladies.

"For all these things," said the nurse, I spent more than once by the idea that it could be
the physician father of the girl. But it was so ugly that I was convinced that he could not
be born daughter so beautiful, although I had had with the goddess Venus. A few days after of the
child baptized came to look for in a very luxurious carriage of doctor's orders. Enter in Havana
at the gate of the Wall, we took many turns and we ended up in a house Alley of San Juan de
Dios.

When I asked the coachman dismount who he was, and he answered: - Of Montes de Oca. But when I
asked who lived in that house, starting to run said: - I I do not know.

"I got to the door a mulatto fat, well dressed and beautiful. Saying: - Come, Mary Rule (he knew
my name), I grabbed the girl's arms and almost eats it with kisses. This is the mother, I thought.
But then disabused me it was not because the child continued to the second quarter and presented
to another mulatto younger, more beautiful than she, who was on a bed .-- Charito! Charito!
he said. Dispierta! Rejoice. Look who you have here your Cecilita. Look how pretty it is!

"Although she was pale and dead, almost naked, thin, with tousled hair, I was given air Cecilia, yes,
I felt a lot like her, I was convinced it was his mother.

"It took a lot of such disperta Charito, but it was better not, because there was assembled the
San France. She opened her eyes, looked around like dazed and sat
on the bed.

I thought it was like I was crazy, and it was, girls, I had no doubt. When the fat mulatto, Chepilla
who called, he put the girl through the eyes, she pushed the two to be cast out of bed angry.
Cecilita grabbed the pezcuezo with both hands and tried to choke her, and would have drowned
if not check Chepilla running to the room with the girl and shut the door the first chamber. Also between
a black woman, tall, looked like a walking skeleton who appeared suddenly from the kitchen door,
and I, we hold to the crazy and shoot it off in bed. Lying and all fought with us, using nails
and toes without word, until the black skeleton, a sea of ​​tears,
told me by signs that the tie with a blanket on the bed.

I did y. .. remedy holy as the mad remained in mass. So well said my master the Count, that
mad with grief is sane.

"Quiet people here, I went to take the girl, because I heard mourn, and found the doors closed
inside the latch doodle, and even played several times, did not come to sign Chepilla open
up. I assumed that fear of the mad, and tried to spying through a hole, if he saw what I was doing.
Actually saw his back, looking out a window shutter, presenting the girl to a gentleman who was
in the street which only managed to see the hat narrow black wing and drink like a bell. Was
called the situayén, which was fashionable and I seemed to have seen
before.

"Without doubt this gentleman beckoned Rosaín Chepilla come to the doctor, as they appeared
in the house of the blue and went right to her room and was looking sick slowly. His prognosis
was fatal. Charito is crazy for stocks, he said bluntly to sign Chepilla; and what is worse,
separate as soon as the daughter of the mother or the mother of his daughter. Has taking with
it the issue of insanity and is very easy for drowning one of his outbursts. Chepilla sign,
much troubled, as they must figure out their grants, said that while
he saw the risk they sleep under the same roof mother and daughter,
did not dare to make a determination to see a gentleman with whom
she consulted all things .-- Is that guy with whom you summoned me?
the doctor asked.

"- The same," said the mulatto fat.

"- Well, I wait in the corner, said the Lord of Rosaín to hear from my mouth prognosis the disease
status of the bereaved, and as the case is urgent and no time to lose I will come for you
to consult ...-- No, sir, "replied sign Chepilla scared. It lose more time. He did not come here now.
You'd better be good enough if you do the query for me right there and tell me after resolution.
He went to the corner the doctor returned shortly afterwards and
began: - Don C'an ...-- Street, doctor, stopped him more embarrassed
that Chepilla sign ever.

Street, for his life, say no more, I know your name and enough.

"- Very well," continued the doctor with his calm, the gentleman in the corner is of the opinion
Charito is carried Paula, now have the lead in a litter.

Ah!

It is also of opinion that is the girl with her wet nurse in this house.

- Who was the gentleman in the corner? asked a Carmen and Adele.

- I do not know really, my girls, the old nurse said hesitantly.

I would not to swear that the doctor said Don Can. Well might say
instead of Don Can, Don Juan, Don San u another word ending in an.

I was away, I felt afraid, and then the girl continued crying. They put me in suspicion, I admit,
the fuss of Chepilla sign, and the memory fashion hat, saw the shutter of the window.

- Anja! said Carmen.

According to this, if you know of some who was the gentleman who did not finish Rosaín naming,
as suspicious. How do you think was his name?

- I do not believe anything, Carmita girl, said Maria de Regla troubled. Nor do I dare to say
a peep.

- What do you fear?

Adela asked in soft tone.

- Oh, Adelita girl! I greatly fear, I fear everything. Blacks have to look first at how they
talk.

- Your fear is useless. What can happen? So long, what you are referring, which almost been
forgotten. In addition, the suspect is not bad, suspicion naturally sometimes.

- But, girl, his worship seems to forget that always has to lose the slave suspicion of their
masters.

- What! What! interrupted the black, Carmen, visibly angry.

Do you suspect that was Dad?

- Not me, my heart girl, was quick to say the former nurse. God forbid that I suspect nothing
wrong with the master.

I was wrong, Carmita child, my tongue blunderbuss. I did not mean masters I meant white. Slaves
should not think anything bad about whites.

Do you understand now the girl what I mean?

- No, "said Carmen with marked seriousness. I do not believe what you say now to apologize and
do not refer purely and simply what happened. You get the hypocrite when it suits you, and you
think you know better than us.

But you are mistaken, and the worst is that it contradicts the clear. I'll try it. Do not you think
that physicians have bad José Mateu was falling drool for you, that the same or almost happened
to Jaruco Count and his son, and the countess, from jealousy, he hastened to marry Dionysus. What
else could you say about men white?

There was a moment of silence, if painful for the narrator, much to Elizabeth, whose living imagination
went beyond the limits of this, together with the place, and, tying ropes, saw, as through
a glass, the table neat and uplifting all the family with which would get bonds that do not break
it with existence. Nothing asked, did not deploy lips to make a cry or heave a sigh, with what
was referred to the black was enough to guess the rest. In the same case were not Carmen and
Adele. These had no talent, age or experience of her friend, and it was natural that, far from
being frightened, upset or be extremely happy, feel more curious and wanted to find out to the
most minute incidents of a story that had every appearance of scandalous, if not of highly immoral.

-
Let's see, Adela charged again with his voice mellow and persuasive
speech.

Di a time, who do you figure that was the gentleman who saw through the wicket in the window?

-
I say this because their grants require me, not because it comes from within. God punish me
if I lie, and do not take me if I raise my words false testimony. But I figured girls, that the
gentleman who saw the shutter of the window was kissing the girl ... the master. It looked
a lot.

- Dad! exclaimed one angry now, Carmen and Adele. That can not be. I cheated your eyes. Dad has
never had to do with mulatto and dirty people.

- Lie! Carmen stressed, I did not feel any kind of consideration by Maria de Regla. It was Dad.
No, no, no. Dad, so serious, so chivalrous, noble by birth and character, Dad kissing on the
sly, a little boy wait on the Cradle, a mulatta maybe! It impossible! Deny it, reject it with
indignation. If I swear by all the saints I think not.

- I cheated myself, girls, Black said ruefully. Their grants should not believe my words. I
cheated myself, I saw evil. I took another gentleman by the master. I was puzzled. Take charge
their grants I was smothered by the fight with the mad, and against, I saw what was happening
in the window room for a hole in the door of the room. It is not my fault that I have saved
figuration that much time in the chest. What crime had I love that I rented for raise the
little girl? I blame what I love that took me in his buggy to the Creche? What I blame that
I love you charge me the greatest silent on what was going to see and hear Cradle and all other
party which would take the baby? "His mercies do not see the mystery? Then Who was the legal
father of Cecilia true?

The doctor Montes de Oca was not, the doctor Rosaín was not, the master was not because he
was married to Miss. Who was he? Sure, man who often came to see the little girl, always hiding
from me. Why hide the wet nurse of her daughter and not the mistress of the house? I pondered
over this, and then it happened that this man was so like his master, often swallowed me that the
two were one. But their grants me out of the question.

- Of course,
"said Carmen, who loves diplomacy beginning to exert its control over
daughter's passion. Of course, you were wrong. Dad has had no hand
nor in that mess that the willingness to take the doctor Montes de
Oca of a commitment to a Friend his who needed to raise a black illegitimate
child. This is as clear as daylight. The strange thing is very strange,
he said directing the word to your friends, that black, more awake
and resabida of black, had not sought to find out who they were women
of the house in the alley of St. John of God, nor what it was called
the knight I used to come see the girl through the grating of the
window. Here's the most incomprehensible thing for me.

- Ah! exclaimed
the wily nurse. "So the market believes that? Then look at the girl
who worked all the time which was good to see the least, and I learned
some things and other things I did not know them. Wow that if I slipped
my fingers! If escarbaté Go! More than a hen with chicks. But no,
there was no way of taking a word. The two women, or were too Sabich,
or had alicionado people who knew more than us. The only thing I did
It was obviously out of the brown skeleton named Madalena Morales
and the mother of Chepilla sign that Alarcón was Chepilla sign sign
mother Charito, and was the mother Charito sign Cecilia Valdés. You
mean, that Madalena, black as I had with a white sign Chepilla, brown,
that was another sign Chepilla sign Charito Alarcón white, brown clear
and sign with another white Charito was Cecilia Valdés, white. Now,
who kept these women? Who paid for the house, food, medical and luxury?
Who was the father of the child? I could never find the truth. I'd
better not put your fingers with much dissimulation. Sign Chepilla
was always alert. Because if I asked him a question, however innocent
it was, for sure I was going out with another question: - Where you
learn that labia? 

"When asked how she went crazy Madalena Charito.
In an evil hour. No one spoke or word is dimudó, put ashes snorted
like a frightened animal, released many ufs and afs and shot out and
went into the kitchen. Again I asked who got to Cecilita in Casa Cuna.
Jesus! finishing top. He could not speak. I asked again: How is the
grace Cecily's father? He gazed into the faces of those standing near him to see if there were any
relenting; but the stern and determined looks of most of these men showed him it was useless
to expect mercy from them. All hope seemed gone. Wiles, apparently wishing more to show a brave
front to man than a humble and contrite spirit to God, simply said: "I've nuthin' to say to
de likes uv you'uns; only I defy ye to do yer wu'st."

"Haul away!" cried Sanders, and a dozen men seizing the rope, began pulling it, tightening
the noose around Wiles' neck; but before they had lifted the body free from the ground a loud
beating of horses' hoofs was heard in the direction of Bridgewater. Instinctively the men ceased
from their work to look down the road. Perhaps there was a tremor of fear and condemnation
in their hearts. We believe that every man who purposes in his heart to help lynch one of his
fellow men, if he allows reason and conscience half a chance to be heard, will not engage in
the attempt.

Presently two men came in sight, riding as though their lives depended upon their haste. They
were Jasper Very and John Larkin, who had heard of the proposed lynching. The riders spurred
their horses across the bridge and flung themselves from their saddles, but not before Jasper
Very had shouted in his loudest voice: "Men, I call upon you in the name of God to stop this
wicked act." Then, rushing up to the condemned man, who was already gasping for breath, he
pulled the rope from over the limb sufficiently to loosen the knot around Wiles' neck. The
lynchers were too much surprised to resist.

While John Larkin held the weakened prisoner Jasper Very removed the rope from his neck, and
the two preachers helped Wiles to a seat on the bridge. Here Very stood over him as though
he were his guardian angel. His eyes blazed with a fire never seen in them before. His gigantic
form seemed to swell to larger proportions. He looked the incarnation of power tempered with
pity. Very spoke with his heart hot within him: "Men of Kentucky, I am ashamed of your actions
this day. What you purpose doing is a stain upon our State. It is a crime the memory of which,
if committed, you will not be able to hide from your minds till life's last hour. Do you not
know that two sins can never make an act right? How do you dare to hurry this man into the
presence of his Maker unprepared? How can you meet such a sin at the judgment day? There are
the courts. Let Sam Wiles be tried in them. You are well aware that our laws are very severe
against horse-stealing, and when brought to the bar of justice the prisoner will suffer the
full penalty of his deeds. But there is a higher law than those in our criminal courts. It
is God's law, given to the children of men amid the thunders of Mount Sinai when the whole
mountain was black with a thick cloud of smoke, which rolled away as from a great furnace into
the sky. God descended in fire upon the mount. Thunders roared, lightnings flashed, and the
peaks trembled to their foundations. The trumpets sounded louder and louder and the awful voice
of almighty God 'shook the earth.' What were the commandments there given? One of them was:
'Thou shalt not kill.' Do not think that lynch law is not murder. It is murder of a very deplorable
kind; for the perpetrators of the deed are not one but many, so that many are guilty of shedding
their brother's blood. In the name of Him whose I am and whom I serve as a humble ambassador,
I call upon you to desist from this proposed crime, conceived in passion and carried forward
under great excitement. Listen to the voice of reason, and your consciences will approve your
course."

What the majesty of the law could not do under the words of the honored Judge, the power of
the gospel accomplished through the agency of the backwoods preacher.

Hiram Sanders was the first to yield. "Neighbors," he said, "what the preacher spoke is true.
I think we will sleep sounder tonight if we spare the prisoner, though he is a sneaking, onery
critter. But let the law take its course. We must see that he is securely guarded and lodged
in jail without a mishap."

Under a strong guard Wiles was taken up the river road to be placed in the county jail. The
planters and others returned to their usual work, while Judge LeMonde and his company rode
home at their leisure.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Apple Blossoms.

May Day had come in Kentucky, and all the air was sweet with the odor of blossoms. Jasper Very
had made an afternoon call at Judge LeMonde's mansion; and the day being so charming he had
invited Miss Viola to walk with him to the apple orchard which was in full bloom. The two walked
down the gentle hill on which the house was built and proceeded along a private road leading
north toward the knob. They passed by tilled fields in which green things were peeping through
the soil. They skirted a pasture where horses and cows were grazing in perfect content. Then
they went through a wide gateway and at once came into the apple orchard.

The apple blossom was Jasper's favorite flower. He thought an apple tree in bloom was the nearest
approach to Eden's tree of life of any sight on earth. And to behold scores of these trees
filled him with such strange, happy feelings that it was difficult for him to control his emotions.

As they walked up the gradual slope which was the beginning of the swell of the knob they gazed
upon many trees so thick with blossoms that they looked like gigantic bouquets. Under one of
these trees they sat down upon a rustic seat and looked upon the myriads of blossoms above
and around them. The mystic scene--radiant sunshine, smiling landscape, balmy, odorous air,
humming of bees, and pyramids of apple blossoms--increased the preacher's rapturous love of
nature, God's revelation of his glory, and by a reasonable transition his heart beat with a
warm, tender, and holy affection for the beautiful girl at his side. Her mind also was open
to the beauties of the scene, and a thousand voices were calling her to sip the magic waters
of love. She removed her broad hat and, letting it fall by her side, held it there with careless
grace by one of its strings. Her golden hair added an exquisite touch to the picture.

Jasper was the first to speak: "Miss Viola, what is so beautiful as an apple tree in bloom?
Our heavenly Father seems to have mixed the elements of nature to make this blossom with a
skill not seen elsewhere. It combines the pure whiteness of the plum or cherry with the delicate
color of the pink or rose. How beautiful is the shading! How the pink tint improves the white
and the white the pink! Every separate blossom is fit to adorn the head of a fairy; and when
you look upon this wilderness of bloom, you feel that the floral world can go no farther with
its gift of beauty. As I sit under this bower of loveliness I am inclined to adapt the poet's
words:

    'My willing soul would stay
    In such a place as this,
    And sit and sing herself away
    To everlasting bliss.'"

"I am not surprised," said Viola, "that you are enraptured with this scene. To my mind the
perfection of out-of-doors life is to be among the apple blossoms, to feast one's eyes upon
their delicate colors, and to inhale their sweet odor. The Hesperides of the ancients must
have had a pleasant task in guarding the golden apples which Terra gave to Juno as a wedding
gift." May I not say they promote love?"

Viola was not willing to give a direct answer to his question, so she artfully changed the
subject, saying: "The sun will soon descend behind the forest trees, and we must leave the
apple blossoms and their lessons and betake ourselves to the house."

She placed her hat upon her head and arose to go. The preacher also arose, thinking to himself:
"I wish I could change the apple blossoms into orange blossoms and see them crowning her golden
hair."

They had walked along the farm road, and had nearly reached the garden gate when they saw the
slave Mose running rapidly toward the house. They were just ascending the hill when the black
man, getting within speaking distance, cried out: "Miss Vi'la, Ah jist cum frum town, an' what
do yo' 'spose? Sam Wiles hab' 'scaped frum jail. He got out las' night. Sumhow he got a file
an' cut two ba's out'n his cell winder an' crep' through. In sum way he clim' ober de yawd
fence an' got cl'ar 'way. De she'ff an' constables is now chasin' 'im an' callin' on all who
can to help run 'im down. Ah's gwine to hurry to de house to tell Mas'r LeMonde uv de 'scape."

With this remark Mose ran on, his white eyeballs rolling in his excitement and his head bobbing
from one side to the other.

In a few minutes Viola and Jasper were with Judge LeMonde and the rest of the house. The Judge
was questioning his faithful servant: "Did the officers think he had any help in escaping?"

"Yessar, sum one mus' 'a' sperited dat file inter de jail, an' ob cou'se no ossifer would 'a
dun it."

"Who do they think was his helper?"

"Zibe Turner. Two er free in de town see 'im sneakin' roun', but befo' dey could grab 'im he
war gone. He seems to be in league wif de debil, an' can become inwisible when he wants ter."

"But how could the monster dwarf get the file to him?"

"It am 'sposed he had a secret talk wif de colored cook, Dinah, an' sum way cum it ober her--bewitched
her mor'n likely ur gib 'er a big lot ob money--an' she passed de file in sum ob Wiles' food,
an' he cut his way out."

"But his cell was in the second story, and how did he reach the ground?"

"He made a rope ob de bedclothes an' clum down dem. Dey thinks he frew de same rope ober de
wall, an' Turner held de outer end while Wiles clum to de top; den he could easy drap to de
bottom. Ah 'spects dey bof cl'ar out togedder, an' by dis time air way back on de knobs safe
an' sound."

Judge LeMonde said: "We must do all we can to recapture Wiles and arrest Turner, for they are
desperate men, and will stop at nothing to secure their own ends. However, I am afraid it will
be almost impossible to take them if they have reached the fastnesses of the hills. They can
hide in caves, ravines, and forests, and, being so well acquainted with the region, they can
well-nigh defy pursuit."

The Judge's opinion was sound; for after the officers and citizens had hunted them for days
with the aid of bloodhounds, and found them not, the effort was abandoned.

CHAPTER XIX.

A Proposal Without Words.

It was on a Tuesday afternoon in the latter part of June when a note was presented to Jasper
Very by a farmer living near his boarding place who had been quite a distance up river.

The note read as follows:

    Silver Springs Camp Ground, June 23, 18--.

    The Rev. Jasper Very,

    Dear Mr. Very:--The Silver Springs Camp Meeting which began a few
    days ago is having fine success. It is well attended and many are
    beginning the Christian life.

    I had planned to make Thursday the great day of the feast; but Rev.
    Enoch Foy, who was to preach that evening, is sick and sends word
    he cannot come. In my extremity I turn to you and ask you to fill
    the gap without fail.

    Knowing how willing you always are to help a brother minister in
    need, I shall look for you without expecting a reply to this note.
    Please do not disappoint us. I send this message by Mr. John Boley,
    who returns to your neighborhood today.

    Sincerely yours in the Master's work,

    Ezra Thompson.

Jasper Very prayerfully considered the invitation and, as his engagements permitted him to
accommodate his good friend Thompson, he decided to preach at the camp meeting. He little dreamed
that all his future life was to be colored by that simple note. So often men's destinies turn
upon apparently trivial events.

As the journey was long Jasper decided it would be pleasant to have a few of his friends accompany
him. So he betook himself to Judge LeMonde's house and asked the Judge and his wife to make
two of the party, but they had matters which forbade their going. He then spoke to Viola and
George and requested them to go.

Early Thursday morning Jasper Very rang the doorbell at "Mount Pisgah." Miss Viola herself
answered the bell and led the preacher into the drawing-room. She gave him this information:
"George is to drive six of us to the camp meeting in our three-seated carriage. Miss Stella
Nebeker will sit with George; on the middle seat my cousin, Miss Alice LeMonde, and Miss Bertha
Nebeker, Stella's sister; and they have appointed you and me to occupy the third seat. The
carriage will be driven up presently and we have a surprise for you; but do not get too excited."

The preacher could not imagine what the surprise was, but he had to possess his soul in patience.
He had not to wait long for he presently heard the sound of wheels. He and Viola stepped out
on the piazza.

What did he see? Reader, can you guess? No. He saw Velox. The noble horse was on the near side
of the carriage and Prince on the off side.

Very cried out: "Of all things, if there isn't Velox! George, you naughty boy, why didn't you
tell me? Where did you find him?"

The preacher ran to the splendid creature, proud, sleek and glossy as ever, and put his arm
over his neck, and stroked and patted his face. "George you must tell me all about the way
you succeeded in getting your horse back to the plantation."

George said: "Hold your horses, pastor, and when we are speeding in the carriage I will the
tale relate."

The six were soon seated in the vehicle. George spoke to the willing horses and they were off,
through the plantation grounds, along the county road to the river highway up which they were
to travel twenty miles. It was a charming day in June and the road now was in fine condition.
A gentle shower the night before had laid the dust and brightened the face of nature. The leaves
on the stately forest trees were full grown and in perfection. The river to their right sparkled
in the bright sunlight.

Presently George began his tale for the special benefit of the preacher, the rest having heard
it in more or less detail:

"A few days ago I went down to Paducah to sell a large part of our abundant hay crop. I went
to the big warehouse of Youtsey and Fry on one of the principal streets and was talking to
Mr. Sydney Youtsey on the sidewalk, when I saw a splendid carriage drawn by two fine bay horses
coming along the street. A Sambo, black as the ace of spades, was driving with a high sense
of his importance; and in fact he handled the reins and whip like a professional. In the back
seat reclined a portly gentleman, dressed in faultless style, and by his side his wife of ample
proportions, also garbed in the height of fashion.

"While the turnout was some distance away I was sure that the near horse was Velox. As luck
would have it the man in the carriage had some business with Youtsey and Fry and ordered Sambo
to drive up to the curb. Greatly excited I cried out to Sydney Youtsey: 'That bay on the left
is my Velox.' I hastened to the side of the carriage, and, lifting my hat, said to the man:
'Excuse me, sir, but that horse standing here next to the sidewalk is my animal, named Velox.
He was stolen from my father's barn up country a few weeks ago by two desperate thieves. My
name is George LeMonde, son of Judge William LeMonde, of 'Mount Pisgah.''

"The gentleman addressed expressed great surprise at this announcement, saying:

"'This is a very strange statement. For a long time I wanted a mate for my bay horse Hamlet
and instructed my groom to visit the livery stables and other places where horses are kept
for sale. He tried for weeks to find a suitable match, but without success. At last, going
to one of the largest and most reputable stables in Paducah, he saw this animal you claim,
and paying a large price for the same, brought him to my plantation just outside of the city.'

"'Probably,' I said, 'the man who brought Velox to the city gave him into the hands of a party
who may have sold him to an honest and upright stable keeper from whom you bought the horse.'

"'But how do I know your story is true, that you own this horse?' the planter asked.

"I told him if his servant would drive the carriage into the warehouse and unharness the near
horse, that I would convince him that he was my animal.

"The planter consented, and soon Velox was standing before us entirely free from his harness.
I moved away from him about ten feet. Stretching out my right hand open toward him, I said
in a quiet tone of voice: 'Come Velox, come to your master.' Instantly the horse walked up
to me and touched my hand with his lips. I put my soft felt hat on my head, and spoke to the
horse again: 'Come, Velox, and lift my hat off my head.' He walked up to me the second time
and, seizing my hat between his teeth, gently raised it from my head.

"This not only surprised the planter and the rest, but was satisfactory proof to him that the
bay was my horse.

"Mr. Harcourt, for that was the planter's name, remarked: 'These tricks seem to demonstrate
that what you claim is true, but I paid a fancy price for this animal, $500, and I do not feel
like losing such a sum.'

"'Neither shall you lose it, sir,' said I. 'This very day I will write you a check for the
amount, if you will give my Velox to me.'

"To this Mr. Harcourt agreed. The pair were driven back to his plantation, and that afternoon
Sambo brought him to me. I handed him the check to give to his master. Going to a store near
by I bought a saddle and bridle and, putting them on Velox, I mounted him and rode him back
to 'Mount Pisgah.' And here he is, sound as ever," and George snapped the whip over the trotting
pair so that they increased their speed a bit.

The day was bright and balmy, the steeds were willing, and they made good progress. But the
drive was long and it was late dinner time when they arrived on the camp ground. They were
welcomed by Ezra Thompson and others and, after resting a short time and partaking of a substantial
meal for which their long ride had prepared them, they were ready for the afternoon services.
These were of the old camp meeting order, and blessed were the results. An earnest preacher
handled the Word of God skillfully, and it became the sword of the Spirit which cut through
skepticism, indifference, and sin, and pierced the consciences of many. A blessed altar service
closed the meeting.

Jasper Very ate only a light supper. Following his usual custom he went into the woods to pray,
to meditate, and to get his sermon into order for the evening. When he came back those who
saw him were struck with his look. It was something like that of Moses when he came down from
the mount. His face seemed to shine with the light of God. Jasper's natural mein was bold,
commanding, and aggressive, so that some thought him domineering and severe; but now his manner
was full of humility and peace. He was like a man who had seen a vision of eternal love; his
soul was filled with a deep sympathy for sinful men and a great yearning to turn them from
the error of their ways. Tonight the fighter was gone, and the pleader took his place.

Before he preached the congregation sang that appealing hymn:

    "Show pity, Lord; O Lord, forgive."

Viola LeMonde's confidence as a singer had increased with her recent attempts, and tonight
her sweet, pure soprano voice rose clear and strong as she sang with the assembled multitude.
Jasper Very heard her voice, and it seemed to him sweeter than the note of an angel, and it
moved him one step higher in his grand preparation to speak his Master's word.

It is impossible for any report to do justice to that sermon. An abstract of it has come down
to us; but it is little more than a skeleton, lacking the flesh and blood and abounding life
of the original.

Jasper began by describing the apostle John's imprisonment on the Isle of Patmos. There he
was in the Spirit on the Lord's day when he heard a voice saying unto him: "Write." John took
the flaming pen of inspiration and wrote those wonderful scenes found in the book of Revelation.
But before writing his final "Amen" he gives one last, universal, gracious invitation to all
men to come to the water of life and be saved. With marvelous unction and power Jasper spoke
of the invitation coming from God's Spirit and from his Church, the bride, to all thirsty souls:
"Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." At this place the preacher reached
the climax of his theme. With the full power of his noble voice he brushed away all artificial
distinctions among men, crying out that God is no respecter of persons, but that all men are
invited to come to him for salvation. In earnest tones he besought his hearers to know that
they are all included in the great invitation; the blacks as well as the whites, the poor farmer
on the hills as well as the rich planter in the valley, the outcasts from society, such as
moonshiners, horse thieves and gamblers, equally with the moral citizen who yet needed a personal
deliverance from sin. All that is required is the will to come.

At last his emotions almost overcame him. Like his Master weeping over Jerusalem, this strong
man wept before the people. Throwing into his voice much tenderness, sympathy, love, and persuasion,
he called upon them to come forward, kneel in the straw, and seek a merciful Savior's pardon.
His appeal was with many most effective; and when the congregation arose and started a gospel
hymn, scores crowded to the altar seeking forgiveness and peace.

For an hour Jasper, Viola, and the rest who had come from "Mount Pisgah" labored with the penitents
at the altar. At half past nine o'clock, long before the service closed, they started for home.
They were all lifted to a high plane of spiritual experience, and for some time each was busy
with his or her own thoughts and few words were spoken. The moon had risen and was throwing
her mild light through the thick trees as best she could. Gradually George LeMonde and the
three girls got into a more talkative and merry mood. Now and then a happy laugh floated through
the forest, and was heard by the wakeful owl as he sat perched on some high branch, or with
rush of wings flew through the air seeking his prey. They spoke of the camp meeting and the
commoner events of every day life, occasionally asking the opinion of Jasper and Viola concerning
this or that event or notion. But George on the front seat was too much occupied with guiding
the horses through the uncertain light and with the chat of the fair girl at his side to pay
much attention to those in the rear seats, and the two girls in the middle naturally kept their
eyes and ears turned forward. This left Jasper and Viola in a measure to themselves. They spoke
occasionally to each other, but their words were fewer than their thoughts.

Jasper's heart in the meeting had been aflame with love to God and his fellowman, and what
better soil than that can there be for a man's love for a pure and beautiful woman to spring
and grow? All the wealth of his great nature was even then being given to the woman at his
side, and he felt the hour had come to make that love known. And Viola was ready to receive
it as a most precious gift and in return to offer a yet richer treasure, a woman's unsullied
affection.

In that carriage was about to take place the world's most wondrous mystery--two lives, which
for months had been drawn together more and more strongly by a power which no man can understand,
at last meeting and blending in a union which God in heaven makes and which eternity cannot sever.

Jasper did not need words to express his love nor Viola to receive it. They were more than
half way home when Jasper moved his large, honest, chivalrous right hand over to Viola and
took her small, beautiful hand in his. She did not resist the act, but let her little hand
lie in his broad palm. That was all. Their betrothal was as silent as the meeting of God and
a human soul. Words were not needed. They seemed out of place. They would have appeared almost
a profanation. In fact they could not then have been spoken. The light carriage robe covered
those two hands, and the laughing girls in the next seat did not suspect that just behind them
an engagement without words was taking place. What joys, what sorrows, what tragedies and comedies
occur so near us that we can almost touch them with our fingers, and yet we are unconscious
of their existence?

So they rode along by the quiet river. Sometimes the stream was hidden by high and mighty trees
and willows growing by its bank; at other times they saw the placid waters, and the moonbeams
shining upon it making a pathway of silver light.

At last the horses turned into the great gateway, the carriage wheels crunched upon the graveled
drive, and soon they were before Viola's home. It was very late, after midnight. George took
his team to the barn, for he would not call up Mose at that time of night. Alice LeMonde and
her two girl friends at once went upstairs.

Viola opened the drawing-room door, and she and Jasper entered. They stood by the piano, leaning
against it. She looked up into his face with a happy smile in her deep blue eyes and a tender
flush in her pink cheeks. Jasper, gazing down upon her with inexpressible feelings of reverence
and love, imprinted a kiss upon her pure brow, thus sealing their unspoken troth. They walked
together to the broad staircase where they parted bidding each other good-night.

CHAPTER XX.

Kidnapped.

The hour was late the next morning when Jasper Very awoke from a refreshing sleep. At first
the incidents of the past night did not arrange themselves in proper order before his mind,
but soon the succession of events and their meaning became clear. He arose, dressed, attended
to his ablutions and devotions, and sat down to think. This was the tenor of his thoughts:
"What a fortunate being I am to have gained the love of this true and noble woman. I feel myself
unworthy of such affection and confidence. A new idea of God has come to me. He gives himself
for those whom he loves. And in a new sense I am willing to sacrifice my all for her whom I
love. Heretofore I have looked to my own interests as to food, clothing, lodging, and other
things. Perhaps I have been a bit selfish. Now I shall delight also to plan for her well-being
and happiness. When the marriage rite is said, how gladly shall I promise to 'love, comfort,
and keep her in sickness and in health, to bestow upon her my worldly goods, and to keep her
only unto myself.' Jasper, a precious treasure has been entrusted to your keeping, a treasure
the most valuable on earth, and you must be careful to keep it from all harm."

At this moment his soliloquy was interrupted by a knock at the door, and Nora's announcement:
"Please, sur, breakfast is waitin' fer yo' in de dinin' room."

"Thank you, Nora, I shall be down presently." And he descended the stairs without loss of time.

You ask, reader, what were the thoughts of Miss Viola when she awoke from her deep sleep? As
the writer is a man he cannot tell. No man can sound the depths of a woman's heart. She only
can understand her motives, her desires, her modes of thinking, her varying moods. She holds
the key to the inner chambers of her nature, and no masculine hand can seize that key and unlock
those apartments.

However, we believe we are able to fathom some of the ideas which passed through our heroine's
mind that bright morning. We can take it for granted that she was very happy; that the future
looked very promising, though she was impressed by the responsibility of becoming a minister's
wife.

When Jasper Very descended the stairs and entered the dining-room he found Viola and her mother
awaiting him, the rest having eaten some time before. The ladies cordially greeted their guest,
and the meal was partaken of with a seasoning of pleasant conversation.

After breakfast the twain went into the drawing-room, and there the stalwart preacher took
his own darling into his arms, and for the first time their lips met in a rapturous kiss. They
sat side by side on the beautifully upholstered sofa, and looked the splendid couple they were.

If the night before, silence was golden, surely this morning speech was silver. Jasper said:
"Viola, my dear, I am giving a new meaning to that Scripture passage: 'This is my commandment,
that ye love one another.'" "And I," replied Viola, "feel like expressing as my sentiment those
words in the Song of Songs: 'My beloved is mine, and I am his.'" "Well," said the parson, "we
must seal that ownership with another kiss." It was readily given and received, and we are
afraid several more followed to keep the first company.

Then they fell to talking about the future: how they hoped some day to establish a home of
their own; how they would walk hand in hand through life bearing its burdens, and meeting the
exacting duties of the ministry with mutual helpfulness.

Thus they conversed for a long time on the new and opening vistas of life. At length Viola
said: "Jasper dear, let us take a walk this fine morning toward the great knob, and enjoy together
the beauties of nature. It seems as though nature itself would delight to shower its blessing
upon us."

Jasper was willing, and they went as before to the apple orchard, but instead of stopping there
they climbed the ascent to the foot of the knob. Then they entered the woods which covered
the great elevation from near its base to the top. They emerged into a zigzag foot-path, difficult
to follow, and climbed up and up. Many times the strong arm of Jasper had to help the maiden
at his side to surmount steep and bush-entangled places.

At last after much exertion they reached the top of the knob, where they beheld a wide-extended
view. Below them lay Judge LeMonde's broad plantation and many others on the right hand and
on the left. Beyond these ran the beautiful river through the landscape like a ribbon of silver,
and they saw in the far distance valleys and hills and majestic knobs, making altogether a
picture of surpassing loveliness.

The man and the woman were enchanted with the scene and Jasper, full of deep emotions, cried
out: "Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name. He causeth
the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man."

Viola exclaimed: "My father's plantation is called 'Mount Pisgah,' and this view reminds me
of that other scene Moses saw on his 'Mount Pisgah.'"

They sat under one of the great forest trees crowning the brow of the knob and feasted their
eyes on the near and the distant prospect. They heard the birds singing in the trees, and saw
the saucy squirrels running up and down the hickory and other trees. Jasper spoke of his present
engagements, saying on that afternoon he must visit a family down the river, and the next day
he had an appointment to begin a two days' meeting in a distant township of the county.

Viola told of her plans. She intended tomorrow morning to have Mose drive her to a number of
the families attending the mission school. She wished to become better acquainted with them,
to show a friendly interest in their welfare, and to teach the boys and girls some further
rudiments of knowledge, and tell them a number of interesting Bible stories.

This knowledge gave Jasper much concern, and he said: "My dear Viola, I have now even more
than a pastor's regard for your safety and welfare. Are you not afraid to travel those lonely
hills without any protector save Mose? While the mission school gradually is improving the
moral tone of that region, you know there are some depraved and desperate persons living about
there who would not hesitate to steal your horses, or your purse, or commit other crimes, if
it were to their seeming advantage to do so?"

"Yes, I know that, dear Jasper, but hitherto the Lord has protected me, and I believe I can
trust him to hold me safely in the hollow of his almighty hand. If I am called to suffer in
his cause, I am willing. I have no fear of physical violence, and I am sure duty calls me to
that settlement tomorrow."

"Well, my beloved, may heaven still safeguard you, and may you continue to be a blessing to
that community which needs reformation, education and the gospel so much."

Viola spoke: "It is getting near dinner time, and we must not be late for that meal as we were
for breakfast." With that they arose, and proceeded down the knob and on to the mansion.

After dinner Jasper Very bade them all a cordial good-by, and proceeded on his errand of mercy
to a family who needed his ministrations.

Early the next morning Viola, seated in her phaeton with faithful Mose holding the reins over
Prince and Bess, started to the mission school settlement. She had taken with her some things
which would interest the children--candy for the little ones and some bright books for those
older. The distance was considerable, but at last they arrived at the cabin of Mart Spink,
where they were cordially received.

Viola stepped down from the carriage and, entering the house, soon had the whole family around
her. Their minds seemed famished for knowledge. She first opened a paper bag and passed several
pieces of candy to the younger children, Elmira, Robert and Jonathan. She offered the bag to
the parents and to Susanna, and they helped themselves sparingly. She then brought out from
her satchel a nicely bound copy of Aesop's Fables, and presented the book to Susanna. The girl
was both surprised and pleased. Opening her wonderful eyes wide, she thanked her teacher in
few words. Viola also gave the family some of the simpler school books used in the public schools
and a few volumes of a religious nature. After a further half hour spent in pleasant conversation
Viola left the cabin, and directed Mose to drive to the Sneath home.

She found Harrop Sneath sitting under the shade of a tree about as lazy and contented as ever.
He was smoking tobacco contained in a corncob pipe. But Viola noticed a decided improvement
in the cabin. It was cleaner than when she first saw it, and had a bit more of furniture in
it. All the children showed the benefit they had received from attending the mission school.
Jemima, the oldest daughter, revealed the greatest improvement. Her eye was brighter, her dress
cleaner and better fitting, and her demeanor showed more intelligence and self-possession.

Viola distributed sweets and books to this family much as she had done to the other, and they
were gladly received. She led the talk to things which would interest their minds--prospects
for good crops, the sewing circle recently organized for women and girls, the picnic which
the mission school expected soon to have.

She told them several thrilling Bible stories about David slaying Goliath, Daniel in the lions'
den, the three Hebrew children.

It was nearing dinner time and the mother invited Viola to partake of their plain fare. She
said: "You air u'st to all de good tings money can buy. We'uns cayn't gibe you much, but sich
as we'uns hab you air welcome to."

Viola replied: "I am really greatly obliged to you, Mrs. Sneath, for your kind invitation,
and will gladly dine with you today. It is not so much the amount or kind of food one is given
but the spirit in which it is given that counts."

"Jist so," said Mrs. Sneath, "so we'uns'll all set down soon to corn pone and pork. Please
ask your nigger to unhitch his hosses and put 'em in de bawn. He'll find sum hay der for 'em.
De nigger shall hab sum dinner too."

Viola putting aside any punctilious feelings she had, partook of the homely meal with what
grace and relish she could command, and thanking them all for their kindness, bade them good-by.

Viola visited a number of other families in the afternoon, and toward the evening of the long
summer day instructed her servant to turn the horses toward home. They were not far from the
cabin of the monster dwarf, Zibe Turner. A strange feeling of fear and apprehension sprang
up within her. Was it caused by her nearness to the home of this wicked man, or by a premonition
of danger?

They were passing through one of the densest parts of the great forest. The sun was yet some
distance above the horizon, but his slanting rays could throw only a dim light through that
mass of wood and foliage.

Suddenly two men sprang from behind high bushes by the roadside. They had black cloth masks
over their faces. Holes were cut in the masks through which the bandits could see. One man
was tall and broad. The other was short and thickset. The shorter man leaped to the horses'
heads and, seizing the reins, stopped their progress. The other stepped to the side of the
phaeton, and said in a voice he tried to disguise: "Lady, we'uns do not mean to harm you, but
you must cum wid us."

Viola, though dreadfully frightened, straightened herself up in the carriage, and replied:
"What do you men mean by stopping a carriage on the highway, and thus disturbing peaceable
citizens? I call upon you to go, let go the reins of my horses, and allow my servant to drive
me home."

"Dat is fur from our wish," said the desperado, "and if you won't walk away quietly wif us,
we'uns will have to tote you away."

With this the highwayman (who was no other than Sam Wiles) jumped into the vehicle, and seizing
the young woman around the waist, was dragging her forcibly to the ground. Viola could make
no successful resistance in the grasp of this powerful man, but he met resistance where he
little expected it. The slave held the buggy whip in his hand, and hastily reversing his hold
on the whip, brought the butt end of it down with much force on the miscreant's head. Wiles
was half stunned by the blow, but he would not release his hold on Viola, and cursed the black
with dreadful oaths.

But it was the work only of a second for the terrible dwarf, Zibe Turner, to spring to the
front of the carriage, and grabbing Mose in his sinuous arms, he drew him to the earth, then
struck him a terrific blow on his head, and threw him to the ground. What the blow might not
have done (for a negro's skull is very thick) the fall accomplished; for when he fell Mose's
head struck the protruding root of a great oak tree, and the blow was of sufficient violence
to stun the black man. Zibe Turner let the negro lie by the side of the road, and going to
the horses led them to a trunk of a tree and, taking the hitch strap, tied it to a lower limb.
The outlaws' purpose this time was not stealing horses.

In the meantime Sam Wiles carried Viola, vainly struggling, about one hundred feet up the road
and turned to the right, where not far away a two-seated wagon stood, with two horses hitched
to it. Wiles lifted Viola, now exhausted and half dead with fear, into the rear seat and sat
down beside her. Presently the monster dwarf appeared and, freeing the horses, jumped on to
the front seat. Turning the horses into the road, he drove in an opposite direction to that
which Viola had been taking.

No words were spoken by any of the party and the horses pursued their way through the darkening
forest. After a time they were driven by the dwarf into the enclosure before his mother's cabin.
She was at the door, evidently expecting them. The devil which was in her caused her to cry
out in hideous glee: "An' so you'uns cotched her did you'uns? Good. Now we'uns'll see what
de Jedge'll do. Will he put gentl'men ob de hills in de jug ag'in? De debil blast 'im and all
his kind." Looking at Viola, who now had braced herself for any approaching ordeal, remembering
that she was Judge LeMonde's daughter, the hag said: "Now, my purty lady, we'uns'll see who'll
wear fine clothes, an' eat de best tings, an' go round de kentry convartin' de people. We'uns
count dat you'll get a taste of how we'uns live. Don't hurt yer digestion ner spile yet purty
looks longin' ter see yer pa an' ma an' dat cussed preacher."

The monster dwarf here broke in, speaking in his deep voice: "Ma, dat's nuff now. Tell sis
to git ready in a hurry, for we'uns have a long drive before us."

Sis was soon ready--the tall, raw-boned, homely young woman, a fit member of this ogre family,
but with a little less of depravity in her makeup and looks. She was dressed in a long calico
gown, heavy coarse shoes, and a much worn hat, whose flowers appeared worse than "the last
rose of summer," after it had faded.

Viola maintained silence, and awaited developments. The plan soon unfolded itself. Sis Turner
got up into the rear seat beside Viola. Zibe Turner mounted to the front seat, took the reins
in his right hand, spoke to the horses, and away they went, leaving Sam Wiles looking after
them. What was the character of his thoughts?

Turner drove his team along a faintly marked country road always toward higher ground. On and
on they went for miles, the way in many places becoming so dark, that the only direction was
the avenue made by the cutting down of the trees. Sometimes they came to such serious obstructions
in the road that the driver had to get down to remove them. At last the way was so narrow they
had to leave the wagon and proceed on horseback.

After climbing higher and higher they arrived at a small open place near the top of the knob.
In its midst was a diminutive log cabin, consisting of only one room. Turner stopped his horses
in front of the cabin, dismounted, and requested the girls to do the same. He unbarred the
door, and the three entered. By means of flint, steel, tinder, and burnt rags Turner made a
light. Viola observed that the cabin was of about the same order as the Sneath home she had
visited that morning. A large fireplace was on one side. There was no window, and only one
door. Two cheap beds were in two corners of the room. In another corner there were a number
of bundles of provisions. A few cooking utensils were on the hearth, and a few dishes were
on the table. The door on the inside was secured by a heavy bar which fell into a strong socket,
the bar being fastened by a stout padlock.

Zibe Turner spoke: "Miss LeMonde, dis cabin is to be yer hum for a while. My sister is to be
comp'ny for ye, an' also yer guard. No harm is to cum to ye, if ye do what ye air told. I'm
goin' to leave now, an' sis'll tend to yer wants. Good-night to bof uv you'uns."

With this he left the cabin, and drove away.

CHAPTER XXI.

The Search.

As the time for the evening meal was approaching at Judge LeMonde's mansion, his wife said
to him: "I wonder what is keeping Viola so long today. She told me before starting, she would
be home by sundown, and it surely is time she were back."

The Judge responded: "Do not be alarmed. She may have been kept longer than she expected at
some of the places she visited. The days are very long now, and the twilight lingers. Besides,
there will be moonlight tonight and if they are delayed they can easily see their way over
the big road by the light of the moon. Mose is a trustworthy fellow and we know he is a careful
driver."

At this time Nora knocked at the door, announcing that supper was ready. Madam LeMonde was
not fully at ease, but went with the rest to the dining-room. The repast was rather a quiet
one, and when it was finished dusk had fully settled over the valley. The Judge and his wife
went to the piazza and looked down the plantation private way, but could see no sign of carriage
or horses. They together walked to the large gate which opened on the county road, opening
the gate, and went the short distance to the river road along which the returning carriage
would come. They stood and strained their eyes looking down the highway, but could discern
no vehicle of any kind approaching.

For some time they stood looking and listening, and then returned to the house. Now they were
anxious indeed; and so was their son George who had been to the barn on some business with
one of the hostlers.

Madam LeMonde exclaimed: "What can be keeping them? Surely some accident or harm has befallen
them. Viola would never stay away from home as late as this unless she had company with her.
I am very nervous and disturbed. What can we do?"

George spoke up and said: "Do not be distressed, mother. If the carriage does not come in a
few minutes, I will get Velox and ride along the road to meet it and to be of help, if it is
needed."

"Do so, my son, for this will help to relieve me of suspense," said his mother.

They waited until it was quite dark, for the moon had not yet risen, though it would show itself
presently. Then George decided to go at once. Hurrying to the barn, he saddled and bridled
his noble horse and instantly went along the road, his horse trotting rapidly.

About five miles down the road George met Mose coming in the phaeton, but Viola was missing.
Terribly anxious for the safety of his sister, the white man asked the slave what had happened.

Mose was still somewhat dizzy from the blow he had received from the monster dwarf and his
fall on the root of the oak, but he told the story as far as he knew, and added some particulars
about himself.

He said he lay for a long time unconscious by the side of the country road, but at last his
senses came back to him. His head pained him very much, and a great swelling was over his right
eye. In the dim light he saw the horses hitched under the tree.

He tried to rise from the ground, but found it impossible at first. After making a number of
attempts, he managed to get up on his feet and went to the phaeton reeling like a drunken man.
He untied the horses and almost fell into the seat. He managed, however, to keep the horses
in the road and drove them as best he could till he met "Mas'r George."

George considered whether it were better for him to ride furiously after the outlaws, or to
return to the plantation with Mose. He chose the latter course, and before a great while they
came up the private way to the mansion.

The Judge and his wife, and indeed the whole household, were anxiously awaiting them. When
the phaeton drove up and no Viola in it, Madam LeMonde became hysterical and almost fainted.
She screamed: "Where is my daughter? Where is she? What has happened to her? Tell me quickly."

The Judge was compelled to quiet his wife before he could hear the story of his daughter's
abduction.

The group returned into the house. Entering the sitting-room they discussed what was best to
be done. The Judge requested his son George to ride as fast as possible to the county seat,
arouse the sheriff and ask him to select a posse as soon as he was able, to search for the
missing girl. This George proceeded to do. He rushed to the barn and mounting a fresh horse
set off at all speed on his errand.

Judge LeMonde hastily wrote some notes containing a brief account of his daughter's seizure
and, entrusting them to his most faithful slaves, instructed them to deliver the notes to those
addressed. These were his most intimate neighbors and friends in the valley. He requested them
to meet him at "Mount Pisgah" early in the morning.

As the Judge could do no more that night he suggested that they retire to their rooms, and
seek rest. This they did, but no sleep came to him nor to his wife that night. Their thoughts
were with the girl:

"Where is she? Have they murdered her? What could be their object in carrying her away? Was
it revenge? How difficult it will be to find her. But Oh! that morning would come, so that
the attempt can be made!"

Thus they beat the walls of darkness with unavailing questions, and even their prayers were
mixed with natural forebodings and fears.

With the first dawn of day Nora, who also had passed a restless night, awoke the fat cook (for
she in spite of sympathy for the family had slept soundly) and asked her to get coffee and
toast as quickly as possible. This was soon prepared, and the Judge and his wife drank the
stimulant and ate a little toast.

Presently thereafter the neighbors began to arrive. They were greatly affected by the foul
deed, and vowed the direst punishment upon the outlaws in case they were captured. They offered
to the family every assistance in their power. They spoke comforting words to the afflicted
Judge, who showed the marks of his mental anguish and sleepless night in his haggard face.
They sent their respects to Madam LeMonde, who was too prostrated to see them at this time.

When all were arrived it was decided to await the coming of the sheriff and posse when all
would go to the spot where Viola was taken, and from that point scour the wilderness under
the sheriff's lead.

The sun was not high in the heavens when the sheriff and a company of eight determined-looking
men rode up to the mansion. No words were wasted. All were eager to depart. The leader ordered
the company and planters to fall in, and away they went with swift pace toward the place they
sought. Judge LeMonde and George rode with the sheriff. Mose, nearly recovered from his hurt,
was in the company as guide.

They came to the place where the carriage was stopped, and Mose took time to point to the very
spot where his head came in contact with the root of the oak. They followed the road along
which Sam Wiles went with the struggling Viola in his arms. They turned to the right, and saw
the hoof prints of the horses the marauders had hidden with the wagon in the brush.

Examining the road carefully (a road very little traveled) they saw wagon tracks which might
have been those made by the wagon in which the kidnappers sat with their victim.

Suspecting that the men would go first to the cabin of Zibe Turner, they went to this house,
and found the old mother at home. From her they could get no satisfaction. She denied that
she had seen Viola LeMonde lately. Shaking her bony arm at the Judge and the rest, she commanded
them to begone from her premises.

The searchers, leaving the enclosure, rode a short distance into the woods and there stopped.
They decided to follow the flight as before by means of the horse hoof and wagon tracks. This
they did, but soon the way became merely a path, and then the path ended in the unmarked woodland.

All trace of the fugitives was thus lost. The sheriff then divided his company into parties
of two men each, and sent them in different directions in such a manner as to cover as much
ground as possible. Before dismissing them, he told them to search diligently the ground traversed,
especially the wildest and deepest parts of the hills. They were to ride their horses when
the way permitted, otherwise to go on foot.

Not one of these men needed urging. They were all fired with a grim determination to find if
possible the place where the beautiful captive was imprisoned. They took no account of their
own personal affairs, of hunger and fatigue, of the difficulties of travel through the uncleared
forests. The clothing of some became torn with briers and sharp rocks, their shoes were damaged
with stones, fallen limbs, muck and mire. Their hands were pierced by many thorns, as they
pushed their way through the wilderness.

The first day passed without finding any trace of the missing maiden.

Where was Jasper Very while these thrilling events were taking place? As we have intimated,
he had gone to a distant part of the county to hold a two days' meeting. All unconscious of
the terrible evil that had fallen upon his betrothed, he was pursuing his Master's work with
his accustomed zeal and success.

Before leaving home to visit her mission school people Viola had informed her mother of the
new and intimate relations existing between Jasper Very and herself. The mother was much pleased
with the engagement and, woman like, could not keep the news from her husband. She told him
the story. He also was pleased with the information. The night he sent word to his neighbors
of the abduction he wrote a longer note to Jasper Very, acquainting him of the villainous occurrence.
This message he sent to the preacher by a trustful servant, Joshua.

The servant rode through the night, but did not reach the village till the middle of the next
morning. Horse and man were very much exhausted. The eight o'clock meeting was just closing
and the preaching service was about to begin, when Joshua rode up to the little meeting-house.
Jasper, looking through the open door, saw Joshua, whom he knew as one of Judge LeMonde's slaves.

Thinking something was wrong, Jasper hurried from the church and spoke to the messenger. Joshua
gave him the note. As he read its contents, a heavy groan escaped his lips and he almost fell
to the ground. With a tremendous effort at self-control, but with tears coursing down his manly
cheeks, he said to Joshua: "Man, you and your horse are very tired. A livery stable is just
around the corner. Put up your horse there, and the owner will tell you where you can get food
and rest."

He then went into the church and said: "Friends, I have just received news which is very urgent,
requiring my presence in another part of the county. I am sorry I cannot preach here this morning,
but I must be excused, and I will ask the Rev. Irby Trynor kindly to take my place." With these
words he hurried from the building, and going to the stable of his stopping-place, quickly
put saddle and bridle on trusty Bob, and rode like a Jehu in the direction of "Mount Pisgah."

Darkness was settling on the river bottom when Jasper Very came along the road passing by Judge
LeMonde's plantation. Riding to the corner he turned to the right, went up the county road
to the big gate, opened it, and passed up to the piazza. The Judge and George had returned
from their unsuccessful search a half hour before. The planters had gone home for the night,
promising to renew the hunt next morning. The sheriff and his men were accommodated at various
houses, some stopping at "Mount Pisgah."

As Jasper dismounted the Judge himself met him. For a moment the two strong men could find
no words to speak. They shook hands together and looked the sorrow they felt. Then the Judge
invited Jasper into the house, ordering a servant to take Bob to the barn. Jasper was most
anxious to know all the particulars of the case, and the Judge told him every detail. Their
tired, hungry bodies craved some refreshments which were served to them, and soon they went
to their rooms to seek that rest which the strenuous efforts of the morrow required.

In the quiet of his room Jasper had a great fight with his own heart. Fierce temptations assailed
him. He would have vengeance. If he found those atrocious men he would kill them, if he could.
His feelings found vent in some of the imprecatory psalms. Such cattle as Wiles and Turner
were not fit to live; they polluted the earth upon which they stood. If arrested, they should
suffer the direst penalties of the law.

But after this paroxysm had spent itself, his feeling became calmer. Prayer, like a healing
balm, came to his aid. He was able to commit even this trial to the wisdom and help of almighty
God.

Thus he found repose in sleep, and in the morning arose with a clear mind, a refreshed body,
and a preparation for the heavy duties of the day.

That day the search was renewed with the same vigor as yesterday, but even with the help of
Very, who passed through the wilderness like a tornado, the hiding place of the desperadoes
was not discovered.

The searchers returned to their abodes well nigh exhausted and discouraged. Judge LeMonde requested
Jasper Very to pass the night at "Mount Pisgah," and this the preacher did.

After supper they were sitting on the piazza going over the incidents of the day, and planning
what course they would best take on the morrow, when one of them, looking in the direction
of the big gate, saw a light shining apparently on one of its posts. He called the attention
of the rest to it. They wondered what it could mean. It could not be a firefly. It was not
the light of a lantern in the hands of some one walking; the light was too steady. The Judge
said to George: "My son, run down the lane, and see what that light means." George needed no
urging, but at once went with swift pace to the gate. There he beheld a lighted candle stuck
on the top of the right post of the gate. Below the candle was a piece of paper tied with a
string, and the string made fast to the post.

George brought both candle and paper to the group on the piazza. The Judge took the paper into
the sitting room. On the paper was some writing done with a sprawling hand. He had some difficulty
in deciphering it, but at last made out its contents. This is how it read:

    "judg lemond yer Dater iz wel and in Gud hans. You must gib 1000
    dollars in Gold and She wil kum hum put Mony in Holler Tre whar
    Riber Bens 4 mile belo bridge-water nex Mundy Eve. If de Man Who
    Kums for de Gold gits shot or tuk yer Dater wil dy.

    "Sind Po Wite."

Judge LeMonde was some time deciphering the note. When he understood it, he called the sheriff
and the other men into the room, and read aloud the writing. At once a council was held. The
Judge said: "Evidently the bandits have put the time of payment next Monday evening to give
me opportunity to get the money from the bank. Sheriff, what do you advise?"

The officer thought deeply for a while, and then answered: "Those are very desperate and determined
men. Their reason for abducting your daughter is now plain--it was for ransom. Of course, Judge,
you do not put one thousand dollars in the scale against Miss Viola's life. It is outrageous
to think of gratifying the wishes of those scoundrels, but I am afraid it must be done, if
we cannot circumvent them before that time. We have still tomorrow and Monday to continue the
search. Perhaps we can discover their hiding place in these two days."

Jasper Very said: "We must be more diligent, if possible, than before in seeking the captive.
Tomorrow is the Sabbath, but I feel it my duty to give up all my church engagements to help
find the missing one."

"Tomorrow," added the sheriff, "we will cover new territory in the forest, and let us hope
for success."

CHAPTER XXII.

The Rescue.

While the men at "Mount Pisgah" were planning how to deliver Viola from her captors, Mart Spink,
father of Susanna, the girl with the wonderful eyes, was down with a severe chill in his cabin
among the hills. Cold shivers ran up and down his back, as though a lizard shod with ice were
making a playground of it. Then the cold struck his head, and his teeth began to chatter worse
than if he were climbing "Greenland's icy mountains." Soon his whole body was in a frigid state
which made him cry out for bedclothes, and more bedclothes, and still more blankets and quilts.
He shook so with his chilly sensations that the bedclothes above him were in perpetual motion,
and the mattress under him was agitated with the motions of his body. Then came on the terrible
fever, which was worse than the chill, as the pain of fire is harder to bear than the cold
of ice. Poor Spink seemed to be burning up. A dreadful headache seized him, which was only
a little relieved when his wife applied cloths wrung out of cold water to his forehead. After
some hours came the great sweat, which saturated his night shirt and a portion of his pillow
and bedclothes.

This attack was so violent it bordered on a "congestive chill," which the settlers knew to
be very dangerous. His wife waited upon him all night, not wishing to keep the children up,
and in the morning he was very weak and she much worn.

Susanna rose early and took the pail to milk Brindle. What was her surprise to find the barn
door open, and when she looked into the building she saw that their young horse, Chester, was
missing. He had pushed the barn door ajar and disappeared. She dropped her pail, ran into the
house, and told her mother the news. Mrs. Spink thought it best to inform her husband of the
occurrence, though he was still quite ill.

Spink spoke from his bed: "That hoss has prob'ly went back to his old hum. You'uns knows I
bought him of a feller away back on de knobs. Sum one must go find 'im. I can't go, nuther
can yer ma. Elmiry an' the boys must do the chores. So, Susanna, you must get Maud out'n de
barn, an' go after de hoss. It's a long trip, an' I'm sorry ye hav ter go. Take a snack (food)
with yer, fer ye'll git hungry."

Susanna replied: "Don't be troubled, pa. I can ride as good as a man. I will gladly go, and
try my best to find Chester." Her marvelous eyes shone with a brilliant light, and in a few
minutes she was gone.

The girl's quest for the horse might have reminded her of Saul's search for his father's asses,
had she been better acquainted with the Bible. As Saul failed to discover the animals, but
found a kingdom, so the maid did not find the horse, Chester, but discovered a startling situation.

Her way led by Zibe Turner's cabin, then to the knob, and along its side, ever up toward the
former home of the horse. When she had nearly reached the top she came to the little open space
containing the hut in which Viola LeMonde was imprisoned.

There was an old well by the hut, but its sweep had rotted down, and the water was stagnant
and unfit to drink. Hence, Elmira Turner, the guard of Viola, was compelled to go to a spring
one-eighth of a mile distant to get pure water. Having barred the cabin on the outside, she
was on such a trip when Susanna rode up.

The rider, with a girl's curiosity, came to the hut to look it over. Viola heard the horse's
tread and, looking between two logs from which the chinks had fallen, saw her young friend.
"Susanna, dear," she cried, greatly excited, "Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner have taken me by force
and brought me here. My guard, Elmira Turner, has gone to the spring for water. Ride as fast
as you can, and tell my father or some other friend of my whereabouts."

Susanna was surprised beyond measure at the discovery, and her heavenly eyes glowed like two stars.

"O my dear teacher," she exclaimed, "I have heard that you were carried away. I wanted to help
in the search but was not able. This is awful. I will ride back as quick as possible, and try
to find some one to come to aid you."

With this she turned her horse about, and applied whip and spur to Maud. Regardless of obstructions
frequently in her path--fallen limbs, saplings growing close together, bushes coming to the
breast of her steed, springy soil and uneven ground--she rode with a swift pace. Her dark hair
streamed behind her. With firm hands she held the reins, and her bright eyes traced the direction
to take and also looked for some of the searchers.

She was riding through a thick wood, tolerably free from underbrush, when she was overjoyed
to see Jasper Very riding toward her on his well known horse, Bob. The preacher showed the
marks of his exertions. His face was flushed, his hair never very amenable to brush and comb,
was rumpled by contact with bushes, twigs and leaves. He was moving along swiftly, ever looking
for some signs which would lead him to his beloved. He had become separated from his companion,
John Larkin.

Susanna and Jasper saw each other about the same time, and in a trice their horses were face
to face. Almost breathless with hard riding and excitement the girl told what she had learned.

The preacher was affected as though a current of electricity had passed through his body. For
a minute he was too bewildered to think, but by an effort of will he became somewhat more calm
and considered what was best to be done.

He said: "Susanna, how can we thank you enough for this information? God bless you for bringing
it to me. Now ride as rapidly as possible to your home and ask your father please to loan us
a horse and buggy. Bring them along the road as far as you can with ease. If I get Miss Viola
out of the hut, I will give her a place on Bob's back, and we will ride till we meet the buggy.
Is it possible for you to direct me to the hut?"

"Yes, Mr. Very. When I returned, thinking I might have to act as pilot to the cabin I kept
the way in my mind, and I think I can tell you pretty well how to go." She then indicated the
route in considerable detail, and Jasper was sure he could find the place.

What deep emotions stirred his breast as he hurried forward! He knew that his darling was alive.
This was a great satisfaction. But she was in dire peril. He must rescue her at once at all
hazards. He would dare the danger alone, for the searchers being scattered through the wilderness,
there was no one to whom he could look for help.

He had learned that Elmira Turner, the monster dwarf's sister, was guarding Viola, and he rightly
supposed that Sam Wiles or the dwarf would picket the hut most of the time.

Without any great difficulty Jasper Very followed the route given him by Susanna. At last he
saw a little before him the opening in the forest of which he had been told. He dismounted
from Bob, and hid him in a thicket. Then he cautiously crept forward and, coming to the edge
of the clearing, screened himself behind a big walnut tree and reconnoitered the surroundings.
The coast seemed clear. He walked quickly to the door of the hut and said in a loud voice:
"Viola, Jasper is here, and has come to take you home. I find the door is locked on the inside,
but not the outside. Can you unfasten the door?"

"O Jasper," said Viola, "the woman with me holds the key to the lock, and she will not give
it to me."

"No, indeed, I'll not," said Elmira Turner, "an' I defy you to git in. My brother'll be here
soon, an' if you want to save yer hide, it will be healthy for you to make yo'self sca'se right
off."

"Woman," shouted Very, "if you will not unlock the door I'll break it down."

"Try it," said she.

Jasper did try. He was the strongest man in the county, and it seemed that now the strength
of ten men was given him.

The door was made of thick oak. The cabin may have been built extra strong to shelter some
former inmates, if attacked by Indians. But at this time the door was weakened by age and exposure
to the elements; also it was somewhat worm eaten.

Jasper put his right shoulder to the door, and pushed with all his might. The door cracked
a little, but did not break. He took the broken well sweep and, using the larger end (which
contained some sound wood) as a battering ram, fiercely assaulted the obstruction. This weakened
the structure, but it did not yield. Then Jasper, summoning all his mighty strength, hurled
himself against the door, and it fell in with a crash.

He at once passed inside the hut. Taking hold of Viola, he was leading her to the opening,
when Elmira Turner, seized hold of the girl to keep her in the room. A struggle ensued. Jasper
did not want to strike the Turner woman or treat her roughly. So he was compelled to force
Viola from her grasp by main strength. This he did, and taking his betrothed in his arms, stepped
out into the sunlight.

Just then the sound of a shot rang out on the stillness of the summer air, and Viola became
limp and apparently lifeless in her lover's arms.

Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, had come to the clearing in the nick of time. He saw the open
door. He beheld the rescuer bearing out the captive in his arms. Murder sprang up at once in
his heart. He decided to kill the preacher then and there. This he had wanted to do for a long
time. But the excitement of the occasion and his own dreadful hate unsteadied his nerves a
trifle. When putting his rifle to his shoulder, he aimed at Very's heart, crying out: "Dat's
my holt!" The bullet missed its mark, and entered the right shoulder of the lovely Viola.

When the dwarf saw the unexpected result of his shot, even his resolution failed him, and he
proceeded no further with his murderous work.

Jasper Very looked down on the senseless form of his beloved, and cried out in the bitter agony
of his soul: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

Holding her as he would a little child in his arms, he strode out of the clearing. Quickly
coming to his horse, Bob, he unhitched his rein, and holding the unconscious girl tenderly
but firmly in his left arm, he swung into the saddle.

With anguish in his soul and unaccustomed tears in his blue eyes, he pressed one kiss upon
the pale lips of her who was dearer to him than life. Holding her in as comfortable position
as possible, he started down the knob.

Viola gave little if any signs of life. She was wholly unconscious, her face was as pale as
death, her eyes were closed, there was no perceptible pulse.

Jasper rode as carefully as possible, but was a considerable time reaching the more open section
of the country. At last he came to the very primitive road along which he had not ridden far,
when he beheld approaching the horse and buggy he had requested Susanna to get.

Susanna was the driver, and was amazed at what she saw--her Sunday School teacher lying like
one dead on the preacher's arm.

Time was too precious for many words of explanation, and it was the work of only a minute or
two to place Viola in the buggy, and for Jasper to get in beside her. Susanna rode Bob.

Jasper Very's plan was to take the wounded maiden to Mart Spink's house, and then to hurry
for medical help, if she were living.

Driving as rapidly as was consistent with the seriousness of the case, they at last reached
the home of Susanna. The daughter rushed into the house and told her mother the tragic story
in brief. The woman was greatly shocked, and at once went to the buggy and told Jasper Very
that Viola could be put into a bedroom adjoining the one in which her husband lay. Mart Spink
was much better now. Such is the way of chills and fever.

Jasper, seeing faint signs of life in Viola, left her to the tender ministries of Mrs. Spink
and Susanna, while he rode with all haste for a doctor who lived several miles away.

The women undressed the patient, and put her into the bed. They bathed her wound, and bandaged
it as best they could. Fortunately it had not bled excessively.

In due time the physician, who was also a surgeon, came. He probed for the ball, and succeeded
in extracting it. He gave those restoratives and remedies which the state of medicine in those
days and in that region warranted. He ordered that the patient be kept perfectly quiet, and
that no persons but her mother (who became her nurse) and Mrs. Spink should enter the room.

For days and weeks the life of the lovely girl hung in an even balance. Great was the interest
which this calamity aroused in the whole country around. The news of the shooting spread with
great rapidity. By night all the searchers had heard of it, and as the kidnaped maiden was
found and restored to friends, their work in that particular was done, and most of them returned
to their homes.

As the golden autumn days came Viola gained a little strength and was able to be moved to "Mount
Pisgah." Here Jasper and her intimate friends were permitted to see her for short periods.
Her face was as white as the pillow upon which she lay. Her blue eyes had lost their bright,
but not their kind and loving, look. Her golden hair was still beautiful, and it seemed an
aureole around her head.

One bright day she felt able to hold a longer conversation than before with her betrothed.
Very sat by the bedside, holding the thin white hand. The slender finger could scarce retain
the beautiful engagement ring her lover had given her.

"Jasper, dear," she said, "how happy I am that I received the cruel ball instead of you. All
the suffering I have gladly borne for your sake. Yes, and if it were my lot to be an invalid
while life lasts, I would willingly bear the burden, knowing that by the cross I suffer my
beloved is able in the full strength of his manhood to preach the gospel and minister to the
wants of human souls. So there are compensations in all the ills of life."

"My precious one," said the preacher, "your words are those of her who lives very near the
heart of God. The finest thing in the world is sacrifice and suffering for the benefit of others.
But you must put far away the idea of being a constant invalid. Gradually you are regaining
your health, and before long we shall see you as lively and jolly as ever. By Christmas time
I want to behold roses in your cheeks, and see you skip about like a roe upon the mountains.
Keep up a brave, trustful spirit, and I believe all will be well."

He kissed his betrothed tenderly, stroked her beautiful hair, and retired from the room.

CHAPTER XXIII.

A Battle With Moonshiners.

Sam Wiles and Zibe Turner, the monster dwarf, were not captured by the sheriff and his men.
For a number of days after the wounding of Viola LeMonde the officers and others kept a sharp
watch on the cabins of both outlaws, and tried to find them in some of the fastnesses of the
hills. But the bandits were too cunning for them. They seldom dared to enter their homes, but
spent most of their time in the open or in the shelter of the cave where the illicit whisky
was made. Some of their confederates were usually near them, ready to give them warning of
any officer's approach.

At last the climax came. It was a hot evening in mid-August. Judge LeMonde was sitting under
the pine trees, attempting to catch any breeze which might blow from the river when, looking
down the road leading to the big gate, he saw a woman approaching.

It was Jemima Sneath, and she was evidently laboring under great excitement. Her eyes were
deep sunken and glowed like coals of fire. They showed what was in her heart--jealousy, hate,
anger, recklessness, courage, determination. Her thick black hair was loosely put together,
stray locks falling here and there about her face and neck. The soldiers lit the bushes as they found, and ran fire two leagues.
The land was the same as on the voyage history. People, who with Father Cardiel went towards
the west, fire also hit the grass of the fields, and climbed fire up too high. He said Father
Cardiel night about six miles west of the bay, where they found fresh water. On the morning
of Tuesday 15, after praying, and have all entrusted to God, continued their journey, and at
the distance of a league of sleep, they found a house, one hand was six flags of cloth of
various colors, on average rod on table, high sticks, nailed to the ground and on the other
five horses dead, sausage of straw, with clines and tail, stuck three sticks each about height
competent. Entering the house, they found two lines ponchos and cabando encountered three deceased,
who still had flesh and hair. One male appeared, and the other wives: in the hair of one of these
had a brass plate half-quarter long and two fingers wide, and ears, earrings of the same. At
the top of the house was another upset poncho, and tied with a strip of colored wool, and it
came out a long stick as a weathervane, that eight long tassels hanging Amusco wool. According to these
signs, the dead were from the nation Puelche. They went forward in search of those who had
made that funeral, believing then give with them, and together with ground floor, but, but walked
another three miles, they found trail and they ran out of supplies. They wanted the soldiers
to hunt ducks in the lagoons were, and as it was with bullet did not kill anything.

Father Cardiel sent two soldiers to the ship with a paper to the Father
Superior Matias Strobl, and the captain, giving everything ratio found,
and asking them to thirty men provisions and ammunition for them,
and those with him, which could last up to four days later.

The same day 15 left in the boat the pilot D. Diego Varela and Father Quiroga to probe the channel
entrance, and make all the banks in your mouth, but by the strong wind were obliged to disembark
in a small cove where casting network mariners, full of big fish took all of one species, which
appear trout from seven to eight pounds. Found in that part of the coast to burn good wood, and
in good proportion, so that they can provide them with the ships that enter. In the afternoon
became the Father Matias and his entourage, saying that found in the lagoon, the salt would have
more a yard tall, white as snow, and hard as stone, but had found no sign any Indians who
inhabit this land.

On Wednesday 16, but blew strongly the south-west, nothing bothered to ship, being well defended,
and winds up not being able to surf. Two soldiers came to letter from Father Cardiel, to whose
pleading the Father condescended Strobl, who on Thursday 17: sunrise,
jumped ashore with the ensign and soldiers, to join the Father Cardiel,
while the Father Quiroga, the ship's captain and first mate, were
on the boat to probe what they lacked in the bay, and jumping on the
ground, it rose to a high hill, which is north of the bay.

Found towards the northern part of a great lagoon extended three miles to the west, and almost
as north, without any communication with the sea; but could not tell if this was a freshwater
lake. Father Matias walked four miles with its people, and knowing that he approached the Father
Cardiel, sent him to say that it came to where his bow was. He did the Father Cardiel with great
work, said Father Matias, than that his people came charging so much fatigued, and having thought
better at the point, he seemed to be daring to go to get known among barbarians, and on horseback.
Gave him many reasons to the contrary, with its fearless and courageous spirit Father Cardiel,
putting ahead of the value and experience of those people, stores that had guns, gunpowder and
bullets, the cowardice of every Indian, as is resistance, and finally, the cause so God took his
hand, which was the conversion of those nations. Responded Father Matias, who entrusted to
God, and would respond in the morning that the resolution was turned to the ship. Obeying the
Father Cardiel soon, but with the feeling leave without seeing the Indians who figured very close,
as I had already seen a dog white barked, and was pulling up to where I thought I had to find the
Indians. The cause which was then the Father Matias carry little food was prevented.

Saturday 19, proposed again the Father Cardiel would rather find out where his room had Indians,
and asked the Father Superior Strobl, who consulted with the captain of the ship, with the
ensign, with the sergeant and the Father Quiroga, according to the instruction that such cases
had given him the Father Provincial. Made the query, his mind was to return this to take the
field the Father Cardiel with the soldiers who volunteered to accompany him. The soldiers said
the captain of the ship many sailors who willingly offered, Marine and a soldier, each carrying
food for eight days, and good prevention of ammunition.

Sunday 20, when he was the new moon, having seen the Father Quiroga and pilots particular care
when full and the tide, they found that the tide went to the five o'clock, and at 11 plenamar
the day. Which is very necessary to know the that they enter into this port, because there are
no less than six fathoms perpendicular difference, so that at high tide a ship can enter online
by banks, which are uncovered at low tide. At dawn that day, after saying Mass, jumped ashore Father
Cardiel with the escort of soldiers and sailors who were all 34,
and took the road west.

The order was watching this. In the morning, prayed some prayers, and the act of contrition
and a prayer in giving thanks to God for the common benefit, and he they offered the works
and that day, specifying the hunger, thirst, fatigue, danger, & C., and protesting that they
did for their love and for the conversion of infidels. After had lunch, and marched singing
the Litany of the Virgin, and after she prayed the Father Cardiel clerical itinerary. At night
praying the rosary and sang the Salve Regina, and the morning and evening prayer, and to carry
backpacks and walk to the Father signal with a bell that served as drum.

They walked in this way four days, in at 6 and 7 miles every day, almost always a way Indians,
one foot wide, which was full of horse manure and foals, and old, and very good springs. At the
end of the four days were diverted the path to a high slope, where watching a spyglass, discovered
quality land than others. Walked in four days, a matter of 25 leagues without find any tree or
grass hay but something green in the spring, or loam soil to plant, but all sterile, water
itself, and in abundance in several springs, where was the way or path of the Indians, and
where there was not, all freshwater lakes.

They did not see any smoke or farm animals were found, but a few who fled guanacos half a league,
and as is ostrich, which killed one, being sterile the whole game campaign and hills: even
birds were heard, but is this or that. Had drawn, then, again bereaved sick. People behaved
with much evidence, although a few days went to and barefoot, some with blisters, and others with
wounds, and more on the sixth day were damaged. Father Cardiel at a few days suffered many pains
in the joints of the legs, so that the fifth could not walk without crutches, and finding no other
remedy, to be in these cloths soaked in urine: this alone and paternal providence of God could
continue. The cold at night bother them much, and even with the few bushes that were, had
fire all night, and had no blankets, nor to be covered, first warmed and the other froze, unable
to sleep.

With all this work was so strong the spirit of Father Cardiel, if it had been sui juris, had
come by land, discovering what is about decanted, happy or Caesars, and of nations willing to receive
the Gospel, which is already had offered some of his entourage. Because it into account that with
beads she wore, could buy horses from the Indians, and captivate minds, but as they hoped to
achieve license to practice this kind, tried to turn the port into another four days. In the eight
days it took the Father Cardiel in this expedition, noted the Father Quiroga with an astronomical
quadrant latitude of this bay of San Julian, and according to these observations, The first
entry in the bay is at 49 degrees and 12 minutes: the average 49
degrees and 15 minutes.

On Tuesday 22, at 4 am, boarded the boat the Father Mathias Strobl, Father Joseph Quiroga, the
pilot D. Diego Varela and D. Ensign Salvador Martinez Olmo and went to the first inlet of the
bay, and jumping on the ground, walk north to recognize the lagoon, which had discovered the
history days. A three-fourths of found in the top league, amongst some hills, another freshwater
lake, which has circuit a league. Later, two leagues from the bay, where they landed this day, they
found the great lake, but all covered with salt, three miles long and more than one wide. Went
to the other side to see if were some trees and bushes but did not find, they only have fuel to
burn. In this journey of the lagoon are very hot sun; and its reflection in the snow-white salt were
offended by the sight. Found seven or eight vicuña and guanaco, and to the south side of the
pond, a freshwater well. For the band of this of this gap is a good flatness, and then there's the
sea a league away. At 4 the afternoon of that day were already on board.

What we all came to the conclusion, recognized this land of the bay of San Julian, and bad
qualities, is that there can not inhabit the Indians lack of firewood, honey, hunting, & c. but
who live far away, and proceeded nevertheless, that the narrow path that followed the Father
Cardiel four days is the Auracanos or Chile, or of the Puelches and Peguenches, to come salt as
it once, that your country be free, to the great lake, or to the other of the proximity of
the bay, and this year some would die there main one, for whose funeral would kill two of their
wives and horses, they hiciesen company in the afterlife, He thinks his blindness, and for the same
reason be buried with him all Alhajuela. Amazed themselves were, that on such a distance from
Buenos Aires, had Indians on horseback, because it is judged that from 150 miles down, they
are all footmen, according to the highland Indians tell us, and the
paths of strangers.

It appears by their Alhajuela brass, & c., they have communication with other nations, they have
it with Spanish.

Finally, on Monday 28 February, began getting things ready to leave the Bay San Julian, where
finding no comfort to make this so any establishment, Matias did the Father Superior Strobl
consultation, which entered the Captain of the ship, the ensign, Sergeant, Cardiel Parents and
Quiroga, present the clerk of the ship, and all with one accord they thought it, that this
was not desirable Parents stay there, as also to miss the things necessary for a settlement, had not
Indians, whose conversion is used. So at 9 am began to levarse, but having changed to the same
time the wind to south-west, remained in the same place. At two p.m. blew with great force the
south-west, and although in this bay does not raise sea was so hard that the ship Garró some
fathoms, and it was necessary to harness the antennas and prevent
another anchor.

The sailors, who had gone ashore today on the boat, they found a sign in the field to these
Character: IO HN. WOOD, which is the name of any English or Dutch that has been in this bay.

Tuesday through March 1, having the wind on the south-east, could not leave in the morning, and
placed on a high, in front of the site where they were anchored, a tall wooden cross with this
inscription: - Reigning Felipe V, the year of 1746. At 4 pm, blowing west were weighed and
left the bay of San Julian, at 5, and then they were out, rose the boat on board, and followed
their defeat to the north-east. With that parting be well to here more complete relationship of
the port and bay.

It have many things the travelers foreigners, and especially George Anson, Commander of the England
squad, the year of 1741 came to infest the South Sea, the narrow Lemaire. Among other things,
put some of its paper maps, which is the famous bay form a large
river, which originates from a large gap, 40 or 50 miles inland, and
that this gap created another river, called Bell, who runs to the
south out to sea.

All it wanted the Royal Council of Indies that was done here a population, and to this end
was undertaken this journey, but experience has disillusioned, that everything they said in those
rivers foreigners is a simple and pure hoax, because this river is not found, no sign of having
ever been, that finally the adage is true Castilian, which, to distant lands, lingering lies. All
lie this bay in 49 degrees, minutes, more or less, and they're right, because as I said, has
been now that is at 49 degrees and 12 minutes, your login, and the
environment where they can emerge ships in 49 degrees and 15 minutes.

Their respective length, counted from the island of Lobos, are 15 degrees and 20 minutes, and
the universal length, told Teibez peak of Tenerife, are 311 degrees, and 40 minutes. Solament
not no river enters the bay can be some great navigate many miles above, and in his diaries
and letters written to some unfounded foreigners, but even a small stream could find our Spanish.

The
entrance of this port is difficult to know the signal that takes more than height, because
from outside is only the first inlet, almost all full of shoals, but it's easy to know that entry,
governed by the following address. Near the west of the mouth port is a very high hill, which going
from the north-east, looks very far, as the higher than is seen in this coast, and from afar
looks like an island, and toward something else, are the tips of three hills, which also look like
islands, until they more closely we see that are land. Well, that was in demand at the port of
San Julian from the island of Reyes, moving away from the earth, because the coast is dangerous
and full of bass, and on reaching At 49 degrees, take the view of the aforesaid highest mountain
and sail, approaching the east-west land him, and then see the first cove, which is to the northern
side a white barriers, and any land which is at the south side to the river of Santa Cruz, is
low, and also seems to make a white barrier, like a wall.

The harbor entrance is very difficult, and can not get ships at low tide, it is only a narrow channel
with two fathoms and a half, or three fathoms deep, which runs south-west to a point in which there
are some rocks, and from there runs farther south near the sea, which is left to the west. At
high tide can get ships of any size, because, as noted, the tide rises and falls six fathoms
perpendicular, and very different the appearance of the entrance and the harbor, as seen in two
planes made the Father Quiroga. However, it is always necessary for the ship, that'll take practical
pilot of this port bottom out and return the boat to recognize the input, because, as I said,
it is difficult, and will always be good to go when the tide is losing the strength to Ancora
quite thoroughly, before low tide. Large ships can enter up to get behind islands, where at
low tide are 13 and 14 fathoms. The fund is good, black clay mixed with fine sand. The winds
here, even blowing hard, do not swell up, around the port for being covered with earth. Inside
two islands, which are worth at the flood, and including many gulls.

A half-tide are discovered other islands, and finally tide stays dry, the South, an area that
resembled a large bay tide.

This port for the summer does not have to wash the vessels, as some gaps springs which are west
of the port, three or four miles distant, and another nearest lake, that is to the north-west of
the entrance, far from a league from the sea, and is very hard to find among two hills near the
top. Winter time is likely to lower some streams Snow distilled water. All land is salty and barren,
but are some bushes west of the entrance, which can be used for fuel for the ships: no no pasture
for cattle, but is inland, which is some little in the glens, where springs, nor is it a tree
that can be used for wood.

Puédese easily fortify the port, building a battery on top of stones, is the south-west of the first
entry in the north coast, because here are close the entrance channel and passes the gun to
throw this point, neither can the beat the fortress built ships on this site, because lowering
the tide, they would still remain stranded, since the entire creek
out of the tip is left with little water at low tide, and even in
the narrow channel barely to three fathoms.

 She and George were
the idols of their hearts. To lose one from the home even to gain a preacher-son was an experience
bringing pain and sorrow. Still their judgment confirmed the step; for, if they were to have
the sadness of separation, they were to have the deep satisfaction of giving their daughter
to a greater service.

Miss Viola was busy most of the time preparing her trousseau. Many of the garments were made
to order in Lexington, but much fancy work on delicate fabrics was done by the bride-to-be.

The great day dawned at last. A holiday had been given to all the slaves on the plantation.
The Judge decided to spare no expense in making the occasion as pleasant as possible. He had
instructed his black people to have a barbecue at their quarters. Some of our readers are benighted
as to the meaning of that great word. How shall we enlighten their ignorance? Words are insufficient
to set forth the joy and glory of this feast. We may try our best, but much must be left unrecorded.

Two very long wooden tables were stretched on the ground behind the slaves' cabins, under the
splendid natural forest trees which Kentucky boasted. The day before an ox was killed, and
a deep pit dug in the ground. Early on the eighteenth, the ox was suspended in this hole and
a great fire lighted under the carcass. There for hours the body roasted in its own fat. Besides
the ox, succulent roasting pigs were cooked whole, chickens were prepared in various ways.
All vegetables common to the season were gotten ready in unlimited abundance. Bread enough
for all and much to spare appeared on the tables. Pies and cakes of many kinds lay in beautiful
companionship with the other good things. Steaming coffee in abundance for all was on hand.
And plenty of "Adam's ale"--pure spring water.

This barbecue feast was to be eaten after the marriage ceremony was performed.

The wedding feast for the white folks was spread on tables which had been placed under the
pine trees some distance east of the great mansion. It was impossible to accommodate all the
invited guests in the dining-room of the house, and Viola decided to have the dinner served
in the open air under the trees. As to the quality and quantity of this feast it is only necessary
to say that Aunt Dinah and her satellites had been preparing it for days, and the proud cook
was intending to stake her reputation as to ability on it for all time to come. The result
was worthy of the effort she had made.

On the morning of the eighteenth came the great event. Let us try to picture the scene. It
was to be an open air wedding. Viola had requested that all the colored people be permitted
to witness the ceremony. There were hundreds of them, big and little, old and young. They were
disposed by Mose and others under the pine trees nearest to the river.

Grouped nearer to the mansion were the members of the mission school, many planters and their
families, some guests from Lexington and other places. Just by the pavement in front of the
piazza a chair had been provided for Madam LeMonde.

The principals in the ceremony were in a bedroom upstairs.

And now the strains of a wedding march floats out over the great company, played by a pianist
from Paducah.

With slow and measured step the wedding party descend the broad stairway. We see Susanna Spink
walking before. Ms. Josefa went to open it. Fr Gil was ready. Hastily took chocolate, and having
kissed Ms. Josefa with effusion, the nun alleged saved door and slid quickly down the street. Ten
minutes later came the P. Gil. Night was dark and wet. It had rained a lot. Street, filled
with puddles, the road, mud. Outside and in the suburbs, Obdulia waited for his confessor, and
together they went on sale where the car stopped. While they got there did not cross any word.
Fr Gil walked silent, taciturn, clearly revealing either a bad mood that was prevalent there.
It took a while to engage the driver. The duration of the operation, the future got nun in
the sale. Fr Gil remained outside, presence. Both of them were the object of great curiosity
for the hostess, for their children, for the mayoral and the boy's car. I just removed the eye. The
young priest noted that a few glances exchanged between them and mocking expressive embarrassed
him. Suddenly saw the falsity of his situation, the great folly that had done. Another man
had fallen more character at that moment. He had feigned to do so, he hesitated whether he
would tell the girl that he could not accompany her, at last dared not and when the driver
noticed that everything was ready and told Obdulia with characteristic vividness: "Come, father,
and soon ... Up! "Got into the carriage with the resignation of a lamb.

Began to dawn. Dawned the horizon and the wind blew hot and humid, typical of spring and overcast
weather. The carriage rolled down the road, blowing clouds mud. It was an old pull carts that
once must have belonged to an individual.
The other planters were also well represented: Abner Hunt, the fiery little man from down river,
and Hans Schmidt, the large, fair-faced German, with several others. Hiram Sanders, the herculean
blacksmith of Bridgewater, had a place at the table.

When the great feast was nearly over and ices were being served, Judge LeMonde arose and thus
spoke: "Dear friends, I do not wish to interrupt the meal, neither do I wish to make a speech,
only to say that Madam LeMonde and myself count this one of the greatest days of our lives.
It surely has a tinge of sorrow in it but the joy far surpasses the sadness. I am very glad
indeed to behold you enjoying the felicities of the occasion. There is a bit of the program
to take place that nobody on the grounds knows anything about except Mrs. LeMonde and myself.
I request at this time that my son George go to the slaves' gathering and bring back with him
my servant Mose."

Without a moment's hesitation George started to do the errand his father asked. By the time
the ices had disappeared the white man and the black man came on to the lawn. A look of curiosity
and wonder passed over the company, and all gazed in the direction of the Judge and his servant.

As to Mose he was much taken aback. He appeared confused and bewildered. He thought it was
not possible that his master would blame him for neglecting some duty or doing a bad deed on
such a day and before such a company.

The Judge, calling his servant to come near, arose and said: "I have decided on this memorable
occasion to repay in some measure the devotion and sacrifice of a very faithful and trustworthy
servant. I have found Mose honest, obedient, kind, and always willing to do his part of the
work. More than this he has risked his life to protect his young mistress from falling into
the hands of desperate outlaws. Because of this heroic endeavor I have decided, Mose, to set
you free. I hold in my hand the paper properly made out, and from this hour you are free to
go where you will. But we do not want to lose you from the plantation. If you stay, I will
pay you suitable wages for your work. I will also give you three acres of good land near the
negroes' quarters and will build a nice frame house upon it. I am sure my daughter Viola will
be glad to furnish the house as a reward for the service you rendered her. In due time you
can bring the young woman to whom you are engaged to the house as your bride.

"What do you say, Mose, will you go or stay?"

The poor black man was almost too overcome with emotion to answer a word. Tears streamed down
his cheeks, and he could scarcely stand. However, he managed to say: "Mas'r LeMonde, how kin
Ah thank you fur yo' kindness! Leave you an' dis plantation? Not while de sun shines in de
heavens. As Ah was willin' to die fer Miss Viola, I would any time lay dow my life fer you,
Judge, or ary one of de fambly."

"Well, you are a good boy, and," after handing him the paper, "now you can go to your friends
at the quarters."

When the curtain was rung down on this scene, in a metaphorically sense, it rose on another
of much interest.

The wedding party and guests were still sitting at the tables when honest David Hester, arising
to his feet, said: "I move that we all drink a toast to our newly married friends, and that
we drink it in pure cold water. Also, that John Larkin speak to the toast in behalf of the
company." This motion was seconded by more than a dozen voices, the glasses were filled from
the living spring, and the toast was drunk in the best liquid the world has ever seen.

John Larkin arose and said: "It gives me great pleasure to speak a few words on this happy
and auspicious occasion. First, I wish to thank Judge and Madam LeMonde for the sumptuous repast
they have provided for all who are present. (Loud applause all down the line.) Next, I desire
to say some true words respecting our honored bridegroom. I have known Jasper Very for several
years, and have been his colleague most of the time. I do not overstep the mark when I declare
that he is the greatest preacher in Kentucky today. (Cries of "That's so," and applause.) He
stands foursquare for righteousness seven days in the week. He is a terror to evil doers. It
is by such men's work and sacrifices that we shall stamp out ruffianism, and lift our State
to a high respect for law and order. (Clapping of hands.) His career is yet before him, and
I believe his name will be handed down to coming generations as an eloquent, zealous, fearless,
and successful preacher of the gospel. (Loud applause by the whole company.) My only ambition
is that I may be his traveling companion in the ministry as long as possible, for he is to
me an inspiration, a help, and, best of all, a devoted friend. (Cheers by all.)

"What shall I say concerning the lady who this day becomes his wife? He might have searched
the State over, and not found so suitable a life companion. She was the originator of the mission
school, and its prosperity is seen by the number of its members who are here today. (Much hand
clapping by the people from the hills.) Yes, and she would not let the fear of highwaymen keep
her from the straight path of duty. I chaired the grieving family, out of the second military Giner and
Bishop of the priests. On this point there is no more to say everything was under to established
practices and which required the decorum of our family.

D. Bernard stopped to take a look at Michael, who at the time he heard his uncle, or not listening
(this could never find Bernardo), gave endless laps between fingers to a Greek vessel that served
as press mud papers.

Quitóselo hand gently colocolo in place and returned to pick up the ride interrupted the thread
of his discourse.

- The pain you felt your father was great, and
has kept and who is at all times of her widowhood the respect due
to the memory of a lady like your mother as principal.
Soon they appeared on the front piazza, most of the invited guests still remaining on the lawn.

By a previous arrangement Mose was to be the honored driver of the carriage, to take them to
the railway station. Never was there a prouder or happier negro. He showed the importance of
his duty in every turn of his body. He was dressed in a new suit of clothes, and a tall silk
hat ornamented his woolly head. He held his whip and lines like a master of horse.

Some fond good-byes, a few tears like April showers with the sun shining, a crack of the whip,
and Velox and Prince are off on the happy journey.

So we leave them as with

    "Two souls with but a single thought,
    Two hearts to beat as one,"

they set out on their life work.

"We have heard that our hero became a mighty preacher, whose praise was in all the churches.
His fields of labor widened with the years. His reputation went before him, and he was known
in many States as an original and marvelous genius, but to us he will ever be remembered as
The Kentucky Ranger.

