Of men who have added lustre to the College roll of worthies we may mention Sir John F. W.
Herschel, the astronomer, who was Senior Wrangler in 1813, and died in 1871, laden with all
the honours which scientific and learned bodies could bestow upon him; he lies buried in Westminster
Abbey close to the tomb of Newton. John Couch Adams, Senior Wrangler in 1843, in July 1841,
while yet an undergraduate, resolved to investigate the irregularities in the motion of the
planet Uranus, with the view of determining whether they might be attributed to an undiscovered
planet. The memorandum he made of his resolve is, as has been stated, now in the College Library.
It is a matter of history how Adams carried out his purpose, and how through a series of unlucky
accidents he did not get the sole credit for his discovery of the planet Neptune. Adams became
a Fellow of the College in 1843, but had to vacate his fellowship in 1852 as he was not in
orders. The College tried to induce a Mr. Blakeney, who then held one of the very few fellowships
tenable by a layman, to resign his fellowship and make way for Adams; offering to pay him for
the rest of his life an income equal to that of his fellowship. Mr. Blakeney, however, refused,
and a fellowship was found for Mr. Adams at Pembroke College, which he held till his death. 

Aye, strengthen the government; and let its first manifestation of strength and will be the settling
of the negro question. Give the administration as full power as you please--the more the better;
it is only conferring strength on the people. There is no danger that the men of the North will
ever lose a shadow of individual rights. They are too powerful.

And now let the freemen of America speak, and the work will be done. A great day is at hand; hasten
it. The hour which sees this Union re-united will witness the most glorious triumph of humanity,--the
greatest step towards realizing the social aim of Christianity, and of Him who died for all,--the
recognition of the rights of every one. Onward!

* * * * *

BROWN'S LECTURE TOUR.

I.--HOW HE CAME TO DO IT.

My last speculation had proved a failure. I was left with a stock of fifty impracticable washing-machines
on my hands, and a cash capital of forty-four cents. With the furniture of my room, these
constituted my total assets. I had an unsettled account of forty dollars with Messrs. Roller
& Ems, printers, for washing-machine circulars, cards, etc.; and--

Rap, rap, rap!

[Enter boy.]

'Mr. Peck says as how you'll please call around to his office and
settle up this afternoon, sure.'

[Exit boy.]

New York, Nov. 30,
1859.

Mr. GREEN D. BROWN,

TO JOHN PECK, Dr.

To Rent of Room to date $9 00

Rec'd Pay't,

I came to the emphatic conclusion that I was 'hard up.'

I kept bachelor's
hall in Franklin Street, in apartments not altogether sumptuous, yet
sufficiently so for my purposes,--to wit, to sit in and to sleep in;
and inasmuch as I took my meals amid the gilded splendors of the big
saloon on the corner of Broadway, I was not disposed to reproach myself
with squalor.

                        Yet the articles of furniture in my room were so far removed, separately
or in the aggregate, from anything like the superfluous, that when
I calmly deliberated what to part with, there was nothing which struck
me as a luxury or a comfort as distinct from a necessary of life.

                        I took a second mental inventory: two common chairs, a table, a mirror,
a rocking-chair, a bed, a lounge, and a single picture on the wall.

I declare, thought I, here's nothing to spare.

But things were getting
to a crisis. I must 'make a raise,' somehow. Borrow? Ah, certainly--where
was the benevolent moneyed individual? My credit had gone with my
cash; both were sunk in the washing-machines.

I lighted my pipe,
and surveyed my household goods once more.

There was the picture:
couldn't I do without that?

Possibly. But that picture I had had--let
me see--fifteen, yes, sixteen years. That picture was a third prize
for excellence in declamation, presented me at the school exhibition
in ---- Street, when I was twelve years old. That was in 1843, and
here, on the first of December, 1859, I sat deliberately meditating
its sale for paltry bread and butter!

No, no; I'd go hungry a little
longer, before I'd part with that old relic--remembrancer of the proudest
day of my life. What a pity I hadn't permitted that day to give a
direction to my life, instead of turning my attention to the paltry
expedients for money-making followed by the common herd! In what follows we deal briefly with some features of the life of the place.

The original, and perhaps the chief, purpose of the College in the eyes of those who founded
it was practically that it should form a training ground for the clergy. The statutes of King
Henry VIII. distinctly lay down that theology is the goal to which philosophy and all other
studies lead, and that none were to be elected Fellows who did not propose to study theology.
The statutes of Elizabeth provided a certain elasticity by prescribing that those Fellows who
did not enter priests' orders within six years should vacate their fellowships; but that two
Fellows might be allowed, by the Master and a majority of the Senior Fellows, to devote themselves
to the study of medicine. King Charles I. in 1635 allowed a like privilege to be granted from
thenceforth to two Fellows who were to study law. These privileges were not always popular,
and we occasionally find the clerical Fellows complaining that while the duties of teaching
and catechising were laid on them, a man who had held one of the law or medical fellowships
sometimes took orders late in life and then claimed presentation to a College benefice in virtue
of his seniority as a Fellow, having in the meantime escaped the drudgery to which the Fellow
in orders had been subject.

The emoluments of members of the Society in early times were very modest, and as prices rose
became quite inadequate; the amounts being named in the College statutes were incapable of
alteration, and indirect means were taken to provide relief. In Bishop Fisher's time it was
considered that an endowment of £6 a year sufficed to found a fellowship, and £3 a year to
found a scholarship. The statutable stipend of the Master was only £12 a year, though he had
some other allowances, the total amount of which was equally trivial. James Pilkington, Master
from 1559 to 1561, when he became Bishop of Durham, wrote to Lord Burghley on the subject of
his successor, stating that whoever became Master must have some benefice besides to enable
him to live. Richard Longworth, Master from 1564 to 1569, made a similar complaint, putting
the weekly expenses of his office at £3. We accordingly find that many of the Masters held
country benefices, prebends, or deaneries with their College office. Lord Keeper Williams,
who gave to the College the advowsons of Soulderne in Oxfordshire, Freshwater in the Isle of
Wight, and the sinecure rectories of St. Florence and Aberdaron in Wales, made it part of the
conditions of his gift that the Master should always be entitled to take one of these livings
if a vacancy occurred. Many of the Fellows also held benefices or curacies near Cambridge.
In the eighteenth century the business of holding ecclesiastical preferment in plurality became
almost a fine art; thus Sir Isaac Pennington, who was President of the College and Regius Professor
of Physic, left to the College by his will a fund to provide the sum of £200 a year for the
Master "if he be rector of Freshwater and not otherwise," a direct and curious incentive to
holding in plurality. A Fellow was entitled to his commons, and, in addition, to allowances
of 13s. 4d. under each of the three heads of "corn," "livery," and "stipend," or, as we may
say, food, clothes, and pocket-money. The College officers received but small salaries, the
most highly paid being the President and Senior Bursar, who each received £2.

An effort was made by the Statutes of the Realm to improve the condition of members of colleges.
It seems to have been assumed that the rent of a college farm, like its statutes, could not
be altered; but by an Act of Parliament passed in the eighteenth year of Elizabeth, known as
Sir Thomas Smith's Act, it was enacted that from thenceforth one-third of the rents were to
be paid in wheat and malt; the price of wheat for the purposes of the Act being assumed to
be 6s. 8d. a quarter, and of malt 5s. a quarter. Thus if before the Act the rent of a farm
was £6 a year, after it became law the tenant had to pay £4 in money, three-quarters of wheat,
and four quarters of malt, these two latter items coming to £1 each. But the tenant now paid
a rent varying according to the prices of the day--namely, the money rent plus the cash value
of the wheat and malt according to the best prices of these commodities in Cambridge on the
market-day preceding quarter-day. Thus as the prices of wheat and malt rose the College benefited.
By the Act this variable one-third, or "corn-money," went to increase the allowance for commons.
As time went on the amount of the corn-money was more than sufficient to pay for the commons,
and a further modest allowance out of the surplus was made to all who participated in the College
revenues, whether as Master, Fellow, scholar, or sizar, under the name of præter.

In process of time another source of revenue arose. Leases of College estates were usually
granted for a term of forty years, and there was a general custom that the tenant might surrender
his lease at the end of fourteen years and receive a new one for forty years. As prices rose
tenants were willing to pay a consideration for the renewal known as a "fine"--this was calculated
on the full letting value of the estate at the time of the renewal, the rent reserved remaining
at its traditional amount. At first this fine-money was regarded as a species of surplus, and
grants were made from it to Fellows or scholars who were ill or in special need of temporary
assistance. The cost of entertaining royalties or other distinguished visitors, and part of
the cost of new buildings, were defrayed from this source. In the year 1629 the practice arose
of dividing this fine-money up among the Master and Fellows in certain shares, and the money
so paid became known as the "dividend." At the present time the College property is managed
like any other landed estate, and after the necessary expenses of management and maintenance
have been met, and certain fixed sums paid to the scholars and exhibitioners, and to the University,
the remainder is by the statutes divided up into shares called dividends, each Fellow getting
one dividend, the Master and the members of the College Council receiving certain additions
calculated in dividends; there is a general restriction that the dividend shall not exceed
£250 a year. The fall in the value of land at present automatically provides that this limit
is not exceeded; if the revenues become more than sufficient for the purpose, additional fellowships
and scholarships must be established.

The reader will gather that the chief endowment of the College arises from land. The College
estates lie scattered over most of the eastern side of England, from Yorkshire to Kent. There
is no large block of property anywhere. The estates in past times, when means of communication
were poor, must have been difficult to visit. In the leases of the more distant farms it was
usual to stipulate that the tenant should provide "horse meat and man's meat" for the Master
and Bursar and their servants while on a tour of inspection. That some care was bestowed on
the management is clear from the regular entries, in the books of accounts, of the expenses
of those "riding on College business." Probably the estates were visited when leases came to
be renewed, and an effort made to discover the actual letting value of the property. Land agents
seem to have been first employed to make formal valuations towards the end of the eighteenth
century, and about the same time plans of the estates were obtained, some of these, made before
the enclosures, showing the land scattered in many minute pieces, are very curious and interesting.

The actual life within the College walls is not so easy to describe with any certainty. At
first, as we have seen, the undergraduates actually lived with Fellows of the College, and
overcrowding must have been a constant feature of College life. On 15th December 1565 a return
was made to Lord Burghley of all students, "whether tutors or pupils," residing in the College,
with notes as to whether they had come into Chapel in their surplices or not. The return concludes
with this summary: "The whole number is 287, whereof there came into the Chappell with surplesses
upon the last Saturdaie and Sondaie 147; and abrode in the country 33. And of thother 107 whiche
cumme not in as yet, there be many cumme to the Colledge of late and be not yet provided of
surplesses." At this time we have to remember that the buildings of the College consisted only
of the First Court, the Infirmary or Labyrinth, and a small block of buildings in a corner
of the ground now occupied by the Second Court, swept away when that was built. The arrangement
seems to have been as follows. The ground-floor rooms were occupied by junior Fellows, each
with a few pupils. The rooms on the first floor, known in the College books as the "middle
chambers," were in greater request; with these went the rooms on the second floor, with sometimes
excelses or garrets over them--these could accommodate a senior Fellow with several pupils.
In the older parts of the College the rooms occupied the whole depth of the building, and so
were lighted from both sides; in the corners, when light could be obtained, cubicles or studies
were partitioned off. From a sanitary point of view, life under such conditions must have left
much to be desired, and the burial registers of All Saints' parish (in which the older part
of the College is situated) leave the impression of frequent and almost epidemic illness in
the College during the sixteenth and early part of the seventeenth century.

The undergraduates in early times were much younger than the men of the present day. The statutes
prescribed that the oath should not be required from scholars who were under sixteen years
of age; the frequent occurrence of non juratus in the admission entry of a scholar shows that
many came to the College before that age. Probably the average age was about sixteen; the idea
being that after the seven years' residence required for the M.A. degree they would be of the
proper age to present themselves for ordination. Those under eighteen years of age might be
publicly whipped in the Hall for breaches of discipline.

Students from distant parts of England probably resided continuously in College from the time
they entered it until they took their degrees. The statutes of King Henry VIII. contemplate
a period of some relaxation at Christmas; providing that each Fellow in turn should be "Lord"
at Christmas, and prepare dialogues and plays to be acted by members of the College between
Epiphany and Lent. The brazier in the Hall seems to have been kept burning in the evening about
Christmas time; of this practice a curious relic survived until comparatively lately, it being
the custom to leave a few gas-jets burning in the Hall until midnight from St. John's Day (December
27) until Twelfth Night.

There were three classes of students. The Fellow Commoners, sons of noblemen or wealthy land-owners,
who sat at the High Table, or, as it was phrased, were in Fellows' commons. Some came in considerable
state. In 1624 the Earl of Arundel and Surrey sent his two sons, Lord Maltravers and Mr. William
Howard, to the College. The Earl's chaplain, or secretary, in making arrangements for their
coming, wrote to request that they should have one chamber in the College, with a "pallett
for the gromes of their chamber"; the rest of "his lordships company, being two gentlemen,
a grome of his stable and a footman, may be lodged in the towne near the College." At this
period the Second Court had been built, and the accommodation for residence thus somewhat greater
than in Elizabethan times. The Fellow Commoner wore a gown ornamented with gold lace, and a
cap with a gold tassel. The last Fellow Commoner at St. John's to wear this dress was the present
Admiral Sir Wilmot Hawksworth Fawkes.

The next class in order of status were the Pensioners--men who paid their expenses without
assistance from the College, sons of middle-class parents. In times of which we have any definite
record this was the most numerous class in College. Lastly, we have the sizars. A sizar was
definitely attached to a Fellow or Fellow Commoner; he was not exactly a servant, but made
himself generally useful. For example, those members of the College who absented themselves
from the University sermon were in the eighteenth century fined sixpence, and the sizars were
expected to mark the absentees. 'There's no audience, I perceive,' said I.

'Wal, I didn't cal'late much of anybody'd go in. They gen'ally go over to Tyre when they want shows.
Tyre's quite a town. You'd do better over thar; 's on'y seven mile over to Tyre.'
I explained my position to the landlord at once, and threw myself
on his mercy. I told him I had no money, but would walk over to Tyre
that very evening, rather than task his hospitality longer. After
making a little money in Tyre, I would return to Sidon and settle
his little bill. At the present time there is no difference
in status among members of the College; the foundation scholars, however, having special seats
in Chapel and a separate table in Hall if they choose to make use of it.

Until 1882 the condition of celibacy attached to all fellowships in the College; Queen Elizabeth
held strong views on the matter, even discouraging the marriage of Masters. The necessity of
taking orders was somewhat relaxed in 1860. The system had its advantages--it tended to produce
promotion; for the natural inclination of mankind to marry, vacated fellowships; the disadvantage
was that men with a real taste for study or teaching had no certain career before them. The
question of allowing Fellows to marry was raised in the eighteenth century, but met with little
support and much opposition. Even in the middle of the nineteenth century a University Commission
inclined to the view that celibacy was inseparable from the collegiate system.

