In Wadham the conservative Oxford workmen were inspired by the presence of Somerset masons,
whom the Foundress brought up from her own county, so rich in the splendid Gothic of the fifteenth
century. Hence the chapel of Wadham (shown in Plate XXII) is to all intents and purposes the
choir of a great Somerset church. So marked is the old style in its windows that some of the
best authorities on architecture have maintained that the stonework of these could not have
been made in the seventeenth century, but must have survived from some older building; Ferguson,
the historian of architecture, when confronted with the fact that the college has still the
detailed accounts showing how, week by week, the Jacobean masons worked, swept this evidence
aside with the dictum--"No amount of documents could prove what was impossible." But here the
"impossible" really happened.

The permanence of Gothic in Oxford is a point for professional students; the studied simplicity,
which is the great secret of Wadham's beauty, concerns everyone. The effect of the garden front
is produced simply by the long lines of the string-courses and by the procession of the beautifully
proportioned gables. Another form is shown in the cut, Fig. 296. Here sheets of tinfoil are used
to regulate the electrostatic capacity, while at m is shown the finger piece for regulating the
size of the spark gap a.

Synonym--Spark Micrometer.
Resultant. The line indicating the result of the application of two
or more forces to a point. Its direction and length give the elements
of direction and intensity. (See Forces, Resolution of Forces, Composition
of Components.)

Resultant Polarity. Clare was
building during half a century; Wadham was finished in three years; but both have been fortunate
in being left alone; they have not been "improved" by later additions.

The chapel at Wadham has another feature of great interest for those who visit it; the glass
in it (not that in the ante-chapel) is all contemporary with the college, and is a first-rate
example of the taste of early Stuart times. The apostles and the prophets of the side windows
have few merits, except their age, and the fact that they illustrate what local craftsmen could
do in the reign of James I; but the big east window is of a very different rank. The college
authorities quarrelled with the local workmen, and introduced a foreign craftsman, Bernard
van Ling from London. In our day he would have been called a "blackleg," and mobbed: perhaps,
even in the seventeenth century, he needed protection, for the college built him a furnace
in their garden, and he there produced the finest specimen of seventeenth century glass that
Oxford can show. Even for those who are not students of glass, the Wadham windows are attractive
with their two Jonahs and two whales, "The big one that swallowed Jonah, and the little one
that Jonah swallowed" (to quote an old college jest).

The gardens at Wadham are famous; they have not the magnificence of St. John's or the antiquarian
charm of the old walls at New College or Merton; but, for the variety and fine growth of their
trees, they are unsurpassed, though the glory of these is passing. Warden Wills planted them
in the days of the French Revolution, and trees have their time to fall at last, even though
they long survive their planters.

WADHAM COLLEGE (2) HISTORY

    "But these were merciful men, whose righteousness
     hath not been forgotten. . . . Their bodies are buried
     in peace; but their name liveth for evermore."
                            /Ecclesiasticus/, xliv. 10, 14.

The collection of pictures In Wadham Hall is probably the best of any college in Oxford--always,
of course, excepting Christ Church. The fleet of 1885 consisted of forty-one vessels, more than
half hailing from New Bedford; but four of the fleet were lost.

Seven years before the wonderful catch of 1852, disasters and other
reverses had caused many serious failures, and from that date really
begins the decline in whaling, which was rapid after 1860.

But meantime San Francisco had worked into the business. For years vessels had fitted out
from the Sandwich Islands, returning home only about once in five years. But there were many
abuses and disadvantages in this; hence San Francisco as it grew in importance became the head-quarters
for fitting, and one ship after another was transferred from the New Bedford fleet to that
of San Francisco, until now she is next to New Bedford in the whaling business. It is doubtful
if the fleet sailing from Buzzard's Bay twenty-five years hence is half the size of the fleet
of to-day; for vessels that are lost, sold, or broken up are seldom replaced. The astonishing
decline in this industry is shown by the fact that three hundred
and eleven whaling vessels were owned in New Bedford in 1855.

Thirty years later, in 1885, only one hundred and thirty-five such vessels were owned in the
whole United States, eighty-six of which hailed from New Bedford, twenty from San Francisco,
and the rest from Provincetown, New London, Edgartown, Boston, Stonington, and Marion.

The disasters which have befallen the whaling industry are many and fearful. During the late
war rebel cruisers captured fifty vessels, forty-six of them, with their cargoes and outfits,
being burned. Twenty-eight of them were New Bedford vessels. These, with other losses, show
what New Bedford had at stake before the Court of Commissioners of Alabama Claims. Her slice
of the Geneva Award will approximate, when all paid, three millions of dollars. The "stone fleets,"
sunk off Charleston and Savannah harbors in 1861, drew heavily on whaling vessels; for more
money would be paid by the Government for vessels than they could earn in whaling. In the
first stone fleet were twelve New Bedford whalers, and in the second, eight. Then there were the
horrible calamities of 1871 and 1876. In the former year thirty-three
vessels were crushed or abandoned in the Arctic, twenty-two belonging
in New Bedford. When the Royal Society celebrated its 250th anniversary
in 1912, many of its members made a pilgrimage to "its cradle" (or what was, at any rate, "/one/
of its cradles").

Wadham also produced, among other early members of the Royal Society, its historian, Thomas
Sprat, Bishop of Rochester, who somehow, as "Pindaric Sprat" (he was the friend and also the
editor of /Abraham Cowley/), found his way into Johnson's /Lives of the Poets/; he is, however,
more likely to be remembered because his subserviency, when he was Dean of Westminster to James
II, has earned him an unenviable place in Macaulay's gallery of Revolution worthies and unworthies.
Sprat, it should be added, was an exception to the prevailing Whig tradition of Wadham, which
found a worthy exponent in Arthur Onslow, the greatest Speaker of the House of Commons, who
ruled over that august body for a record period, thirty-four years (1727-1761), and formed
its rules and traditions in the period when it was first asserting its claim to govern.

 [Plate XXIII. Wadham College : The Hall Interior]

Two centuries later than the Royal Society days at Wadham, another group of philosophers was
trained there, who thought that the views of their master, Auguste Comte, were going to make
as great a revolution in human thought as the views of a Bacon or a Newton. All the leading
English Positivists were at Wadham--Congreve, Beesley, Bridges, Frederic Harrison, of whom
the last alone survives, to fight with undiminished vigour for the causes which he championed
in Mid- Victorian days. Positivism had less influence than its adherents expected, but it powerfully
affected for a time the political and the religious thought of England.

Forty years later another famous group of young men were at Wadham together. As they are all
alive, it is impossible, and would be unbecoming, to estimate what their influence on English
life and thought will be; but it was a curious coincidence that sent to Wadham together, in
the 'nineties, Lord Birkenhead, who reached the Woolsack at the earliest age on record; Sir
John Simon, who, if he had wished, could have lowered that record still further, and C. B.
Fry, once a household name as the greatest of British athletes.

Three groups of Wadham men have been spoken of; one other name must be mentioned of one who
stood alone at college, and for a long time in the world outside, in his attitude to the social
problems of our day. Whatever may be the future of the Settlement movement, its leader, Samuel
Barnett, "Barnett of Whitechapel," is not to be forgotten, for his name is associated as a
pioneer and an inspiring force with every movement of educational and social advance in the
latter half of the nineteenth century. M. Clemenceau, no friendly judge of the ministers of
any religious body, pronounced him one of the three greatest men he had met in England. Certainly
he was great, if greatness means to anticipate the problems of the future before the rest of
the world sees their urgency, and to make real contributions to their solution.

It has been a feature of the history of Oxford that every college has, from time to time, come
to the front as the special home and source of some movement. There has never been the overshadowing
concentration of men and of wealth, which has given a more one-sided direction to the history
of Cambridge. Hence the strength of the college system; every college has its traditions to
live up to, its great names to cherish, and Wadham is, certainly, by no means last or least
in these respects.

HERTFORD COLLEGE

    "Outspake the (Warden) roundly:
      'The bridge must straight go down;
     For if they once should get the bridge ...'"
                     MACAULAY, /Horatius/, adapted.

Academic bridges, over the Cam or elsewhere, are a great feature at Cambridge. At Oxford they
were unknown till this century, when University first of all threw its modest little arch over
Logic Lane; later, in 1913. the "Bridge of Sighs," which forms the subject of Plate XXIV, was
completed. There was a hard struggle before leave could be obtained from the City Council for
thus bridging a public thoroughfare; University only maintained their claim to a bridge by
a long lawsuit, in which the college rights were firmly established by the production of charters,
which went back to the reign of King John. The great opposition to the Hertford Bridge was
said to be due to regard for the feelings of the old Warden of New College, who considered
that it would injure the view of his college bell-tower. Whether this story be true or not,
Hertford obtained its permission at last, and Sir Thomas Jackson added a new attraction to
Oxford's buildings. His genius has been especially shown in triumphing over the difficulties
of the Hertford site, for it was no easy thing to unite into a harmonious whole, buildings
so various; his new chapel-- opened in 1908--is worthy to rank with the best classic architecture
in Oxford.

The variety of the Hertford buildings only reflects the chequered history of the foundations
that have occupied them. As early as the thirteenth century Hart Hall stood on this site. In
the eighteenth century this old hall was turned into a college by an Oxford reformer, Dr. Newton.
But unfortunately Newton's endowments were not equal to his ambition, and the first Hertford
/College/ fell into such decay that finally its buildings were transferred to an entirely different
foundation, Magdalen Hall. Almost immediately afterwards, old Magdalen Hall, which stood close
to Magdalen College, was burned down, and the society sold their site, thus made empty, to
their wealthy namesake, and migrated, in 1822, to what had formerly been Hertford College.
Finally, in 1874, Magdalen Hall was re-endowed by the head of the great financial house of
Baring as "Hertford College" once more.

This college then unites the traditions of two old halls, and of its own predecessor, and from
all of them it derives some famous names. Hart Hall was the home of John Selden, one of the
greatest of English scholars; Hertford College had an undistinguished English prime minister
in Henry Pelham, and a most distinguished leader of opposition in Charles James Foxe; while
Magdalen Hall was even more rich in traditions, as being the home of the translator of the
Bible, William Tyndale, as the centre of Puritan strength in the Laudian days, when from its
ranks were filled the vacancies all over Oxford caused by the expulsions of Royalists, and
finally as having trained Lord Clarendon, famous as Charles II's minister, still more famous
as the historian, whose monumental work was one of the first endowments of the Oxford Press.

All these traditions are now concentrated in the one college, and, as has been said, the buildings
have been greatly extended to meet the needs of the new foundation. When Hertford College is
completed according to the plans already drawn by Sir Thomas Jackson, it will reach from All
Souls' to Holywell. This last northern part of its front has been delayed by the European War.

The new--or, rather, the revived--college has, as yet, hardly had time to make Oxford history,
but the influence of its second Principal. Dr. Boyd, whose long reign, happily not yet over,
began in 1877, has had the result of finding for Oxford new benefactors in one of the wealthiest
of the London City Companies; the Drapers' magnificent gifts of the new Science Library and
of the Electrical Laboratory are good instances to show that the days of the "pious founder"
are not yet over.

 [Plate XXIV. Hertford College : The Bridge]

ST. EDMUND HALL

    "Or wander down an ancient street
     Where mingling ages quaintly meet,
     Tower and battlement, dome and gable
     Mellowed by time to a picture sweet."
                                    A. G. BUTLER.

The group of buildings, shown in Plate XXV, is not only picturesque-- it also illustrates Oxford
history from more than one point of view.

The apse of the Chapel of Queen's on the left belongs to a building already spoken of, which
is the most perfect example of a small basilican church in Oxford. The church tower in the
centre, though itself dating from the fourteenth century, is the most modern part of one of
the oldest churches in Oxford, St. Peter in the East. The crypt and the chancel of this church
go back to the time of the Conquest, and are probably the work of Robert d'Oili, to whom William
the Conqueror gave the city of Oxford; he was first an oppressor and then a benefactor; in
the former character, he built the castle keep, still standing near the station; in the latter,
he was the builder, besides St. Peter, of the churches of St. Michael and of the Holy Cross;
parts of his work survive in all three. 

It had stood there--the house--before and after the Revolution. It had been turned into a small
garrison more than once. Its walls had heard anxious councils, as
men of strong nerve and resolute will made their vows of independence.

Before this last foundation is spoken of, a word must be said as to the road round which these
three buildings are grouped--Queen's Lane. It survives, almost unaltered, from Pre-Reformation
Oxford, and, winding as it does its narrow way between high walls, it is an interesting specimen
of the "lanes" which threaded mediaeval Oxford, a city in which the High Street and, to a smaller
extent, Cornmarket Street were the only real thoroughfares; the rest of the city was a network
of narrow ways.

