No man ever had a better excuse for his superstitions than the Admiral; no sooner had he got
done with his Vision than the wind dropped, the sun came out, the sea fell, and communication
with the land was restored. While he had been sick and dreaming one of his crew, Diego Mendez,
had been busy with practical efforts in preparation for this day of fine weather; he had made
a great raft out of Indian canoes lashed together, with mighty sacks of sail cloth into which
the provisions might be bundled; and as soon as the sea had become calm enough he took this
raft in over the bar to the settlement ashore, and began the business of embarking the whole
of the stores and ammunition of Bartholomew's garrison.  By this practical method the whole
establishment was transferred from the shore to the ships in the space of two days, and nothing
was left but the caravel, which it was found impossible to float again.  It was heavy work
towing the raft constantly backwards and forwards from the ships to the shore, but Diego Mendez
had the satisfaction of being the last man to embark from the deserted settlement, and to see
that not an ounce of stores or ammunition had been lost.

Columbus, always quick to reward the services of a good man, kissed Diego Mendez publicly--on
both cheeks, and (what doubtless pleased him much better) gave him command of the caravel of
which poor Tristan had been the captain.

With a favourable wind they sailed from this accursed shore at the end of April 1503.  It is
strange, as Winsor points out, that in the name of this coast should be preserved the only
territorial remembrance of Columbus, and that his descendant the Duke of Veragua should in
his title commemorate one of the most unfortunate of the Admiral's adventures.  And if any
one should desire a proof of the utterly misleading nature of most of Columbus's writings about
himself, let him know that a few months later he solemnly wrote to the Sovereigns concerning
this very place that "there is not in the world a country whose inhabitants are more timid;
and the whole place is capable of being easily put into a state of defence.  Your people that
may come here, if they should wish to become masters of the products of other lands, will have
to take them by force or retire empty-handed.  In this country they will simply have to trust
their persons in the hands of the savages."  The facts being that the inhabitants were extremely
fierce and warlike and irreconcilably hostile; that the river was a trap out of which in the
dry season there was no escape, and the harbour outside a mere shelterless lee shore; that
it would require an army and an armada to hold the place against the natives, and that any
one who trusted himself in their hands would share the fate of the unhappy Diego Tristan. 
One may choose between believing that the Admiral's memory had entirely failed him (although
he had not been backward in making a minute record, of all his sufferings) or that he was craftily
attempting to deceive the Sovereigns.  My own belief is that he was neither trying to deceive
anybody nor that he had forgotten anything, but that he was simply incapable of uttering the
bare truth when he had a pen in his hand.

From their position on the coast of Veragua Espanola bore almost due north; but Columbus was
too good a seaman to attempt to make the island by sailing straight for it.  He knew that the
steady west-going current would set him far down on his course, and he therefore decided to
work up the coast a long way to the eastward before standing across for Espanola. The crew
grumbled very much at this proceeding, which they did not understand; in fact they argued from
it that the Admiral was making straight for Spain, and this, in the crazy condition of the
vessels, naturally alarmed them.  But in his old high-handed, secret way the Admiral told them
nothing; he even took away from the other captains all the charts that they had made of this
coast, so that no one but himself would be able to find the way back to it; and he took a kind
of pleasure in the complete mystification thus produced on his fellow-voyagers. "None of them
could explain whither I went nor whence I came; they did not know the way to return thither,"
he writes, somewhat childishly.

But he was not back in Espanola yet, and his means for getting there were crumbling away beneath
his feet.  One of the three remaining caravels was entirely riddled by seaworms and had to
be abandoned at the harbour called Puerto Bello; and the company was crowded on to two ships.
The men now became more than ever discontented at the easterly course, and on May 1st, when
he had come as far east as the Gulf of Darien, Columbus felt obliged to bear away to the north,
although as it turned out he had not nearly made enough easting.  He stood on this course,
for nine days, the west-going current setting him down all the time; and the first land that
he made, on May 10th, was the group of islands off the western end of Cuba which he had called
the Queen's Gardens.

He anchored for six days here, as the crews were completely exhausted; the ships' stores were
reduced to biscuits, oil, and vinegar; the vessels leaked like sieves, and the pumps had to
be kept going continually.  And no sooner had they anchored than a hurricane came on, and brought
up a sea so heavy that the Admiral was convinced that his ships could not live within it. 
We have got so accustomed to reading of storms and tempests that it seems useless to try and
drive home the horror and terror of them; but here were these two rotten ships alone at the
end of the world, far beyond the help of man, the great seas roaring up under them in the black
night, parting their worn cables, snatching away their anchors from them, and finally driving
them one upon the other to grind and strain and prey upon each other, as though the external
conspiracy of the elements against them both were not sufficient! The struggle was hard, and
Lincoln and his bride were of necessity very frugal. In 1841 he might have had the nomination for
Governor, but he declined it; having given up his ambition to become the "DeWitt Clinton of Illinois."
  Bruised and battered, wet by the terrifying surges, and entirely
uncomforted by food or drink, they did somehow endure these miseries; and were to endure worse
too before they were done with it.

