This brings up the whole question of the rightfulness of war. If it must be waged, is success
the highest duty? If military necessity demands, may any and every law of God and man be disregarded?

While we write these concluding pages, the European conflict is raging, and the voice of the
most warlike nation on the globe is heard continually affirming that war is useful and highly
honorable, and that any means, however frightful, if necessary to ensure or hasten victory
is praise-worthy!

Then both presidents were right!

But is not international war murder on a great scale? It is glorious to die for one's country;
but how about killing for our country? killing innocent men, too? for the soldiers on either
side honestly believe they are doing their duty in shooting and stabbing as many as possible!
"The business of war," said John Wesley, "is the business of devils." So it would seem; but
at heart few are enemies, none devils.

It has been a pleasure in this narrative to record instances of a very different spirit. Surely,
in proportion to population such were not fewer in the South than in the North. Like Whittier's
Angels of Buena Vista they rescue us from pessimism. They are prophetic of a better day.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] I still possess the copy of Davies's Legendre which I bought on the 8th of November for
twenty Confederate dollars, and of which I memorized three books in prison. As to the Shakespeare,
see ante, p. 85.

[12] I retain with pride the wooden spoon which did me good service when I was in limbo. It
cost me over two weeks' labor in shaping it with half a knife-blade and pieces of broken glass.
For the little block of wood I paid the sentry one "rebel dollar!"

[13] Many years after the war he rendered financial aid to fellow prisoners, his chum, artist
Vander Weyde, and General Hayes. Author of several valuable works, he is now head of the publishing
house of G. P. Putnam's Sons.

[14] It was a special pleasure after the lapse of fifty years to meet Estabrooks at the Massachusetts
Commandery of the Loyal Legion, where, without knowing of his presence, I had just made honorable
mention of him in an address on prison life. 

And its not all black and white with the other items either. Sea salt does have certain redeeming qualities
not found in mined salt and under certain very special conditions, eating small quantities
of salt may be acceptable. Similarly, some forms of sugar are not quite as harmful as other
forms, though all are harmful.

The primary health problem caused by table salt is not that it contributes
to high blood pressure in people with poor kidneys, though it does
that. Of course I felt sadly the loss of years of study that might
have better equipped me; but it seemed a duty. I had had some experience which, I thought,
proved me not wholly unqualified. While a student in college and while reading law I had partly
supported myself by giving instruction to private pupils and in the schools of General Russell
and Mayor Skinner. Afterwards, before the war, I had taught Greek in the Worcester (Mass.)
Academy; and English literature, Greek, and Latin for more than three years as principal of
the Worcester public high school. I knew the vocation would be congenial. So I became principal
of a state normal school, of two high schools, of a large academy; house chairman of a (Conn.)
legislative committee securing the enactment of three school measures of importance; later,
president of a college, professor in a theological seminary and in Cornell University; founder
and for three years first president of the earliest and long the largest of the world's general
summer schools (which now in the United States number nearly 700); lecturer in many Chautauqua
assemblies, colleges, vacation schools, and university extension centres; President of the
State University of North Dakota; editor, with biographic sketches and copious notes, of many
masterpieces as text-books in higher English literature; author of a history of my regiment;
also of a treatise on Voice and Gesture, of many monographs and magazine articles mostly educational;
associate founder and first president of The Watch and Ward Society; one of the directors and
executive committee of the American Peace Society; director of the Massachusetts Peace Society;
president of The American Institute of Instruction; translator, annotator, and essayist of
The Book of Job; etc.

It may be proper to add that among those indebted in some degree to my instruction or training
were several who captured Yale's highest prize for rhetorical excellence (the hundred dollar
gold medal of which I was the first recipient): one college president; six college professors;
three university presidents; two governors of states; two United States Senators; and many
others eminent as clergymen, authors, judges, editors, and business men.

[16] The higher death-rate (if that be conceded) of southern soldiers is easily accounted for.
The northern soldiers had been carefully selected by competent surgeons. They were physically
perfect, or nearly so. They were in the bloom of early manhood or the strength of middle age--not
an old man among them, not a diseased man among them, not a broken-down constitution among
them. But multitudes of the southern, enrolled by conscription, were physically unfit. Many
were much too old or too young. Said our General Grant, "To fill their ranks, they have robbed
the cradle and the grave!"

[17] The exchange is said to have been stopped in 1862-63 by the refusal of the Confederates
to give up captured negro soldiers in return for southern captives in the North, the United
States properly insisting upon perfect equality in the treatment of black and white. But early
in 1864, if not previously, the Confederates yielded the point and were anxious to surrender
man for man.

APPENDIX

(From the original record. See p. 88.)

Proceedings of a Court Martial convened at Danville Mil. Pris. by virtue of the following Order:

                                  DANVILLE MIL. PRISON, Oct. 29, 1864.

General Order

No. 1.

Pursuant to the Regulations adopted by the Union Officers of the 2d Floor Military Prison,
Danville, Va., Oct. 26, 1864, a Court Martial is hereby appointed to convene at 10 o'clock
A.M. on the 29th inst. or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, for the Trial of Captain
[I omit from the record the name of the accused], 104th N. Y. Vols., and such other officers
as may be brought before it.

               Detail for the Court.

 Lt. Col. W. A. LEACH,      [Here follow the names
   90th P. V.               of Captains Bryant,
 Lt. Col. THEO. GREGG,      Black, Clapp, Burkart,
   45th P. V.               Weiss (?), Reilly (?),
 Major J. W. BYRON,         Moody, and the name
   88th N. Y. V.            of the Judge Advocate,
 Capt. G. M. DICKERMAN,     Lt. and Adjt. James A.
   26th Mass. V.            Clark, 17th Pa. Cav.]

                           By order of the Officers of the 2d Floor,
                                                 JAMES CARLE,
                                 Col. 190th Pa. Vols., Senior Officer.

DANVILLE MIL. PRISON, VA., 10 o'clock A.M., 31st, Oct. 1864.

The Court met pursuant to the foregoing order. Present all the members. The Court then proceeded
to the trial of Capt. [we again omit the name of the accused], 104th N. Y. Vols.

The Judge Advocate stated that he had acquainted the accused of the order convening the Court,
to which he replied in the words following, to wit: "What is that to do with me? I recognize
no authority in this prison to convene a court martial," or words to that effect.

