Our practical life is filled with psychological problems which have to be solved somehow, and
if everything is left to commonsense and to unscientific fancies about the mind, confusion
must result, and the psychologist who stands aloof will be to blame.

Hence I tried in my little book “On the Witness Stand” to discuss for those interested in law
the value of exact psychology for the problems of the courtroom. In “Psychotherapy” I showed
the bearing of a scientific study of the mind on medicine. In “Psychology and the Teacher”
I outlined its consequences for educational problems. In “Psychology and Industrial Efficiency”
I studied the importance of exact psychology for commerce and industry. And I continue this
series by the present little volume, which speaks of psychology's possible service to social
sanity. I cannot promise that even this will be the last, as I have not yet touched on psychology's
relation to religion, to art, and to politics.

The field which I have approached this time demanded a different kind of treatment from that
in the earlier books. There I had aimed at a certain systematic completeness. When we come
to the social questions, such a method would be misleading, as any systematic study of these
psychological factors is still a hope for the future. Many parts of the field have never yet
been touched by the plow of the psychologist. The only method which seems possible to-day is
to select a few characteristic topics of social discussion and to outline for each of them
in what sense a psychologist might contribute to the solution or might at least further the
analysis of the problem. The aim is to show that our social difficulties are ultimately dependent
upon mental conditions which ought to be cleared up with the methods of modern psychology.

I selected as illustrations those social questions which seemed to me most significant for
our period. A few of them admitted an approach with experimental methods, others merely a dissection
of the psychological and psychophysiological roots. The problems of sex, of socialism, and
of superstition seemed to me especially important, and if some may blame me for overlooking
the problem of suffrage, I can at least refer to the chapter on the jury, which comes quite
near to this militant question.

Most of this material appears here for the first time. The chapter on thought transference,
however, was published in shorter form in the Metropolitan Magazine, that on the jury, also
abbreviated, in the Century Magazine, and that on naïve psychology in the Atlantic Monthly.
The paper on sexual education is an argument, and at the same time an answer in a vivid discussion.
Last summer I published in the New York Times an article which dealt with the sex problem.
It led to vehement attacks from all over the country. The present long paper replies to them
fully. I hope sincerely that it will be my last word in the matter. The advocates of sexual
talk now have the floor; from now on I shall stick to the one policy in which I firmly believe,
the policy of silence.

                                                  HUGO MÜNSTERBERG.

  Cambridge, Mass., January, 1914.

                               CONTENTS

CHAPTER                               PAGE

PREFACE                                vii

  I. SEX EDUCATION                       3

  II. SOCIALISM                         71

 III. THE INTELLECTUAL UNDERWORLD      113

  IV. THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE             141

   V. THE MIND OF THE JURYMAN          181

  VI. EFFICIENCY ON THE FARM           205

 VII. SOCIAL SINS IN ADVERTISING       229

VIII. THE MIND OF THE INVESTOR         253

  IX. SOCIETY AND THE DANCE            273

   X. NAÏVE PSYCHOLOGY                 291

                              PSYCHOLOGY
                                  AND
                             SOCIAL SANITY

                                   I

                             SEX EDUCATION

The time is not long past when the social question was understood to mean essentially the question
of the distribution of profit and wages. The feeling was that everything would be all right
in our society, if this great problem of labour and property could be solved rightly. But in
recent years the chief meaning of the phrase has shifted. Of all the social questions the predominant,
the fundamentally social one, seems nowadays the problem of sex, with all its side issues of
social evils and social vice. It is as if society feels instinctively that these problems touch
still deeper layers of the social structure. Even the fights about socialism and the whole
capitalistic order do not any longer stir the conscience of the community so strongly as the
grave concern about the family. All public life is penetrated by sexual discussions, magazines
and newspapers are overflooded with considerations of the sexual problem, on the stage one
play of sexual reform is pushed off by the next, the pulpit resounds with sermons on sex, sex
education enters into the schools, legislatures and courts are drawn into this whirl of sexualized
public opinion; the old-fashioned policy of silence has been crushed by a policy of thundering
outcry, which is heard in every home and every nursery. This loudness of debate is surely an
effect of the horror with which the appalling misery around us is suddenly discovered. All
which was hidden by prudery is disclosed in its viciousness, and this outburst of indignation
is the result. Yet it would never have swollen to this overwhelming flood if the nation were
not convinced that this is the only way to cause a betterment and a new hope. The evil was
the result of the silence itself. Free speech and public discussion alone can remove the misery
and cleanse the social life. The parents must know, and the teachers must know, and the boys
must know, and the girls must know, if the abhorrent ills are ever to be removed.

But there are two elements in the situation which ought to be separated in sober thought. There
may be agreement on the one and yet disagreement on the other. It is hardly possible to disagree
on the one factor of the situation, the existence of horrid calamities, and of deplorable abuses
in the world of sex, evils of which surely the average person knew rather little, and which
were systematically hidden from society, and above all, from the youth, by the traditional
method of reticence. To recognize these abscesses in the social organism necessarily means
for every decent being the sincere and enthusiastic hope of removing them. There cannot be
any dissent. It is a holy war, if society fights for clean living, for protection of its children
against sexual ruin and treacherous diseases, against white slavery and the poisoning of married
life. But while there must be perfect agreement about the moral duty of the social community,
there can be the widest disagreement about the right method of carrying on this fight. The
popular view of the day is distinctly that as these evils were hidden from sight by the policy
of silence, the right method of removing them from the world must be the opposite scheme, the
policy of unveiled speech. The overwhelming majority has come to this conclusion as if it were
a matter of course. The man on the street, and what is more surprising, the woman in the home,
are convinced that, if we disapprove of those evils, we must first of all condemn the silence
of our forefathers. They feel as if he who sticks to the belief in silence must necessarily
help the enemies of society, and become responsible for the alarming increase of sexual affliction
and crime. They refuse to see that on the one side the existing facts and the burning need
for their removal, and on the other side the question of the best method and best plan for
the fight, are entirely distinct, and that the highest intention for social reform may go together
with the deepest conviction that the popular method of the present day is doing incalculable
harm, is utterly wrong, and is one of the most dangerous causes of that evil which it hopes
to destroy.

The psychologist, I am convinced, must here stand on the unpopular side. To be sure, he is
not unaccustomed to such an unfortunate position in the camp of the disfavoured minority. Whenever
a great movement sweeps through the civilized world, it generally starts from the recognition
of a great social wrong and from the enthusiasm for a thorough change. But these wrongs, whether
they have political or social, economic or moral character, are always the products of both
physical and psychical causes. The public thinks first of all of the physical ones. There are
railroad accidents: therefore improve the physical technique of the signal system; there is
drunkenness: therefore remove the whiskey bottle. The psychical element is by no means ignored.
Yet it is treated as if mere insight into the cause, mere good will and understanding, are
sufficient to take care of the mental factors involved. The social reformers are therefore
always discussing the existing miseries, the possibilities of improvements in the world of
things, and the necessity of spreading knowledge and enthusiasm. They do not ask the advice
of the psychologist, but only his jubilant approval, and they always feel surprised if he has
to acknowledge that there seems to him something wrong in the calculation. The psychologist
knows that the mental elements cannot be brought under such a simple formula according to which
good will and insight are sufficient; he knows that the mental mechanism which is at work there
has its own complicated laws, which must be considered with the same care for detail as those
technical schemes for improvement. The psychologist is not astonished that though the technical
improvements of the railways are increased, yet one serious accident follows another, as long
as no one gives attention to the study of the engineer's mind. Nor is he surprised that while
the area of prohibition is expanding rapidly, the consumption of beer and whiskey is nevertheless
growing still more quickly, as long as the psychology of the drinker is neglected. The trusts
and the labour movements, immigration and the race question, the peace movement and a score
of other social problems show exactly the same picture—everywhere insight into old evils, everywhere
enthusiasm for new goals, everywhere attention to outside factors, and everywhere negligence
of those functions of the mind which are independent of the mere will of the individual.

But now since a new great wave of discussion has arisen, and the sexual problem is stirring
the nation, the psychologist's faith in the unpopular policy puts him into an especially difficult
position. Whenever he brings from his psychological studies arguments which point to the errors
in public prejudices, he can present his facts in full array. Nothing hinders him from speaking
with earnestness against the follies of hasty and short-sighted methods in every concern of
public life, if he has the courage to oppose the fancies of the day. But the fight in favour
of the policy of silence is different. If he begins to shout his arguments, he himself breaks
that rôle of silence which he recommends. He speaks for a conviction, which demands from him
first of all that he shall not speak. The more eagerly he spreads his science, the more he
must put himself in the wrong before his own conscience. He is thus thrown into an unavoidable
conflict. If he is silent, the cause of his opponents will prosper, and if he objects with
full arguments, his adversaries have a perfect right to claim that he himself sets a poor example
and that his psychology helps still more to increase that noisy discussion which he denounces
as ruinous to the community. But in this contradictory situation the circle must be broken
somewhere, and even at the risk of adding to the dangerous tumult which he condemns, the psychologist
must break his silence in order to plead for silence. I shall have to go into all the obnoxious
detail, for if I yielded to my feeling of disgust, my reticence would not help the cause while
all others are shouting. I break silence in order to convince others that if they were silent,
too, our common social hopes and wishes would be nearer to actual fulfilment.

But let us acknowledge from the start that we stand before an extremely complicated question,
in which no routine formula can do justice to the manifoldness of problems. Most of these discussions
are misshaped from the beginning by the effort to deal with the whole social sex problem, while
only one or another feature is seriously considered. Now it is white slavery, and now the venereal
diseases; now the demands of eugenics, and now the dissipation of boys; now the influence of
literature and drama, and now the effect of sexual education in home and school; now the medical
situation and the demands of hygiene, and now the moral situation and the demands of religion;
now the influence on the feministic movement, and now on art and social life; now the situation
in the educated middle classes, and now in the life of the millions. We ought to disentangle
the various threads in this confusing social tissue and follow each by itself. We shall see
soon enough that not only the various elements of the situation awake very different demands,
but that often any single feature may lead to social postulates which interfere with each other.
Any regulation prescription falsifies the picture of the true needs of the time.

                                  II

We certainly follow the present trend of the discussion if we single out first of all the care
for the girls who are in danger of becoming victims of private or professional misuse as the
result of their ignorance of the world of erotics. This type of alarming news most often reaches
the imagination of the newspaper reader nowadays, and this is the appeal of the most sensational
plays. The spectre of the white slavery danger threatens the whole nation, and the gigantic
number of illegitimate births seems fit to shake the most indifferent citizen. Every naïve
girl appears a possible victim of man's lust, and all seem to agree that every girl should
be acquainted with the treacherous dangers which threaten her chastity. The new programme along
this line centres in one remedy: the girls of all classes ought to be informed about the real
conditions before they have an opportunity to come into any bodily contact with men. How far
the school is to spread this helpful knowledge, how far the wisdom of parents is to fill these
blanks of information, how far serious literature is to furnish such science, and how far the
stage or even the film is to bring it to the masses, remains a secondary feature of the scheme,
however much it is discussed among the social reformers.

The whole new wisdom proceeds according to the simple principle which has proved its value
in the field of popular hygiene. The health of the nation has indeed been greatly improved
since the alarming ignorance in the matters of prophylaxis in disease has been systematically
fought by popular information. If the mosquito or the hookworm or the fly is responsible for
diseases from which hundreds of thousands have to suffer, there can be no wiser and straighter
policy than to spread this knowledge to every corner of the country. The teachers in the schoolroom
and the writers in the popular magazines cannot do better than to repeat the message, until
every adult and every child knows where the enemy may be found and helps to destroy the insects
and to avoid the dangers of contact. This is the formula after which those reformers want to
work who hold the old-fashioned policy of silence in sexual matters to be obsolete. Of course
they aim toward a mild beginning. It may start with beautiful descriptions of blossoms and
of fruits, of eggs and of hens, before it comes to the account of sexual intercourse and human
embryos, but if the talking is to have any effect superior to not talking, the concrete sexual
relations must be impressed upon the imagination of the girl before she becomes sixteen years
of age.

Here is the real place for the psychological objection. It is not true that you can bring such
sexual knowledge into the mind of a girl in the period of her development with the same detachment
with which you can deposit in her mind the knowledge about mosquitoes and houseflies. That
prophylactic information concerning the influence of the insects on diseases remains an isolated
group of ideas, which has no other influence on the mind than the intended one, the influence
of guiding the actions in a reasonable direction. The information about her sexual organs and
the effects on the sexual organism of men may also have as one of its results a certain theoretical
willingness to avoid social dangers. But the far stronger immediate effect is the psychophysiological
reverberation in the whole youthful organism with strong reactions on its blood vessels and
on its nerves. The individual differences are extremely great here. On every social level we
find cool natures whose frigidity would inhibit strong influences in these organic directions.
But they are the girls who have least to fear anyhow. With a much larger number the information,
however slowly and tactfully imparted, must mean a breaking down of inhibitions which held
sexual feelings and sexual curiosity in check.

The new ideas become the centre of attention, the whole world begins to appear in a new light,
everything which was harmless becomes full of meaning and suggestion, new problems awake, and
the new ideas irradiate over the whole mental mechanism. The new problems again demand their
answers. Just the type of girl to whom the lure might become dangerous will be pushed to ever
new inquiries, and if the policy of information is accepted in principle, it would be only
wise to furnish her with all the supplementary knowledge which covers the multitude of sexual
perversions and social malpractices of which to-day many a clean married woman has not the
faintest idea. But to such a girl who knows all, the surroundings appear in the new glamour.
She understands now how her body is the object of desire, she learns to feel her power, and
all this works backward on her sexual irritation, which soon overaccentuates everything which
stands in relation to sex. Soon she lives in an atmosphere of high sexual tension in which
the sound and healthy interests of a young life have to suffer by the hysterical emphasis on
sexuality. The Freudian psychoanalysis, which threatens to become the fad of the American neurologists,
probably goes too far when it seeks the cause for all neurasthenic and hysteric disturbances
in repressed sexual ideas of youth. But no psychotherapist can doubt that the havoc which secret
sexual thoughts may bring to the neural life, especially of the unbalanced, is tremendous.
Broken health and a distorted view of the social world with an unsound, unclean, and ultimately
immoral emphasis on the sexual relations may thus be the sad result for millions of girls,
whose girlhood under the policy of the past would have remained untainted by the sordid ideas
of man as an animal.

Yet the calamity would not be so threatening if the effect of sexual instruction were really
confined to the putrid influence on the young imagination. The real outcome is not only such
a revolution in the thoughts, but the power which it gains over action. We have only to consider
the mechanism which nature has provided. The sexual desire belongs to the same group of human
instincts as the desire for food or the desire for sleep, all of which aim toward a certain
biological end, which must be fulfilled in order to secure life. The desire for food and sleep
serves the individual himself, the desire for the sexual act serves the race. In every one
of these cases nature has furnished the body with a wonderful psychophysical mechanism which
enforces the outcome automatically. In every case we have a kind of circulatory process into
which mental excitements and physiological changes enter, and these are so subtly related to
each other that one always increases the other, until the maximum desire is reached, to which
the will must surrender. Nature needs this automatic function; otherwise the vital needs of
individual and race might be suppressed by other interests, and neglected. In the case of the
sexual instinct, the mutual relations between the various parts of this circulatory process
are especially complicated. Here it must be sufficient to say that the idea of sexual processes
produces dilation of blood vessels in the sexual sphere, and that this physiological change
itself becomes the source and stimulus for more vivid sexual feelings, which associate themselves
with more complex sexual thoughts. These in their turn reinforce again the physiological effect
on the sexual organ, and so the play goes on until the irritation of the whole sexual apparatus
and the corresponding sexual mental emotions reach a height at which the desire for satisfaction
becomes stronger than any ordinary motives of sober reason.

This is the great trick of nature in its incessant service to the conservation of the animal
race. Monogamic civilization strives to regulate and organize these race instincts and to raise
culture above the mere lure of nature. But that surely cannot be done by merely ignoring that
automatic mechanism of nature. On the contrary, the first demand of civilization must be to
make use of this inborn psychophysical apparatus for its own ideal human purposes, and to adjust
the social behaviour most delicately to the unchangeable mechanism. The first demand, accordingly,
ought to be that we excite no one of these mutually reinforcing parts of the system, neither
the organs nor the thoughts nor the feelings, as each one would heighten the activities of
the others, and would thus become the starting point of an irrepressible demand for sexual
satisfaction. The average boy or girl cannot give theoretical attention to the thoughts concerning
sexuality without the whole mechanism for reinforcement automatically entering into action.
We may instruct with the best intention to suppress, and yet our instruction itself must become
a source of stimulation, which necessarily creates the desire for improper conduct. The policy
of silence showed an instinctive understanding of this fundamental situation. Even if that
traditional policy had had no positive purpose, its negative function, its leaving at rest
the explosive sexual system of the youth, must be acknowledged as one of those wonderful instinctive
procedures by which society protects itself.

The reformer might object that he gives not only information, but depicts the dangers and warns
against the ruinous effects. He evidently fancies that such a black frame around the luring
picture will be a strong enough countermotive to suppress the sensual desire. But while the
faint normal longing can well be balanced by the trained respect for the mysterious unknown,
the strongly accentuated craving of the girl who knows may ill be balanced by any thought of
possible disagreeable consequences. Still more important, however, is a second aspect. The
girl to whom the world sex is the great taboo is really held back from lascivious life by an
instinctive respect and anxiety. As soon as girl and boy are knowers, all becomes a matter
of naked calculation. What they have learned from their instruction in home and school and
literature and drama is that the unmarried woman must avoid becoming a mother. Far from enforcing
a less sensuous life, this only teaches them to avoid the social opprobrium by going skilfully
to work. The old-fashioned morality sermon kept the youth on the paths of clean life; the new-fashioned
sexual instruction stimulates not only their sensual longings, but also makes it entirely clear
to the young that they have nothing whatever to fear if they yield to their voluptuousness
but make careful use of their new physiological knowledge. From my psychotherapeutic activity,
I know too well how much vileness and perversity are gently covered by the term flirtation
nowadays in the circle of those who have learned early to conceal the traces. The French type
of the demi-vierge is just beginning to play its rôle in the new world. The new policy will
bring in the great day for her, and with it a moral poisoning which must be felt in the whole
social atmosphere.

                                  III

We have not as yet stopped to examine whether at least the propaganda for the girl's sexual
education starts rightly when it takes for granted that ignorance is the chief source for the
fall of women. The sociological student cannot possibly admit this as a silent presupposition.
In many a pathetic confession we have read as to the past of fallen girls that they were not
aware of the consequences. But it would be utterly arbitrary to construe even such statements
as proofs that they were unaware of the limits which society demanded from them. If a man breaks
into a neighbour's garden by night to steal, he may have been ignorant of the fact that shooting
traps were laid there for thieves, but that does not make him worthy of the pity which we may
offer to him who suffers by ignorance only. The melodramatic idea that a straightforward girl
with honest intent is abducted by strangers and held by physical force in places of degradation
can simply be dismissed from a discussion of the general situation. The chances that any decent
man or woman will be killed by a burglar are a hundred times larger than that a decent girl
without fault of her own will become the victim of a white slavery system which depends upon
physical force. Since the new policy of antisilence has filled the newspapers with the most
filthy gossip about such imaginary horrors, it is not surprising that frivolous girls who elope
with their lovers later invent stories of criminal detention, first by half poisoning and afterward
by handcuffing. Of all the systematic, thorough investigations, that of the Vice Commission
of Philadelphia seems so far the most instructive and most helpful. It shows the picture of
a shameful and scandalous social situation, and yet, in spite of years of most insistent search
by the best specialists, it says in plain words that “no instances of actual physical slavery
have been specifically brought to our attention.”

This does not contradict in the least the indubitable fact that in all large cities white slavery
exists in the wider sense of the word—that is, that many girls are kept in a life of shame
because the escape from it is purposely made difficult to them. They are held constantly in
debt and are made to believe that their immunity from arrest depends upon their keeping on
good terms with the owners of disorderly houses. But the decisive point for us is that while
they are held back at a time when they know too much, they are not brought there by force at
a time when they know too little. The Philadelphia Vice Report analyzes carefully the conditions
and motives which have brought the prostitutes to their life of shame. The results of those
hundreds of interviews point nowhere to ignorance. The list of reasons for entering upon such
a life brings information like this: “She liked the man,” “Wanted to see what immoral life
was like,” “Sneaked out for pleasure, got into bad company,” “Would not go to school, frequented
picture shows, got into bad company,” “Thought she would have a better time,” “Envied girls
with fine clothes and gay time,” “Wanted to go to dances and theatres,” “Went with girls who
drank, influenced by them,” “Liked to go to moving picture shows,” “Did not care what happened
when forbidden to marry.” With these personal reasons go the economic ones: “Heard immorality
was an easy way to make money, which she needed,” “Decided that this was the easiest way of
earning money,” “Wanted pretty clothes,” “Never liked hard work,” “Tired of drudgery at home,”
“Could make more money this way than in a factory.” Only once is it reported: “Chloroformed
at a party, taken to man's house and ruined by him.” If that is true, we have there simply
a case of actual crime, against which nobody can be protected by mere knowledge. In short,
a thorough study indicates clearly that the girl who falls is not pushed passively into her misery.

Surely it is alarming to read that last year in one single large city of the Middle West two
hundred school girls have become mothers, but whoever studies the real sociological material
cannot doubt that every one of those two hundred knew very clearly that she was doing something
which she ought not to do. Every one of them had knowledge enough, and if the knowledge was
often vague and dirty, the effect would not have been improved by substituting for it more
knowledge, even if it were clearer and scientifically more correct. What every one of those
two hundred girls needed was less knowledge—that is, less familiarity of the mind with this
whole group of erotic ideas, and through this a greater respect for and fear of the unknown.
Nobody who really understands the facts of the sexual world with the insight of the physician
will deny that nevertheless treacherous dangers and sources of misfortune may be near to any
girl, and that they might be avoided if she knew the truth. But then it is no longer a question
of a general truth, which can be implanted by any education, but a specific truth concerning
the special man. The husband whom she marries may be a scoundrel who infects her with ruinous
disease, but even if she had read all the medical books beforehand it would not have helped her.

                                  IV

The situation of the boys seems in many respects different. They are on the aggressive side.
There is no danger that by their lack of knowledge they will be lured into a life of humiliation,
but the danger of their ruin is more imminent and the risk which parents run with them is far
worse. Any hour of reckless fun may bring them a life of cruel suffering. The havoc which venereal
diseases bring to the men of all social classes is tremendous. The Report of the Surgeon-General
of the Army for 1911 states that with the mean strength of about seventy-three thousand men
in the army, the admissions to the hospitals on account of venereal diseases were over thirteen
thousand. That is, of any hundred men at least eighteen were ill from sexual infection. The
New York County Hospital Society reports two hundred and forty-three thousand cases of venereal
disease treated in one year, as compared with forty-one thousand five hundred and eighty-five
cases of all other communicable diseases. This horrible sapping of the physical energies of
the nation, with the devastating results in the family, with the poisoning of the germs for
the next generation, and with the disastrous diseases of brain and spinal cord, is surely the
gravest material danger which exists. How small compared with that the thousands of deaths
from crime and accidents and wrecks! how insignificant the harvest of human life which any
war may reap! And all this can ultimately be avoided, not only by abstinence, but by strict
hygiene and rigorous social reorganization. At this moment we have only to ask how much of
a change for the better can be expected from a mere sexual education of the boys.

From a psychological point of view, this situation appears much more difficult than that of
the girls. All psychological motives speak for a policy of silence in the girls' cases. For
the boys, on the other hand, the importance of some hygienic instruction cannot be denied.
A knowledge of the disastrous consequences of sexual diseases must have a certain influence
for good, and the grave difficulty lies only in the fact that nevertheless all the arguments
which speak against the sexual education of the girls hold for the boys, too. The harm to the
youthful imagination, the starting of erotic thoughts with sensual excitement in consequence
of any kind of sexual instruction must be still greater for the young man than for the young
woman, as he is more easily able to satisfy his desires. We must thus undoubtedly expect most
evil consequences from the instruction of the boys; and yet we cannot deny the possible advantages.
Their hygienic consciousness may be enriched and their moral consciousness tainted by the same
hour of well-meant instruction. With the girls an energetic no is the only sane answer; with
the boys the social reformer may well hesitate between the no and the yes. The balance between
fear and hope may be very even there. Yet, however depressing such a decision may be, the psychologist
must acknowledge that even here the loss by frank discussion is greater than the gain.

A serious warning lies in the well-known fact that of all professional students, the young
medical men have the worst reputation for their reckless indulgence in an erotic life. They
know most, and it is psychologically not surprising that just on that account they are most
reckless. The instinctive fear of the half knower has left them; they live in an illusory safety,
the danger has become familiar to them, and they deceive themselves with the idea that the
particular case is harmless. If the steps to be taken were to be worked out at the writing
desk in cool mood and sober deliberation, the knowledge would at least often be a certain help,
but when the passionate desire has taken hold of the mind and the organic tension of the irritated
body works on the mind, there is no longer a fair fight with those sober reasons. The action
of the glands controls the psychophysical reactions, so that the ideas which would lead to
opposite response are inhibited. Alcohol and the imitative mood of social gayety may help to
dull those hygienic fears, but on the whole the mere sexual longing is sufficient to break
down the reminiscence of medical warning. The situation for the boy is then ultimately this:
A full knowledge of the chances of disease will start in hours of sexual coolness on the one
side a certain resolution to abstain from sexual intercourse, and on the other side a certain
intention to use protective means for the prevention of venereal diseases. As soon as the sexual
desire awakes, the decision of the first kind will become the less effective, and will be the
more easily overrun the more firmly the idea is fixed that such preventive means are at his
disposal. At the same time the discussion of all these sexual matters, even with their gruesome
background, will force on the mind a stronger engagement with sexual thought than had ever
before occurred, and this will find its discharge in an increased sexual tension. On the other
hand, this new knowledge of means of safety will greatly increase the playing with danger.
Of course it may be said that the education ought not to refer only to sexual hygiene, but
that it ought to be a moral education. That, however, is an entirely different story. We shall
speak about it; we shall put our faith in it, but at present we are talking of that specific
sexual education which is the fad of the day.

                                   V

Sexual education, to be sure, does not necessarily mean education of young people only. The
adults who know, the married men and women of the community, may not know enough to protect
their sons and daughters. And the need for their full information may stretch far beyond their
personal family interests. They are to form the public opinion which must stand behind every
real reform, their consciences must be stirred, the hidden misery must be brought before them.
Thus they need sexual education as much as the youngsters, only they need it in a form which
appeals to them and makes them willing to listen; and our reformers have at last discovered
the form. The public must be taught from the stage of the theatre. The magazine with its short
stories on sex incidents, the newspaper with its sensational court reports, may help to carry
the gruesome information to the masses, but the deepest impression will always be made when
actual human beings are shown on the stage in their appealing distress, as living accusations
against the rotten foundations of society. The stage is overcrowded with sexual drama and the
social community inundated with discussions about it.

It is not easy to find the right attitude toward this red-light literature. Many different
interests are concerned, and it is often extremely difficult to disentangle them. Three such
interests stand out very clearly: the true æsthetic one, the purely commercial one, and the
sociological one. It would be wonderful if the æsthetic culture of our community had reached
a development at which the æsthetic attitude toward a play would be absolutely controlling.
If we could trust this æsthetic instinct, no other question would be admissible but the one
whether the play is a good work of art or not. The social inquiry whether the human fates which
the poet shows us suggests legislative reforms or hygienic improvements would be entirely inhibited
in the truly artistic consciousness. It would make no difference to the spectator whether the
action played in Chicago or Petersburg, whether it dealt with men and women of to-day or of
two thousand years ago. The human element would absorb our interest, and as far as the joys
and the miseries of sexual life entered into the drama, they would be accepted as a social
background, just as the landscape is the natural background. A community which is æsthetically
mature enough to appreciate Ibsen does not leave “The Ghosts” with eugenic reform ideas. The
inherited paralysis on a luetic basis is accepted there as a tragic element of human fate.
On the height of true art the question of decency or indecency has disappeared, too. The nude
marble statue is an inspiration, and not a possible stimulus to frivolous sensuality, if the
mind is æsthetically cultivated. The nakedness of erotic passion in the drama of high æsthetic
intent before a truly educated audience has not the slightest similarity to the half-draped
chorus of sensual operetta before a gallery which wants to be tickled. But who would claim
that the dramatic literature of the sexual problems with which the last seasons have filled
the theatres from the orchestra to the second balcony has that sublime æsthetic intent, or
that it was brought to a public which even posed in an æsthetic attitude! As far as any high
aim was involved, it was the antiæsthetic moral value. The plays presented themselves as appeals
to the social conscience, and yet this idealistic interpretation would falsify the true motives
on both sides. The crowd went because it found the satisfaction of sexual curiosity and erotic
tension through the unveiled discussion of social perversities. And the managers produced the
plays because the lurid subjects with their appeal to the low instincts, and therefore with
their sure commercial success, could here escape the condemnation of police and decent public
as they were covered by the pretence of social reform. How far the writers of the play of prostitution
prostituted art in order to share the commercial profits in this wave of sexual reform may
better remain undiscussed.

What do these plays really teach us? I think I have seen almost all of them, and the composite
picture in my mind is one of an absurdly distorted, exaggerated, and misleading view of actual
social surroundings, suggesting wrong problems, wrong complaints, and wrong remedies. When
I studied the reports of the vice commissions of the large American and European cities, the
combined image in my consciousness was surely a stirring and alarming one, but it had no similarity
with the character of those melodramatic vagaries. Even the best and most famous of these fabrications
throw wrong sidelights on the social problems, and by a false emphasis inhibit the feeling
for the proportions of life. If in “The Fight” the father, a senator, visits a disorderly house,
unlocks the room in which the freshest fruit is promised him, and finds there his young daughter
who has just been abducted by force, the facts themselves are just as absurd as the following
scenes, in which this father shows that the little episode did not make the slightest impression
on him. He coolly continues to fight against those politicians who want to remove such places
from the town. In “Bought and Paid For” marriage itself is presented as white slavery. The
woman has to tolerate the caresses of her husband, even when he has drunk more champagne than
is wise for him. The play makes us believe that she must suffer his love because she was poor
before she married and he has paid her with a life of luxury. Where are we to end if such logic
in questions of sexual intercourse is to benumb common sense? England brought us “The Blindness
of Virtue,” the story of a boy and a girl whom we are to believe to be constantly in grave
danger because they are ignorant, while in reality nothing happens, and everything suggests
that the moral danger for this particular girl would have been much greater if she had known
how to enjoy love without consequences.

The most sensational specimen of the group was “The Lure.” It would be absurd to face this
production from any æsthetic point of view. It would be unthinkable that a work of such crudeness
could satisfy a metropolitan public, even if some of the most marked faults of construction
were acknowledged as the results of the forceful expurgation of the police. Nevertheless, the
only significance of the play lies outside of its artistic sphere, and belongs entirely to
its effort to help in this great social reform. The only strong applause, which probably repeats
itself every evening, broke out when the old, good-natured physician said that as soon as women
have the vote the white slavers will be sent to the electric chair. But it is worth while to
examine the sermon which a play of this type really preaches, and to become aware of the illusions
with which the thoughtless public receives this message. All which we see there on the stage
is taken by the masses as a remonstrance against the old, cowardly policy of silence, and the
play is to work as a great proof that complete frankness and clear insight can help the daughters
of the community.

The whole play contains the sad story of two girls. There is Nell. What happened to her? She
is the daughter of a respectable banker in a small town. A scoundrel, a commercial white slaver,
a typical Broadway “cadet” with luring manners, goes to the small town, finds access to the
church parlours, is introduced to the girl, and after some courtship he elopes with her and
makes her believe that they are correctly married. After the fraudulent marriage with a falsified
license he brings her into a metropolitan disorderly house and holds her there by force. Of
course this is brutal stage exaggeration, but even if this impossibility were true, what conclusion
are we to draw, and what advice are we to give? Does it mean that in future a young girl who
meets a nice chap in the church socials of her native town ought to keep away from him, because
she ought all the time to think that he might be a delegate of a Broadway brothel? To fill
a girl with suspicions in a case like that of Nell would be no wiser than to tell the ordinary
man that he ought not to deposit his earnings in any bank, because the cashier might run away
with it. To be sure, it would have been better if Nell had not eloped, but is there any knowledge
of sexual questions which would have helped her to a wiser decision? On the contrary, she said
she did elope because her life in the small town was so uninteresting, and she felt so lonely
and was longing for the life of love. She knew all which was to be known then, and if there
had been any power to hold her back from the foolish elopement it could have been only a kind
of instinctive respect for the traditional demands of society, that kind of respect which grows
up from the policy of silence and is trampled to the ground by the policy of loud talk.

The other girl in the play is Sylvia. Her fate is very different. She needs melodramatic money
for her sick mother. Her earnings in the department store are not enough. The sly owner of
a treacherous employment agency has given her a card over the counter, advising her to come
there, when she needs extra employment. The agency keeps open in the evening. She tells her
mother that she will seek some extra work there. The mother warns her that there are so many
traps for decent girls, and she answers that she is not afraid and that she will be on the
lookout. She goes there, and the skilful owner of the agency shows her how miserable the pay
would be for any decent evening work, and how easily she can earn all the money she needs for
her mother if she is willing to be paid by men. At first she refuses with pathos, but under
the suggestive pressure of luring arguments she slowly weakens, and finally consents to exchange
her street gown for a fantastic costume of half-nakedness. The feelings of the audience are
saved by the detective who breaks in at the decisive moment, but the arguments of the advocates
of sexual education cannot possibly be saved after that voluntary yielding. Sylvia knows what
she has to expect, and no more intense perusal of literature on the subject of prostitution
would have changed her mind. What else in the world could have helped her in such an hour but
a still stronger feeling of instinctive repugnance? If Sylvia was actually to put her fate
on a mere calculation, with a full knowledge of all the sociological facts involved, she probably
reasoned wrongly in dealing with this particular employment agency, but was on the whole not
so wrong in deciding that a frivolous life would be the most reasonable way out of her financial
difficulties, as her sexual education would include, of course, a sufficient knowledge of all
which is needed to avoid conception and infection. She would therefore know that after a little
while of serving the lust of men she would be just as intact and just as attractive. If society
has the wish to force Sylvia to a decision in the opposite direction, only one way is open:
to make the belief in the sacred value of virtue so deep and powerful that any mere reasoning
and calculation loses its strength. But that is possible only through an education which relies
on the instinctive respect and mystical belief. Only a policy of silence could have saved Sylvia,
because that alone would have implanted in her mind an ineffable idea of unknown horrors which
would await her when she broke the sacred ring of chastity.

The climax of public discussions was reached when America had its season of Brieux' “Damaged
Goods.” Its topic is entirely different, as it deals exclusively with the spreading of contagious
diseases and the prevention of their destructive influence on the family. Yet the doubt whether
such a dramatized medical lesson belongs on the metropolitan stage has here exactly the same
justification. Nevertheless, it brings its new set of issues. Brieux' play does not deserve
any interest as a drama. With complete sincerity the theatre programme announces, “The object
of this play is a study of the disease of syphilis in its bearing on marriage.” The play was
first produced in Paris in the year 1901. It began its great medical teaching in America in
the spring of 1913. Even those who have only superficial contact with medicine know that the
twelve years which lie between those dates have seen the greatest progress in the study of
syphilis which has ever been made. It is sufficient to think of the Wassermann test, the Ehrlich
treatment, the new discoveries concerning the relations of lues and brain disease, and many
other details in order to understand that a clinical lesson about this disease written in the
first year of the century must be utterly antiquated in its fourteenth year. We might just
as well teach the fighting of tuberculosis with the clinical textbook of thirty years ago.

How misleading many of the claims of the play are ought to have struck even the unscientific
audience. The real centre of the so-called drama is that the father and the grandmother of
the diseased infant are willing to risk the health of the wet nurse rather than to allow the
child to go over to artificial feeding. The whole play loses its chief point and its greatest
pathetic speech if we do not accept the Parisian view that a sickly child must die if it has
its milk from the bottle. The Boston audience wildly applauded the great speech of the grandmother
who wants to poison the nurse rather than to sacrifice her grandchild to the drinking of sterilized
milk, and yet it was an audience which surely was brought up on the bottle. It would be very
easy to write another play in which quite different medical views are presented, and where
will it lead us if the various treatments of tuberculosis, perhaps by the Friedmann cures,
or of diphtheria, perhaps by chiropractice or osteopathy, are to be fought out on the stage
until finally the editors of Life would write a play around their usual thesis that the physicians
are destroying mankind and that our modern medicine is humbug. As long as the drama shows us
human elements, every one can be a party and can take a stand for the motives of his heart.
But if the stage presents arguments on scientific questions in which no public is able to examine
the facts, the way is open for any one-sided propaganda.

Moreover, what, after all, are the lessons which the men are to learn from these three hours
of talk on syphilis? To be sure, it is suggested that it would be best if every young man were
to marry early and remain faithful to his wife and take care that she remain faithful to him.
But this aphorism will make very little impression on the kind of listener whose tendency would
naturally turn him in other directions. He hears in the play far more facts which encourage
him in his selfish instincts. He hears the old doctor assuring his patient that not more than
a negligible 10 per cent. of all men enter married life without having had sexual intercourse
with women. He hears that the disease can be easily cured, that he may marry quite safely after
three years, that the harm done to the child can be removed, and that no one ought to be blamed
for acquiring the disease, as anybody may acquire it and that it is only a matter of good or
bad luck. The president of the Medical Society in Boston drew the perfectly correct consequences
when in a warm recommendation of the play he emphasized the importance of the knowledge about
the disease, inasmuch as any one may acquire it in a hundred ways which have nothing to do
with sexual life. He says anybody may get syphilis by wetting a lead pencil with his lips or
from an infected towel or from a pipe or from a drinking glass or from a cigarette. This is
medically entirely correct, and yet if Brieux had added this medical truth to all the other
medical sayings of his doctor, he would have taken away the whole meaning of the play and would
have put it just on the level of a dramatized story about scarlet fever or typhoid.

Yet here, too, the fundamental mistake remains the psychological one. The play hopes to reform
by the appeal to fear, while the whole mental mechanism of man is so arranged that in the emotional
tension of the sexual desire the argument of the fear that we may have bad luck will always
be outbalanced by the hope and conviction that we will not be the one who draws the black ball.
And together with this psychological fact goes the other stubborn feature of the mind, which
no sermon can remove, that the focussing of the attention on the sexual problems, even in their
repelling form, starts too often a reaction of glands and with it sexual thoughts which ultimately
lead to a desire for satisfaction.

The cleverest of this group of plays strictly intended for sexual education—as Shaw's “Mrs.
Warren's Profession” or plays of Pinero and similar ones would belong only indirectly in this
circle—is probably Wedekind's “Spring's Awakening.” It brought to Germany, and especially to
Berlin, any education which the Friedrichstrasse had failed to bring. To prohibit it would
have meant the reactionary crushing of a distinctly literary work by a brilliant writer; to
allow it meant to fill the Berlin life for seasons with a new spirit which showed its effects.
The sexual discussion became the favourite topic; the girls learned to look out for their safety:
and it was probably only a chance that at the same time a wave of immorality overflooded the
youth of Berlin. The times of naïve flirtation were over; any indecency seemed allowable if
only conception was artificially prevented. The social life of Berlin from the fashionable
quarters of Berlin West to the factory quarters of Berlin East was never more rotten and more
perverse than in those years in which sexual education from the stage indulged in its orgies.

The central problem is not whether the facts are distorted or not, and whether the suggestions
are wise or not, and whether the remedies are practicable or not. All this is secondary to
the fundamental question of whether it is wise to spread out such problems before the miscellaneous
public of our theatres. No doubt a few of the social reformers are sprinkled over the audiences.
There are a few in the boxes as well as in the galleries who discern the realities and who
hear the true appeal, even through those grotesque melodramas. But with the overwhelming majority
it is quite different. For them it is entertainment, and as such it is devastating. It is quite
true that many a piquant comic opera shows more actual frivolity, and no one will underestimate
the shady influence of such voluptuous vulgarities in their multicoloured stage setting. Yet
from a psychological point of view the effect of the pathetic treatment is far more dangerous
than that of the frivolous. A good many well-meaning reformers do not see that, because they
know too little of the deeper layers of the sexual imagination. The intimate connection between
sexuality and cruelty, perversion and viciousness, may produce much more injurious results
in the mind of the average man when he sees the tragedy of the white slave than when he laughs
at the farce of the chorus girl. Moreover, even the information which such plays divulge may
stimulate some model citizens to help the police and the doctors, but it may suggest to a much
larger number hitherto unknown paths of viciousness. The average New Yorker would hear with
surprise from the Rockefeller Report on Commercialized Prostitution in New York City that the
commission has visited in Manhattan a hundred and forty parlour houses, twenty of which were
known to the trade as fifty-cent houses, eighty as one-dollar houses, six as two-dollar houses,
and thirty-four as five-and ten-dollar houses. Yet the chances are great that essentially persons
with serious interests in social hygiene turn to such books of sober study. But to cry out
such information to those Broadway crowds which seek a few hours' fun before they go to the
next lobster palace or to the nearest cabaret cannot possibly serve social hygiene.

Worst of all, the theatre, more than any other source of so-called information, has been responsible
for the breakdown of the barriers of social reserve in sexual discussions, and that means ultimately
in erotic behaviour. The book which the individual man or woman reads at his fireside has no
socializing influence, but the play which they see together is naturally discussed, views are
exchanged, and all which in old-fashioned times was avoided, even in serious discussion, becomes
daily more a matter of the most superficial gossip. When recently at a dinner party a charming
young woman whom I had hardly met before asked me, when we were at the oysters, how prostitution
is regulated in Germany, and did not conclude the subject before we had reached the ice cream,
I saw the natural consequences of this new era of theatre influence. Society, which with the
excuse of philanthropic sociology favours erotically tainted problems, must sink down to a
community in which the sexual relations become chaotic and turbulent. Finally, the theatre
is not open only to the adult. Its filthy message reaches the ears of boys and girls, who,
even if they take it solemnly, are forced to think of these facts and to set the whole mechanism
of sexual associations and complex reactions into motion. The playwriters know that well, but
they have their own theory. When I once remonstrated against the indecencies which are injected
into the imagination of the adolescent by the plays, Mr. Bayard Veiller, the talented author
of “The Fight,” answered in a Sunday newspaper. He said that he could not help thinking of
the insane man who objected to throwing a bucket of salt water into the ocean for fear it would
turn the ocean salt. “Does not Professor Münsterberg know that you can't put more sex thoughts
into the minds of young men and women, because their minds contain nothing else?” If the present
movement is not brought to a stop, the time may indeed come when those young minds will not
contain anything else. But is that really true of to-day, and, above all, was it true of yesterday,
before the curtain was raised on the red-light drama?

                                  VI

How is it possible that with such obvious dangers and such evident injurious effects, this
movement on the stage and in literature, in the schools and in the homes, is defended and furthered
by so many well-meaning and earnest thinking men and women in the community? A number of causes
may have worked together there. It cannot be overlooked that one of the most effective ones
was probably the new enthusiasm for the feministic movement. We do not want to discuss here
the right and wrong of this worldwide advance toward the fuller liberation of women. If we
have to touch on it here, it is only to point out that this connection between the sound elements
of the feministic movement and the propaganda for sex education on the new-fashioned lines
is really not necessary at all. I do not know whether the feminists are entirely right, but
I feel sure that their own principles ought rather to lead them to an opposition to this breaking
down of the barriers. It is nothing but a superficiality if they instinctively take their stand
on the side of those who spread broadcast the knowledge about sex.

The feminists vehemently object to the dual standard, but if they help everything which makes
sex an object of common gossip, it may work indeed toward a uniform standard; only the uniformity
will not consist in the men's being chaste like the women, but in the women's being immoral
like the men. The feministic enthusiasm turns passionately against those scandalous places
of women's humiliation; and yet its chief influence on female education is the effort to give
more freedom to the individual girl, and that means to remove her from the authority and discipline
of the parental home, to open the door for her to the street, to leave her to her craving for
amusement, to smooth the path which leads to ruin. The sincere feminists may say that some
of the changes which they hope for are so great that they are ready to pay the price for them
and to take in exchange a rapid increase of sexual vice and of erotic disorderliness. But to
fancy that the liberation of women and the protection of women can be furthered by the same
means is a psychological illusion. The community which opens the playhouses to the lure of
the new dramatic art may protect 5 per cent. of those who are in danger to-day, but throws
50 per cent. more into abysses. The feminists who see to the depths of their ideals ought to
join full-heartedly the ranks of those who entirely object to this distribution of the infectious
germs of sexual knowledge.

Some stray support may come to the new movement also from another side. Some believe that this
great emphasis on sexual interests may intensify æsthetic longings in the American commonwealth.
No doubt this interrelation exists. No civilization has known a great artistic rise without
a certain freedom and joy in sensual life. Prudery always has made true æsthetic unfolding
impossible. Yet if we yielded here, we would again be pushed away from our real problem. The
æsthetic enthusiast might think it a blessing for the American nation if a great æsthetic outburst
were secured, even by the ruin of moral standards: a wonderful blossoming of fascinating flowers
from a swampy soil in an atmosphere full of moral miasmas. To be sure, even then it is very
doubtful whether any success could be hoped for, as a lightness in sexual matters may be a
symptom of an artistic age, but surely is not its cause. The artist may love to drink, but
the drink does not make an artist. An æsthetic community may reach its best when it is freed
from sexual censorship, but throwing the censor out of the house would not add anything to
the æsthetic inspiration of a society which is instinctively indifferent to the artistic calling.
Above all, the question for us is not whether the sexual overeducation may have certain pleasant
side effects: we ask only how far it succeeds in its intended chief effect of improving morally
the social community.

In fact, neither feminism nor æstheticism could have secured this indulgence of the community
in the new movement, if one more direct argument had not influenced the conviction of some
of our leaders. They reason around one central thought—namely, that the old policy of silence,
in which they grew up, has been tried and has shown itself unsuccessful. The horrible dimensions
which the social evil has taken, the ruinous effects on family life and national health, are
before us. The old policy must therefore be wrong. Let us try with all our might the reform,
however disgusting its first appearance may be. This surely is the virile argument of men who
know what they are aiming at. And yet it is based on fundamental psychological misapprehensions.
It is a great confusion of causes and effects. The misery has this distressing form not on
account of the policy of silence, but in spite of it, or rather it took the tremendous dimensions
of to-day at the same time that the dam of silence was broken and the flood of sexual gossip
rushed in.

We find exactly this relation throughout the history of civilized mankind. To be sure, some
editorial writers behave as if the erotic calamity of the day were something unheard of, and
as if it demanded a new remedy. The historical retrospect leaves no doubt that periods of sexual
tension and of sexual relaxation, of hysteric erotic excitement and of a certain cool indifference
have alternated throughout thousands of years. And whenever an age was unusually immoral and
lascivious, it was always also a period in which under the mask of scientific interest or social
frankness or æsthetic openmindedness the sexual problems were matters of freest discussion.
The periods of austerity and restraint, on the other hand, were always characterized also by
an unwillingness to talk about sexual relations and to show them in their animal nakedness.
Antiquity knew those ups and downs, mediæval times knew them, and in modern centuries the fluctuations
have been still more rapid. As soon as a moral age with its policy of silence is succeeded
by an immoral age, it is certainly a very easy historical misconstruction to say that the immorality
resulted from the preceding conspiracy of silence and that the immorality would disappear if
the opposite scheme of frankest speech were adopted. But the fact that this argument is accepted
and that the overwhelming majority hails the new régime with enthusiasm is nothing but an almost
essential part of the new period, which has succeeded the time of modesty.

Sexual discussion and sexual immorality have always been parts of one circle; sexual silence
and moral restraint form another circle. The change from one to the other has come in the history
of mankind, usually through new conditions of life, and the primary factor has not been any
policy of keeping quiet in respect or of gossiping in curiosity, but the starting point has
generally been a change in the life habits. When new wealth has come to a people with new liberties
and new desires for enjoyment, the great periods of sexual frivolity have started and brought
secondarily the discussions of sex problems, which intensified the immoral life. On the other
hand, when a nation in the richness of its life has been brought before new great responsibilities,
great social earthquakes and revolutions, great wars for national honour, or great new intellectual
or religious ideals, then the sexual tension has been released, the attention has been withdrawn
from the frivolous concerns, and the people have settled down soberly to a life of modesty
and morality, which brought with it as a natural consequence the policy of reverence and silence.
The new situation in America, and to a certain degree all over the world, has come in, too,
not through the silence of the preceding generation, but by the sudden change from agricultural
to industrial life, with its gigantic cumulation of capital, with its widespread new wealth,
with its new ideas of social liberty, with its fading religion, with its technical wonders
of luxury and comfort. This new age, which takes its orders from Broadway with its cabarets
and tango dances, must ridicule the silence of our fathers and denounce it as a conspiracy.
It needs the sexual discussions, as it craves the lurid music and the sensual dances, until
finally even the most earnest energies, those of social reform and of hygiene, of intellectual
culture and of artistic effort, are forced into the service of this antimoral fashion.

Some sober spectators argue that as things have gone to this extent, it might be wise to try
the new policy as an experiment, because matters cannot become worse than they are to-day.
But those who yield to the new advice so readily ought again to look into the pages of history,
or ought at least to study the situation in some other countries before they proclaim that
the climax has been reached. It may be true that it would not be possible to transform still
more New York hotels into dancing halls, since the innovation of this fashion, which suggests
the dancing epidemics of mediæval times, has reached practically every fashionable hostelry.
Yet we may be only at the beginning, as in this vicious circle of craving for sensual life
and talking about sexual problems the erotic transformation of the whole social behaviour is
usually a rapid one. The Rococo age reached many subtleties, which we do not dream of as yet,
but to which the conspiracy against silence may boldly push us. Read the memoirs of Casanova,
the Italian of the eighteenth century, whose biography gives a vivid picture of a time in which
certainly no one was silent on sexual affairs and in which life was essentially a chain of
gallant adventures; even the sexual diseases figured as gallant diseases. In the select American
circles it is already noticeable that the favourites of rich men get a certain social acknowledgment.
The great masses have not reached this stage at present, which is, of course, very familiar
in France. But if we proceed in that rapid rhythm with which we have changed in the last ten
years, ten years hence we may have substituted the influence of mistresses for the influence
of Tammany grafters, and twenty years hence a Madame Pompadour may be dwelling not far from
the White House and controlling the fate of the nation with her small hands, as she did for
two decades when Louis XV was king. History has sufficiently shown that these are the logical
consequences of the sensualization of a rich people, whose mind is filled with sexual problems.
Are we to wait, too, until a great revolution or a great war shakes the nation to its depths
and hammers new ideas of morality into its conscience? Even our literature might sink still
deeper and deeper. If we begin with the sexual problem, it lies in its very nature that that
which is interesting to-day is to-morrow stale, and new regions of sexuality must be opened.
The fiction of Germany in the last few years shows the whole pathetic decadence which results.
The most abstruse perversions, the ugliest degenerations of sexual sinfulness, have become
the favourite topics, and the best sellers are books which in the previous age would have been
crushed by police and public opinion alike, but which in the present time are excused under
scientific and sociological pretences, although they are more corrupt and carry more infection
than any diseases against which they warn.

                                  VII

What is to be done? In one point we all agree: Those who are called to do so must bend their
utmost energy toward the purification of the outer forms of community life and of the public
institutions. Certain eugenic ideas must be carried through relentlessly; above all, the sexual
segregation of the feeble-minded, whose progeny fills the houses of disorder and the ranks
of the prostitutes. The hospitals must be wide open for every sexual disease, and all discrimination
against diseases which may be acquired by sexual intercourse must be utterly given up in order
to stamp out this scourge of mankind, as far as possible, with the medical knowledge of our
day. Every effort must be made to suppress places through which unclean temptations are influencing
the youth. Parents and doctors should speak in the intimacy of private talk earnest words of
warning. The fight against police corruption and graft must be relentlessly carried on so as
to have the violation of the laws really punished.

Many means may still seem debatable among those who know the social and medical facts. Certainly
some of the eugenic postulates go too far. It is, for instance, extremely difficult to say
where the limit is to be set for permissible marriages. There may be no doubt that feeble-mindedness
ought not to be transmitted to the next generation, but have we really a right to prevent the
marriage of epileptics or psychasthenics? Can we be surprised then that others already begin
to demand that neurasthenics shall not marry? Even the health certificate at the wedding may
give only an illusion of safety, as the health of too many marriages is destroyed by the escapades
of the husband, and it may, on the other hand, lead to a narrowing down under the pressure
of arbitrary theories, producing a true race suicide. The question whether the healthy man
is the only desirable element of the community is one which allows different answers. Much
of the greatest work for the world's progress has been created by men with faulty animal constitutions
whose parents would never have received permission to marry from a rigorous eugenic board.

But whatever the sociological reasons for hesitation may be, the state legislators and physicians,
the police officers and social workers have no right to stop. They must push forward and force
the public life into paths of less injurious and less dangerous sexual habits and customs.
Their success will depend upon the energy with which they keep themselves independent of the
control of those who do not count with realities. The hope that men will become sexually abstinent
outside married life is fantastic, and the book of history ought not to have been written in
vain. Any counting on this imaginary overcoming of selfish desire for sexual satisfaction decreases
the chances of real hygienic reform. It would even be an inexcusable hypocrisy of the medical
profession if, with its consent, one group of specialists behave as if sexual abstinence were
the bodily ideal, while thousands of no less conscientious physicians in the world, especially
those concerned with nervous diseases, feel again and again obliged to advise sexual intercourse
for their patients. We know to-day, even much better than ten years ago, how many serious disturbances
result from the suppression of normal sexual life. The past has shown, moreover, that when
society succeeded in spreading alarm and in decreasing prostitution by fear, the result was
such a rapid increase of perversion and nerve-racking self-abuse that after a short while the
normal ways were again preferred as the lesser evil.

And the reformers will need a second limitation of their efforts. They cannot hope for success
as long as they fancy that reasoning and calculation and sober balancing of dangers and joys,
of injuries and advantages, can ever be the decisive factor of progress. They ought not to
forget that as soon as this whole problem is brought down to a mere considering of consequences
by the individual, their eugenic hopes may be cruelly shaken. However distressing it is to
say it frankly, by mere appeal to reason we shall not turn many girls from the way which leads
to prostitution, nor many boys from the anticipation of married life. The girl in the factory,
who hesitates between the hard work at the machine for the smallest pay, without pleasures,
and the easy money of the street, with an abundance of fun, may in the regrettable life of
prosaic reality balance the consequences very differently from the moralist. She has discovered
that the ideal of virtue is not so highly valued in her circles as in the middle classes. The
loss of her virtue is not such a severe hindrance in her life, and even if she yields for a
while to earn her extra money in indecent ways, the chances are great that she may remain more
attractive to a possible future husband from her set than if she lived the depressing life
of grief and deprivation. The probability of her marrying and becoming the mother in a decent
family home may be greater than on the straighter path. It is, of course, extremely sad that
reality takes such an immoral way, but just here is the field where the reformers ought to
keep their eyes wide open, instead of basing their appeals on illusory constructions about
social conditions which do not exist. And if the boys begin to reason, their calculations may
count on a still greater probability of good outcome, if they indulge in their pleasures. More
than that, the fate of certain European countries shows that when it comes to this clear reasoning,
the great turn of the selfish man is from the dangerous prostitute to the clean girl or married
woman, to the sisters and wives of his friends, and that means the true ruin of home life.

What is the consequence of all? That the fight ought to be given up? Surely not. But that instead
of relying on physical conditions, on fear of diseases, on merely eugenic improvements and
on clever reasoning, the reform must come from within, must be one of education and morality,
must be controlled, not by bacteriology, but by ethics, must find its strength not from horror
of skin diseases, but in the reverence for the ideal values of humanity.

                                 VIII

We must not deceive ourselves as to the gravity of the problem. It is not one of the passing
questions which are replaced next season by new ones. State laws and interstate laws may and
ought to continue to round off some of the sharp edges, institutions and associations may and
ought to succeed in diminishing some of the misery, but the central problem of national policy
in the treatment of the youth will stay with us until it has been solved rightly; illustrative
instruction cannot be such a solution. We must see with open eyes where we are standing. The
American nation of to-day is no longer the America of yesterday. The puritanism which certainly
was a spirit of restraint has gone and cannot be brought back. The new wealth and power, the
influx of sensuous South European and East European elements, the general trend of our age
all over the civilized world, with its technical comfort and its inexpensive luxuries, the
receding of religion and many more factors, have given a new face to America in the last fifteen
years. A desire for the satisfaction of the senses, a longing for amusements, has become predominant
in thousandfold shades from the refined to the vulgar. In such self-seeking periods the sexual
desire in its masked and its unmasked forms gains steadily in importance and fascination.

America, moreover, is in a particularly difficult situation. This new longing for joy, even
with its erotic touch, brings with it many valuable enrichments of every national life, not
least among them the spreading of the sense of beauty. But what is needed is a wholesome national
self-control by which an antisocial growth of these emotions will be suppressed. Our present-day
American life so far lacks these conditions for the truly harmonious organization of the new
tendencies. There are many causes for it. The long puritanic past did not allow that slow European
training in æsthetic and harmless social enjoyments. Moreover, the widespread wealth, the feeling
of democratic equality, the faintness of truly artistic interests in the masses, all reinforce
the craving for the mere tickling of the senses, for amusement of the body, for vaudeville
on the stage and in life. The sexual element in this wave of enjoyment becomes reinforced by
the American position of the woman outside of the family circle. Her contact with men has been
multiplied, her right to seek joy in every possible way has become the corollary of her new
independence, her position has become more exposed and more dangerous. And in addition to all
this, the chief factor, which alone would be sufficient to give to the situation a threatening
aspect: American educationalists do not believe in discipline. As long as the community was
controlled by the moral influence of puritanism, the lack of training in subordination under
social authority and obedient discipline was without danger, while it strengthened the spirit
of political liberty. But to-day, in the period of the new antipuritanic life, the lack of
discipline in education means an actual threat to the social safety.

In such a situation what can be more fraught with dangers than to abolish the policy of silence
and to uphold the policy of talking and talking about sexual matters with those whose minds
were still untouched by the lure. It means to fill the atmosphere in which the growing adolescent
moves with sultry ideas, it means to distort the view of the social surroundings, it means
to stir up the sexual desires and to teach children how to indulge in them without immediate
punishment. Just as in a community of graft and corruption the individual soon loses the finer
feeling for honesty, and crime flourishes simply because every one knows that nobody expects
anything better, so in a community in which sexual problems are the lessons of the youth and
the dinner talk of the adult, the feeling of respect for man's deepest emotions fades away.
Man and woman lose the instinctive shyness in touching on this sacred ground, and as the organic
desires push and push toward it, the youth soon discovers that the barriers to the forbidden
ground are removed and that in their place stands a simple signal with a suggestive word of
warning against some easily avoided traps.

From a psychological point of view the right policy would be to reduce the external temptations,
above all, the opportunities for contact. Coeducation, for instance, was morally without difficulties
twenty years ago, but it is unfit in high schools and colleges for the eastern part of the
nation in the atmosphere of to-day. Moreover, the æsthetic spirit ought to be educated systematically,
and above all, the whole education of the youth ought to be built on discipline; the lesson
by which the youth learns to overcome the desire and to inhibit the will is the most essential
for the young American of to-morrow. The policy of silence has never meant that a girl should
grow up without the consciousness that the field of sexual facts exists in our social world;
on the contrary, those feelings of shame and decency which belong to the steady learning of
a clean child from the days of the nursery have strongly impressed on the young soul that such
regions are real, but that they must not be approached by curiosity or self-seeking wilfulness.
This instinct itself brought something of ideal value, of respect and even of reverence into
the most trivial life, however often it became ruined by foul companionship. To strengthen
this instinctive emotion of mysterious respect, which makes the young mind shrink from brutal
intrusion, will remain the wisest policy, as long as we cannot change that automatic mechanism
of human nature by which the sexual thought stimulates the sexual organs. The masses are, of
course, in favour of the opposite programme, which is in itself only another symptom of the
erotic atmosphere into which the new antipuritanic nation has come. That mechanism of the nervous
system furnishes them a pleasant excitement when they read and hear the discussions and plays
which bristle with sexual instruction. The magazines which, with the best intentions, fight
for the new policy, easily find millions of readers; the plays with their erotic overflow and
the moral ending are crowded, and mostly by those who hardly need the instruction any longer.
A nation which tries to lift its sexual morality by dragging the sexual problems to the street
for the inspection of the crowd, without shyness and without shame, and which wilfully makes
them objects of gossip and stage entertainment, is doing worse than Munchausen when he tried
to lift himself by his scalp. It seems less important that the youth learn the secrets of sexual
intercourse than that their teachers and guardians learn the elements of physiological psychology;
the sexual sins of the youth start from the educational sins of the elders.

It is easy to say, as the social reformers and the vice commissioners and the sex instructors
and many others have repeated in ever new forms, that “all children's questions should be answered
truthfully,” and to work up the whole sermon to the final trumpet call, “The truth shall make
you free.” Yet this is entirely useless as long as we have not defined what we mean by freedom,
and above all what we mean by truth. If the child enjoys the beautiful softness of the butterfly's
coloured wing, it is surely a truth, if we teach him that seen under the microscope in reality
there is no softness there, but large ugly bumps and hollows and that the beautiful impression
is nothing but an illusion. But is this truth of the microscope the only truth, and is science
the only truth, and is there ever only one truth about the concrete facts of reality? Does
truth in this sense not simply mean a certain order into which we bring our experience in the
service of certain purposes of thought? We may approach the chaos of life experience with different
purposes, and led by any one of them we may reach that consistent unity of ideas for the limited
outlook which we call truth. The chemist has a right to consider everything in the world as
chemical substances, and the mathematician may take the same things as geometric objects. And
yet he who seeks a meaning in these things and a value and an inner development may come to
another kind of truth. Only a general philosophy of life can ultimately grade and organize
those various relative truths and combine them in an all-embracing unity.

No doubt the physician's scientific discoveries and observations are perfectly true. Man is
an animal, and anatomical and physiological conditions control his existence, and if we want
to understand this animal's life and want to keep it healthy, we have to ask for the truth
of the physician. But shame upon him who wants to educate youth toward the view that man as
an animal is the true man! If we educate at all, we educate in the service of culture and civilization.
All building up of the youthful mind is itself service to human progress. But this human progress
is not a mere growth of the animal race. It has its total meaning in the understanding of man
as a soul, determined by purposes and ideals. Not the laws of physiology, but the demands of
logic, ethics, æsthetics, and religion control the man who makes history and who serves civilization.
He who says that the child's questions ought to be answered truthfully means in this connection
that lowest truth of all, the truth of physiology, and forgets that when he opens too early
the mind of the boy and the girl to this materialistic truth he at the same time closes it,
and closes it perhaps forever, to that richer truth in which man is understood as historic
being, as agent for the good and true and beautiful and eternal.

Give to the child the truth, but that truth which makes life worth living, that truth which
teaches him that life is a task and a duty, and that his true health and soundness and value
will depend upon the energy with which he makes the world and his own body with its selfish
desires subservient to unselfish ideals. If you mean by the truth that half-truth of man as
a sexual creature of flesh and nerves, the child to whom you offer it will be led to ever new
questions, and if you go on answering them truthfully as the new fashion suggests, your reservoir
will soon be emptied, even if the six volumes of Havelock Ellis' “Psychology of Sex” are fully
at your disposal. But the more this species of truth is given out, the more life itself, for
which you educate the child, will appear to him unworthy and meaningless. If the truth of civilized
life is merely that which natural science can analyze, then life has lost its honour and its
loyalty, its enthusiasm and its value. He who sees the truth in the idealistic aspect of man
will not necessarily evade the curious question of the child who is puzzled about the naturalistic
processes around him. But instead of whetting his appetite for unsavoury knowledge, he will
seriously influence the young mind to turn the attention into the opposite direction. He will
speak to him about the fact that there is something animal-like in the human being, but will
add that the true values of life lie just in overcoming the low instincts in the interest of
high aims. He will point to those hidden naturalistic realities as something not overimportant,
but as something which a clean boy and girl do not ask about and with which only the imagination
of bad companions is engaged. An instinctive indifference and aversion to the contact with
anything low and impure can easily be developed in every healthy child amid clean surroundings.
Why is the boy to live and to die for the honour of his country? Why is he to devote himself
to the search for knowledge? Why is he to fight for the growth of morality? Why does he not
confine himself to mere seeking for comfort and ease and satisfaction of the senses? All which
really creates civilization and human progress depends upon symbols and belief. As soon as
we make all those symbols of the historic community, all the ideals of honour and devotion,
righteousness and beauty, glory and faithfulness, mere matters of scientific calculation, they
stare us in the face as sheer absurdities; and yet we might again misname that as truth. Then
it is the untruth which makes us free, it is the non-scientific, humanistic aspect which liberates
us from the slavery of our low desires.

Certainly there will always be some wild boys and girls in the school who try to spread filthy
knowledge, but if the atmosphere is filled with respect and reverence, and the minds are trained
by inner discipline and morality, the contagion of such mischievous talk will reach only those
children who have the disposition of the degenerate. The majority will remain uncontaminated.
Plenty of lewd literature in the circulars of the quacks and even in the sensational newspapers
will reach their eye and their brain, and yet it will leave not the slightest trace. The trained,
clean mind develops a moral antitoxin which at every pulse-beat of life destroys the poisonous
toxins produced by the germs which enter the system. The red lanterns will never be entirely
extinguished in any large city the world over, but the boy who has developed a sense of respect
and reverence and an instinctive desire for moral cleanliness and a power to overcome selfish
impulses, will pass them by and forget them when he comes to the next street corner. But the
other, whose imagination has been filled with a shameless truth and who receives as his protection
merely a warning which appeals to his fear of diseases, may pass that red lantern entrance
at first, but at the next block his tainted imagination will have overcome the fear, and with
the reckless confidence that he will know how to protect himself and that he will have good
luck he, too, like the moth, will feel attracted toward the red light and will turn back. We
can prohibit alcohol, but we cannot prohibit the stimulus to sexual lust. It is always present,
and the selfish desire, made rampant by a society which craves amusement, will always be stronger
than any social argument or any talk of possible individual danger. The only effective check
is the deep inner respect, and we must teach it to the youth, or the whole nation will have
to be taught it soon by the sterner discipline of history. The genius of mankind cannot be
deceived by philistine phrases about the conspiracy of silence. The decision to be silent was
a solemn pledge to the historic spirit of human progress, which demands its symbols, its conventions,
and its beliefs. To destroy the harvest of these ideal values, because some weeds have grown
up with them, by breaking down the dams and allowing the flood of truth-talk to burst in is
the great psychological crime of our day. There is only one hope and salvation: let us build
up the dam again to protect our field for a better to-morrow.

                                  II

                               SOCIALISM

The history of socialism has been a history of false prophecies. Socialism started with a sure
conviction that under the conditions of modern industry the working class must be driven into
worse and worse misery. In reality the development has gone the opposite way. There are endlessly
more workingmen with a comfortable income than ever before. The prophets also knew surely that
the wealth from manufacturing enterprises would be concentrated with fewer and fewer men, while
history has taken the opposite turn and has distributed the shares of the industrial companies
into hundreds of thousands of hands. Other prophecies foretold the end of the small farmer,
still others the uprooting of the middle class, others gave the date for the great crash; and
everything would have come out exactly as the prophets foresaw it, if they had not forgotten
to consider many other factors in the social situation which gave to the events a very different
turn. But it may be acknowledged that the wrong prophesying was done not only by the socialists,
but no less by the spectators. I myself have to confess my guilt. Many years ago when I wrote
my German book on “The Americans,” I declared with the ringing voice of the prophet that socialism
would never take hold of America. It was so easy to show that its chief principles and fundamental
doctrines were directly opposed to the deepest creeds of Americanism and that the whole temper
of the population was necessarily averse to the anticapitalistic fancies. The individualistic
striving, the faith in rivalry, the fear of centralization, the political liberty, the lack
of class barriers which makes it possible for any one to reach the highest economic power,
all work against socialism, and all are essential for American democracy. Above all, the whole
American life was controlled by the feeling that individual wealth is the measurement of individual
success, and even puritanism had an internal affinity to capitalism. Hence socialism could
not mean anything but an imported frill which could not be taken seriously by the commonwealth.
In later editions of the book I modified my predictions slightly, and to-day I feel almost
inclined to withdraw my prophecy entirely.

To be sure, I still think that the deepest meaning of Americanism and of the American mission
in the world is farther away from socialism than the spirit of any other nation. And yet—I
do not say that I fear, or that I hope, but I believe—socialism has in no other land at present
such good chances to become the policy of the state. The country has entered into a career
of progressive experiments; the traditional respect for the old constitutional system of checks
and balances to the mere will of the crowd has been undermined. The real legislative reign
of the masses has just begun and it would seem only natural that such an entirely new movement
should be pushed forward by its own momentum. If the genius of America, which was conservative,
turns radical, the political machinery here would be more fit than that of any other land to
allow the enforcement of socialism. This will not come to-day or to-morrow, but that socialism
may suddenly be with us the day after to-morrow is the possibility with which the neutral observer
must count. There is no need of directly reversing the prophecies, as there are many energies
in the soul of the nation which may react against this new tendency and may automatically check
this un-American economic capture. It is a fight with equal chances, and which side will win
cannot be foreseen. But if socialism really has entered the realm of practical possibilities,
it becomes the duty of everybody to study the new demands from his own standpoint. The nation
must see the facts from many angles before it can decide on this tremendous issue. Any one-sidedness,
whether in favour of or against the new programme, must be dangerous. In such a situation even
the psychologist may be excused for feeling tempted to contribute his little share to the discussion.

The central problem of the psychologist would evidently lie in the question whether the socialistic
reformer calculates with right ideas about the human mind. There might, to be sure, be a little
psychological side-show not without a peculiar interest at the entrance gate of socialism.
We might turn the question, what is the psychology of the socialist, so as to mean, not with
what psychology does the socialist operate, but what goes on in the socialist's mind. No doubt
the motives have gone through deep changes even in the mind of the cultured leaders. When Karl
Marx laid the foundations of socialism, he was moved solely by the desire to recognize a necessary
development. It was the interest of the theorist. He showed that the things which the socialist
depicted simply had to come. He did not ask whether they are good or bad. They were for him
ultimately natural events which were to be forestalled. The leaders to-day see it all in a
new light. The socialistic state is to them a goal to the attainment of which all energies
ought to be bent. Not their theoretical knowledge, but their practical conscience, leads them
to their enthusiasm for a time without capitalism. In the minds of the masses, however, who
vote for the socialist here or abroad, the glory of moral righteousness is somewhat clouded
by motives less inspiring in quality. The animosity against the men of wealth rushes into the
mental foreground, and if it is claimed that the puritans disliked the bear baiting not because
it gave pain to the bears, but because it gave pleasure to the onlookers, it sometimes seems
as if the socialists, too, desire the change, not in order that the poor gain more comfort,
but in order that the rich be punished. And many cleaner motives have mixed in, which resulted
from the general change of conditions. The labourer lives to-day in a cultural atmosphere which
was unknown to his grandfathers. He reads the same newspaper as his employers, he thinks in
the same catch phrases, and has essentially the same foundation of education. Moreover the
publicity of our life in this era of print too easily teaches the workingman that his master
may be neither better nor wiser than he and his comrades. And finally, the political and economic
discussions of the last half century have made it perfectly clear to him that the removing
of the material misery lies in the realm of practical possibility, and that even without bombs
a new economic order may be created almost as easily as a new tariff law or an income tax or
an equal suffrage. Hence it is not surprising that all these motives combined turn the imagination
of millions to the new panaceas.

But if low motives are mixed with high ones in the mind of the champions of socialism, they
certainly have never stopped assuring us that it is worse with their opponents. I wish your son's
house and Mr. Wildeve's were a hundred miles apart instead of four or five."

"Then there WAS an understanding between him and Clym's wife when he made a fool of Thomasin!"

"We'll
hope there's no understanding now."

"And our hope will probably be very vain. O Clym! O Thomasin!"

"There's no harm done yet. In fact, I've persuaded Wildeve to mind his own business."

"How?"

"O, not by talking--by a plan of mine called the silent system."

"I hope you'll succeed."

"I shall if you help me by calling and making friends with your son. You'll have a chance then
of using your eyes."

"Well, since it has come to this," said Mrs. Yeobright sadly, "I will own to you, reddleman, that
I thought of going. I should be much happier if we were reconciled. The marriage is unalterable,
my life may be cut short, and I should wish to die in peace. He is my only son; and since sons
are made of such stuff I am not sorry I have no other. As for Thomasin, I never expected much
from her; and she has not disappointed me. But I forgave her long ago; and I forgive him now.
I'll go."

At this very time of the reddleman's conversation with Mrs. Yeobright at Blooms-End another
conversation on the same subject was languidly proceeding at Alderworth.

All the day Clym had borne himself as if his mind were too full of its own matter to allow him
to care about outward things, and his words now showed what had occupied his thoughts. It was
just after the mysterious knocking that he began the theme. "Since I have been away today, Eustacia,
I have considered that something must be done to heal up this ghastly breach between my dear
mother and myself. It troubles me."

"What do you propose to do?" said Eustacia abstractedly, for she could not clear away from her
the excitement caused by Wildeve's recent manoeuvre for an interview.

"You seem to take a very mild interest in what I propose, little or much," said Clym, with tolerable
warmth.

"You mistake me," she answered, reviving at his reproach. "I am only thinking."

"What of?"

"Partly of that moth whose skeleton is getting burnt up in the wick of the candle," she said slowly.
"But you know I always take an interest in what you say."

"Very well, dear. Then I think I must go and call upon her."...He went on with tender feeling:
"It is a thing I am not at all too proud to do, and only a fear that I might irritate her has
kept me away so long. But I must do something. It is wrong in me to allow this sort of thing
to go on."

"What have you to blame yourself about?"

"She is getting old, and her life is lonely, and I am her only son."

"She has Thomasin."

"Thomasin is not her daughter; and if she were that would not excuse me. But this is beside the point.
I have made up my mind to go to her, and all I wish to ask you is whether you will do your
best to help me--that is, forget the past; and if she shows her willingness to be reconciled,
meet her halfway by welcoming her to our house, or by accepting a welcome to hers?"

At first Eustacia closed her lips as if she would rather do anything on the whole globe than
what he suggested. But the lines of her mouth softened with thought, though not so far as they might
have softened, and she said, "I will put nothing in your way; but after what has passed it, is
asking too much that I go and make advances."

"You never distinctly told me what did pass between you."

"I could not do it then, nor can I now. Sometimes more bitterness is sown in five minutes than can
be got rid of in a whole life; and that may be the case here." She paused a few moments, and
added, "If you had never returned to your native place, Clym, what a blessing it would have
been for you!... It has altered the destinies of----"

"Three people."

"Five," Eustacia thought; but she kept that in.

5--The Journey across the Heath

Thursday, the thirty-first of August, was one of a series of days during which snug houses were stifling,
and when cool draughts were treats; when cracks appeared in clayey gardens, and were called "earthquakes"
by apprehensive children; when loose spokes were discovered in the wheels of carts and carriages;
and when stinging insects haunted the air, the earth, and every drop of water that was to be
found.

In Mrs. Yeobright's garden large-leaved plants of a tender kind flagged by ten o'clock in the
morning; rhubarb bent downward at eleven; and even stiff cabbages were limp by noon.

It was about eleven o'clock on this day that Mrs. Yeobright started across the heath towards
her son's house, to do her best in getting reconciled with him and
Eustacia, in conformity with her words to the reddleman.

She had hoped to be well advanced in her walk before the heat of the day was at its highest,
but after setting out she found that this was not to be done. The sun had branded the whole heath
with its mark, even the purple heath-flowers having put on a brownness under the dry blazes of
the few preceding days. Every valley was filled with air like that of a kiln, and the clean
quartz sand of the winter water-courses, which formed summer paths, had undergone a species of
incineration since the drought had set in.

In cool, fresh weather Mrs. Yeobright would have found no inconvenience in walking to Alderworth,
but the present torrid attack made the journey a heavy undertaking for a woman past middle
age; and at the end of the third mile she wished that she had hired Fairway to drive her a portion
at least of the distance. But from the point at which she had arrived it was as easy to reach
Clym's house as to get home again. So she went on, the air around her pulsating silently, and
oppressing the earth with lassitude. She looked at the sky overhead, and saw that the sapphirine
hue of the zenith in spring and early summer had been replaced by a metallic violet.

Occasionally she came to a spot where independent worlds of ephemerons were passing their time
in mad carousal, some in the air, some on the hot ground and vegetation, some in the tepid and
stringy water of a nearly dried pool. All the shallower ponds had decreased to a vaporous mud amid
which the maggoty shapes of innumerable obscure creatures could be indistinctly seen, heaving and
wallowing with enjoyment. Being a woman not disinclined to philosophize she sometimes sat down under
her umbrella to rest and to watch their happiness, for a certain hopefulness as to the result
of her visit gave ease to her mind, and between important thoughts left it free to dwell on
any infinitesimal matter which caught her eyes.

Mrs. Yeobright had never before been to her son's house, and its exact position was unknown
to her. She tried one ascending path and another, and found that they led her astray. Retracing her
steps, she came again to an open level, where she perceived at a
distance a man at work.

She went towards him and inquired the way.

The labourer pointed out the direction, and added, "Do you see that furze-cutter, ma'am, going up
that footpath yond?"

Mrs. Yeobright strained her eyes, and at last said that she did perceive him.

"Well, if you follow him you can make no mistake.

He's going to the same place, ma'am."

She followed the figure indicated. He appeared of a russet hue, not more distinguishable from
the scene around him than the green caterpillar from the leaf it feeds on. His progress when actually
walking was more rapid than Mrs. Yeobright's; but she was enabled to keep at an equable distance from
him by his habit of stopping whenever he came to a brake of brambles, where he paused awhile.
On coming in her turn to each of these spots she found half a dozen long limp brambles which
he had cut from the bush during his halt and laid out straight beside the path. They were evidently
intended for furze-faggot bonds which he meant to collect on his return.

The silent being who thus occupied himself seemed to be of no more account in life than an insect.
He appeared as a mere parasite of the heath, fretting its surface in his daily labour as a moth frets
a garment, entirely engrossed with its products, having no knowledge of anything in the world but fern,
furze, heath, lichens, and moss.

The furze-cutter was so absorbed in the business of his journey that he never turned his head;
and his leather-legged and gauntleted form at length became to her as nothing more than a moving
handpost to show her the way.

Suddenly she was attracted to his individuality by observing peculiarities in his walk. It was a
gait she had seen somewhere before; and the gait revealed the man to her, as the gait of Ahimaaz
in the distant plain made him known to the watchman of the king. "His walk is exactly as my
husband's used to be," she said; and then the thought burst upon her that the furze-cutter was
her son.

She was scarcely able to familiarize herself with this strange reality. She had been told that
Clym was in the habit of cutting furze, but she had supposed that he occupied himself with the labour
only at odd times, by way of useful pastime; yet she now beheld him as a furze-cutter and nothing
more--wearing the regulation dress of the craft, and thinking the regulation thoughts, to
judge by his motions. Planning a dozen hasty schemes for at once preserving him and Eustacia
from this mode of life, she throbbingly followed the way, and saw him enter his own door.

At one side of Clym's house was a knoll, and on the top of the knoll a clump of fir trees so
highly thrust up into the sky that their foliage from a distance appeared as a black spot in the
air above the crown of the hill. On reaching this place Mrs. Yeobright felt distressingly agitated,
weary, and unwell. She ascended, and sat down under their shade to recover herself, and to consider
how best to break the ground with Eustacia, so as not to irritate a woman underneath whose apparent
indolence lurked passions even stronger and more active than her own.

The trees beneath which she sat were singularly battered, rude, and wild, and for a few minutes
Mrs. Yeobright dismissed thoughts of her own storm-broken and exhausted state to contemplate
theirs. Not a bough in the nine trees which composed the group but was splintered, lopped, and
distorted by the fierce weather that there held them at its mercy whenever it prevailed. Some
were blasted and split as if by lightning, black stains as from fire marking their sides, while
the ground at their feet was strewn with dead fir-needles and heaps of cones blown down in the
gales of past years. The place was called the Devil's Bellows, and it was only necessary to come
there on a March or November night to discover the forcible reasons for that name. On the present
heated afternoon, when no perceptible wind was blowing, the trees kept up a perpetual moan which
one could hardly believe to be caused by the air.

Here she sat for twenty minutes or more ere she could summon resolution to go down to the door, her courage
being lowered to zero by her physical lassitude. To any other person than a mother it might
have seemed a little humiliating that she, the elder of the two women, should be the first to
make advances. But Mrs. Yeobright had well considered all that, and she only thought how best
to make her visit appear to Eustacia not abject but wise.

From her elevated position the exhausted woman could perceive the roof of the house below, and
the garden and the whole enclosure of the little domicile. And now, at the moment of rising,
she saw a second man approaching the gate. His manner was peculiar, hesitating, and not that of
a person come on business or by invitation. He surveyed the house with interest, and then walked
round and scanned the outer boundary of the garden, as one might have done had it been the birthplace
of Shakespeare, the prison of Mary Stuart, or the Chateau of Hougomont. After passing round and again
reaching the gate he went in. Mrs. Yeobright was vexed at this, having reckoned on finding her
son and his wife by themselves; but a moment's thought showed her
that the presence of an acquaintance would take off the awkwardness
of her first appearance in the house, by confining the talk to general
matters until she had begun to feel comfortable with them.

She came down the hill to the gate, and looked into the hot garden.

There lay the cat asleep on the bare gravel of the path, as if beds, rugs, and carpets were
unendurable. The leaves of the hollyhocks hung like half-closed umbrellas, the sap almost simmered
in the stems, and foliage with a smooth surface glared like metallic mirrors. A small apple tree,
of the sort called Ratheripe, grew just inside the gate, the only one which throve in the
garden, by reason of the lightness of the soil; and among the fallen apples on the ground beneath
were wasps rolling drunk with the juice, or creeping about the little caves in each fruit
which they had eaten out before stupefied by its sweetness. By the door lay Clym's furze-hook
and the last handful of faggot-bonds she had seen him gather; they had plainly been thrown
down there as he entered the house.

6--A Conjuncture, and Its Result upon the Pedestrian

Wildeve, as has been stated, was determined to visit Eustacia boldly, by day, and on the easy terms
of a relation, since the reddleman had spied out and spoilt his walks to her by night. The spell
that she had thrown over him in the moonlight dance made it impossible for a man having no strong
puritanic force within him to keep away altogether. He merely calculated on meeting her and her
husband in an ordinary manner, chatting a little while, and leaving again. Every outward sign
was to be conventional; but the one great fact would be there to satisfy him--he would see her.
He did not even desire Clym's absence, since it was just possible that Eustacia might resent
any situation which could compromise her dignity as a wife, whatever the state of her heart towards
him. Women were often so.

He went accordingly; and it happened that the time of his arrival coincided with that of Mrs.
Yeobright's pause on the hill near the house. When he had looked round the premises in the
manner she had noticed he went and knocked at the door. There was a few minutes' interval,
and then the key turned in the lock, the door opened, and Eustacia herself confronted him.

Nobody
could have imagined from her bearing now that here stood the woman who had joined with him in
the impassioned dance of the week before, unless indeed he could have penetrated below the
surface and gauged the real depth of that still stream.

"I hope you reached home safely?" said Wildeve.

"O yes," she carelessly returned.

"And were you not tired the next day? I feared you might be."

"I was rather. You need not speak low--nobody will over-hear us. My small servant is gone on an
errand to the village."

"Then Clym is not at home?"

"Yes, he is."

"O! I thought that perhaps you had locked the door because you were alone and were afraid of
tramps."

"No--here is my husband."

They had been standing in the entry. Closing the front door and turning the key, as before, she
threw open the door of the adjoining room and asked him to walk in. Wildeve entered, the room
appearing to be empty; but as soon as he had advanced a few steps he started. On the hearthrug
lay Clym asleep. Beside him were the leggings, thick boots, leather gloves, and sleeve-waistcoat
in which he worked.

"You may go in; you will not disturb him," she said, following behind. "My reason for fastening
the door is that he may not be intruded upon by any chance comer while lying here, if I should
be in the garden or upstairs."

"Why is he sleeping there?" said Wildeve in low tones.

"He is very weary. He went out at half-past four this morning, and
has been working ever since.

He cuts furze because it is the only thing he can do that does not put any strain upon his poor
eyes." The contrast between the sleeper's appearance and Wildeve's at this moment was painfully
apparent to Eustacia, Wildeve being elegantly dressed in a new summer suit and light hat; and
she continued: "Ah! you don't know how differently he appeared when I first met him, though it
is such a little while ago. His hands were as white and soft as mine; and look at them now, how
rough and brown they are! His complexion is by nature fair, and that rusty look he has now, all of
a colour with his leather clothes, is caused by the burning of the sun."

"Why does he go out at all!" Wildeve whispered.
"Because he hates to be idle; though what he earns doesn't add much
to our exchequer. However, he says that when people are living upon
their capital they must keep down current expenses by turning a penny
where they can."

"The fates have not been kind to you, Eustacia Yeobright."

"I
have nothing to thank them for."

"Nor has he--except for their one
great gift to him."

"What's that?"

Wildeve looked her in the eyes.

Eustacia
blushed for the first time that day. "Well, I am a questionable gift,"
she said quietly. "I thought you meant the gift of content--which
he has, and I have not."

"I can understand content in such a case--though
how the outward situation can attract him puzzles me."

"That's because
you don't know him. He's an enthusiast about ideas, and careless about
outward things. He often reminds me of the Apostle Paul."

"I am glad
to hear that he's so grand in character as that."

"Yes; but the worst
of it is that though Paul was excellent as a man in the Bible he would
hardly have done in real life."

Their voices had instinctively dropped
lower, though at first they had taken no particular care to avoid
awakening Clym. "Well, if that means that your marriage is a misfortune
to you, you know who is to blame," said Wildeve.

"The marriage is
no misfortune in itself," she retorted with some little petulance.
"It is simply the accident which has happened since that has been
the cause of my ruin. I have certainly got thistles for figs in a
worldly sense, but how could I tell what time would bring forth?"

"Sometimes,
Eustacia, I think it is a judgment upon you. You rightly belonged
to me, you know; and I had no idea of losing you."

"No, it was not
my fault! Two could not belong to you; and remember that, before I
was aware, you turned aside to another woman. It was cruel levity
in you to do that. I never dreamt of playing such a game on my side
till you began it on yours."

"I meant nothing by it," replied Wildeve.
"It was a mere interlude. Men are given to the trick of having a passing
fancy for somebody else in the midst of a permanent love, which reasserts
itself afterwards just as before. On account of your rebellious manner
to me I was tempted to go further than I should have done; and when
you still would keep playing the same tantalizing part I went further
still, and married her." Turning and looking again at the unconscious
form of Clym, he murmured, "I am afraid that you don't value your
prize, Clym....He ought to be happier than I in one thing at least.
He may know what it is to come down in the world, and to be afflicted
with a great personal calamity; but he probably doesn't know what
it is to lose the woman he loved."

"He is not ungrateful for winning
her," whispered Eustacia, "and in that respect he is a good man. Many
women would go far for such a husband. But do I desire unreasonably
much in wanting what is called life--music, poetry, passion, war,
and all the beating and pulsing that are going on in the great arteries
of the world? That was the shape of my youthful dream; but I did not
get it. Yet I thought I saw the way to it in my Clym."

"And you only
married him on that account?"

"There you mistake me. I married him
because I loved him, but I won't say that I didn't love him partly
because I thought I saw a promise of that life in him."

"You have
dropped into your old mournful key."

"But I am not going to be depressed,"
she cried perversely. "I began a new system by going to that dance,
and I mean to stick to it. Clym can sing merrily; why should not I?"

Wildeve
looked thoughtfully at her. "It is easier to say you will sing than
to do it; though if I could I would encourage you in your attempt.
But as life means nothing to me, without one thing which is now impossible,
you will forgive me for not being able to encourage you."

"Damon,
what is the matter with you, that you speak like that?" she asked,
raising her deep shady eyes to his.

"That's a thing I shall never
tell plainly; and perhaps if I try to tell you in riddles you will
not care to guess them."

Eustacia remained silent for a minute, and
she said, "We are in a strange relationship today. You mince matters
to an uncommon nicety. You mean, Damon, that you still love me. Well,
that gives me sorrow, for I am not made so entirely happy by my marriage
that I am willing to spurn you for the information, as I ought to
do. But we have said too much about this. Do you mean to wait until
my husband is awake?"

"I thought to speak to him; but it is unnecessary,
Eustacia, if I offend you by not forgetting you, you are right to
mention it; but do not talk of spurning."

She did not reply, and
they stood looking musingly at Clym as he slept on in that profound
sleep which is the result of physical labour carried on in circumstances
that wake no nervous fear.

"God, how I envy him that sweet sleep!"
said Wildeve. "I have not slept like that since I was a boy--years
and years ago."

While they thus watched him a click at the gate was
audible, and a knock came to the door. Eustacia went to a window and
looked out.

Her countenance changed. First she became crimson, and
then the red subsided till it even partially left her lips.

"Shall
I go away?" said Wildeve, standing up.

"I hardly know."

"Who is
it?"

"Mrs. Yeobright. O, what she said to me that day! I cannot understand
this visit--what does she mean? And she suspects that past time of
ours."

"I am in your hands. If you think she had better not see me
here I'll go into the next room."

"Well, yes--go."

Wildeve at once
withdrew; but before he had been half a minute in the adjoining apartment
Eustacia came after him.

"No," she said, "we won't have any of this.
If she comes in she must see you--and think if she likes there's something
wrong! But how can I open the door to her, when she dislikes me--wishes
to see not me, but her son? I won't open the door!"

Mrs. Yeobright
knocked again more loudly.

"Her knocking will, in all likelihood,
awaken him," continued Eustacia, "and then he will let her in himself.
Ah--listen."

They could hear Clym moving in the other room, as if
disturbed by the knocking, and he uttered the word "Mother."

"Yes--he
is awake--he will go to the door," she said, with a breath of relief.
"Come this way. I have a bad name with her, and you must not be seen.
Thus I am obliged to act by stealth, not because I do ill, but because
others are pleased to say so."

By this time she had taken him to
the back door, which was open, disclosing a path leading down the
garden. "Now, one word, Damon," she remarked as he stepped forth.
"This is your first visit here; let it be your last. We have been
hot lovers in our time, but it won't do now. Good-bye."

"Good-bye,"
said Wildeve. "I have had all I came for, and I am satisfied."

"What
was it?"

"A sight of you. Upon my eternal honour I came for no more."

Wildeve
kissed his hand to the beautiful girl he addressed, and passed into
the garden, where she watched him down the path, over the stile at
the end, and into the ferns outside, which brushed his hips as he
went along till he became lost in their thickets. When he had quite
gone she slowly turned, and directed her attention to the interior
of the house.

But it was possible that her presence might not be
desired by Clym and his mother at this moment of their first meeting,
or that it would be superfluous. At all events, she was in no hurry
to meet Mrs. Yeobright. She resolved to wait till Clym came to look
for her, and glided back into the garden. Here she idly occupied herself
for a few minutes, till finding no notice was taken of her she retraced
her steps through the house to the front, where she listened for voices
in the parlour. But hearing none she opened the door and went in. We are too little aware that the average existence
of the masses in earlier centuries was on a much narrower scale than the life of practically
the poorest to-day, and that the mere material existence of those who to-day consider themselves
as industrial slaves is in many respects high above that of the apprentices in the periods
before the machine age. Even at present those who think that they are at the bottom of material
life in one country often live much better than the multitudes in other lands in which fewer
desires have been aroused and developed.

The individual may often alternate between different standards, just as any one of us when
he goes out camping may feel perfectly happy with the most moderate external conditions, which
would appear to him utter deprivation in the midst of his stylish life the year around. Many
an Irish servant girl feels that she cannot live here without her own bathroom, and yet is
perfectly satisfied when she goes home for the summer and lives with seven in a room, not counting
the pigs. This dependence upon relative conditions must be the more complete the more the income
is used for external satisfactions. As far as the means serve education and æsthetic enjoyment
and inner culture, there remains at least a certain parallelism between the amount of supply
and the enjoyment. But the average American of the five-thousand-dollar class spends four thousand
nine hundred dollars on goods of a different order. Altogether his expenses are the house and
the table, the clothes of the women, and his runabout. In all these lines there is no limit,
and the house of to-day is no longer a pleasure if his neighbour builds a bigger one to-morrow.
The man with the fifty-thousand-dollar expenditures feels the same dissatisfaction if he cannot
have the steam yacht and the picture gallery which the multimillionaire enjoys.

The inner attitude, the temperament, the training, the adjustment of desires to the available
means, is the only decisive factor in such situations. The trust magnate and the factory foreman
have equal chances to feel happiness in the standard of life in which they live. If they compare
themselves with those who are richer, and if their hearts hang on the external satisfactions,
they both may feel wretched; and yet with another turn of mind they both may be content. Optimism
and pessimism, contentment and envy, self-dependence and dependence upon the judgment of the
world, joyfulness and despondency, are more decisive contrasts for the budget of happiness
than the difference between fifteen dollars a week and fifteen dollars a minute. Some of my
best friends have to live from hand to mouth, and some are multimillionaires. I have found
them on the whole equally happy and equally satisfied with their position in life. If there
was a difference at all, I discovered that those who ate from silver plates were sometimes
complaining about the materialism of our time, in which so much value is put on money. I have
never found their fate especially enviable, nor that of the others especially pitiable, and
evidently they themselves have no such feelings. The general impression is much more as if
actors play on the stage. The one gives the rôle of the king in purple cloak and ermine, the
other plays the part of a beggar in ragged clothes. But the one rôle is not more interesting
than the other, and everything depends upon the art of playing the character.

This whole scramble for money's worth is based on a psychological illusion, not only because
pleasure and displeasure are dependent upon relative conditions, but also because the elimination
of one source of feeling intensifies the feelings from other sources. The vulgar display of
wealth which cheapens our life so much, the desire to seek social distinction by a scale of
expenditure which in itself gives no joy, have in our time accentuated the longing for wealth
out of all proportion. This is true of every layer of society. The clerk's wife spends for
her frocks just as absurdly large a part of his income as the banker's wife. Every salesgirl
must have a plume on her hat rather than a nourishing luncheon. Others must have six motor
cars instead of a decent library in their palace. But this longing for useless display is still
outdone by the hysterical craving for amusement. The factory girl must have her movies every
night, and besides the nine hundred kino shows, a hundred and twenty theatres are needed to
satisfy the amusement seeking crowd of New York, in addition to the half dozen which offer
art. This mad race to outdo one another and this hunting after pleasures which tickle the senses
have benumbed the social mind and have inhibited in it the feeling for deeper values. But if
by a magic word extreme equality of material means were created and the mere sensuous enjoyments
evenly distributed, in that moment all the other differences from individual to individual
would be felt with heightened sharpness, and would be causes for much stronger feelings of
happiness and unhappiness.

Men differ in their inborn mental powers, in their intelligence and talent, in beauty, in health,
in honours and career, in family and friends. The contrasts which are created in every one
of these respects are far greater and for the ill-fated far more cruel than those of the tax-payers.
The beautiful face which is a passport through life and the discouraging homeliness, the perfect
body which allows vigorous work and the weak organism of the invalid unfit for the struggle
of life, the genius in science or art or statesmanship and the hopelessly trivial mind, the
youth in a harmonious, beautiful family life and the childhood in an atmosphere of discord,
the home full of love from wife and children and the house childless and chilly, the honours
of the community and the disappointment of social bankruptcy—they are the great premiums and
the great punishments, which are whirled by fate into the crowd of mankind. Even here most
of it is relative. We rejoice in four-score years, but if we knew that others were allowed
a thousand years of life, we should be despondent that hardly a short century is dealt out
to us. We are happy in the respect of our social community simply because we do not desire
the honours of the czar or of the mikado. But if we began to measure our fate by that of others,
how could we ever be satisfied? Women might envy men and men might envy women, the poet might
wish to be the champion of sport and the sportsman might be unhappy because he is not a poet.
No one of us can have the knowledge and the technical powers which the child of the thirtieth
century will enjoy. As soon as we begin to compare and do not find the centre of our life in
ourselves, we are condemned.

Everybody's life is composed of joys and pains which may come from any of these sources. Where
beauty is lacking, wit may brilliantly shine; where health is failing, a talent may console;
where the family life is unhappy, the ambitions for a career may be fulfilled. Much inequality
will thus result, but the chances for a certain evenness of human joy and sorrow will be the
greater the more numerous the sources from which the joys and griefs of our days are springing.
Add the inequalities of wealth, and you increase the chances that the emotional values in the
lives of all of us will become more equal. The ugly girl may be rich and the poor one may be
beautiful, the genius may hunger and the stupid man may marry the widow with millions, the
healthy man may have to earn his scanty living and the patient may enjoy the luxuries of life.
Their states of feeling will be more alike than if a socialistic order had put them all on
the same economic level of philistine comfort. The joys of capital are after all much less
deeply felt than any of those others, and the sufferings from poverty are much less incisive
than those from disappointed ambition, from jealousy, from illness, or from bereavement. It
is well known that many more people die from overfeeding than from underfeeding. We may feel
disgusted that the luxuries so often fall to the unworthy and that the finest people have to
endure the hardship of narrow means. But all those other gifts and deprivations, those talents
and beauties and powers and family relations, are no less arbitrarily dealt out. We all may
wish to be geniuses or radiant beauties, great singers or fathers of a dozen children; we have
not chosen our more modest lot.

It might be answered that the poverty of the industrial masses to-day means not only the absence
of the special comforts, but that it means positive suffering. Men are starving from want and
are chained down like slaves to a torturing task. But let us discriminate. It is true in states
of unemployment and illness the physical man may be crushed by naked poverty, but that has
nothing whatever to do with socialism. We have emphasized before that it is the solemn duty
of society to find ways and means to protect every one who is willing to work as long as he
is healthy, against starvation in times of old age and sickness, and if possible in periods
of market depression. The non-socialistic community has the power to take care of that, and
it is entirely an illusory belief that socialism has in that respect any advantage. All the
comparisons of the two economic orders ought to refer only to the variations rather high above
the starvation line, even though the American must call starvation a standard which the coolie
may think tolerable and to which the European poor in the Middle Ages were often accustomed.
On the other hand, neither capitalism nor socialism can protect the reckless and the wasteful
against economic suicide.

Much more important is the problem of suffering through the character of the work itself. That
is the real fountainhead of the socialistic flood which threatens to inundate our present-day
social structures. But is there not even here a psychological misunderstanding involved? It
may be granted that many a man and many a woman stand in the factory day after day and year
after year with the one feeling of distress and wretchedness at the hard work to which they
are forced. But is their work really responsible for it, and is it not rather their personal
attitude? Who is doing harder physical work than the sportsman? There is no more exhausting
muscle strain than the climb over the glaciers of the Alps, which thousands pursue with passion.
Analyze the profession of the physician. How many of his functions are in themselves of such
a character that they might be denounced as the most humiliating slavery, if they were demanded
from any man who could not see the aim and higher interest which they are serving! This is
exactly the point where the leaders of labour are sinning unpardonably. They work with all
the means of suggestion, until the workman, as if hypnotized, looks on the mere movements which
he is to perform in the factory, and forgets entirely the higher interest and aim of civilization
which he is helping to serve. The scholar in his laboratory has to do a thousand things which
in themselves are ugly and dirty, tiresome and dangerous, uninteresting and exhausting, but
which he is performing with enthusiasm because he knows that he is serving the great ideal
of cultured life, to discover the truth and thus to help the progress of mankind. There is
under no factory roof a workman so forlorn that the work of his hands is not aiding the fulfilment
of an equally great and equally ideal purpose of civilized mankind, the development of economic
civilization. As soon as his labour amidst the noise of the machines is felt as such a service
to an ideal cultural purpose, the work is no longer dead, but living, interesting, significant,
wonderful.

The mother who takes care of her little children has to go through a thousand tiresome actions
which would be intolerable if they were meaningless, but which compose a beautiful life if
they are held together by the aim which the motherly love sees before it. Whatever work a human
being may perform, force on his mind the treacherous suggestion that it is meaningless, that
it is slavery, that others seize the profit, and he must hate it and feel it an unbearable
hardship. It has often been observed that the most bitter complaints have always come from
those workers who are reached by the suggestions of theories and not from those who simply
face practice, even though their life may be a much harder one. In Russia the workingmen of
the city found their life so intolerable that revolts broke out, while the rural classes were
satisfied with conditions of much more cruel deprivation. Our social reformers too easily forget
the one great teaching of the history of mankind, that the most powerful factor in the world
is the ideas. Surely there is some truth even in that one-sided picture of the history of civilization
which makes everything dependent upon economic conditions, but the element of truth which is
contained therein is due to the fact that economic conditions may influence the ideas. The
ideas are the really decisive agencies. Only for ideas have men been ready to die, and for
ideas have they killed one another. Give to the world the idea that earthly goods are useless
and heavenly goods alone valuable, and in this kingdom of the religious idea the beggarly rags
of the monk are more desired than the gold of the mighty. Religion and patriotism, honour and
loyalty, ambition and love, reform ideals and political goals, æsthetic, intellectual, and
moral ideas have turned the great wheel of history. Give to the workingman the right kind of
ideas, the right attitude toward his work, and all the hardship becomes blessedness and the
suffering glory. His best payment then will be the satisfaction of carrying his stone to the
great temple of human progress, even though it may not be a cornerstone.

Even the complaint repeated without end that the workingman's task is unendurable because of
its unceasing monotony is ultimately nothing but a psychological theory, and this theory is
superficial and misleading. It is easy to point out to the suggestible mind that there is a
wonderful enrichment of life in variety, and that uniformity must therefore be something ugly
and discouraging and unworthy. But the real mental facts allow just as well the opposite argument.
The mere change and variation, going from one thing to another, makes the mind restless and
distracted, without inner unity and harmony. To be loyal to one task and to continue it faithfully
and insistently, brings that perfect adjustment of the mind in which every new act is welcome
because it has become the habit ingrained in the personality. To be sure there are individual
differences. We have in political life, too, radicals who get more satisfaction from change,
and conservatives who prefer continuity of traditions; and so the whole mental structure of
some men is better adjusted to a frequent variation in work, and that of others better prepared
for continuity. The one has a temperament which may lead him from one occupation to another,
from one town to another, from one flat to another, from one set of companions to another.
But there is the opposite type of minds. To them it is far more welcome to continue throughout
life at the same work, in the same old home, in touch with the same dear friends. Many minds
surely are better fitted for alternation in their activities, but many others, and they certainly
are not the worst, are naturally much better adapted to a regular repetition. There are opportunities
for both types of mental behaviour in the workshop of the nation, and the peaceful adjustment
is disturbed only by the hasty theory that repetition is a lower class of work, which makes
man a mere machine and that it is therefore to be despised. Change the theory about uniformity,
and you remove monotony from the industrial world. Monotony is only the uniformity which is hated.

Do we not see that power of theories and ideas everywhere around us, even in the most trivial
things? The most splendid gown is nothing but an object of contempt if it is the fashion of
the day before yesterday. In lands where titles and decorations are a traditional idea, the
little piece of tin may be more coveted than any treasures of wealth. Through ideas only can
the great social question be solved. No distribution of income can change in the least the
total sum of pleasure and displeasure in the world, and the socialistic scheme is of all the
useless efforts to increase pleasure and to decrease displeasure the least desirable, because
it works, as we have seen, at the same time against those mental functions which secure the
most forceful progress of economic life. A true change can come only from within. The superficial,
unpsychological theories of human happiness, which have been hammered into the working population
of our age, have made true happiness more and more difficult to attain. There is small chance
that this inner conversion will come in our day through religion, however much religion may
help toward it. There is still smaller chance that philosophy can do it and that the average
man will take the attitude of Antisthenes who claimed that it is divine not to need anything
and that he who needs least is nearest to the ideal. But there is every chance that mankind
will remember again more vividly the deeper lasting values of humanity. Society must be sobered
after the frenzy of this present-day rush for external goods. The shallow disappointment is
felt too widely already. The world is beginning to discover once more that this scramble for
pearls and palaces and motor cars among the rich, and for their showy imitations among the
middle class, and the envy of material profits and the chase for amusements even among the
poorest, leave life meaningless and cold and silly. As soon as the industrial community turns
to a new set of ideas and becomes inspired by the belief in the ideal value of the work as
work and as a necessary contribution to the progress of mankind, the social question will be
solved, as all the differences which socialism wants to eliminate then appear trivial and insignificant.

But on the other hand, this belief cannot grow, and cannot spread its roots deep in the soil
of the industrial mind unless, as a necessary counterpart, the ideas of duties and obligations
spread and enlarge among those who profit from the rights of capital. The capitalistic society
must organize itself so that the sinking below the starvation line through illness, old age,
or unemployment will be reduced to a minimum, so that the greatest possible participation in
all which gives higher value to life will be secured for the worker and his family, and above
all, so that the industrial control will be exerted by the best and the wisest. Nowhere is
reform of ideals more needed. The brutality of capital is never felt more strongly than when
the workingman suspects that those at the top are not selected on account of their stronger
capacities. Only when capital is conscious of its duties can the belief in the ideal meaning
of the workingman's function take hold of the masses and inhibit the suggestion of socialism.
Merely granting the external claims, giving to the factory girls increasing chance for amusement,
means to deceive them. The more such longings are satisfied, the more they must grow and become
a craze which sharpens the feeling of dissatisfaction. This desire for superficial joys, for
sensual amusements and cheap display is nothing but a suggested habit, which imitation creates
in a period of waste. If a time of simplicity were to come, not only the longing for these
prizes would become silent, but the prizes themselves would appear worthless. Liberate the
workingman from his distrust of the present social order; let him feel deeply that his duties
are not enforced slavery but a solemn offering to human progress, which he gives in glad coöperation
in the spirit of ideal belief. At the same time stop the overestimation of the outer enjoyments,
and cultivate the appreciation of the lasting values, and our time of unrest will come to inner
harmony. But do not believe that this can ever be done, if those who are called to be the leaders
of the social group are not models and do not by their own lives give the cue for this new
attitude and new valuation. As long as they outdo one another in the wild chase of frivolity
and seek in the industrial work of the nation only a stronghold for their rights and not a
fountain spring of duties, as long as they want to enjoy instead of to believe, this inner
change can never come in the community. The psychologist can do nothing but to predict that
no other scheme, no outer reform, no new plan of distribution, can bring a real change, as
every calculation which works with outer means to secure happiness must remain a psychological
illusion. The change from within is the only promise and the only hope.

                                  III

                      THE INTELLECTUAL UNDERWORLD

The public conscience of the social world has been stirred in recent days by the dangers which
threaten from an antisocial world that lurks in darkness. The sociologists recognize that it
is not a question of vicious and criminal individuals, but one of an antisocial atmosphere,
of immoral traditions and surroundings, through which crime flourishes and vice is fostered.
They speak of a social underworld, and mean by it that whole pitiable setting in which the
gangs of thieves and the hordes of prostitutes live their miserable lives. The public discussions
nowadays are full of stirring outcries against the rapid spreading of vice in our large cities;
it is a war for clean living and health. But after all we ought not to forget that similar
dangers surround our inner culture and our spiritual life, and that an intellectual underworld
threatens our time, which demands a no less rigorous fight until its vice is wiped out. The
vice of the social underworld gives a sham satisfaction to the human desire for sensual life;
the vice of the intellectual underworld gives the same sham fulfilment to the human longing
for knowledge and for truth. The infectious germs which it spreads in the realm of culture
may ultimately be more dangerous to the inner health of the nation than any physical diseases.
The battle against vice and crime in the world of the body ought to be paralleled by a battle
against superstition and humbug in the world of the mind. The victory over the social underworld
would anyhow never be lasting unless the intellectual underworld were subjugated first. In
the atmosphere of sham-truth all the antisocial instincts grow rankly.

I know of a large, beautiful high school in which the boys and girls are to receive the decisive
impulses for their inner life from well-trained teachers who have had a solid college education.
I have found out that quite a number of these teachers are clients of a medium who habitually
informs them as to their future, and for a dollar a sitting gives them advice at every turn
of their lives. I do not know whether she takes it from the tea leaves or from an Egyptian
dream book or from her own trance fancies, but I do know that the prophecies of this fraud
have deeply influenced some of their lives and shaped the faculty of the high school. What
does this mean? Mature educators to whose training society has devoted its fullest effort and
who are chosen to bring to the youth the message of earnest thought and solid knowledge, and
whose intellectual life ought therefore to be controlled by consistent thinking and real love
for knowledge, fall back into the lowest forms of mental barbarism and really believe in the
most illogical prostitution of truth. The double life of Jekyll and Hyde is more natural than
this. The impulse to virtuous behaviour and the atrocities of the criminal may after all be
combined in one character, but the desire to master the world by a disciplined knowledge and
to think the universe in ideas of order and law cannot go together with a real satisfaction
and belief in the chaotic superstitions of mediumistic humbugs. Here we have truly a twofold
personality, one living in a world of culture and the other in an underworld of intellectual
dissipation and vice. It would not be desirable for the high school teachers who are to be
models of virtue to live a second life as gamblers and pick-pockets, but it is more dangerous
if they are the agents of intellectual culture and indulge at the same time in intellectual
prostitution.

No spirit of false tolerance ought any longer to be permitted, when the treacherous danger
has become so nation wide. It is sufficient to take up any newspaper between New York and San
Francisco and run through the advertisements of the spiritualists and psychical mediums, the
palmists and the astrologers, the spiritual advisers and the psychotherapists: it is evident
that it is a regular organized industry which brings its steady income to thousands, and which
in the bigger towns has its red-light districts with its resorts for the intellectual vice.
The servant girl gets her information as to the fidelity of her lover for fifty cents, the
clerk who wants to bet on the races pays five dollars, the great banker who wants to bet on
stocks pays fifty dollars for his prophetic tips, and the widow who wants messages from her
husband pays five hundred dollars, but they all come and pay gladly. If this mood permeates
the public of all classes, it is not surprising that the cheapest spiritualistic fraud creeps
into religious circles, that the wildest medical humbug is successfully rivalling the work
of the scientific physician, and that the intellectual graft of psychical research is beginning
to corrupt the camps of the educated. Surely it is a profitable business, and I know it from
inside information, as not long ago a very successful clairvoyant came to the Harvard Psychological
Laboratory and offered me a partnership with half his income, not because he himself believed
much in my psychology, but because, as he assured me, there are some clients who think more
highly of my style of psychology than of his, and if we got together the business would flourish.
He told me just how it was to be done and how easy it is and what persons frequent his parlours.
But I have inside information of a very different kind before me, if I think of the victims
who come to me for help when superstition has broken their mental springs. There was a young
girl to whom life was one great joy, until for ten dollars she got the information that she
would die in a very big building, and now she goes into hysterics when her family tries to
take her into a theatre or a hotel or a railway station or a school.

Indeed the psychologist has an unusually good chance to get glimpses of this filthy underworld,
even if he does not frequent the squalid quarters of the astrologers. Bushels of mail bring
this superstition and mental crookedness to his study, and his material allows him to observe
every variety of illogical thought. If a letter comes to his collection which presents itself
as a new specimen that ought to be analyzed a little further, nothing is needed but a short
word of reply. It will at once bring a full supply of twisted thought, sufficient for a careful
dissection. It has been said repeatedly in the various vice investigations that no one can
understand the ill fate of the vicious girls, unless he studies carefully the men whom they
are to please. An investigation into mental vice demands still more an understanding of those
minds which play the part of customers. There are too many who cannot think in straight lines
and to whom the most absurd linking of facts is the most satisfactory answer in any question.
The crudeness of their intellect, which may go together with ample knowledge in other fields,
predestines them to be deceived and puts a premium on the imposture. I may try to characterize
some varieties of crooked thinking from chance tests of the correspondence with which the underworld
has besieged me. I have only the letters of most recent date in hand.

I abstract, of course, from those written by insane individuals. They come plentifully and
show all sorts of distortions and impossible ideas. But they do not belong here. The confused
mind of the patient is not to be held responsible. His absurdities are symptoms of disease,
and they are sharply to be separated from the lack of logic in the sound mind, just as the
impulse to kill in paranoia is to be distinguished from the murderous schemes of the criminal.
It is generally not difficult to recognize at once which is which. I find the most frequent
type of letters from evidently diseased persons to be writings like this: “Dear Sir: I wish
to let you know that some young men have a sort of a comb machine composed of wireless telephone
and reinforced electricity. They can play this machine and make a person talk or wake or go
to sleep. They can tell where you are, even miles away. They play in the eyes and brain, I
think. They have two machines; so they know when the police or anybody is coming toward their
house. They keep talking most of the time so as to take up a person's mind. It is about time
it was stopped, but people don't understand such things around here. Could a wireless telephone
get their voices? Hoping you will do something to stop them, I am yours, ONE WHO HAS BEEN ANNOYED
VERY MUCH.”

There is no help for such a poor sufferer except in the asylum. Here we want to deal not with
the patients, but only with the sinners who sin against logic, while their minds are undiseased.

There is another large class of correspondents, which is not to be blamed, and which is one
of the most interesting contributers to the psychologist's files. People write long discussions
of theories which they build up on peculiar happenings in their minds. The theories themselves
may be entirely illogical, or at least in contradiction to all acknowledged science, but such
letters are interesting, because they disclose abnormal mental states. Here it is not real
insanity; but all kinds of abnormal impulses or ideas, of psychasthenic emotions, of neurasthenic
disturbances, of hysteric inhibition, are the starting points, and it is only natural that
such pathological intrusions should bewilder the patient and induce him to form the wildest
theories. Again, he may believe in the most improbable and most fantastic connection of things,
but this is due to the overwhelming power of disturbances which he is indeed unable to explain
to himself. I have a whole set of letters from women who explain in fantastic theories their
magical power to foresee coming events; and yet it is not difficult to recognize as the foundation
of all such ideas some well-known forms of memory disturbance. Commonly it is the widespread
tendency of women to accompany a scene with the feeling that they have experienced it once
before. They are few who never have had it, especially in states of fatigue; many have it very
often; and some are led to trust it and to become convinced that they really experienced the
scene, at least in their minds, beforehand. This uncanny impression then easily develops into
untenable speculations on the borderland of normal intellect. The letters which approach those
of the insane most nearly come from persons who try to work out a theory to account for hysterical
experiences which break into their normal life. Sometimes the most absurd explanations must
be acknowledged as justified from the standpoint of the patient. A woman wrote to me that she
had the abnormal power to produce railroad wrecks by her mere will, while she was lying at
home in bed. She wanted me to hypnotize her in order to relieve her from this uncanny power.
She had elaborated this thought in full detail. She did not know, what I found out only slowly,
that in hysterical attacks at night, for which every memory was lost the next morning, she
used a stolen switch key to open a switch, because she was angry with a railway official. I
will ignore all such cases with an abnormal background here and confine myself to the healthy
crowd.

If I were to characterize their writings from an outside point of view, I might first say that
their expressions are expansive. There is no limit to their manuscripts, though I have to confess
that an exposition of eighty-five hundred pages which has just been announced to me by its
author has not yet reached me. Nor can it be denied that their relation to old-fashioned or
to new-fashioned spelling is not always a harmonious one. Nor should I call them always polite:
the criticism of my own opinions, which they generally know only from some garbled newspaper
reports, often takes forms which are not the usual ones for scholarly correspondence. “Whether
it is your darkness or if it is the badness of the police that go around calling themselves
the government, that probably ordered you to put such ignorance in the Sunday article, I do
not know.” Or more straightforward are letters of this type: “Greeting—You take the prize as
an educated fool. According to reports to me by less stupid and more honest men than you, the
matter is....” It is surprising how often the handwriting is pretty, coquettish, or affected,
but almost half of my crank correspondence is typewritten.

When the newspapers tell of a mysterious case, minds of this type immediately feel attracted
to mix in. When a few years ago I published an article disclosing the tricks of Madame Palladino,
I was simply flooded with letters of advice and of explanation. The same thing occurred recently
when the papers reported that I was experimenting with Beulah Miller. Now it is easy to understand
that those who fancied that the Miller child had supernatural gifts of telepathy and clairvoyance
would wish to bring their questions to me so that I might make Beulah Miller trace their lost
bracelets or predict their fortune in the Stock Exchange. But I was at a loss to understand
why so many persons from Maine to California felt tempted to write long letters to me in which
they told me what kind of questions I ought to ask the child, as if I could not formulate a
question for myself. Every one expected a special report for himself with exact statements
of her answers. The whole performance showed a lack of judgment which is typical of that lower
intellectual layer; and yet the letters were often written on beautifully monogrammed letter
paper. More often, however, my own writings or doings have nothing to do with the case. I am
the perfectly innocent receiver of written messages about anything between heaven and earth,
while the messages which my correspondents receive from me are not always authentic. One of
my psychically talented writers reports: “On May 31st at eight forty-nine A. M. in the midst
of a thunderstorm I came into communication with Doctor Münsterberg and asked him to send me
a message. He said, 'The name of my son is Wilhelm Münsterberg.'” It is improbable that I lied
so boldly about my family, even in a telepathic message.

I may select a few typical theories, which all come from evidently otherwise normal and harmless
people. I have before me a whole series of manuscripts from a druggist who is sure that his
ego theory is “very near the truth.” It is in itself very simple and convincing. “The right
and the left cerebral egos united with one sublime ego are in the body in a loose union in
possession of an amœboid cell. During sleep they may separate. The sublime ego wanders through
nerve paths to the bowels, and the bowel experiences are the dreams.” An experiment brought
a definite proof of this. The druggist dyed some crackers deep blue with methylene blue, and
later dreamed that a large train of blue food was passing by. As each carriage of the train
corresponded to a granule of starch in the crackers, he was able to figure that the ego which
saw those parts of the crackers was about one thousandth of an inch large. “The fact of seeing
in dreams is due to vital force, the peculiar low speed to the high vibration force of living
albuminoids emitted from every tendril of bioplasm and perceived by the eye of the ego-bion
during its visit.” “Within the ego-bion is the ego itself, which is much simpler looking, about
one hundredth of a micromillimeter.” I do not want to go into details of how these egos can
be transmitted “by kiss or otherwise” from one generation to another, but I can say that as
soon as the reader has grasped the fundamental thesis of the author, everything follows with
perfect logic. The good man, who is doubtless a faithful druggist and whose mind is perfectly
clear, has simply twisted some of the ideas which he has gathered from his ample reading and
developed his pet theory.

His case is very similar to that of a dignified, elderly trained nurse who is faithfully devoted
to her noble daily work and who follows her vocation without indicating to any one that she
is the author of a great unpublished philosophical work. She has spent twenty-five years of
her life on the elaboration of this magnum opus, which is richly illustrated. Everything in
the book is consistent and in harmony with its presuppositions. The theory again is very simple;
every detail is perfectly convincing, if you acknowledge the starting point. As to this, there
may be difference of opinion. The fundamental thought is that all human souls are born in the
forests of Central Africa. “Souls are sexless forces. Never is one soul born into life. There
are always two. Often we find three pairs of almost the same type with but a shadow of density
to distinguish each pair. Man evolutes upward on the scale of life by two tribes of apes. Ere
man becomes human, he represents one cell force. When man takes the human form as Maquake,
he becomes a double life cell.” I do not claim to be an expert in this system, but if I understand
the whole work rightly, the idea is that any human soul born there by the monkeys in Africa
has to pass in circles of one thousand years from individual to individual, becoming at first
negro, then Indian, then Malayan, then Hindu, then Greek, Celt, and Roman, then Jew, and finally
American. After a thousand years the soul begins to degenerate and enters sinners and criminals.
Which stage the soul has reached can easily be seen from the finger nails. The chief illustrations
of the great work were therefore drawings of finger nails of all races. It is a side issue
of the theory that “souls once matured generally pass on to another star. The nearer the sun
is to the star holding life, the denser is all growth in nature.” I acknowledge that this view
of evolution does not harmonize exactly with my own, but I cannot deny that the whole system
is worked out with perfect consistency, and wherever I asked the writer difficult questions
as to some special problems, she was at once ready to give the answers with completely logical
deduction from her premises. She is by no means mentally diseased, and she does not mix her
theories with her practical activity. If she sits as nurse at the bedside of a patient, she
recognizes of course from the finger nails that this particular soul may be three or five thousand
years old, and accordingly in a decaying state, but that does not interfere with her conscientious
work as a nurse and helper.

To be sure, not every one spends twenty-five years on the elaboration of some twisted fancies.
Most of my correspondents write the monumental thoughts of their systems with decisive brevity.
A physician informs me that every thought and act of our lives is transfixed on the etheric
vapours that surround our earth, and that it is therefore only natural that a clairvoyant is
able to see those fixed events and write them down afterward from the ethereal inscriptions.
Another tells about his discovery that the human body is a great electrical magnet. I am the
more glad to make this fact widely known, as the author writes that he has not given it to
the public yet, as he is not financially able to advertise it. Yet he himself adds that after
all it is not necessary to advertise truth. On eight quarto pages he draws the most evident
consequences of his discovery and shows how he is able to explain by it the chemical change
of each cell in the brain and to prove that “foolish so-called spirits are simply electrical
demonstrations.” “I can demonstrate every current, nerve cell, and atom of the human body.
It may seem strange to you that I claim so much, but with the induction every investigation
has been so easy for me. I have never been puzzled for any demonstration yet, but I am still
searching for more knowledge. Yours for investigation....” I may say that this is a feature
common to most of my correspondents of this metaphysical type. They are never “puzzled.”

Nearly related to this type of theories are the systems of astrology; and in our upper world
very few are really aware what a rôle astrology is still playing in the intellectual underworld.
Some of the astrological communications I receive periodically go so far beyond my understanding
that I do not even dare to quote them. But some of the astrological authors present very neat
and clean theories which are so simple and so practical that it is almost a pity that they
are absurd. For instance, I am greatly interested in the question of determining how far the
mind of individuals is predisposed for particular vocations, and in the psychological laboratory
we are busy with methods to approach the problem. The astrologers have a much more convincing
scheme. My friend writes that he has observed “over two thousand cases wherein the dates of
birth have been the means to give the position of the planets at the hour of birth, the purpose
being to ascertain the influence they had on man. Now the furniture business calls for an artistic
temperament, and after careful observation through birth dates it is found that the successful
furniture men have the planet Venus in their nativities. But the Venus influence is prominent
also in other lines of business such as art, jewellery, and in all lines where women's necessities
are manufactured. Other planetary influences on success in business are: Saturn for miners,
tanners, gardeners, clowns, and beggars; Mercury for teachers, secretaries, stationers, printers,
and tailors; Jupiter for clergymen, judges, lawyers, and senators; Mars for dentists, barbers,
cutlers, carpenters, and apothecaries; Uranus for inventors, chemists, occultists, and others.”

One system which is still more frequent than the astrological is the strictly spiritualistic
one, which expresses itself in spirit returns and messages from the other world. Geographically
the most favoured stations for wireless heavenly connections seem to be Brooklyn, New York,
and Los Angeles, California. The adherents of this underworld philosophy have a slang of their
own, and the result is that their letters, while they spring from the deepest emotions, sound
as if they were copied from the same sample book. The better style begins about like this:
“Knowing that you are intensely interested in things psychological, I beg to enclose you copies
of some of the automatic letters which I have received. I have a young lawyer friend in the
city, and he and I can throw down fifteen or twenty sheets of paper on a table, take hold of
hands and get them written full, and in this way I have received letters from Pericles, Aristides,
Immanuel Kant, and many others. I got letters from Julia Ward Howe a week after her transition,
and I got letters from Emerson and Abraham Lincoln by asking for them. I enclose copy of the
last letter which I received from Charlotte Cushman, and I think you will agree there is nothing
foolish about it or indeed about any of the letters. I have recently married again, and my
present wife is a wonderful trance medium, probably the best means of communication between
the two worlds living to-day.” This is not exceptional, as practically every one of my spiritualistic
correspondents has some “best means of communication between the two worlds.” The messages
themselves usually begin: “My loved one, out of the realms of light and truth, I come to you
...” and so on. If the letters do not come from the spiritualists themselves, some of their
friends feel the need of turning my attention to the “wonderful psychic powers” of their acquaintances.
Not seldom the spirits take a more refined form. “The forms of the newly dead come to me in
bulk. I see and feel them. They are purplish inky in colour. When a real spirit comes to me
in white, I close my eyes. I seem to have to. The spirit or presence most commonly seen, I
believe, is a thought form. It frequently comes off the cover of a magazine, and were I not
getting wise, I would think the universe turned suddenly to beauty. But I am learning that
a person can receive wonderfully exaggerated reports from the very soul of the artist.”

From here we see before us the wide vista of the individual gifts and talents: the underworld
people are sometimes bragging of them, sometimes grafting with them, if not blackmailing, and
often simply enjoying them with the sweet feeling of superiority. The powers turn in all valuable
directions. Here is one who wishes to know whether I have ever heard of any other “person who
senses the magnetism of the earth and is able to tell many kinds of earthquakes? Also volcanic
heats? A quick reply will favour me.” Many have the regular prophetic gift; practically every
one of them foresaw the assassination of McKinley. Most of them, however, are gifted in curing
diseases. The typical letter reads as follows: “There is a young man living here who seems
to be endowed with a wonderful occult power by the use of which he is able to diagnose almost
any human ailment. He goes into a trance, and while in this condition the name of the subject
is given him, and then without any further questions he proceeds to diagnose his case fully
and correctly and prescribes a treatment for the relief of the trouble. In every case yet diagnosed
a cure has almost immediately resulted.” This kind of gift is so frequent that it is really
surprising that so many physicians still rely on their clumsier method. Marvellous also are
the effects which hypnotism can secure in this paradise of the ignorant. After having hypnotized
patients many hundred times, I fancied that I had a general impression as to the powers and
limits of hypnotism. But there is no end to the new information which I get from my hypnotizing
correspondents. “Has it ever occurred to you that by hypnotism death will be prevented, and
all ills, mental or otherwise, be cured before long? Why do I think so?” Of course I do not
know why she thinks so. I usually do not know why the writers of the underworld letters think
so. Or rather I usually do know that they do not think at all.

There may be many who will read all this not only with surprise, but with skepticism. They
live their intellectually clean lives, dwell in safe, comfortable houses of the intellect and
move on well-paved educational streets, and never see or hear anything of those inhabitants
of the intellectual slums. If ever a letter like those which pour in hundreds to the desk of
the psychologist were to stray into their mail, they would feel sure that they had to do with
a lunatic who belongs in an asylum under a physician's care. They have no idea that not only
their furnaceman and washwoman, but also their tailor and their watchmaker, or perhaps the
teacher of their children, and, if they examine more carefully, three of their last dinner
guests, are strolling for hours or for a night, or living for seasons, if not for a lifetime,
in that world of superstition and anti-intellectual mentality. Such people are not ill; they
are personally not even cranks; they are simply confused and unable to live an ordered intellectual
life. Their character and temperament and their personality in every other respect may be faultless,
but their ideas are chaotic. They bring together the contradictory and make contrasts out of
the identical, and, far from any sound religious belief or any true metaphysical philosophy,
they simply mix any mystical whims into the groups of thought which civilization has brought
into systematic order. Instead of trying to learn, they are always longing for some illegitimate
intellectual profit; they are always trying to pick the pocket of the absolute.

It is not difficult to recognize the social conditions from which this tendency springs. The
fundamental one, after all, is the widely spread lack of respect for the expert. Such a lack
easily results from democratic life, as democracy encourages the belief that every one can
judge about everything and can decide from his own resources what ought to be thought and what
ought to be done. Yet no one can claim that it is truly a part of democracy itself and that
the democratic spirit would suffer if this view were suppressed. On the contrary, democracy
can never be fully successful and can never be carried through in consistent purity until this
greatest danger of the democratic spirit of society is completely overcome and repressed by
an honest respect for the expert and a willing subordination of judgment to his better knowledge.
Another condition which makes our country a favourite playground for fantastic vagaries is
the strong emphasis on the material sides of life, on business and business success. The result
is a kind of contrast effect. As the surface of such a rushing business life lacks everything
which would satisfy the deeper longings of the soul, the effort to create an inner world is
readily pushed to mystical extremes in which all contact with the practical world is lost,
and finally all solid knowledge disregarded and caricatured. The newspapers have their great
share, too. Any absurdity which a crank anywhere in the world brings forth is heralded with
a joy in the sensational impossibilities which must devastate the mind of the naïve reader.

But whatever the sources of this prevailing superstition may be, there ought to be no disagreement
about its intellectual sinfulness and its danger to society. We see some alarming consequences
in the growth of the revolt against scientific medicine. Millions of good Americans do not
want to know anything about physicians who have devoted their lives to the study of medicine,
but prefer any quack or humbug, any healer or mystic. Yet for a queer reason the case of the
treatment of diseases shows the ruinous results of this social procedure very slowly. Every
scientific physician knows that many diseases can be cured by autosuggestion in emotional excitement,
and if this belief in the quack produces the excitement and the suggestion, the patient may
really be cured, not on account but in spite of the quack who treats him. The whole misery
of this antimedical movement is therefore somewhat veiled and alleviated. But this is not so
in the fields of real culture and knowledge. The belief in the absurdities there has not even
an autosuggestive value. It is simply destructive to the life of civilized society. It is absurd
for us to put our best energies to work to build up a splendid system of education for the
youth of the whole nation, and at the same time to allow its structure to be undermined by
the millionfold intellectual depravity.

Of course it may be difficult to say what ought to be done. I feel sure that society ought
to suppress with relentless energy all those parlours of the astrologists and palmists, of
the scientific mediums and spiritualists, of the quacks and prophets. Their announcements by
signs or in the public press ought to be stopped, and ought to be treated by the postal department
of the government as the advertisements of other fraudulent enterprises are treated. A large
rôle in the campaign would have to be played by the newspapers, but their best help would be
rendered by negative action, by not publishing anything of a superstitious and mystical type.
The most important part of the fight, however, is to recognize the danger clearly, to acknowledge
it frankly, and to see with open eyes how alarmingly the evil has grown around us. No one will
fancy that any social schemes can be sufficient to bring superstition to an end, any more than
any one can expect that the present fight against city vice will forever put a stop to sexual
immorality. But that surely cannot be an argument for giving up the battle against the moral
perversities of metropolitan life. The fact that we cannot be entirely successful ought still
less to be an argument for any leniency with the intellectual perversities and the infectious
diseases the germs of which are disseminated in our world of honest culture by the inhabitants
of the cultural underworld.

                                  IV

                         THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

The harmony and soundness of society depend upon its inner unity of mind. Social organization
does not mean only an external fitting together, but an internal equality of mind. Men must
understand one another in order to form a social unit, and such understanding certainly means
more than using the same words and the same grammar. They must be able to grasp other men's
point of view, they must have a common world in which to work, and this demands that they mould
the world in the same forms of thought. If one calls green what another calls sour, and one
feels as noise what another feels as toothache, they cannot enter into a social group. Yet
it is no less confusing and no less antisocial if the world which one sees as a system of causes
and effects is to another a realm of capricious, causeless, zigzag happenings. The mental links
which join society are threatened if some live with their thoughts in a world of order and
natural law, and others in a mystical chaos.

This has nothing to do with differences of opinion. Society profits from contrasting views,
from discussion and struggle. The opposing parties in a real debate understand each other well
and are working with the same logic and the same desire for order of thought. This contrast
between order and mysticism has still less to do with the difference of knowledge and belief
in a higher religious and philosophical sense. There is no real antagonism between science
and religion, between experience and philosophical speculation. They point to each other, they
demand each other, and no social question is involved when the interests of one man emphasize
more the scholarly search for scientific truth, and those of another concentrate throughout
his lifework on the emotional wisdom of religion. It is quite different with mysticism and
science; they are not two parties of a debate on equal terms. They exclude each other, as the
mystic projects his feeling interests into those objects which the scientist tries to analyze
and to understand as effects of causes. Nothing is a safer test of the cultural development
of a society than the instinct for the difference between religion and superstition. Mysticism
is a systematized superstition. It never undermines the true interests of society more than
when it goes to work with pseudo-scientific tools. Its most repellent form, that of sheer spiritualism,
has in recent years declined somewhat, and the organizations for antilogical, psychical research
eke out a pitiable existence nowadays. But the community of the silent or noisy believers in
telepathy, mystical foresight, clairvoyance, and wonder workers seems to increase.

The scientific psychologist might have a twofold contact with such movements. His most natural
interest is that of studying the mental makeup of those who chase this will-o'-the-wisp. Their
mental vagaries and superstitious fancies are quite fascinating material for his dissection.
But for the interests of society an entirely different effort is, after all, more consequential.
The psychologist has no right to avoid the trouble of examining conspicuous cases which superficially
seem to endorse the fantastic theories of the mentally untrained. Such an investigation is
his share, as indeed mental occurrences generally stand in the centre of the alleged wonderful
facts. From this feeling of social responsibility some years ago I approached the hysterical
trickster, Madame Palladino, who had so much inflamed the mystical imagination of the country,
and from this interest in the social aspect I undertook again recently a research into the
mental powers of Beulah Miller, who was well on the way to bewilder the whole nation and thus
to stir up the always latent mystic inclinations of the community. It is a typical specimen
of those cases which can easily upset the loosely reasoning public and do tremendous harm to
the mental unity of the social organism. It seems worth while to illuminate it in full detail.

Indeed, since the days when Madame Eusapia Palladino stirred the whole country with her marvellous
mystic powers, no case of psychical mystery has engaged the interest of the nation as that
of little Beulah Miller in Warren, Rhode Island, has done. The story of her wonderful performances
has become a favourite feature of the Sunday papers, and the small New England town for the
first time in its long history has been in the limelight. The reporters have made their pilgrimages,
and every one has returned bewildered and amazed. Here at last the truth of telepathy was proved.
Sworn affidavits of reliable persons removed the last doubts; and I myself, with my long training
as a scientist, had to confess, when for the first time I had spent a few hours with Beulah
Miller, that I was as deeply startled and overcome with wonder as I was after the first night
with Eusapia Palladino. Yet what a contrast! There the elderly, stout Italian woman at a midnight
hour, in dimly lighted rooms, in disreputable New York quarters, where the palmists and mediums
live in their world of sham psychology, sitting in a trance state at a table surrounded by
spiritualistic believers who had to pay their entrance fees; here a little, naïve, ten-year-old
girl among her toys in the kitchen of her parents' modest white cottage in a lovely country
village! I never felt a more uncanny, nerve-irritating atmosphere than in Palladino's squalid
quarters, and I do not remember more idyllic, peaceful surroundings than when I sat between
Beulah and her sister through bright sunny mornings in their mother's home with their cat beside
them and the pet lamb coming into the room from the meadow. There everything suggested fraud,
and when at my second séance her foot was caught behind the curtain and the whole humbug exposed,
it was exactly what I had expected. But here everything breathed sincerity and naïveté and
absence of fraud—yet my mere assurance cannot convince a skeptic; we must examine the case
carefully.

The claims are very simple: Here is a school child of ten years who is able to read in the
mind of any one present anything of which he is thinking. If you take a card from a pack and
look at it, and still better if several people look at it, and best of all if her mother or
sister looks at it, too, Beulah will say at once which card it is, although she may stand in
the farthest corner of the room. She will give you the date on any coin which you have in hand;
in a book she will tell you the particular word at which you are looking. Indeed, a sworn affidavit
reports still more surprising feats. Beulah gave correctly the name of the reporter whom nobody
else knew and the name of the New York paper for which she is writing. At school she reads
words written on the blackboard with her back turned to it. At home she knows what any visitor
is hiding in his pocket.

The serious-minded man who is disgusted with spiritualistic charlatans and their commercial
humbug is naturally inclined here, too, at once to offer the theory that all is fraud and that
a detective would be the right man to investigate the case. When the newspapers discovered
that I had begun to study the girl, I received from many sides letters with suggestions to
look for certain devices with which stage performers carry out such tricks, such as marked
cards and the equipment of the magician. But whoever thinks of fraud here misunderstands the
whole situation. The psychical powers of Beulah Miller were not brought before the public by
the child or her family; there was no desire for notoriety, and in spite of the very modest
circumstances in which this carpenter's family has to live, the facts became known before any
commercial possibility suggested itself.

The mother was startled by Beulah's psychical gifts because she noticed two years ago that
when the family was playing “Old Maid” Beulah always knew in whose hands the dangerous queen
was to be found. Then they began to experiment with cards in the family circle, and her ability
to know of what the mother or the sister was thinking became more and more interesting to them.
Slowly her school friends began to notice it, and children in the Sunday-school told the minister
about Beulah's queer mind-reading. All this time no newspaper had known about it. One day the
minister, when he passed the house, entered and inquired whether those rumours were true. He
had a little glass full of honey in his pocket, and Beulah spelled the word honey at once.
He made some tests with coins, and every one was successful. This minister, Rev. H. W. Watjen,
told this to his friend Judge Mason, who has lived in Warren for more than thirty years, and
then both the minister and the judge visited repeatedly the village where the Millers live,
performed a large number of experiments with cards and coins and words, and became the friendly
advisers of the mother, who was still troubled by her doubt whether these supernatural gifts
of the child came from God or from the devil. Only through the agency of these two well-known
men, the Baptist minister and the judge, was the public informed that a mysterious case existed
in the neighbourhood of Warren, and when the newspapers began to send their reporters and strangers
came to see the wonder, these two men decided who should see the child. Of course, commercial
propositions, invitations to give performances on the vaudeville stage, soon began to pour
in, but with indignation the mother refused to listen to any such idea. Because of my scientific
interest in such psychological puzzles, the judge and the minister turned to me to investigate
the case. It is evident that this whole social situation lacks every conceivable motive for fraud.

But this impression was strongly heightened by the behaviour of the family and of the child
during the study which I carried on in the three weeks following. The mother, the twelve-year-old
sister Gladys, and Beulah herself were most willing to agree to anything which would make the
test difficult, and they themselves asked to have everything tried with no member of the family
in the room. Beulah was quite happy to show her art under unaccustomed conditions like having
her eyes covered with thick bandages. When inadvertently some one turned a card so that she
could see it, she was the first to break out into childish laughter at her having seen it.
In short, everything indicated such perfect sincerity, and the most careful examination yielded
so absolutely no trace of intentional fraud, that I can vouch for the honesty of the intentions
of all concerned in the experiments carried on so far.

If fraud and humbug may certainly be excluded, the wiseacres will say that the results must
then have been a matter of chance coincidence. No one can deny that chance may sometimes bring
surprising results. Dreams of far-distant accidents come true, and yet no one who considers
those millions of dreams which do not come true and which therefore remain disregarded will
acknowledge any prophetic power in sleep. It may happen, if you are asked to call a name or
a figure of which another man is thinking, that you will strike the right one. Moreover, recent
experiments have shown that there is much natural uniformity in the thoughts of men. Certain
figures or names or things more readily rush to the mind than others. Hence the chances that
two persons will be thinking of the same figure are much larger than would appear from the
mere calculation of probabilities. Yet even if we make the largest possible concession to happy
coincidences, there cannot remain the slightest doubt that the experiments carried on under
standard conditions yielded results the correctness of which endlessly surpasses any possible
accidental outcome. We may take a typical illustration: I drew cards which she could not possibly
see, while they were shown to the mother and sister sitting next to me, Beulah sitting on the
other side of the room. The first was a nine of hearts; she said nine of hearts. The next was
six of clubs, to which she said first six of spades; when told it was not spades, she answered
clubs. The next was two of diamonds; her first figure was four; when told that it was wrong,
she corrected herself two, and added diamonds. The next was nine of clubs, which she gave correctly;
seven of spades, she said at first seven of diamonds, then spades; jack of spades, she gave
correctly at once, and so on.

One other series: We had little cardboard squares on each of which was a large single letter.
I drew any three, put them into the cover of a box, and while the mother, Gladys, and I were
looking at the three letters, Beulah, sitting beside us, looked at the ceiling. The first were
R-T-O. She said R-T-I. When told it was wrong, she added O. The next were S-U-T; she gave S-U,
and then wrongly R P Q, and finally T. The next were N-A-R; she gave G N-A-S R. The following
D-W-O she gave D-W, but could not find the last letter. It is evident that every one of the
cards gave her fifty-two chances, and not more than one in fifty-two would have been correct
if it were only guessing, and as to the letters, not more than one among twenty-six would have
been chosen correctly by chance. The given example demonstrates that of five cards she gave
three correctly, two half correctly, and those two mistakes were rectified after the first
wrong guess. The second experiment demanded from her four times three letters. Of these twelve
letters, six were right at the first guess and five after one or two wrong trials. Taking only
this little list of card and letter experiments together, we can say that the probabilities
are only one to many billions that such a result would ever come by chance.

Yet such correctness was not exceptional. On the contrary, I have no series performed under
these conditions which did not yield as favourable an outcome as this. Some were even much
more startling. Once she gave six cards in succession correctly. It was no different with word
experiments. The printed word at which the sister and I looked was stall; she spelled E S-T-O
A-R I L-L. And when the word was steam, she spelled L S-N K T-O A E-A-M; when it was glass,
S G-L-R A-S. Whenever a letter was wrong, she was told so and was allowed a second or a third
choice, but never more than three. It is evident from these three illustrations that she gave
the right letter in the first place six times, and that the right letter was her second choice
four times, and her third choice three times, while no letter was missed in three choices.
Cases of this type again could never occur by mere chance. The number of successful strokes
in this last experiment might be belittled by the claim that the last letters of the word were
guessed when the first letters had been found. But this was not the case. First, even such
a guess would have been chance. The word might have been grave instead of grass, or star instead
of stall. What is much more important, however, is that a large number of other cases proved
that she was not aware of the words at all, but spelled the letters without reference to their
forming a word. Once I wrote Chicago on a pad. The mother and sister gazed at the word, and
Beulah spelled correctly C-H-I-C-A-G, but made eight wrong efforts before she found the closing
O. In other cases, she did not notice that the word was completed, and was trying to fish up
still other letters from her mind. Everything showed that the word as a word did not come to
her mind, but only the single letters. I leave entirely out of consideration the marvels of
mind-reading which were secured by the judge and the minister, the male and female newspaper
reporters, before I took charge of the study of the case. I rely only on what I saw and of
which I took exact notes. I wrote down every wrong letter and every wrong figure, and base
my calculation only on this entirely reliable material. Nevertheless, I must acknowledge it
as a fact beyond doubt that such results as I got regularly could never possibly have been
secured by mere coincidence and chance. As chance and fraud are thus equally out of the question,
we are obliged to seek for another explanation.

There is one explanation which offers itself most readily: We saw that in order to succeed,
some one around her, preferably the mother and sister, who stand nearest to her heart, have
to know the words or the cards. Those visual images must be in some one's mind, and she has
the unusual power of being able to read what is in the minds of those others. Such an explanation
even seems to some a very modest claim, almost a kind of critical and skeptical view. The judge
and the minister, for instance, in accepting this idea of her mind-reading, felt conservative,
as through it they disclaimed any belief in mysterious clairvoyance and telepathic powers.
In the newspaper stories, where the mysteries grew with the geographical distance from Rhode
Island, Beulah was said to be able to tell names or dates or facts which no one present knew.
It was asserted that she could give the dates on the coins which any one had in his pocket
without the possessor himself knowing them, or that she could give a word in a book on which
some one was holding his finger without reading it. No wonder that the public felt sure that
she could just as well discover secrets which no one knows and be aware of far-distant happenings.
It is only one step from this to the belief in a prophetic foresight of what is to come. For
most unthinking people, mind-reading leads in this fashion over to the whole world of mysticism.
In sharp contrast to such vagaries, the critical observers like the judge and the minister
insisted that there was no trace of such prophetic gifts or of such telepathic wonders to be
found, and that everything resolves itself simply into mere mind-reading. Some one in the neighbourhood
must have the idea in mind and must fixedly think of it. Only then will it arise in Beulah's
consciousness.

But have we really a right to speak of mind-reading itself as if it were such a simple process,
perhaps unusual, but not surprising, something like a slightly abnormal state? If we look at
it from the standpoint of the scientist, we should say, on the contrary, that there is a very
sharp boundary line which separates mind-reading from all the experiences which the scientific
psychologist knows. The psychologist has no difficulty in understanding mental diseases like
hysteria or abnormal states like hypnotism, or any other unusual variation of mental life.
The same principles by which he explains the ordinary life of the mind are sufficient to give
account of all the strange and rare occurrences. But when he comes to mind-reading, an entirely
new point of view is chosen. It would mean a complete break with everything which science has
found in the mental world. The psychologist has never discovered a mental content which was
not the effect or the after-effect of the stimulation of the senses. No man born blind has
ever by his own powers brought the colour sensations to his mind, and no communication from
without was ever traced which was not carried over the path of the senses. The world which
is in the mind of my friend, in order to reach my mind, must stimulate his brain, and that
brain excitement must lead to the contraction of his mouth muscles, and that must stir the
air waves which reach my ear drum, and the excitement must be carried from my ear to the brain,
where the mental ideas arise. No abnormal states like hypnotism change in the least this procedure.
But if we fancy that the mere mental idea in one man can start the same idea in another, we
lack every possible means to connect such a wonder with anything which the scientist so far
acknowledges.

To be sure, every sincere scholar devoted to truth has to yield to the actual facts. We cannot
stubbornly say that the facts do not exist because they do not harmonize with what is known
so far. The psychologist would not necessarily be at the end of his wit if the developments
of to-morrow proved that mind-reading in Beulah Miller's case, or in any other case, is a fact
beyond doubt. He might argue that all previous knowledge was based on a wrong idea and that,
for instance, other processes go on in the brain, which can be transmitted from organism to
organism like wireless telegraphic waves without the perception of the senses. If these other
processes were conceived as the foundation of mental images, the scientific psychological scholar
of the future might possibly work out a consistent theory and all the previously known facts
might then be translated into the language of the new science. Whether in this or a similar
way we should ever come to really satisfactory results, no one can foresee, but at least it
is certain that this would involve a complete giving up of everything which scientists have
so far held to be right. Certainly in the history of civilization great revolutions in science
have happened. The astronomers had to begin almost anew; why cannot the psychologists turn
around and acknowledge that they have been entirely wrong so far and that they must begin once
more at the beginning and rewrite all which they have so far taken to be truth?

Certainly the psychologists are no cowards. They would not hesitate to declare their mental
bankruptcy if the progress of truth demanded it. But at least we must be entirely clear that
this is indeed the situation and that no step on the track of mind-reading can be taken without
giving up everything which we have so far held to be true. And it is evident that such a radical
break with the whole past of human science can be considered only if every other effort for
explanation fails, and if it seems really impossible to understand the facts in the light of
all which science has already accomplished. If Beulah Miller's little hands are to set the
torch to the whole pile of our knowledge, we ought first to be perfectly sure that there is
really nothing worth saving. We cannot accept the theory of the apostles of mind-reading until
we know surely that Beulah Miller can receive communications which cannot possibly be explained
with the means of science.

Now we all know one kind of mind-reading which looks very astounding and yet which there is
no difficulty at all in explaining. It is a favourite performance on the stage, and not seldom
tried as a parlour game. I refer to the kind of mind-reading in which one person thinks of
a hidden coin, and the other holds his wrist and is then able to find the secreted object.
There is no mystery in such apparent transmission of the idea, because it is the result of
small unintentional movements of the arm. The one who thinks hard of the corner of the room
in which the coin is placed cannot help giving small impulses in that direction. He himself
is not aware of these faint movements, but the man who has a fine sense of touch becomes conscious
of these motions in the wrist which his fingers grasp, and under the guidance of these slight
movements he is led to the particular place. Some persons express their thought of places more
easily than others and are therefore better fitted for the game, and we find still greater
differences in the sensitiveness of different persons. Not every one can play the game as well
as a trained stage performer, who may have an extreme refinement of touch and may notice even
the least movements in the wrist which others would not feel at all. Such an explanation is
not an arbitrary theory. We can easily show with delicate instruments in the psychological
laboratory that every one in thinking of a special direction soon begins to move his hand toward
it without knowing anything of these slight movements. The instruments allow the reading of
such impulses where the mere feeling of the hand would hardly show any signs. A very neat form
of the same type is often seen on the stage when the performer is to read a series of numbers
in the mind of some one who thinks intensely of the figures. Some one in the audience thinks
of the number fifty-seven. The performer asks him to think of the first figure, then he grasps
his hand and counts slowly from zero to nine. After that he asks him to think of the second
figure, and counts once more. Immediately after he will announce rightly the two digits. Again
there is no mystery in it. He knows that the man who thinks of the figure five will make a
slight involuntary movement when the five is reached in counting, and the same movement will
occur at the seven in the second counting. If he is very well trained, he will not need the
touching of the hand; he will perform the same experiment with figures without any actual contact
whatever. It will be sufficient to see the man who is thinking of a figure while he himself
is counting. As soon as the dangerous digit is reached, the man will give some unintentional
sign. Perhaps his breathing will become a degree deeper, or stop for a moment, his eyelids
may make a reflex movement, his fingers may contract a bit. This remains entirely unnoticed
by any one in the audience, but the professional mind-reader has heightened his sensibility
so much that none of these involuntary signs escapes him. Yet from the standpoint of science
his seeing these subtle signs is on principle no different from our ordinary seeing when a
man points his finger in some direction.

But the experience of the scientist goes still farther. In the cases of this parlour trick
and the stage performance the one who claims to read the mind of the other is more or less
clearly aware of those unintended signs. He feels those slight movement impulses, which he
follows. But we know from experiences of very different kind that such signs may make an impression
on the senses and influence the man, and yet may not really come to consciousness. Even those
who play the game of mind-reading in the parlour and who are led by the arm movements to find
the hidden coin will often say with perfect sincerity that they do not feel any movements in
the wrist which they touch. This is indeed quite possible. Those slight shocks which come to
their finger tips reach their brains and control their movements without producing a conscious
impression. They are led in the right direction without knowing what is leading them. The physician
finds the most extreme cases of such happenings with some types of his hysteric patients. They
may not hear what is said to them or see what is shown to them, and yet it makes an impression
on them and works on their minds, and they may be able later to bring it to their memory and
it may guide their actions, but on account of their disease those impressions do not really
reach their conscious minds.

We find the same lack of seeing or hearing or feeling in many cases of hypnotism. But it is
not necessary to go to such extreme happenings. All of us can remember experiences when impressions
reached our eyes or ears and yet were not noticed at the time, although they guided our actions.
We may have been on the street in deep thought or in an interesting conversation so that we
were not giving any attention whatever to the way, and yet every step was taken correctly under
the guidance of our eyes. We saw the street, although we were not conscious of seeing it. We
do not hear a clock ticking in our room when we are working, and yet if the clock suddenly
stops we notice it. This indicates that the ticking of the clock reached us somehow and had
an effect on us in spite of our not being conscious of it. The scientists are still debating
whether it is best to say that these not conscious processes are going on in our subconscious
mind or whether they are simply brain processes. For all practical purposes, this makes no
difference. We may say that our brain gets an impression through our eyes when we see the street,
or through our ears when we hear the clock, or we may say that our subconscious mind receives
these messages of eye and ear. In neither case does the scientist find anything mysterious
or supernatural.

I am convinced that all the experiences with Beulah Miller may ultimately be understood through
those two principles. She has unusual gifts and her performances are extremely interesting,
but I think everything can be explained through her subconscious noticing of unintended signs.
Where no signs are given which reach her senses, she cannot read any one's mind. But the signs
which she receives are not noticed by her consciously. She is not really aware of them; they
go to her brain or to her subconscious mind and work from there on her conscious mind.

What speaks in favour of such a skeptical view? I mention at first one fact which was absolutely
proved by my experiments—namely, that Beulah Miller's successes turn into complete failures
as soon as neither the mother nor the sister is present in the room. All the experiments which
I have conducted in which I alone, or I together with the minister and the judge, thought of
words or cards or letters or numbers did not yield better results than any one would get by
mere guessing. In one series, for instance, in which we all three made the greatest effort
to concentrate our minds on written figures, she knew the first number correctly only in two
out of fourteen cases. In another series of twelve letters she did not know a single one at
the first trial. Sometimes when she showed splendid results with her sister Gladys present,
everything stopped the very moment the sister left the room. Sometimes Beulah knew the first
half of a word while Gladys stood still in the same room, and could not get the second half
of the word when Gladys in the meantime had stepped from the little parlour to the kitchen.
Beulah was helpless even when a wooden door was between her and the member of her family. She
herself did not know that it made such a difference, but the records leave no doubt. I may
at once add here another argument. The good results stop entirely when Beulah is blindfolded.
Even when both her mother and sister were sitting quite near her, her mind-reading became pure
guesswork when her eyes were covered with a scarf. Again, she liked to make the experiment
under this condition and was not aware that her knowledge failed her when she did not see her
mother or sister. Her delight in being blindfolded spoke very clearly for her naïve sincerity,
but her failure indicated no less clearly that she must be dependent upon unintentional signs
for her success.

Let me say at once that some of the observers would probably object to my statement that the
presence of the family was needed and that she had to be in such direct connection with them.
The newspapers told wonderful stories of her success with strangers, and even the judge and
the minister felt certain that they had seen splendid results under most difficult conditions.
Yet I have to stick to what I observed myself. It may be objected—and it is well known that
this is the pet objection of the spiritualists against the criticism of scholars—that the results
come well only when the child is in full sympathy with those present and that I may have disturbed
her. But this was not the case. I evidently did not disturb her, inasmuch as we saw that the
experiments which I made with her when the sister or the mother was present were most satisfactory.
Moreover, she was evidently very much at ease with me when we had become more acquainted, and
just those entirely negative results were mostly received on a morning when I had fulfilled
the dearest wishes of the two children, a watch for the one and a ring for the other, besides
all the candy with which my pockets were regularly stuffed. She was in the happiest frame of
mind and most willing to do her best. But if I rely exclusively on my own observation, it is
not only because I suppose that the experiments yielded just as good results as those of other
observers. It is rather because I know how difficult it is to give reliable accounts from mere
memory and to make experiments without long training in experimental methods. All those publicly
reported experiments had been made without any actual exact records, and, moreover, by persons
who overlooked the most evident sources of error. As a matter of course, I took notes of everything
which happened, and treated the case with the same carefulness with which I am accustomed to
carry on the experiments in the Harvard Psychological Laboratory.

To give some illustrations of sources of error, I may mention that the earlier observers were
convinced that Beulah could not see slight movements of the persons in the room when she was
looking fixedly at the ceiling, or that she could not notice the movements of the sister or
the mother when she was staring straight into the eyes of the experimenter. Any psychologist,
on the contrary, would say that that would be a most favourable condition for watching small
signs. He knows that while we fixate a point with the centre of our eye we are most sensitive
to slight movement impressions on the side parts of our eye, and that this sensitiveness is
often abnormally heightened. Just when the child is looking steadily into our face or to the
ceiling, the outside parts of her sensitive retina may bring to her the visible unintentional
signs from her sister or mother. The untrained observer is also usually unaware how easily
he helps by suggestive movements or utterances to the other observers. When Beulah gave a six
instead of a nine, one of our friends whispered that she may have seen it upside down in her
mind, or when she gave a zero instead of a six that it looked similar. In short, they keep
helping without knowing it. Very characteristic is the habit of unintentionally using phrases
which begin with the letters of which they are thinking. The letter in their minds forces them
to speak words which begin with it. If they start at a C, we hear “Come, Beulah,” if at a T,
“Try, Beulah,” if at an S, “See, Beulah.” It is very hard to protect ourselves against such
unintended and unnoticed helps. It is still more difficult to keep the failures in mind. The
eager expectancy of hearing the right letter or number from the lips of the child gives such
a strong emphasis to the right results that the wrong ones slip from the mind of the hearer.
The right figure may be only the third or the fourth guess of the child, but if then the whole
admiring chorus around say emphatically at this fourth trial that this is quite right, those
three wrong efforts which preceded fade away from the memory. I may acknowledge for myself
that I was mostly inclined to believe that the number of the correct answers had been greater
than they actually were according to my exact records. For all these reasons I had the very
best right to disregard the reports of all those who relied on their amateur art of experimenting
and on their mere memory account.

What kind of signs could be in question? It may seem to outsiders that the most wonderful system
of signs would be needed for every content of one mind to be communicated to another. But here
again we must first reduce the exaggerated claims to the simpler reality. When Beulah makes
card experiments, the whole words jack, queen, king, spade, club, heart, diamond, come to her
mind, but when she makes word experiments, never under any circumstances does a real word come
to her consciousness, but only single letters. Why is this? If king and queen can be transmitted
from mind to mind, why not dog and cat? Yet when the mother thinks of dog, it is always only
first D, and after a while O, and finally G which creeps into her mind. This difference seems
to me most characteristic, because it indicates very clearly that the whole performance is
possible only when the communicated content belongs to a small list which can be easily counted.
There are only three face cards, only four suites, only ten numbers, and only twenty-six letters,
but there are ten thousand words and more. It is easy to connect every one of the ten numbers
or every one of the twenty-six letters with a particular sign, but it would be impossible to
have a sign for every one of the ten thousand words. Yet if we had to do with real mind-reading,
it ought to make no difference whether we transmit the letter D or the word dog. This fact
that she can recognize words only by slow spelling, while the faces and the suites of the cards
and the names of the numbers come as full words, seems to me to point most clearly to the whole
key of the situation. Anything which cannot be brought into such a simple number series, for
instance, a colour impression, can never be transmitted. If the mother looks at the ace of
diamonds, Beulah says that she sees the red of the diamond before her in her mind, but if the
mother looks at the picture of a blue lake, this blue impression can never arise in Beulah's
mind, but only the letters B-L-U-E.

Moreover, I observed that for Beulah the letters of the alphabet were indeed connected with
numbers, as in seeking a letter she has a habit of going through the alphabet and at the same
time moving one finger after another. Thus she feels each letter as having a definite place
in her series of finger movements, and the finger movements themselves are often counted by
her, so that each letter is finally connected with a special number. This, indeed, reduces
the situation to rather a simple scheme. She succeeds only if her mother or sister is present
and if her eyes are open, and she succeeds only with material which can be easily counted.
A very short system of simple signs would thus be entirely sufficient to communicate everything
which her mind-reading brings to her. As to the particular signs, I do not yet feel sure. It
would probably take months of careful examination before I should find them out, just as in
Germany it has taken months for scholars to discover the unintentional signs which the owner
of a trick horse made, from which the horse was apparently able to calculate. I have no time
to carry on such an investigation in this case, the more as I do not see that any new insight
could be gained by it.

Once I noticed distinctly how in the card experiments the mother without her own knowledge
made seven movements with her foot when she thought of the figure seven. That gave me the idea
that the signs might be given by very slight knocking on the floor which Beulah's oversensitive
skin might notice. What speaks against such a view is that the results stop when she is blindfolded.
Yet in this connection I may mention another aspect. It is quite possible that the covering
of her eyes may destroy her power, and that nevertheless she may receive her signs chiefly
not through the eyes, but through touch and ear. It may be that she needs her eyes open because
the seeing of the members of the family may heighten by a kind of autosuggestion her sensitiveness
for the perception of the slight signs. I have no doubt that this kind of autosuggestion plays
a large rôle in her mind. She can read a card much better when she is allowed to touch with
her fingers the rear of the card. She herself believes that she receives the knowledge through
her finger tips. In reality it is, of course, a stimulus by which she becomes more suggestible
and by which accordingly her sensitiveness to the slight signs which her mother and sister
give her becomes increased. We must, however, never forget that these signs, whatever they
may be, are not only unintentional on the part of her family, but also not consciously perceived
by Beulah. If she stares at the ceiling, and her mother, without knowing it, makes seven slight
foot movements, Beulah gets through the side parts of her eye a nerve impression, but she does
not think of the foot. This nerve impression, as we saw, works on the subconscious mind, or
on the brain, and the idea of seven then arises in her conscious mind like a picture which
she can see.

Such a system of signs, completely unknown to those who give them and to her who receives them,
cannot have been built up in a short while. But we heard how it originated. At first Beulah
recognized the queen in the hands of her sister and mother, when they were playing “Old Maid.”
There are many who have so much power to recognize the small signs. But when they began to
make experiments with cards, probably definite family habits developed; there was much occasion
to treat each card individually, to link some involuntary movement with the face cards and
some with each suite, and slowly to carry this system over to letters. They all agree that
Beulah recognizes some frequent letters much more easily than the rare letters. What the observers
have now found was the result of two years' training with mother and sister. Yet all this became
possible only because Beulah evidently has this unusual, supernormal sensitiveness together
with this abnormal power to receive the signs without their coming at once to consciousness.
Her mental makeup in this respect constantly reminds the psychologist of the traits of a hysteric
woman.

We have to add only one important point. Some startling results have surely been gained by
another method. The same sensitiveness which makes Beulah able to receive signs which others
do not notice, evidently makes her able to catch words spoken in a low voice within a certain
distance, while she is not consciously giving her attention to them. She picks up bits of conversation
which she overhears and which settle in her subconscious mind, until they later come to her
consciousness in a way for which she cannot account. All were startled when at the end of our
first day together I took a bill in my closed hand and asked her what I had there, and she
at once replied a “ten-dollar bill,” while they all agreed that the child had never seen a
ten-dollar bill before. This result surprised the minister and the judge greatly, and only
later did I remember that I had whispered to the judge in the next room, with the door open,
that I should ask her to tell the figures on a ten-dollar bill. In the same way the greatest
sensation must be explained, which the experiments before my arrival yielded. The New York
lady who came with the minister's family and others to the house was overwhelmed when Beulah
spelled her name, which, as the affidavit said, was not known to any one else present. This
affidavit was as a matter of course given according to the best knowledge of all concerned.
Yet when later I came to Warren, one of the participants who told me the incident strengthened
it by adding that he was the more surprised when the child spelled the name correctly with
a K at the end, as he had understood that it was spelled with a T. In other words, some of
those present did know the name, and the lady had evidently either been introduced or addressed
by some one, and this had slipped from their minds because Beulah was not in the room. But
she was probably in the other room and caught it in her subconscious mind. At her first début
before the minister, too, by her same abnormal sensitiveness she probably heard when he told
the mother that he had a glass of honey in his pocket. In short, the two actions of her subconscious
mind, or of her brain, always go together, her noticing of family signs from her mother and
sister and her catching of spoken words from strangers, both under conditions under which ordinary
persons would neither see nor hear them. We have therefore nothing mysterious, nothing supernatural
before us, but an extremely interesting case of an abnormal mental development, and this unusual
power working in a mind which is entirely naïve and sincere.

How long will this naïveté and sincerity last? This is no psychological, but a social problem.
Since the newspapers have taken hold of the case, every mail brings heaps of letters from all
corners of the country. Some of them bring invitations to give performances, but they are not
the most dangerous ones. Most of the letters urge the child to use her mysterious, supernatural
powers for trivial or pathetic ends in the interest of the writers. Sometimes she is to locate
a lost trunk, or a mislaid pocketbook; sometimes she is to prophesy whether a voyage will go
smoothly or whether a business venture will succeed; sometimes she is to read in her mind where
a runaway child may be found; and almost always money promises are connected with such requests.
The mother, who has not much education but who is a splendid, right-minded country woman with
the very best intentions for the true good of her children, has ignored all this silly invasion.
She showed me a whole teacupful of two-cent stamps for replies which she had collected from
Beulah's correspondence. But I ask again, how long will it last? If Beulah closes her eyes
and some chance letters come to her mind, and she forms a word from them and sends it as a
reply to the anxious mother who is seeking her child, she will soon discover that it is easy
to gather money in a world which wants to be deceived. She is followed by the most tempting
invitations to live in metropolitan houses where sensational experiments can be performed with
her. The naïve mother is still impressed when a New York woman applies the well-known tricks
and assures her that the child reminds her so much of her own little dead niece that she ought
to come to her New York house. It is a pity how the community forces sensationalism, commercialism,
and finally humbug and fraud on a naïve little country girl who ought to be left alone with
her pet lamb in her mother's kitchen. Her gift is extremely interesting to the psychologist,
and if it is not misused by those who try to pump spiritualistic superstitions into her little
mind or to force automatic writing on her it will be harmless and no cause for hysteric developments.
But surely her art is entirely useless for any practical purpose. She cannot know anything
which others do not know beforehand. Clairvoyant powers or prophetic gifts are not hers, and
above all her mind-reading is a natural process. The edifice of science will not be shaken
by the powers of my little Rhode Island friend.

Yet the most important part is not the fate of the individual child, but the behaviour of this
nation-wide public which chases her into the swamps of fraud. No one can decide and settle
whether the party of superstition forms the majority or the minority. If all the silent voters
were sincere, they probably would carry the vote for telepathy. But in any case, such a party
exists, and it does not care in the least that scientific investigations clear up a case which
threatens to bring our world of thought into chaotic disorder. A world of mental trickery and
mystery, a world which by its very principle could never be understood, is to them instinctively
more welcome than a world of scientific order. There cannot be a more fundamental contrast
between men who are to form a social unit than this radical difference of attitude toward the
world of experience. Compared with this deepest split in the community, all its other social
questions seem temporary and superficial.

                                   V

                        THE MIND OF THE JURYMAN

Every lawyer knows some good stories about some wild juries he has known, which made him shiver
and doubt whether a dozen laymen ever can see a legal point. But every newspaper reader, too,
remembers an abundance of cases in which the decision of the jury startled him by its absurdity.
Who does not recall sensational acquittals in which sympathy for the defendant or prejudice
against the plaintiff carried away the feelings of the twelve good men and true? For them are
the unwritten laws, for them the mingling of justice with race hatreds or with gallantry. And
even in the heart of New York a judge recently said to a chauffeur who had killed a child and
had been acquitted: “Now go and get drunk again; then this jury will allow you to run over
as many children as you like.”

Yet whatever the temperament of the jury and its legal insight, we may sharply separate its
ideas of deserved punishment from that far more important aspect of its function, the weighing
of evidence. The juries may be whimsical in their decisions, they may be lenient in their acquittals
or over-rigid in their verdicts of guilty, but that is quite in keeping with the democratic
spirit of the institution. The Teutonic nations did not want the abstract law of the scholarly
judges; they want the pulse-beat of life throbbing in the court decisions, and what may be
a wilful ignoring of the law of the jurists may be a heartfelt expression of the popular sentiment.
Better to have some statutes riddled by the illogical verdicts than legal decisions severed
from the sense of justice which is living in the soul of the nation. But while a rush into
prejudice or a hasty overriding of law may draw attention to some exceptional verdicts, in
the overwhelming mass of jury decisions nothing is aimed at but a real clearing up of the facts.
The evidence is submitted, and while the lawyers may have wrangled as to what is evidence and
what is not, and while they may have tried, by their presentation of the witnesses on their
own side and by their cross-examinations, to throw light on some parts of the evidence and
shadow on some others, the jurymen are simply to seek the truth when all the evidence has been
submitted. And mostly they do not forget that they will live up to their duty best the more
they suppress in their own hearts the question whether they like or dislike the truth that
comes to light. Whoever weighs the social significance of the jury system ought not to be guided
by the few stray cases in which the emotional response obscures the truth, but all praise and
blame and every scrutiny of the institution ought to be confined essentially to the ability
of the jurymen to live up to their chief responsibility, the sober finding of the true facts.

It cannot be denied that much criticism has been directed against the whole jury system in
America as well as in Europe by legal scholars as well as by laymen on account of the prevailing
doubt whether the traditional form is really furthering the clearing up of the hidden truth.
Where the evidence is so perfectly clear that every one by himself feels from the start exactly
like all the others, the coöperation of the twelve men cannot do any harm, but it cannot do
any particular good either. Such cases do not demand the special interest of the social reformer.
His doubts and fears come up only when difference of opinion exists, and the discussion and
the repeated votes overcome the divergence of opinion. The skeptics claim that the system as
such may easily be instrumental for suppressing the truth and bringing the erroneous opinion
to victory. In earlier times a frequent objection was that lack of higher education made men
unfit to weigh correctly the facts in a complicated situation. But this kind of arguing has
been given up for a long while. The famous French lawyer who, whenever he had a weak case,
made use of his right to challenge jurymen by systematically excluding all persons of higher
education, certainly blundered in this respect, according to the views of to-day. Those best
informed within and without the legal science agree that the verdicts of straightforward people
with public-school education are in the long run neither better nor worse than those of men
with college schooling or professional training. A jury of artisans and farmers understands
and looks into a mass of neutral material as well as a jury of bankers and doctors, or at least
its final verdict has an equal chance to hit the truth.

But the critics say that it is not the lack of general or logical training of the single individual
which obstructs the path of justice. The trouble lies rather in the mutual influence of the
twelve men. The more persons work together, the less, they say, every single man can reach
his highest level. They become a mass with mass consciousness, a kind of crowd in which each
one becomes oversuggestible. Each one thinks less reliably, less intelligently, and less impartially
than he would by himself alone. We know how men in a crowd do indeed lose some of the best
features of their individuality. A crowd may be thrown into a panic, may rush into any foolish,
violent action, may lynch and plunder, or a crowd may be stirred to a pitch of enthusiasm,
may be roused to heroic deeds or to wonderful generosity, but whether the outcome be wretched
or splendid, in any case it is the product of persons who have been entirely changed. In the
midst of the panic or in the midst of the heroic enthusiasm no one has kept his own characteristic
mental features. The individual no longer judges for himself; he is carried away, his own heart
reverberates with the feelings of the whole crowd. The mass consciousness is not an adding
up, a mere summation, of the individual minds, but the creation of something entirely new.
Such a crowd may be pushed into any paths, chance leaders may use or misuse its increased suggestibility
for any ends. No one can foresee whether this heaping up of men will bring good or bad results.
Certainly the individual level of the crowd will always be below the level of its best members.
And is not a jury necessarily such a group with a mass consciousness of its own? Every individual
is melted into the total, has lost his independent power of judging, and becomes influenced
through his heightened suggestibility and social feeling by any chance pressure which may push
toward error as often as toward truth.

But if such arguments are brought into play, it is evident that it is no longer a legal question,
but a psychological one. The psychologist alone deals scientifically with the problem of mutual
mental influence and with the reënforcing or awakening of mental energies by social coöperation.
He should accordingly investigate the question with his own methods and deal with it from the
standpoint of the scientist. This means he is not simply to form an opinion from general vague
impressions and to talk about it as about a question of politics, where any man may have his
personal idea or fancy, but to discover the facts by definite experiments. The modern student
of mental life is accustomed to the methods of the laboratory. He wants to see exact figures
by which the essential facts come into sharp relief. But let us understand clearly what such
an experiment means. When the psychologist goes to work in his laboratory, his aim is to study
those thoughts and emotions and feelings and deeds which move our social world. But his aim
is not simply to imitate or to repeat the social scenes of the community. He must simplify
them and bring them down to the most elementary situations, in which only the characteristic
mental actions are left. Is this not the way in which the experimenters proceed in every field?
The physicist or the chemist does not study the great events as they occur in nature on a large
scale and with bewildering complexity of conditions, but he brings down every special fact
which interests him to a neat, miniature copy on his laboratory table. There he mixes a few
chemical solutions in his retorts and his test-tubes, or produces the rays or sparks or currents
with his subtle laboratory instruments, and he feels sure that whatever he finds there must
hold true everywhere in the gigantic universe. If the waters move in a certain way in the little
tank on his table, he knows that they must move according to the same laws in the midst of
the ocean. In this spirit the psychologist arranges his experiments too. He does not carry
them on in the turmoil of social life, but prepares artificial situations in which the persons
will show the laws of mental behaviour. An experiment on memory or attention or imagination
or feeling may bring out in a few minutes mental facts which the ordinary observer would discover
only if he were to watch the behaviour and life attitudes of the man for years. Everything
depends upon the degree with which the characteristic mental states are brought into play under
experimental conditions. The great advantage of the experimental method is, here as everywhere,
that everything can be varied and changed at will and that the conditions and the effects can
be exactly measured.

If we apply these principles to the question of the jury, the task is clear. We want to find
out whether the coöperation, the discussion, and the repeated voting of a number of individuals
are helping or hindering them in the effort to judge correctly upon a complex situation. We
must therefore artificially create a situation which brings into action the judgment, the discussion,
and the vote, but if we are loyal to the idea of experimenting we must keep the experiment
free from all those features of a real jury deliberation which have nothing to do with the
mental action itself. Moreover, it is evident that the situations to be judged must allow a
definite knowledge as to the objective truth. The experimenter must know which verdict of his
voters corresponds to the real facts. Secondly, the situation must be difficult in order that
a real doubt may prevail. If all the voters were on one side from the start, no discussion
would be needed. Thirdly, it must be a rather complex situation in order that the judgment
may be influenced by a number of motives. Only in this case will it be possible for the discussion
to point out factors which the other party may have overlooked, thus giving a chance for changes
of mind. All these demands must be fulfilled if the experiment is really to picture the jury
function. But it would be utterly superfluous and would make the exact measurement impossible
if the material on which the judgment is to be based were of the same kind of which the evidence
in the courtroom is composed. The trial by jury in an actual criminal case may involve many
picturesque and interesting details, but the mental act of judging is no different when the
most trivial objects are chosen.

I settled on the following simple device: I used sheets of dark gray cardboard. On each were
pasted white paper dots of different form and in an irregular order. Each card had between
ninety-two and a hundred and eight such white dots of different sizes. The task was to compare
the number of spots on one card with the number of spots on another. Perhaps I held up a card
with a hundred and four dots above, and below one with ninety-eight. Then the subjects of the
experiment had to decide whether the upper card had more dots or fewer dots or an equal number
compared with the lower one. I made the first set of experiments with eighteen Harvard students.
I took more than the twelve men who form a jury in order to reënforce the possible effect,
but did not wish to exceed the number greatly, so that the character of the discussion might
be similar to that in a jury. A much larger number would have made the discussion too formal
or too unruly. The eighteen men sat around a long table and were first allowed to look for
half a minute at the two big cards, each forming his judgment independently. Then at a signal
every one had to write down whether the number of dots on the upper card was larger, equal,
or smaller. Immediately after that they had to indicate by a show of hands how many had voted
for each of the three possibilities. After that a discussion began. Indeed, the two cards offered
plenty of points for earnest and vivid discussion. During the exchange of opinion in which
those who had voted larger tried to convince the party of the smaller, and vice versa, they
were always able to look at the cards and to refer to them, pointing to the various parts.
One showed how the distances on the one card appeared larger, and another pointed out how the
spots were clustered in a certain region, a third how the dots were smaller in some parts,
a fourth spoke about the optical illusions, a fifth about certain impressions resulting from
the narrowness of the margin, and a sixth about the effect of certain irregularities in the
distribution. In short, very different aspects were considered and very different factors emphasized.
The discussion was sometimes quite excited, three or four men speaking at the same time. After
exactly five minutes of talking the vote was repeated, again at first being written and then
being taken by show of hands. A second five minutes' exchange of opinion followed with a new
effort to convince the dissenters. After this period the third and last vote was taken. This
experiment was carried out with a variety of cards with smaller or larger difference of numbers,
but the difference always enough to allow an uncertainty of judgment. Here, indeed, we had
repeated all the essential conditions of the jury vote and discussion, and the mental state
was characteristically similar to that of the jurymen.

The very full accounts which the participants in the experiment wrote down the following day
indicated clearly that we had a true imitation of the mental process in spite of the striking
simplicity of our conditions. One man, for instance, described his inner experience as follows:
“I think the experiment involves factors quite comparable to those that determine the verdict
of a jury. The cards with their spots are the evidence pro and con which each juryman has before
him to interpret. Each person's decision on the number is his interpretation of the situation.
The arguments, too, seem quite comparable to the arguments of the jury. Both consist in pointing
out factors of the situation that have been overlooked and in showing how different interpretations
may be possible.” Another man writes: “In the experiment it seemed that one man judged by one
criterion and another by another, such as distribution, size of spots, vacant spaces, or counting
along one edge. Discussion often brought immediate attention to other criterions than those
he used in his first judgment, and these often outweighed the original. Similarly, different
jurymen would base their opinion on different aspects of the case, and discussion would tend
to draw their attention to other aspects. The experiment also illustrated the relative weight
given to the opinion of different fellow-jurymen. I found that the statements of a few of the
older men who have had more extensive psychological experience weighed more with me than those
of the others. Suggestion did not seem to be much of a factor. A man is rather on his mettle,
and ready to defend his original impression, until he finds that it is hopeless.” Again, another
writes: “To me the experiment seemed fairly comparable to the real situation. As in an actual
trial, the full truth was not available, but certain evidence was presented to all for interpretation.
As to the nature of the discussion itself, I think there was the same mingling of suggestion
and real argument that is to be found in a jury discussion.” Another says: “The discussion
influenced me by suggesting other methods of analysis. For instance, comparison of the amount
of open space in two cards, comparison of the number of dots along the edges, estimation in
diagonal lines, were methods mentioned in the discussion which I used in forming my own judgments.
It does not seem to me that in my own case direct suggestion had any appreciable effect. I
was conscious of a tendency toward contrasuggestibility. There was a half submerged feeling
that it would be good sport to stick it out for the losing side. The lack of any unusual amount
of suggestion and the presence of the influences of analysis and detailed comparison seem to
me to show that the tests were in fact fairly comparable to situations in a jury room.” To
be sure, there were a few who were strongly impressed by the evident differences between the
rich material of an actual trial and the meagre content of our tests: there the actions of
living men, here the space relations of little spots. But they evidently did not sufficiently
realize that the forming of such number judgments was not at all a question of mere perception;
that on the contrary many considerations were involved; most men felt the similarity from the
start.

What were the results of this first group of experiments? Our interest must evidently be centred
on the question of how many judgments were correct at the first vote before any discussion
and any show of hands were influencing the minds of the men, and how many were correct at the
last vote after the two periods of discussion and after taking cognizance of the two preceding
votes. If I sum up all the results, the outcome is that 52 per cent. of the first votes were
correct and 78 per cent. of the final votes were correct. The discussion of the successive
votes had therefore led to an improvement of 26 per cent. of all votes. Or, as the correct
votes were at first 52 per cent., their number is increased by one half. May we not say that
this demonstrates in exact figures that the confidence in the jury system is justified? And
may it not be added that, in view of the widespread prejudices, the result is almost surprising?
Here we had men of high intelligence who were completely able to take account of every possible
aspect of the situation. They had time to do so, they had training to do so, and every foregoing
experiment ought to have stimulated them to do so in the following ones. Yet their judgment
was right in only 52 per cent. of the cases until they heard the opinions of the others and
saw how they voted. The mere seeing of the vote, however, cannot have been decisive, because
48 per cent., that is, practically half of the votes, were at first incorrect. The wrong votes
might have had as much suggestive influence on those who voted rightly as the right votes on
those on the wrong side. If, nevertheless, the change was so strongly in the right direction,
the result must clearly have come from the discussion.

But I am not at the end of my story. I made exactly the same experiments also with a class
of advanced female university students. When I started, my aim was not to examine the differences
of men and women, but only to have ampler material, and I confined my work to students in psychological
classes, because I was anxious to get the best possible scientific analysis of the inner experiences.
I had no prejudice in favour of or against women as members of the jury, any more than my experiments
were guided by a desire to defend or to attack the jury system. I was only anxious to clear
up the facts. The women students had exactly the same opportunities for seeing the cards and
the votes and for exchanging opinions. The discussions, while carried on for the same length
of time, were on the whole less animated. There was less desire to convince and more restraint,
but the record, which was taken in shorthand, showed nearly the same variety of arguments which
the men had brought forward. Everything agreed exactly with the experiments with the men, and
the only difference was in the results. The first vote of all experiments with the women showed
a slightly smaller number of right judgments. The women had 45 per cent. correct judgments,
as against the 52 per cent. of the men. I should not put any emphasis on this difference. It
may be said that the men had more training in scientific observations and the task was therefore
slightly easier for them than for most of the women. I should say that, all taken together,
men and women showed an equal ability in immediate judgment, as with both groups about half
of the first judgments were correct. The fact that with the men 2 per cent. more, with the
women 5 per cent. less, than half were right would not mean much. But the situation is entirely
different with the second figure. We saw that for the men the discussion secured an increase
from 52 per cent. to 78 per cent.; with the women the increase is not a single per cent. The
first votes were 45 per cent. right, and the last votes were 45 per cent. right. In other words,
they had not learned anything from discussion.

It would not be quite correct if we were to draw from that the conclusion that the women did
not change their minds at all. If we examine the number of cases in which in the course of
the first, second, and third votes in any of the experiments some change occurred, we find
changes in 40 per cent. of all judgments of the men and 19 per cent. of all judgments of the
women. This does not mean that a change in a particular case necessarily made the last vote
different from the first; we not seldom had a case where, for instance, the first vote was
larger, the second equal, and the third again larger. And as a matter of course, where a change
between the first and the last occurred, it was not always a change in the right direction.
Moreover, it must not be forgotten that the votes always covered three possibilities, and not
only two. It was therefore possible for the first vote to be wrong, and then for a change to
occur to another wrong vote. The 19 per cent. changes in the decisions of the women contained
accordingly as many cases in which right was turned into wrong as in which wrong was turned
into right, while with the men the changes to the right had an overweight of 26 per cent. The
self-analysis of the women indicated clearly the reason for their mental stubbornness. They
heard the arguments, but they were so fully under the autosuggestion of their first decision
that they fancied that they had known all that before, and that they had discounted the arguments
of their opponents in the first vote. The cobbler has to stick to his last; the psychologist
has to be satisfied with analyzing the mental processes, but it is not his concern to mingle
in politics. He must leave it to others to decide whether it will really be a gain if the jury
box is filled with individuals whose minds are unable to profit from discussion and who return
to their first idea, however much is argued from the other side. It is evident that this tendency
of the female mind must be advantageous for many social purposes. The woman remains loyal to
her instinctive opinion. Hence we have no right to say that the one type of mind is in general
better than the other. We may say only that they are different, and that this difference makes
the men fit and the women unfit for the particular task which society requires from the jurymen.

Practical experience seems to affirm this experimental result on many sides. The public of
the east is still too little aware of this new and yet powerful influence in the far west,
where the jury box is accessible to women. There is no need to point to extreme cases. Any
average trial may illustrate the situation. I have before me the reports of the latest murder
trial at Seattle, the case of Peter Miller. The case was unusual only in that the defendant
had been studying criminal law during his incarceration in jail, and addressed the jury himself
on his own behalf in an argument that is said to have lasted nine hours. The jury was out quite
a long time. Eleven were for acquittal, one woman was against it. The next day the papers brought
out long interviews with her in which she explained the situation. She characterized her general
standing in this way: “I am a dressmaker, and go out every day, six days in the week. I read
the classified ads and glance at the headlines, but I don't have much time to waste on anything
else.” But her attitude in the jury room was very similar. She says: “I was sure of my opinion.
I didn't try to change anybody else's opinion. I just kept my own. They argued a good deal
and asked me if the fact that eleven of twelve had been convinced by the same evidence of Peter
Miller's innocence didn't shake my faith in my own judgment. Well, it didn't. We were out twenty-four
hours. I borrowed a pair of knitting needles from one of the jurors, and I sat there and knitted
most of the time.” The State of Washington will now have to have a new trial, as the jury could
not agree. There will probably still be many hung juries because some dressmaker borrows a
pair of knitting needles from one of the jurors, knits most of the time, and lets the others
argue, as she is sure of her own opinion. The naïve epigram of this model juror, “I didn't
try to change anybody else's opinion; I just kept my own,” illuminates the whole situation.
This is no contrast to the popular idea that woman easily changes her mind. She changes it,
but others cannot change it.

In order to make quite sure that the discussion and not the seeing of the vote is responsible
for the marked improvement in the case of men, I carried on some further experiments in which
the voting alone was involved. To bring this mental process to strongest expression, I went
far beyond the small circle which was needed for the informal exchange of opinion, and operated
instead with my large class of psychological students in Harvard. I have there four hundred
and sixty students, and accordingly had to use much larger cards with large dots. I showed
to them any two cards twice. There was an interval of twenty seconds between the first and
the second exposures, and each time they looked at the cards for three seconds. In one half
of the experiments that interval was not filled at all; in the other half a quick show of hands
was arranged so that every one could see how many on the first impression judged the upper
card as having more or an equal number or fewer dots than the lower. After the second exposure
every one had to write down his final result. The pairs of cards which were exposed when the
show of hands was made were the same as those which were shown without any one knowing how
the other men judged. We calculated the results on the basis of four hundred reports. They
showed that the total number of right judgments in the cases without showing hands was 60 per
cent. correct; in those with show of hands about 65 per cent. A hundred and twenty men had
turned from the right to the wrong—that is, had more incorrect judgments when they saw how
the other men voted than when they were left to themselves.

It is true that those who turned from worse to better by seeing the vote of the others were
in a slight majority, bringing the total vote 5 per cent. upward, but this difference is so
small that it could just as well be explained by the mere fact that this act of public voting
reënforced the attention and improved a little the total vote through this stimulation of the
social consciousness. It is not surprising that the mere seeing of the votes in such cases
has such a small effect, incomparable with that of a real discussion in which new vistas are
opened, inasmuch as in 40 per cent. of the cases the majority was evidently on the wrong side
from the start. Those who are swept away by the majority would therefore in 40 per cent. of
the cases be carried to the wrong side. I went still further and examined by psychological
methods the degree of suggestibility of those four hundred participants in the experiment,
and the results showed that the fifty most suggestible men profited from the seeing of the
vote of the majority no more than the fifty least suggestible ones. In both cases there was
an increase of about 5 per cent. correct judgments. I drew also from this the conclusion that
the show of hands was ineffective as a direct influence toward correctness, and that it had
only the slight indirect value of forcing the men to concentrate their attention better on
those cards. All results, therefore, point in the same direction: it is really the argument
which brings a coöperating group nearer to the truth, and not the seeing how the other men
vote. Hence the psychologist has every reason to be satisfied with the jury system as long
as the women are kept out of it.

                                  VI

                        EFFICIENCY ON THE FARM

We city people who are feeding on city-made public opinion forget that we are in the minority,
and that the interests of the fifty millions of the rural population are fundamental for the
welfare of the whole nation. Moreover, the life of the city itself is most intimately intertwined
with the work on the farm; banking and railroading, industrial enterprises and commercial life,
are dependent upon the farmers' credit and the farmers' prosperity. The nation is beginning
to understand that it would be a calamity indeed if the tempting attractiveness of the city
should drain off still more the human material from the village and from the field. The cry
“back to the land” goes through the whole world, and this means more than a camping tour in
the holidays and some magazine numbers of Country Life in America by the fireplace. Its meaning
ought to be that every nation which wants to remain healthy and strong must take care that
the obvious advantages of metropolitan life are balanced by the joys and gains of the villager
who lacks the shop windows and the exciting turmoil.

Certainly the devices of the city inventor, the telephone and the motor car and a thousand
other gifts of the last generation, have overcome much of the loneliness, and the persistent
efforts of the states to secure better roads and better schools in the country have enriched
and multiplied the values of rural life. Yet the most direct aid is, after all, that which
increases the efficiency of farming itself. In this respect, too, we feel the rapid progress
throughout the country. The improvements in method which the scientific efforts of all nations
have secured are eagerly distributed to the remotest corners. The agents of the governmental
Bureau of Agriculture, the agricultural county demonstrators, the rapidly spreading agricultural
schools, take care that the farmer's “commonsense” with its backwardness and narrowness be
replaced by an insight which results from scientific experiment and exact calculation. Agricultural
science, based on physics and chemistry, on botany and zoölogy, has made wonderful strides
during the last few decades. It must be confessed that the self-complaisance of the farmer
and the power of tradition have offered not a little resistance to the practical application
of the knowledge which the agricultural experiments establish, and the blending of the well-known
conservative attitude of the farmer with a certain carelessness and deficiency in education
has kept the production of the American farm still far below the yielding power which the present
status of knowledge would allow. Other nations, more trained in hard labour and painstaking
economy and accustomed to most careful rotation of crops, obtain a much richer harvest from
the acre, even where the nature of the soil is poor. But the longing of the farmer for the
best methods is rapidly growing, too, and in many a state he shows a splendid eagerness to
try new ways, to develop new plans, and to progress with the advance of science.

In such an age it seems fair to ask whether the circle of sciences which are made contributory
to the efficiency of the agriculturist has been drawn large enough. It is, of course, most
important for every farmer to know the soil and whatever may grow on it and feed on it. All
the new discoveries as to the power of phosphates to increase the crop or as to the part which
protozoa play in the inhibition of fertility, or the influence of parasites on the enemies
of the crops and the numberless naturalistic details of this type, are certainly most important.
Yet does it not look as if in all the operations which the worker on the land has to perform
everything is carefully considered by science, and only the chief thing left out, the worker
and his work? He is earnestly advised as to every detail in the order of nature: he learns
by what chemical substances to improve the soil, what seeds are to be used, and when they are
to be planted, what breeds of animals to raise and how to feed them. But no scientific interest
has thrown light on his own activity in planting the seed and gathering the harvest, in picking
the fruit and caring for the stock.

No doubt, the agent of some trust has recommended to him the newest machines; but their help
still belongs, after all, to the part of outer nature. They are physical apparatus, and even
if the farmer uses nowadays dynamite to loosen the soil, all this new-fashioned power yet remains
scientific usage of the knowledge of nature. But behind all this physical and chemical material
in which and through which the farmer and his men are working stand the farmer himself with
his intelligence, and his men themselves with their lack of intelligence. This human factor,
this bundle of ideas and volitions and feelings and judgments, must ultimately be the centre
of the whole process. There is no machine which can do its best if it is wrongly used, no tool
which can be effective if it is not set to work by an industrious will. The human mind has
to keep in motion that whole great mechanism of farm life. It is the farmer's foresight and
insight which plough and plant and fill the barns. For a long while the average farmer thought
about nature, too, that he could know all he needed, if he applied his homemade knowledge.
That time has passed, and even he relies on the meteorology telegram of the scientific bureaus
rather than on the weather rules of his grandfather. But when it comes to the mental processes
which enter into the agricultural work, he would think it queer to consult science. He would
not even be aware that there is anything to know. The soil and the seed and even the plough
and the harvester are objects about which you can learn. But the attention with which the man
is to do his work, the memory, the perception, the ideas which make themselves felt, the emotions
and the will which control the whole work, would never be objects about which he would seek
new knowledge; they are no problems for him, they are taken for granted.

Yet we have to-day a full-fledged science which does deal with these mental processes. Psychology
speaks about real things as much as chemistry, and the laws of mental life may be relied on
now more safely than the laws of meteorology. It seems unnatural that those who have the interests
of agriculture at heart should turn the attention of the farmer exclusively to the results
of the material sciences and ignore completely the thorough, scientific interest in the processes
of the mind. To be sure, until recently we had the same shortcoming in industrial enterprises
of the factories. Manufacturer and workingman looked as if hypnotized at the machines, forgetting
that those wheels of steel were not the only working powers under the factory roof. A tremendous
effort was devoted to the study and improvement of the industrial apparatus and of the raw
material, while the mental fitness and the mental method of the army of workingmen was dealt
with unscientifically and high-handedly. But within the last few years the attention of the
industrial world has been seriously turned to the matter-of-course fact that the workman's
mind is more important than the machine and the material, if the highest economic output is
to be secured. The great movement for scientific management, however much or little its original
plans may survive, has certainly once for all convinced the world that the study of the man
and his functions ought to be the chief interest of the market, even in our electrical age;
and the more modest movement for vocational guidance has emphasized this personal factor from
sociological motives. At last the psychologists themselves approached the problem of the worker
in the factory, began to examine his individual fitness for his work, and to devise tests in
order to select quickly those whose inborn mental capacity makes them particularly adjusted
to special lines of work. Above all, they examined the methods by which the individual learned
and got his training in the technical activities, they began to determine the exact conditions
which secured the greatest amount of the best possible work with the greatest saving of human
energy. All this is certainly still at its beginning, but even if the solutions of the problems
are still insufficient, the problems themselves will not again be lost sight of. The most obvious
acknowledgment of the importance of these demands lies in the fact that already the quack advice
of pseudo-psychologists is offered from many sides. The up-to-date manufacturer knows, even
if he is not interested in the social duties involved, that the mere economic interest demands
a much more serious study of the workingman's mind than any one thought of ten years ago.

This change must finally come into the agricultural circles. The consequences of the usual,
or rather invariable neglect, are felt less in agriculture than in industry, because the work
is so much more scattered. The harmful effects of poor adjustment and improper training must
be noticed more easily where many thousands are crowded together within the walls of the same
mill. But it would be an illusion to fancy that the damage and the loss of efficiency are therefore
less in the open field than in the narrow factory. On the contrary, the conditions favour the
workshop. There everybody stands under constant supervision, and what is still more important,
always has the chance for imitation. Every improvement, almost every new trick and every new
hand movement which succeeds with one, is taken up by his neighbour and spreads over the establishment.
The principle of farm work is isolation. One hardly knows what another is doing, and where
several do coöperate, they are generally engaged in different functions. Even where the farmhands
work in large groups, the attitude is much less that of team work than of a mere summation
of individual workers. In the country as a whole the man who works on the farm has to gather
his experience for himself, has to secure every advance for himself, and has to miss the benefit
which the social atmosphere of industrial work everywhere furnishes.

It would be utterly misleading to think that the long history of mankind's agricultural pursuits
ought to have been sufficient to bring together the necessary experience. The analysis of the
vocational activities has given every evidence that even the oldest functions are performed
in an impractical, inefficient way. The students of scientific management have demonstrated
how the work of the mason, as old as civilization itself, is carried on every day in every
land with methods which can be improved at once, as soon as a scientific study of the motions
themselves is started. It could hardly be otherwise, and the principle might be illustrated
by any chance case. If a girl were left to herself to learn typewriting, the best way would
seem to her to be to pick out the letters with her two forefingers. She would slowly seek the
right key for each letter and press it down. In this way she would be in the pleasant position
of producing a little letter after only half an hour of trial. As soon as she has succeeded
with such a first half page, she will see only the one goal of increasing the rapidity and
accuracy, and by hard training she will indeed gain steadily in speed and correctness, and
after a year she will write rather quickly. Yet she will never succeed in reaching the ideal
proficiency. In order to attain the highest point, she ought to have started with an entirely
different method. She ought to have begun at once to use all her fingers, and, moreover, to
use them without looking at the keyboard. If she had started with this difficult method she
would never have succeeded in writing a letter the first day. It would have taken weeks to
reach that achievement which the simpler method yields almost at once. But in plodding along
on this harder road she would finally outdistance the competitor with the commonsense method
and would finally gain the highest degree of efficiency. This is exactly the situation everywhere.
Commonsense always grasps for those methods which quickly lead to a modest success, but which
can never lead to maximum achievement. On the other hand, up to the days of modern experimental
psychology the interest was not focussed on the mental operations involved in industrial life
as such. Everything was left to commonsense, and therefore it is not surprising that the farmhand
like the workingman in the mill has never hit upon the one method which is best, as all his
instincts and natural tendencies had to lead him to the second or third best method, since
these alone give immediate results.

A highly educated man who spent his youth in a corn-raising community reports to me the following
psychological observation: However industrious all the boys of the village were, one of them
was always able to husk about a half as much more corn than any one else. He seemed to have
an unusual talent for handling so many more ears than any one of his rivals could manage. "I think
the same as ever of you, Eustacia. Nothing of that sort can degrade you--you ennoble the occupation
of your husband."

"I wish I could feel it."

"Is there any chance of Mr. Yeobright getting better?"

"He thinks so. I doubt it."

"I was quite surprised to hear that he had taken a cottage. I thought, in common with other people,
that he would have taken you off to a home in Paris immediately after you had married him. 'What
a gay, bright future she has before her!' I thought. He will, I suppose, return there with
you, if his sight gets strong again?"

Observing that she did not reply he regarded her more closely. She was almost weeping. Images
of a future never to be enjoyed, the revived sense of her bitter disappointment, the picture
of the neighbour's suspended ridicule which was raised by Wildeve's words, had been too much
for proud Eustacia's equanimity.

Wildeve could hardly control his own too forward feelings when he saw her silent perturbation.
But he affected not to notice this, and she soon recovered her calmness.

"You do not intend to walk home by yourself?" he asked.

"O yes," said Eustacia. "What could hurt me on this heath, who have nothing?"

"By diverging a little I can make my way home the same as yours. I shall be glad to keep you company
as far as Throope Corner." Seeing that Eustacia sat on in hesitation he added, "Perhaps you
think it unwise to be seen in the same road with me after the events of last summer?"

"Indeed I think no such thing," she said haughtily. "I shall accept whose company I choose,
for all that may be said by the miserable inhabitants of Egdon."

"Then let us walk on--if you are ready. Our nearest way is towards that holly bush with the dark
shadow that you see down there."

Eustacia arose, and walked beside him in the direction signified, brushing her way over the damping
heath and fern, and followed by the strains of the merrymakers, who still kept up the dance.
The moon had now waxed bright and silvery, but the heath was proof against such illumination,
and there was to be observed the striking scene of a dark, rayless tract of country under an
atmosphere charged from its zenith to its extremities with whitest light. To an eye above them
their two faces would have appeared amid the expanse like two pearls on a table of ebony.

On this account the irregularities of the path were not visible, and
Wildeve occasionally stumbled; whilst Eustacia found it necessary
to perform some graceful feats of balancing whenever a small tuft
of heather or root of furze protruded itself through the grass of
the narrow track and entangled her feet. At these junctures in her
progress a hand was invariably stretched forward to steady her, holding
her firmly until smooth ground was again reached, when the hand was
again withdrawn to a respectful distance.

They performed the journey
for the most part in silence, and drew near to Throope Corner, a few
hundred yards from which a short path branched away to Eustacia's
house. By degrees they discerned coming towards them a pair of human
figures, apparently of the male sex.

When they came a little nearer
Eustacia broke the silence by saying, "One of those men is my husband.
He promised to come to meet me."

"And the other is my greatest enemy,"
said Wildeve.

"It looks like Diggory Venn."

"That is the man."

"It
is an awkward meeting," said she; "but such is my fortune. He knows
too much about me, unless he could know more, and so prove to himself
that what he now knows counts for nothing. Well, let it be--you must
deliver me up to them."

"You will think twice before you direct me
to do that. Here is a man who has not forgotten an item in our meetings
at Rainbarrow--he is in company with your husband. Which of them,
seeing us together here, will believe that our meeting and dancing
at the gipsy party was by chance?"

"Very well," she whispered gloomily.
"Leave me before they come up."

Wildeve bade her a tender farewell,
and plunged across the fern and furze, Eustacia slowly walking on. The whole position of the body, the position of the hands, the direction of the attention,
the rhythm of the movement, the pauses between the successive actions, the optical judgment
as to the place where the spade ought to cut the ground, the distribution of energy, the respiration,
and many similar parts of the total psychophysical process demand exact analysis if the greatest
efficiency is to be reached. Everybody knows what an amount of attention the golf player has
to give to every detail of his movement, and yet it would be easier to discover by haphazard
methods the best way to handle the golf stick than to use the spade to the best effect.

On the other hand, the better method is not at all necessarily the more difficult one. More
effort is needed at the beginning to acquire an exactly adjusted scheme of movement, but as
soon as the well-organized activity has become habitual, it will realize itself with less inner
interference. For the educated it is no harder to speak correct grammar than to speak slang,
and it is no more difficult to write orthographically than to indulge in chaotic spelling,
just as in every field it is no harder to show good manners than to behave rudely. If the sciences
of digging and chopping, of reaping and raking, of weeding and mowing, of spraying and feeding,
are all postulates of the future, each can transform the chance methods into exact ones, and
that means into truly efficient ones, only when every element has been brought under the scrutiny
of the psychological laboratory. We must measure the time in hundredths of a second, must study
the psychophysical conditions of every movement, where not trees are cut or hay raked, but
where the tools move systems of levers which record graphically the exact amount and character
of every partial effect. The one problem of the distribution of work and rest alone is of such
tremendous importance for the agricultural work that a real scientific study of the details
might lead to just as much saving as the introduction of new machinery. The farmhand, who would
never think of wasting his money, wastes his energies by contracting big muscles, where a better
economized system of movement would allow him to reach the same result through the contraction
of smaller muscles, which involves much less energy and much less fatigue. The loss by wrong
bending and wrong coördination of movement may be greater than by bad weather.

Yet commonsense can never be sufficient to find the right motor will impulses. The ideal distribution
of pauses is extremely different from merely stopping the work when a state of overfatigue
has been reached. Even general scientific rules could not be the last word. Subtle psychological
tests would have to be devised by which the plan for alternation between work and rest could
be carefully adjusted to the individual needs of every rural worker. The mere sensation of
fatigue may be entirely misleading. It must be brought into definite relations to temperature,
moistness, character of the work, training, and other factors. On the other hand, the absence
of fatigue feeling would be in itself no indication that the limit of safety has not been passed,
and yet the work itself must suffer when objective overfatigue of the system has begun. At
the right moment a short interruption may secure again the complete conditions for successful
work. If that moment has passed, an exhaustion may result which can no longer be repaired by
a short rest. Any wrong method of performing these simple activities, that is, any method which
is not based on exact scientific analysis, wastes the energies of the workingman, and by that
the economic means of the farm owner, and indirectly the economic resources of the whole nation.
In the Harvard Psychological Laboratory we are at present engaged in the investigation of such
an apparently trivial function as sewing by hand. The finger which guides the needle is attached
to a system of levers which write an exact graphic record of every stitch on a revolving drum.
And the deeper we enter into this study the more we discover that such a movement, of which
every seamstress and every girl who makes her clothes feels that she knows everything, contains
an abundance of important features of which we do not as yet know anything. With the same scientific
exactitude the laboratory must investigate the milking, or the making of butter, the feeding
of the cattle and the picking of the fruit, the use of the scythe and the axe, the pruning
and the husking. The mere fact that every one, even with the least skill, is able to carry
out such movements with some result, does not in the least guarantee that any one carries them
out to-day with the best result possible.

The governmental experiment station ought to establish regular psychological laboratories,
in which the mental processes involved in the farmer's activity would be examined with the
same loyalty to modern science with which the chemical questions of the soil or the biological
questions of the parasites are furthered. Only such investigations could give the right cues
also to the manufacturers of farming implements. At present the machines are constructed with
the single purpose of greatest physical usefulness, and the farmer who uses them has to adjust
himself to them. The only human factor which enters into the construction so far has been a
certain desire for comfort and ease of handling. But as soon as the mental facts involved are
really examined, they ought to become decisive for the details of the machine. The handle which
controls the lever, and every other part, must be placed so that the will finds the smallest
possible resistance, so that one psychical impulse prepares the way for the next, and then
a maximum of activity can be reached with the smallest possible psychophysical energy. Such
a psychological department of the agricultural station could be expanded, and study not only
the mental conditions of farming, but examine also the psychological factors which belong indirectly
to the sphere of agricultural work. It may examine the mental effects which the various products
of the farm stir up in the customers. The feelings and emotions, the volitions and ideas which
are suggested by the vegetables and fruits, the animals and the flowers, are not without importance
for the success in the market. The psychology of colour and taste, of smell and touch and form,
may be useful knowledge for the scientific farmer, and even his methods of packing and preparing
for the market, of displaying and advertising, may be greatly improved by contact with applied
psychology.

At least one of the psychological side problems demands especial attention, the mental life
of the animals. Animal psychology is no longer made up of hunting stories and queer observations
on ants and wasps, and gossip about pet cats and dogs and canary birds. It has become an exact
science, which is housed in the psychological laboratories of the universities. And with this
change the centre of interest has shifted, too. The mind of the animals is not studied in order
to satisfy our zoölogical interest, but really to serve an understanding of the mental functions.
It was therefore appropriate to introduce those methods which had been tested in human psychology.
In our Harvard Psychological Laboratory, in which a whole floor of the building is devoted
exclusively to animal experiments under specialists, single functions like memory or attention
or emotion are tested in earthworms or turtles or pigeons or monkeys, and the results are no
less accurate than those of subtlest human work. But this experimental animal psychology has
so far served theoretical interests only. It stands where human psychology stood before the
contact with pedagogy, medicine, law, commerce, and industry suggested particular formulations
of the experiments. Such contact with the needs of practical life ought to be secured now for
animal psychology. The farmer who has to do with cows and swine and sheep, with dogs and horses,
with chickens and geese, with pigeons and bees, ought to have an immediate interest to seek
this contact. But his concern ought to go still further. He has to fight the animals that threaten
his harvest.

The farmer himself knows quite well how important the psychical behaviour of the animals is
for his success. He knows how the milk of the cows is influenced by emotional excitement, and
how the handling of horses demands an understanding of their mental dispositions and temperaments.
Sometimes he even works already with primitive psychological methods. He makes use of the mental
instinct which draws insects to the light when he attracts the dangerous moths with light at
night in order to destroy them. Ultimately all the traps and nets with which the enemies of
the crop are caught are schemes for which psychotechnical calculations are decisive. The means
for breaking the horses, down to the whip and the spur and the blinders, are after all the
tools of applied psychology. The manufacturer is already beginning to supply the farmer with
some practical psychology: dogs which despise the ordinary dog biscuits, seem quite satisfied
with the same cheap foods when they are manufactured in the form of bones. The dog first plays
with them and then eats them. There is no reason why everything should be left to mere tradition
and chance in a field in which the methods are sufficiently developed to give exact practical
results, as soon as distinct practical questions are raised. There would be no difficulty in
measuring the reaction times of the horses in thousandths of a second for optical and acoustical
and tactual impressions, or in studying the influence of artificial colour effects on the various
insects in the service of agriculture.

Especial importance may be attached to those investigations in animal psychology which trace
the inheritance of individual characteristics. The laboratory psychologist studies, for instance,
the laws according to which qualities like savageness and tameness are distributed in the succeeding
generations. He studies the proportions of those traits in hundreds of mice, which are especially
fit for the experiment on account of their quick multiplication. But this may lead immediately
to important results for the farmers with reference to mental traits in breeding animals. It
would be misleading if it were denied that all this is a programme to-day and not a realization,
a promise and not a fulfilment. The field is practically still uncultivated. But in a time
in which the nation is anxious to economize the national resources, which were too long wasted,
and in which the need of helping the farmer and of intensifying the values of rural life is
felt so generally, it would be reckless to ignore a promise the fulfilment of which seems so
near. To be sure, the farmers cultivated their fields through thousands of years without chemistry,
just as they do their daily work to-day without psychology, but nobody doubts that the introduction
of scientific chemistry into farming has brought the most valuable help to the national, and
to the world economy. The time seems really ripe for experimental psychology to play the same
rôle for the benefit of mankind, which in the future as in the past will always be prosperous
only when the farmer succeeds.

                                  VII

                      SOCIAL SINS IN ADVERTISING

There is one industry in the world which may be called, more than any other, a socializing
factor in our modern life. The industry of advertising binds men together and tightly knits
the members of society into one compact mass. Every one in the big market-place of civilization
has his demands and has some supply. But in order to link supply and demand, the offering must
be known. The industry which overcomes the isolation of man with his wishes and with his wares
lays the real foundation of the social structure. It is not surprising that it has taken gigantic
dimensions and that uncounted millions are turning the wheels of the advertising factory. The
influence and civilizing power of the means of propaganda go far beyond the help in the direct
exchange of goods. The advertiser makes the modern newspaper and magazine possible. These mightiest
agencies of public opinion and intellectual culture are supported, and their technical perfection
secured, by those who pay their business tax in the form of advertisements.

Under these circumstances it would appear natural to have just as much interest and energy
and incessant thought devoted to this very great and significant industry as to any branch
of manufacturing. But the opposite is true. Armies of engineers and of scientifically trained
workers have put half a century of scholarly research and experimental investigation into the
perfecting of the physical and chemical industries. The most thorough study is devoted to the
raw material and to the machines, to the functions of the workingman and to everything which
improves the mechanical output. In striking contrast to this, the gigantic industry of advertising
is to-day still controlled essentially by an amateurish impressionism, by a so-called commonsense,
which is nothing but the uncritical following of a well-worn path. Surely there is an abundance
of clever advertisement writers at work, and great establishments make some careful tests before
they throw their millions of circulars before the public. Yet even their so-called tests have
in no way scientific character. They are simply based on watching the success in practical
life, and the success is gained by instinct. Commonsense tells even the most superficial advertiser
that a large announcement will pay more than a small one, an advertisement in a paper with
a large circulation more than in a paper with a few subscribers, one with a humorous or emotional
or exciting text more than one with a tiresome and stale text. He also knows that the cover
page in a magazine is worth more than the inner pages, that a picture draws attention, that
a repeated insertion helps better than a lonely one. Yet even a score of such rules would not
remove the scheme of advertising from the commonplaces of the trade. They still would not show
any trace of the fact that the methods of exact measurement and of laboratory research can
be applied to such problems of human society.

Advertising is an appeal to the attention, to the memory, to the feeling, to the impulses of
the reader. Every printed line of advertisement is thus a lever which is constructed to put
some mental mechanism in motion. The science of the mental machinery is psychology, which works
on principles with the exact methods of the experiment. It seems unprogressive, indeed, if
just this one industry neglects the help which experimental science may furnish. A few slight
beginnings, to be sure, have been made, but not by the men of affairs, whose practical interests
are involved. They have been made by psychologists who in these days of carrying psychology
into practical life have pushed the laboratory method into the field of advertising.

The beginnings indicated at once that much which is sanctioned by the traditions of economic
life will have to be fundamentally revised. Psychologists, for instance, examined the memory
value of the different parts of the page. Little booklets were arranged in which words were
placed in the four quarter pages. The advertiser is accustomed patiently to pay an equal amount
for his quarter page, whether it is on the left half or the right, on the lower or on the upper
part of the page. The experiment demonstrated that the words on the upper right-hand quarter
had about twice the memory value of those on the lower left. The advertiser who is accustomed
to spend for his insertion on the lower left the same sum as for that on the upper right throws
half his expenditure away. He reaches only half of the customers, or takes only half a grasp
of those whom he reaches. This case, which can be easily demonstrated by careful experiments,
is typical of the tremendous waste which goes on in the budget of the advertising community.
And yet the advertiser would not like to act like the poet who sings his song not caring whose
heart he will stir.

As long as the psychologist is only aware of an inexcusable waste of means by lack of careful
research into the psychological reactions of the reader, he may leave the matter to the business
circles which have to suffer by their carelessness. But this economic wrong may coincide with
cultural values in other fields, and the social significance of the problem may thus become
accentuated. A problem of this double import, economic and cultural at the same time, to-day
faces publishers, advertisers, and readers. It is of recent origin, but it has grown so rapidly
and taken such important dimensions that at present it overshadows all other debatable questions
in the realm of propaganda. The movement to which we refer is the innovation of mixing reading
matter and advertisements on the same page. In the good old times a monthly magazine like McClure's
or the American or the Metropolitan or the Cosmopolitan showed an arrangement which allowed
a double interpretation. One interpretation, the idealistic one, was that the magazine consisted
of articles and stories in solid unity, which formed the bulk of the issue. In front of this
content, and after it, pages with advertisements were attached. The other interpretation, which
suggested itself to the less ambitious reader, was that the magazine consisted of a heap of
entertaining advertisement pages, between which the reading matter was sandwiched. But in any
case there was nowhere mutual interference. The articles stood alone, and the automobiles,
crackers, cameras, and other wares stood alone, too. All this has been completely changed in
the last two or three years. With a few remarkable exceptions like the Atlantic Monthly, the
World's Work, and the Century, the overwhelming majority of the monthly and weekly papers have
gone over to a system by which the tail of the stories and articles winds itself through the
advertisement pages, and all the advertising sheets are riddled by stray pieces of reading
matter. The immediate purpose is of course evident. If the last dramatic part of the story
suddenly stops on page 15 and is continued on page 76, between the announcements of breakfast
food and a new garter, the publisher, or rather the advertiser, hopes, and the publisher does
not dare to contradict, that some of the emotional interest and excitement will flow over from
the loving pair to the advertised articles. The innocent reader is skilfully to be guided into
the advertiser's paradise.

We claimed that here the economic innovation, whether profitable or not, has its cultural significance.
The sociologists who have thought seriously about the American type of civilization have practically
agreed in the conviction that the shortcoming of the American mind lies in its lack of desire
for harmony and unity. It is an æsthetic deficiency which counts not only where art and artificial
beauty are in question, but shows still more in the practical surroundings and the forms of
life. The nation which is and always has been controlled by strong idealistic moral impulses
takes small care of the æsthetic ideals. The large expenditures for external beautification
must not deceive. Just as the theatre is to the American essentially entertainment and amusement
and fashion, but least of all a life need for great art, so on the whole background of daily
life a thousand motives show themselves more effectively than the longing for inner unity and
beautiful fitness. The masses who waste their incomes for beautiful clothes, not because they
are beautiful, but because they are demanded by the fashion, patiently tolerate the dirt in
the streets, the crowding of cars, the chewing of gum, the vulgar slang in speech, and shirt-sleeve
manners. But this undeveloped state of the sense of inner harmony has effects far beyond the
mere outer appearances. The hysterical excitement in politics, the traditional indifference
to corruption and crime up to the point where they become intolerable, the bewildering mixture
of highest desire for education and cheapest faith in superstitions and mysticism and quacks,
all must result from a social mind in which the æsthetic demand for harmony and proportion
is insufficiently developed. The one great need of the land is a systematic cultivation of
this æsthetic spirit of unity. It cannot be forced on the millions by any sudden and radical
procedures. The steady, cumulating influences of the whole atmosphere of civic life must lead
to a slow but persistent change. Fortunately, many such helpful agencies are at work. Not only
the systematic moulding of the child's mind by art instruction, and of the citizen's mind by
beautiful public buildings, but a thousand features of the day aid in bringing charm and melody
to the average man.

Seen from this point of view the new fashion in the makeup of the periodical literature is
a barbaric and inexcusable interference with the process of æsthetic education. A page on which
advertisements and reading matter are mixed is a mess which irritates and hurts a mind of fine
æsthetic sensitiveness, but which in the uncultivated mind must ruin any budding desire for
subtler harmony. The noises of the street, with all the whistles of the factories and the horns
of the motor cars, are bad enough, and the antinoise crusade is quite in order. Yet the destructive
influence of those chaotic sounds is far weaker than the shrillness and restlessness of these
modern specimens of so-called literature. The mind is tossed up and down and is torn hither
and thither, following now a column of text while the advertisements are pushing in from both
sides, and then reading the latest advertisement while the serious text is drawing the attention.
It is the quantity which counts. The popular magazines which circulate in a million copies
and reach two or three million minds are the loudest preachers of this sermon of bewilderment
and scramble. A consciousness on which these tumultuous pages hammer day by day must lose the
subtler sense of proportionate harmony and must develop an instinctive desire for harshness
and crudeness and chaos. To overcome this riot of the printing press is thus a truly cultural
task, and yet it is evident that the mere appeal to the cultural instinct will not change anything
as long as the publisher and, above all, the advertiser, are convinced that they would have
to sacrifice their personal profit in the interest of æsthetic education. If an end is to be
hoped for, it can be expected only if it is discovered that the calculation of profit is erroneous,
too. But this is after all a question of naked facts, and only the scientific examination can
decide.

The problem might be approached from various sides. It was only meant as a first effort when
I carried on the following experiment: I had a portfolio with twenty-four large bristol-board
cards of the size of the Saturday Evening Post. On eight of those cards I had pasted four different
advertisements, each filling a fourth of a page. On some pages every one of the four advertisements
took one of four whole columns; in other cases the page was divided into an upper and lower,
right and left part. All the advertisements were cut from magazines, and in all the name of
the firm and the object to be sold could be easily recognized. On the sixteen other pages the
arrangement was different. There only two fourths of the page were filled by two advertisements;
the other two fourths contained funny pictures with a few words below. These pictures were
cut from comic papers. All the pictures were of such a kind that they slightly attracted the
attention by their amusing content or by the cleverness of the drawing, but never demanded
any careful inspection or any delay by the reading of the text. This, in most cases, consisted
of a few title words like “The Widow's Might,” “Pause, father, is that whip sterilized?” or
similar easily grasped descriptions of the story in the picture. Even where the text took two
lines, it was more easy to apperceive the picture and its description than the essentials of
the often rather chaotic advertisements. By this arrangement we evidently had thirty-two advertisements
on the eight pages which contained nothing else, and thirty-two other advertisements on the
sixteen pages which contained half propaganda and half pictures with text. All this material
was used as a basis for the following test, in which forty-seven adult persons participated.
All were members of advanced psychological courses, partly men, partly women. None of those
engaged in the experiment knew anything about the purpose beforehand. Thus they had no theories,
and I carefully avoided any suggestion which might have drawn the attention in one or another
direction.

Every one had to go through those twenty-four pages in twelve minutes, devoting exactly thirty
seconds to every page, and a signal marked the time when he had to pass to the next. He was
to give his attention to the whole content of the page, and as both the pictures and the advertisements
were chosen with reference to their being easily understood and quickly grasped, an average
time of more than seven seconds for each of the four offerings on the page was ample, even
for the slow reader. Of course the time would not have been sufficient to read every detail
in the advertisements, but no one had any interest in doing so, as they were instructed beforehand
to keep in mind essentially the advertised article and the firm, and in the case of the pictures
a general impression of the idea.

As soon as the twenty-four pages had been seen, every one was asked to write down the ideas
of five of the funny pictures within three minutes. The results of this were of no consequence,
as the purpose was only to fill the interval of the three minutes in order that all the memory
pictures of the advertisements might settle down in the mind and that all might have an equal
chance If we had turned immediately to the writing down of firms and articles, the last ones
seen would have had an undue advantage. But when the three minutes had been filled with an
effort to remember some of the funny pictures and to write down their salient points, all the
mental after-images of the pages had faded away, and a true memory picture was to be produced. "I
was quite strook to hear you'd agreed to it, ma'am, that I was," continued the besom-maker.

"You
were not more struck by it than I should have been last year this time, Olly. There are a good many
sides to that wedding. I could not tell you all of them, even if I tried."

"I felt myself that he was hardly solid-going enough to mate with your family. Keeping an inn--what
is it? But 'a's clever, that's true, and they say he was an engineering gentleman once, but has
come down by being too outwardly given."

"I saw that, upon the whole, it would be better she should marry where she wished."

"Poor little thing, her feelings got the better of her, no doubt. 'Tis nature. Well, they may
call him what they will--he've several acres of heth-ground broke up here, besides the public
house, and the heth-croppers, and his manners be quite like a gentleman's. And what's done
cannot be undone."

"It cannot," said Mrs. Yeobright. "See, here's the wagon-track at last. Now we shall get along
better."

The wedding subject was no further dwelt upon; and soon a faint diverging path was reached, where
they parted company, Olly first begging her companion to remind Mr. Wildeve that he had not
sent her sick husband the bottle of wine promised on the occasion of his marriage. The besom-maker
turned to the left towards her own house, behind a spur of the hill, and Mrs. Yeobright followed
the straight track, which further on joined the highway by the Quiet Woman Inn, whither she supposed
her niece to have returned with Wildeve from their wedding at Anglebury that day.

She first reached Wildeve's Patch, as it was called, a plot of land redeemed from the heath,
and after long and laborious years brought into cultivation. The man who had discovered that it
could be tilled died of the labour; the man who succeeded him in possession ruined himself
in fertilizing it. Wildeve came like Amerigo Vespucci, and received the honours due to those
who had gone before.

When Mrs. Yeobright had drawn near to the inn, and was about to enter, she saw a horse and vehicle
some two hundred yards beyond it, coming towards her, a man walking alongside with a lantern
in his hand. It was soon evident that this was the reddleman who had inquired for her. Instead
of entering the inn at once, she walked by it and towards the van.

The conveyance came close, and the man was about to pass her with little notice, when she turned
to him and said, "I think you have been inquiring for me? I am Mrs. Yeobright of Blooms-End."

The
reddleman started, and held up his finger. He stopped the horses, and beckoned to her to withdraw
with him a few yards aside, which she did, wondering.

"You don't
know me, ma'am, I suppose?" he said.

"I do not," said she. "Why,
yes, I do! You are young Venn--your father was a dairyman somewhere
here?"

"Yes; and I knew your niece, Miss Tamsin, a little. I have
something bad to tell you."

"About her--no! She has just come home,
I believe, with her husband. They arranged to return this afternoon--to
the inn beyond here."

"She's not there."

"How do you know?"

"Because
she's here. She's in my van," he added slowly.

"What new trouble
has come?" murmured Mrs. Yeobright, putting her hand over her eyes.

"I
can't explain much, ma'am. All I know is that, as I was going along
the road this morning, about a mile out of Anglebury, I heard something
trotting after me like a doe, and looking round there she was, white
as death itself. 'Oh, Diggory Venn!' she said, 'I thought 'twas you--will
you help me? I am in trouble.'"

"How did she know your Christian
name?" said Mrs. Yeobright doubtingly.

"I had met her as a lad before
I went away in this trade. She asked then if she might ride, and then
down she fell in a faint. The mental
setting with which those pictures or the written matter is observed, is fundamentally different
from that which those propaganda notices demand. If the mind is adjusted to the pleasure of
reading for its information and enjoyment, it is not prepared for the fullest apprehension
of an advertisement as such. The attention for the notice on the same page remains shallow
as long as the entirely different kind of text reaches the side parts of the eye. On those
pages, on the other hand, which contain announcements only, a uniform setting of the mind prepared
the way for their fullest effectiveness. The average reader who glances over the pages of the
magazines is not clearly aware of these psychological conditions, and yet that feeling of irritation
which results from the mixing of reading matter and propaganda on the same page is a clear
symptom of this mental reaction. The mere fact that both the advertisements and stories or
anecdotes or pictures are seen in black and white by the retina of the eye, and are in the
same way producing the ideas of words and forms in the mind, does not involve the real psychological
effect being the same. The identical words read as a matter of information in an instructive
text, and read as an argument to the customer in a piece of propaganda, set entirely different
mental mechanisms in motion. The picture of a girl seen with the understanding that it is the
actress of the latest success, or seen with the understanding that it is an advertisement for
a toilet preparation, starts in the whole psychophysical system different kinds of activities,
which mutually inhibit each other. If we anticipate the one form of inner reaction, we make
ourselves unfit for the opposite.

An interesting light falls on the situation from experiments which have recently been carried
on by a Swedish psychologist. He showed that in every learning process the intention with which
we absorb the memory material is decisive for the firmness with which it sticks to our mind.
If a boy learns one group of names or figures or verses with the intention to keep them in
mind forever, and learns another group of the same kind of material with the same effort and
by the same method, but with the intention to have them present for a certain test the next
day, the mental effect is very different. Immediately after the learning, or on the morning
of the next day, he has both groups equally firmly in his mind, but three days later most of
what was learned to be kept is still present. On the other hand, those verses and dates which
were learned with the consciousness that they had to serve the next day have essentially faded
away when the time of the test has passed, even if the test itself was not given. Every lawyer
knows from his experience how easily he forgets the details of the case which has once been
settled by the court, as he has absorbed the material only for the purpose of having it present
up to the end of the procedure. These Swedish experiments have given a cue to further investigations,
and everything seems to confirm this view. It brings out in a very significant way that the
impressions which are made on our mind from without are in their effectiveness on the mind
entirely dependent upon the subjective attitude, and the idea that the same visual stimuli
stir up the same mental reactions is entirely misleading. The attitude of reading and the attitude
of looking at advertisements are so fundamentally different that the whole mental mechanism
is in a different setting.

The result is that whenever we are in the reading attitude, we cannot take the real advertising
effect out of the pictures and notices which are to draw us to the consumption of special articles.
The editor who forces his wisdom into the propaganda page is hurting the advertiser, who, after
all, pays for nothing else but the opportunity to make a certain psychological impression on
the reader. He gets a third more of this effect for which he has to pay so highly if he can
have his advertisement on a clean sheet which brings the whole mind into that willing attitude
to receive suggestions for buying only. It is most probable that the particular form of the
experiment here reported makes this difference between advertising pages with and without reading
matter much smaller than it is in the actual perusal of magazines, as we forced the attention
of the individual on every page for an equal time. In the leisurely method of going through
the magazine the interfering effect of the editorial part would be still greater. Compared
with this antagonism of mental setting, it means rather little that these scattered pieces
of text induce the reader to open the advertisement. If we were really of that austere intellect
which consistently sticks to that which is editorially backed, we should ignore the advertisements,
even if they were crowded into the same page. They might reach our eye, but they would not
touch our mind. Yet there is hardly any fear that the average American reader will indulge
in such severity of taste. He is quite willing to yield to the temptation of the advertising
gossip with its minimum requirement of intellectual energy for its consumption. He will therefore
just as readily turn from the articles to the advertisements if they are separated into two
distinct parts. Frequent observations in the Pullman cars suggested to me rather early the
belief that these advertisement parts in the front and the rear of the magazine were the preferred
regions between the two covers.

Just as the great public habitually prefers the light comedy and operetta to the theatre performances
of high æsthetic intent, it moves instinctively to those printed pages on which a slight appeal
to the imagination is made without any claim on serious thought. It is indeed a pleasant tickling
of the imagination, this leisurely enjoyment of looking over all those picturesque announcements;
it is like passing along the street with its shopwindows in all their lustre and glamour. But
this soft and inane pleasure has been crushed by the arrangement after to-day's fashion. Those
pages on which advertising and articles are mixed helterskelter do not allow the undisturbed
mood. It is as if we constantly had to alternate between lazy strolling and energetic running.
Thus the chances are that the old attractiveness of the traditional advertising part has disappeared.
While those broken ends of the articles may lead the reader unwillingly to the advertisement
pages, he will no longer feel tempted by his own instincts to seek those regions of restlessness;
and if he is of more subtle sensitiveness, the irritation may take the stronger form, and he
may throw away the whole magazine, advertisement and text together. The final outcome, then,
must be disadvantageous to publisher and advertiser alike. The publisher and the editor have
certainly never yielded to this craving of the advertiser for a place on the reading page without
a feeling of revolt. Commercialism has forced them to submit and to make their orderly issues
places of disorder and chaos. The advertisers have rushed into this scheme without a suspicion
that it is a trap. The experiments have proved that they are simply injuring themselves. As
soon as this is widely recognized, a countermovement ought to start. We ought again to have
the treasures of our magazines divided into a straight editorial and a clean advertisement
part. The advertisers will profit from it in dollars and cents through the much greater psychological
effectiveness of their announcements, the editors will be the gainers by being able to present
a harmonious, sympathetic, restful magazine, and the great public will be blessed by the removal
of one of the most malicious nerve irritants and persistent destroyers of mental unity.

                                 VIII

                       THE MIND OF THE INVESTOR

The psychologist who tries to disentangle the interplay of human motives finds hardly a problem
for his art to solve when he approaches the conscientious investor. His work has brought him
savings, and his savings are to work for him. Hence they must not lie idle, and in the complicated
market, with its chaotic offerings, he knows what he has to do. He seeks the advice of the
expert, and under this guidance, he buys that which combines great safety with a fair income.
The intellectual and emotional processes which here take control of the will and of the decision
are perfectly clear and simple, and the mental analysis offers not the least difficulty. The
fundamental instincts of man on the background of modern economic conditions must lead to such
rational and recommendable behaviour. A psychological problem appears only when such a course
of wisdom is abandoned, and either the savings are hidden away instead of being made productive,
or are thrown away in wildcat schemes. Yet of the two extremes the first again is easily understood.
A hysteric fear of possible loss, an unreasonable distrust of banks and bankers, keeps the
overcautious away from the market. But while such a state of mind is said to be frequent in
countries in which the economic life is disorderly, enterprising Americans seldom suffer from
this ailment, and even the theoretical doctrine that it is sinful to have capital working seems
not to have affected practically those who have the capital at their disposal. The specific
American case is the opposite one, and with regard to those reckless investors it seems less
clear what psychological conditions lie at the bottom of their rashness.

Foreign visitors have indeed often noticed with surprise that the American public, in spite
of its cleverness and its practical trend and its commercial instinct, is more ready to throw
its money into speculative abysses than the people of other lands. What is the reason? Those
observers from abroad are usually satisfied with the natural answer that the Americans are
gamblers, or that they have an indomitable desire for capturing money without working. But
the students of comparative sociology cannot forget the fact that many national institutions
and customs of other lands suggest that the blame might with much more justice be directed
against the other party. America prohibits lotteries, while lotteries are flourishing on the
European continent. The Austrians, Italians, and Spaniards are slaves to lotteries, and even
in sober Germany the state carries on a big lottery enterprise. President Eliot once said in
a speech about the moral progress of mankind that a hundred years ago a public lottery was
allowed in Boston for the purpose of getting the funds for erecting a new Harvard dormitory,
and he added that such a procedure would be unthinkable in New England in our more enlightened
days. Yet in the most civilized European countries, whenever a cathedral is to be built, or
an exhibition to be supported, the state gladly sanctions big lottery schemes to secure the
financial means. The European governments argue that a certain amount of gambling instinct
is ingrained in human character, and that it is wiser to create a kind of official outlet by
which it is held within narrow limits, and by which the results yielded are used for the public
good.

This may be a right or a wrong policy, but in any case, it shows that the desire for gambling
is no less marked on the other side of the ocean. In the same way, while private bookmakers
are not allowed at most European races, the official “totalisators” offer to the gamblers the
same outlets. Every tourist remembers from the European casinos in the summer resorts the famous
game with the little horses, a miniature Monaco scheme. And in the privacy of the too often
not very private clubs extremely neat card games are in order which depend still more upon
chance than the American poker. Moreover, the Europeans have not even the right to say that
American life indicates a desire for harvest without ploughing. Every observer of European
life knows to what a high degree the young Frenchman or Austrian, Italian, German, or Russian
approaches married life with an eye on the dowry. Hundreds of thousands consider it as their
chief chance to come to ease and comfort. The whole temper of the nations is adjusted to this
idea, which is essentially lacking in American society. It is evident that no method of getting
rich quick is more direct, and from a higher point of view more immoral, if taken as a motive
for the choice of a mate, than this plan which Europe welcomes. The same difference shows itself
in smaller traits. Europe invented the tipping system, which also means that money is expected
without an equivalent in labour. Tipping is essentially strange to the American character,
however rapid its progress has been on the Atlantic seaboard.

Of course it would be absurd to ignore the existence and even the prevalence of similar attitudes
in America. If the dowry does not exist, not every man marries without a thought of the rich
father-in-law. Forbidden gambling houses are abundant, private betting connected with sport
is flourishing everywhere; above all, the economic organization admits through a back-door
what is banished from the main entrance, by allowing stocks to be issued for very small amounts.
In Germany the state does not permit stocks smaller than one thousand marks, equal to two hundred
and fifty dollars, with the very purpose of making speculative stock buying impossible for
the man of small means. The waiter and the barber who here may buy very small blocks of ten-dollar
stocks have no such chance there. Stock buying is thus confined to those circles from which
a certain wider outlook may be expected. The external framework of the stock market is here
far more likely to tempt the man of small savings into the game, and the mere fact that this
form has been demanded by public consciousness suggests that the spirit which craves lotteries
is surely not absent in the new world, even though the lottery lists in the European newspapers
are blackened over before they are laid out in the American public libraries. A certain desire
for gambling and quick returns evidently exists the world over. But if the Americans are really
speculating more than all the other nations, a number of other mental features must contribute
to the outcome.

One tendency stands quite near to gambling, and yet is characteristically different, the delight
in running risks, the joy in playing with dangers. Some races, in which the gambling instinct
is strong, are yet afraid of high risks, and the pleasure in seeking dangerous situations may
prevail without any longing for the rewards of the gambler. It seems doubtful whether this
adventurous longing for unusual risks belongs to the Anglo-Saxon mind. At least those vocations
which most often involve such a mental trend are much more favoured by the Irish. It is claimed
that they, for instance, are prominent among the railroad men, and that the excessive number
of accidents in the railroad service results from just this reckless disposition of the Irishmen.
It tempts them to escape injury and death only by a hair. Where this desire to feel the nearness
of danger, yet in the hope of escaping it, meets the craving for the excitement of possible
gain, a hazardous investment of one's savings must be expected.

Yet it would be very one-sided and misleading if this group of emotional features were alone
made responsible for the lamentable recklessness in the market. We must first of all necessarily
acknowledge the tremendous powers of suggestion which the whole American life and especially
the stock market contains. The word suggestion has become rather colourless in popular language,
but for the psychologist, it has a very definite meaning. Suggestion is always a proposition
for action, which is forced on the mind in such a way that the impulse to opposite action becomes
inhibited. Under ordinary circumstances, when a proposition is made to do a certain thing through
the mechanism of the mind, the idea of the opposite action may arise. If some one tells the
normal man to go and do this or that, he will at once think of the consequences, and in his
mind perhaps the idea awakes of the dangerousness or of the foolishness, of the immorality
or of the uselessness of such a deed, and any one of these ideas would be a sufficient motive
for ignoring the proposed line of behaviour and for suppressing the desire to follow the poor
advice. But often this normal appearance of the opposite ideas fails. If they arise at all,
they are too faint or too powerless to offer resistance, and often they may not even enter
consciousness. They remain suppressed, and the result is that the idea of action finds its
way unhindered, and breaks out into the deed which normally would have been checked. If this
is the case, the psychologist says that the mind was in a state of increased suggestibility.

The degree of suggestibility, that is of willingness to yield to such propositions for action
and of inability to resist them, is indeed different from man to man. We all know the stubborn
persons who are always inclined to resist whatever is proposed to them and who do not believe
what is told them, and we know the credulous ones who believe everything that they see printed.
But the degree of suggestibility changes no less from hour to hour with the individual. In
a state of fatigue or under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of strong emotions,
in hope and fear, the suggestibility is reënforced. The highest degree of suggestibility is
that mental state which we call hypnotism, in which the power to resist the proposed idea of
action is reduced to a minimum. But the chief factor in making us suggestible is the method
by which the idea of action is proposed, and in psychology we speak of suggestion whenever
an action is proposed by methods which make the mind yielding. It certainly is not objectionable
to exert suggestive influence. Suggestions are the leading factors in education, in art, and
in religion. The authoritative voice with which the teacher proposes the right thing has a
most valuable suggestive power to suppress in the child the opposite misleading impulse. But
surely suggestions can become dangerous and destructive. If actions are proposed in a form
which paralyzes the power to become conscious of the opposite impulses, the voice of reason
and of conscience is silenced, and social and moral ruin must be the result.

Everybody at once thinks of the endless variety of advertisements. An announcement which merely
gives information is of course no suggestion. But if perhaps such an announcement takes the
form of an imperative, an element of suggestion creeps in. To be sure we are accustomed to
this trivial pattern, and no one completely loses his power to resist if the proposition to
buy comes in the grammatical form of a command. If we had reached the highest degree of suggestibility,
as in hypnotism, we could not read “Cook with gas” without at once putting a gas stove into
our kitchen. Yet even such a mild suggestion has its influence and tends slightly to weaken
the arguments which would lead to an opposite action. The advertisements, however, which the
brokers send to our house and which are spread broadcast in the homes of the country to people
who have no technical knowledge of stock-buying are surely not confined to such child-like
and bland forms of suggestion. The whole grouping of figures, the distribution of black and
white in the picture of the market situation, the glowing story of the probable successes with
the bewildering hints of special privileges, must increase the suggestibility of the untrained
mind and reënforce powerfully the suggestive energy of the proposition to buy. The whole technique
of this procedure has nowhere been brought to such virtuosity as in our country. The fact which
we mentioned, that the new industrial and mining enterprises can offer shares small enough
to be accessible to the man without means, has evidently been the chief reason for developing
a style of appeal which would be unthinkable in the countries where the investors are essentially
experienced business men.

But the skill of the prospectus with its sometimes half fraudulent features would, after all,
not gain such influence if suggestion were not produced from another side as well, namely,
through the instinct of imitation. The habit of making risky investments is so extremely widespread
that the individual buyer does not feel himself isolated, and therefore dependent upon his
own judgments and deliberations. He feels himself as a member of a class, and the class easily
becomes a crowd, even a mob, a mob in which the logic of any mob reigns, and that is the logic
of doing unthinkingly what others do. It is well known that every member of a crowd stands
intellectually and morally on a lower level than he would stand if left to his spontaneous
impulses and his own reflections. The crowd may fall into a panic and rush blindly in any direction
into which any one may have happened to start and no one thinks about it, or it may go into
exaltation and exuberantly do what no one alone would dare to risk. This mass consciousness
is also surely a form of increased suggestibility. The individual feels his own responsibility
reduced because he relies instinctively on the judgment of his neighbours, and with this decreased
responsibility the energy for resistance to dangerous propositions disappears. Men buy their
stocks because others are doing it.

But finally, may we not call it suggestion, too, if the individual even tremblingly accepts
the risks of perilous deals, because he feels obliged to grasp for an unusually high income
in order to live up to the style of his set? Of course there is no objective standard of living
if we abstract from that where the income simply secures the needs of bare existence. Above
that, everything depends upon the habits of those around us. If the community steadily screws
up these habits, makes life ostentatious for those of moderate means as well as for the rich,
hysterically emphasizes the material values, the will to be satisfied with the income of safe
investments has to fight against tremendous odds. The truly strong mind will keep its power
to resist, but the slightly weak mind will find the suggestion of the surrounding life more
powerful than the fear of possible loss. If all the neighbours in the village have automobiles,
the man who would enjoy a quiet book and a pleasant walk much more than a showy ride will yield,
and spend a thousand dollars for his motor car where fifty dollars for books would have brought
him far more intense satisfaction. In no country have fashion and ostentatiousness taken such
strong possession of the masses, and the willingness to be satisfied with a moderate income
is therefore nowhere so little at home.

Yet neither gambling and taking risks, nor suggestibility and imitation, are the whole of the
story. We must not forget the superficiality of thinking, the uncritical, loose, and flabby
use of the reasoning power which shows itself in so many spheres of American mass life. It
is sufficient to see the triviality of argument and the cheapness of thought in those newspapers
which seek and enjoy the widest circulation. It is difficult not to believe that fundamentally
sins of education are to blame for it. The school may bring much to the children, but no mere
information can be a substitute for a training in thorough thinking. Here lies the greatest
defect of our average schools. The looseness of the spelling and figuring draws its consequences.
Whoever becomes accustomed to inaccuracy in the elements remains inaccurate in his thinking
his life long. If the American public loses a hundred million dollars a year by investments
in worthless undertakings, surely not the smallest cause is the lack of concise reasoning.
Wrong analogies control the thought of the masses. Any copper stock must be worth buying because
the stock of Calumet-Hecla multiplied its value a hundredfold. But the irony of the situation
lies in the fact that, as experience shows, those who are the clearest thinkers in their own
fields are in the realm of investments as easily trapped as the most superficial reasoners.
It is well known that college professors, school teachers, and ministers figure prominently
on the mailing lists of unscrupulous brokers, and their hard-earned savings are especially
often given for stocks which soon are not worth the paper on which they are printed. Sometimes,
to be sure, this unpractical behaviour of the idealists really results from an unreasonable
indifference to commercial questions. The true scholar, whose life is tuned to the conviction
that he has more important things to do in the world than to make money, readily falls into
a mood of carelessness with regard to the money which he does chance to make. In this state
of indifference he follows any advice and may easily be misled.

But it seems probable that the more frequent case is the opposite one. Just because the teacher
and the pastor have small chance to save anything, they give their fullest thought to the question
how to multiply their earnings, and their mistake springs rather from their ignorance of the
actual conditions. They think that they can figure it out by mere logic and overlook the hard
realities. They resemble another group of victims who can be found in the midst of commercial
life, the over-clever people who rely on especially artificial arguments. They feel sure that
they see some points which no one else has discovered, and while they may have noticed some
small reasonable points, they overlook important conditions which the simpler-minded would
have seen. They know everything better than their neighbours, and whatever their friends buy
or sell they at once have a brilliant argument to prove that the step was wrong. They generally
forget that the listener must be suspicious of their wisdom, as they themselves have never
earned the fruit of their apparent wisdom. They all, however, may find comfort in the well-known
fact that hardly any great financier has died, not even a Harriman or a Morgan, without there
being found in his possession large quantities of worthless stocks and bonds. But the variety
of intellectual types, the careless and the uncritical, the over-clever and the illogical thinkers,
could easily protect themselves against the dangers of the shortcomings in their mental mechanism
if their minds had not another trait, which, too, is more frequent in America than anywhere
else in the world—the lack of respect for the expert.

The average American is his own expert in every field. This is certainly not a reproach. It
supplies American public life with an immense amount of energy and readiness to help. Above
all, historically, it was the necessary outcome of the political democracy. In striking contrast
to the European bureaucracy, any citizen could at any time be called to be postmaster or mayor
or governor or member of the cabinet. A true American would find his way, however complex the
work before him. That was, and is, splendid. Yet the development of the recent decades has
clearly shown that the danger of this mental attitude after all appears to the newer American
generation alarmingly great in many fields. Civil service has steadily grown, the influence
of the engineer and the expert in every technical and practical field has more and more taken
control of American life, because the go-as-you-please methods of the amateur have shown increasingly
their ineffectiveness. Education has slowly been removed from the dilettantic, unprepared school
boards. The reign of the expert in public life seems to have begun. But in private life such
an attitude is still a part of the mental equipment of millions. They ignore the physician
and cure themselves with patent medicines or mental healing: they ignore the banker and broker
and make their investments in accordance with their own amateurish inspiration. They pick up
a few data, ask a few friends who are as little informed as themselves, but do not think of
asking the only group of men who make a serious, persistent study of the market their lifework.

They call this independence, and it cannot be denied that some features of our home and school
education may have fostered this tendency not to submit to the judgment of those who know better.
They have grown up in schools in which the kindergarten method never stopped, in which they
were permitted to select the studies which they liked, and to learn just what pleased them;
they were brought up in homes in which they were begged and persuaded, but never forced to
do the unwelcome; in short, they have never learned to submit their will to authority. It cannot
be surprising that they fancy that it is the right kind of mental setting to feel one's self
the ultimate authority in every field, and it would be harmless indeed if the patent medicines
would really cure as well as the prescriptions of the physician, and if the wildcat schemes
would really yield the same safe income as those investments recommended by the reliable banker.
It is then, after all, no chance that this commercially clever American nation wastes more
in anti-economic fancies than any other people on the globe. And if you hear a frog jump into the
pond with a flounce like a stone thrown in, be sure you run and tell me, because it is a sign
of rain."

"Yes, Eustacia."

                                  

                         "Miss Vye, sir."

"Miss Vy--stacia."

"That will do. Now put in one stick more."

The little slave went on feeding the fire as before. He seemed a mere automaton, galvanized into
moving and speaking by the wayward Eustacia's will. He might have been the brass statue which Albertus
Magnus is said to have animated just so far as to make it chatter, and move, and be his servant.

Before
going on her walk again the young girl stood still on the bank for a few instants and listened.
It was to the full as lonely a place as Rainbarrow, though at rather a lower level; and it was
more sheltered from wind and weather on account of the few firs to
the north.

The bank which enclosed the homestead, and protected it from the lawless state of the world without,
was formed of thick square clods, dug from the ditch on the outside, and built up with a slight
batter or incline, which forms no slight defense where hedges will not grow because of the wind
and the wilderness, and where wall materials are unattainable. Otherwise the situation was quite
open, commanding the whole length of the valley which reached to the river behind Wildeve's
house. High above this to the right, and much nearer thitherward than the Quiet Woman Inn,
the blurred contour of Rainbarrow obstructed the sky.

After her attentive survey of the wild slopes and hollow ravines a gesture of impatience escaped
Eustacia. She vented petulant words every now and then, but there were sighs between her words,
and sudden listenings between her sighs. Descending from her perch she again sauntered off
towards Rainbarrow, though this time she did not go the whole way.
Twice she reappeared at intervals of a few minutes and each time
she said--

"Not any flounce into the pond yet, little man?"

"No,
Miss Eustacia," the child replied.

"Well," she said at last, "I shall
soon be going in, and then I will give you the crooked sixpence, and
let you go home."

"Thank'ee, Miss Eustacia," said the tired stoker,
breathing more easily. And Eustacia again strolled away from the fire,
but this time not towards Rainbarrow. She skirted the bank and went
round to the wicket before the house, where she stood motionless,
looking at the scene.

Fifty yards off rose the corner of the two
converging banks, with the fire upon it; within the bank, lifting
up to the fire one stick at a time, just as before, the figure of
the little child. She idly watched him as he occasionally climbed
up in the nook of the bank and stood beside the brands. The dance seems
once more the centre of public interest; it is cultivated from luncheon to breakfast; it is
debated in every newspaper and every pulpit.

But is not all this merely a new demonstration that the story of the dance is the story of
civilization? Can we deny that this recent craze which, like a dancing mania, has whirled over
the country, is a significant expression of deep cultural changes which have come to America?
Only ten years ago such a dancing fever would have been impossible. People danced, but they
did not take it seriously. It was set off from life and not allowed to penetrate it. It had
still essentially the rôle which belonged to it in a puritanic, hardworking society. But the
last decade has rapidly swept away that New England temper which was so averse to the sensuous
enjoyment of life, and which long kept an invisible control over the spirit of the whole nation.
Symptoms of the change abound: how it came about is another question. Certainly the increase
and the wide distribution of wealth with its comforts and luxuries were responsible, as well
as the practical completion of the pioneer days of the people, the rich blossoming of science
and art, and above all the tremendous influx of warm-blooded, sensual peoples who came in millions
from southern and eastern Europe, and who altered the tendencies of the cool-blooded, Teutonic
races in the land. They have changed the old American Sunday, they have revolutionized the
inner life, they have brought the operas to every large city, and the kinometograph to every
village, and have at last played the music to a nation-wide dance. Yet the problem which faces
every one is not how this dancing craze arose, but rather where it may lead, how far it is
healthy and how far unsound, how far we ought to yield to it or further it, and how far we
ought to resist. To answer this question, it is not enough to watch the outside spectacle,
but we must inquire into the mental motives and mental consequences. Exactly this is our true
problem.

Let us first examine the psychological debit account. No one can doubt that true dangers are
near wherever the dancing habit is prominent. The dance is a bodily movement which aims at
no practical purpose and is thus not bound by outer necessities. It is simply self-expression:
and this gives to the dancing impulse the liberty which easily becomes licentiousness. Two
mental conditions help in that direction; the mere movement as such produces increased excitement,
and the excitement reënforces the movement, and so the dance has in itself the tendency to
become quicker and wilder and more and more unrestrained. When gay Vienna began its waltzing
craze in the last century, it waltzed to the charming melodies of Lanner in a rhythm which
did not demand more than about one hundred and sixty movements in a minute; but soon came Johann
Strauss the father, and the average waltzing rhythm was two hundred and thirty a minute, and
finally the king of the waltz, Johann Strauss the younger, and Vienna danced at the rhythm
of three hundred movements. But another mental effect is still more significant than the impulse
to increase rapidity. The uniformity of the movements, and especially of the revolving movement,
produces a state of half dizziness and half numbness with ecstatic elements. We know the almost
hypnotic state of the whirling dervishes and the raptures in the savage war dances; all this
in milder form is involved in every passionate dance. But nothing is more characteristic of
such half-hypnotic states than that the individual loses control of his will. He behaves like
a drunken man who becomes the slave of his excitement and of every suggestion from without.
No doubt many seek the dancing excitement as a kind of substitute for the alcoholic exaltation.

The social injury which must be feared if the social community indulges in such habits of undisciplined,
passionate expression needs no explaining. The mind is a unit: it cannot be without self-control
in one department and under the desirable self-discipline of the will in another. A period
in which the mad rush of dancing stirs social life must be unfavourable to the development
of thorough training and earnest endeavour. The fate of imperial Rome ought to be the eternal
warning to imperial Manhattan. Italy, like America, took its art and science from over the
sea, but gave to them abundant wealth. Instead of true art, it cultivated the virtuosi, and
in Rome, which paid three thousand dancers, the dance was its glory until it began ingloriously
to sink.

Not without inner relation to the inebriety, and yet distinctly different, is the erotic character
of the dance. Lovemaking is the most central, underlying motive of all the mimic dances all
over the globe. Among many primitive peoples the dance is a real pantomimic presentation of
the whole story from the first tender awaking of a sweet desire through the warmer and warmer
courtship to the raptures of sensual delight. Civilized society has more or less covered the
naked passion, but from the graceful play of the minuet to the graceless movements of the turkey
trot the sensual, not to say the sexual, element can easily be recognized by the sociologist.
Here again cause and effect move in a circle. Love excitement expresses itself in dance, and
the dance heightens the love excitement. This erotic appeal to the senses is the chief reason
why the church has generally taken a hostile attitude. For a long while the dance was denounced
as irreligious and sinful on account of Salome's blasphemous dancing. Certainly the rigid guardians
of morality always look askance on the contact of the sexes in the ballroom. To be sure, the
standards are relative. What appeared to one period the climax of immorality may be considered
quite natural and harmless in another. In earlier centuries it was quite usual in the best
society for the young man to invite the girl to a dance by a kiss, and in some times it was
the polite thing for the gentleman after the dance to sit in the lap of the girl. The shifting
of opinion comes to most striking expression, if we compare our present day acquiescence to
the waltz with the moral indignation of our great-grandmothers. No accusers of the tango to-day
can find more heated words against this Argentine importation than the conservatives of a hundred
years ago chose in their hatred of the waltz. Good society had confined its dancing to those
forms of contact in which only the hands touched each other, leaving to the peasants the crude,
rustic forms, and now suddenly every mother has to see her daughter clasped about the waist
by any strange man. Even the dancing masters cried out against the intruder and claimed that
it was illogical for a man to be allowed to press a girl to his bosom at the sound of music,
while no one would dare to do it between the dances.

Thus the immorality of our most recent dances may be hardly worse than the dancing surprises
of earlier fashions, but who will doubt that these sensual elements of the new social gayeties
are to-day especially dangerous? The whole American atmosphere is filled with erotic thought
to a degree which has been unknown throughout the history of the republic. The newspapers are
filled with intra- and extra-matrimonial scandals, the playhouses commercialize the sexual
instinct in lurid melodramas, sex problems are the centre of public discussion, all the old
barriers which the traditional policy of silence had erected are being broken down, the whole
nation is gossiping about erotics. In such inflammable surroundings where the sparks of the
dance are recklessly kindled, the danger is imminent. If a nation focuses its attention on
sensuality, its virile energy must naturally suffer. There is a well-known antagonism between
sex and sport. Perhaps the very best which may be said about sport is that it keeps boyhood
away from the swamps of sexuality. The dance keeps boyhood away from the martial field of athletics.

The dance has still another psychological effect which must not be disregarded from a social
point of view. It awakes to an unusual degree the impulse to imitation. The seeing of rhythmic
movements starts similar motor impulses in the mind of the onlooker. It is well known that
from the eleventh to the sixteenth century Europe suffered from dancing epidemics. They started
from pathological cases of St. Vitus' dance and released in the excitable crowds cramplike
impulses to imitative movements. But we hear the same story of instinctive imitations on occasions
of less tragic character. It is reported that in the eighteenth century papal Rome was indignant
over the passionate Spanish fandango. It was decided solemnly to put this wild dance under
the ban. The lights of the church were assembled for the formal judgment, when it was proposed
to call a pair of Spanish dancers in order that every one of the priests might form his own
idea of the unholy dance. But history tells that the effect was an unexpected one. After a
short time of fandango demonstration the high clerics began involuntarily to imitate the movements,
and the more passionately the Spaniards indulged in their native whirl, the more the whole
court was transformed into one great dancing party. Even the Italian tarantella probably began
as a disease with nervous dancing movements, and then spread over the land through mere imitation
which led to an ecstatic turning around and around. Whoever studies the adventures of American
dancing during the last season from New York to San Francisco must be impressed by this contagious
character of our dancing habits. But this means that the movement carries in itself the energy
to spread farther and farther, and to fill the daily life with increased longing for the ragtime.
We are already accustomed to the dance at the afternoon tea; how long will it take before we
are threatened by the dance at the breakfast coffee?

We have spoken of three mental effects: the license, the eroticism, and the imitativeness which
are stirred up by the dancing movements. But in the perspective of history we ought not to
overlook another significant trait: the overemphasis on dancing has usually characterized a
period of political reaction, of indifference to public life, of social stagnation and carelessness.
When the volcanoes were rumbling, the masses were always dancing. At all times when tyrants
wanted to divert the attention of the crowd, they gave the dances to their people. A nation
which dances cannot think, but lives from hour to hour. The less political maturity, the more
happiness does a national community show in its dancing pleasures. The Spaniards and the Polish,
the Hungarians and the Bohemians, have always been the great dancers—the Gypsies dance. There
is no fear that the New Yorkers will suddenly stop reading their newspapers and voting at the
primaries; they will not become Spaniards. But an element of this psychological effect of carelessness
and recklessness and stagnation may influence them after all, and may shade the papers which
they read, and even the primaries at which they do vote.

Yet how one-sided would it be, if we gave attention only to the dangers which the dance may
bring to a nation's mind. The credit account of the social dance is certainly not insignificant,
and perhaps momentous just for the Americans of to-day. The dance is a wonderful discharge
of stirred up energy; its rhythmic form relieves the tension of the motor apparatus and produces
a feeling of personal comfort. The power to do this is a valuable asset, when so much emotional
poverty is around us. The dance makes life smooth in the midst of hardship and drudgery. For
the dancer the cup is always overflowing, even though it may be small. There is an element
of relaxation and of joyfulness in the rhythm of the music and the twinkling of the feet, which
comes as a blessing into the dulness and monotony of life. The overworked factory girl does
not seek rest for her muscles after the day of labour, but craves to go on contrasting them
in the rhythmic movements of the dance. So it has been at all times. The hardest worked part
of the community has usually been the most devoted to the gayety of popular dances. The refined
society has in many periods of civilization declined to indulge in dancing, because it was
too widely spread among the lowest working classes in towns and in the country. The dance through
thousands of years has been the bearer of harmless happiness: who would refuse a welcome to
such a benefactor? And with the joyfulness comes the sociability. The dance brings people near
together. It is unfair to claim that the dance is aristocratic, because it presupposes leisure
and luxury. On the contrary, throughout the history of civilization the dance has been above
all, democratic, and has reënforced the feeling of good fellowship, of community, of intimacy,
of unity. Like the popular games which melt all social groups together by a common joyful interest,
and like humour which breaks all social barriers, the love for dancing removes mutual distrust
and harmonizes the masses.

This social effect has manifold relation to another aspect of the dance, which is psychologically
perhaps the deepest: the dance is an art, and as such, of deep æsthetic influence on the whole
mental life. Whenever the joy in dancing comes into the foreground, this art is developed to
high artificiality. No step and no movement is left to the chance inspiration of the moment;
everything is prescribed, and to learn the dances not seldom means an almost scientific study.
In the great dancing periods of the rococo time the mastery of the exact rules appeared one
of the most difficult parts of higher education, and as a real test of the truly cultivated
gentleman and gentlewoman; scholarly books analysed every detail of the necessary forms, and
the society dances in the castles of the eighteenth century were more elaborate than the best
prepared ballets on the stage of to-day. But the popular dances of the really dancing nations
are no less bound by traditions, and we know that even the dances of the savages are moving
on in strictly inherited forms. Far from the license of haphazard movements, the self-expression
of the dancer is thus regulated and bound by rules which are taken by him as prescriptions
of beauty. To dance thus means a steady adjustment to artistic requirements; it is an æsthetic
education by which the whole system of human impulses becomes harmonized and unified. The chance
movements are blended into a beautiful whole, and this reflects on the entire inner setting.
Educators have for a long time been aware that calisthenics, with its subtly tuned movements
of the body, develops refinement in the interplay of mental life. The personality who understands
how to live in gentle, beautiful motions through that trains his mind to beauty. In Europe,
for instance in Hellerau near Dresden, they have recently begun to establish schools for young
men and women in which the main, higher education is to be moulded by the æsthetics of bodily
expression, and the culture of the symbolic dance.

This æsthetic character of the dance, however, leads still further. It is not only the training
in beautiful expression; it is the development of an attitude which is detached from practical
effects and from the practical life of outer success. The dance is an action by which nothing
is produced and nothing in the surroundings changed. It is an oasis in the desert of our materialistic
behaviour. From morning till night we are striving to do things, to manufacture something in
the mill of the nation: but he who dances is satisfied in expressing himself. He becomes detached
from the cares of the hour, he acquires a new habit of disinterested attitude toward life.
Who can underestimate the value of such detachment in our American life? The Americans have
always been eagerly at work, but have never quite learned to enjoy themselves and to take the
æsthetic attitude which creates the wonders of beauty and the true harmonies of life. To forget
drudgery and to sink into the rhythms of the dance may bring to millions that inner completeness
which is possible only when practical and æsthetic attitude are blending in a personality.
The one means restless change; the other means repose, perfection, eternity. This hardworking,
pioneer nation needs the noisy teachings of efficiency and scientific management less than
the melodious teaching of song and dance and beauty. In short, the dance may bring both treacherous
perils and wonderful gifts to our community. It depends upon us whether we reënforce the dangerous
elements of the dance, or the beneficial ones. It will depend on ourselves whether the dance
will debase the nation, as it has so often done in the history of civilization, or whether
it will help to lead it to new heights of beauty and harmony, as it has not seldom done before.
Our social conscience must be wide awake; it will not be a blind fate which will decide when
the door of the future opens whether we shall meet the lady or the tiger.

                                   X

                           NAÏVE PSYCHOLOGY

The scientific psychologists started on a new road yesterday. For a long time their chief interest
was to study the laws of the mind. The final goal was a textbook which would contain a system
of laws to which every human mind is subjected. But in recent times a change has set in. The
trend of much of the best work nowadays is toward the study of individual differences. The
insight into individual personalities was indeed curiously neglected in modern psychology.
This does not mean that the declaration of psychological independence insisted that all men
are born equal, nor did any psychologist fancy that education or social surroundings could
form all men in equal moulds. But as scientists they felt no particular interest in the richness
of colours and tints. They intentionally neglected the question of how men differ, because
they were absorbed by the study of the underlying laws which must hold for every one. It is
hardly surprising that the psychologists chose this somewhat barren way; it was a kind of reaction
against the fantastic flights of the psychology of olden times. Speculations about the soul
had served for centuries. Metaphysics had reigned and the observation of the real facts of
life and experience had been disregarded. When the new time came in which the psychologists
were fascinated by the spirit of scientific method and exact study of actual facts, the safest
way was for them to imitate the well-tested and triumphant procedures of natural science. The
physicist and the chemist seek the laws of the physical universe, and the psychologist tried
to act like them, to study the elements from which the psychical universe is composed and to
find the laws which control them. But while it was wise to make the first forward march in
this one direction, the psychologist finally had to acknowledge that a no less important interest
must push him on an opposite way. The human mind is not important to us only as a type. Every
social aim reminds us that we must understand the individual personality. If we deal with children
in the classroom or with criminals in the courtroom, with customers in the market or with patients
in the hospital, we need not only to know what is true of every human being; we must above
all discover how the particular individual is disposed and composed, or what is characteristic
of special groups, nations, races, sexes, and ages. It is clear that new methods were needed
to approach these younger problems of scientific psychology, but the scientists have eagerly
turned with concerted efforts toward this unexplored region and have devoted the methods of
test experiments, of statistics, and of laboratory measurements to the examination of such
differences between various individuals and groups.

But in all these new efforts the psychologist meets a certain public resistance, or at least
a certain disregard, which he is not accustomed to find in his routine endeavours. As long
as he was simply studying the laws of the mind, he enjoyed the approval of the wider public.
His work was appreciated as is that of the biologist and the chemist. But when it becomes his
aim to discover mental features of the individual, and to foresee what he can expect from the
social groups of men, every layman tells him condescendingly that it is a superfluous task,
as instinct and intuition and the naïve psychology of the street will be more successful than
any measurements with chronoscopes and kymographs. Do we not know how the skilful politician
or the efficient manager looks through the mind of a man at the first glance? The life insurance
agent has hardly entered the door before he knows how this particular mind must be handled.
Every commercial traveller knows more than any psychologist can tell him, and even the waiter
in the restaurant foresees when the guest sits down how large a tip he can expect from him.
In itself it would hardly be convincing to claim that scientific efforts to bring a process
down to exact principles are unnecessary because the process can be performed by instinct.
We all can walk without needing a knowledge of the muscles which are used, and can find nourishment
without knowing the physiology of nutrition. Yet the physiologist has not only brought to light
the principles according to which we actually eat, but he has been able to make significant
suggestions for improved diet, and in not a few cases his knowledge can render services which
no instinctive appetite could replace. The psychological study of human traits, too, may not
only find out the principles underlying the ordinary knowledge of men, but may discover means
for an insight which goes as far beyond the instinctive understanding of man as the scientific
diet prescribed by a physician goes beyond the fancies of a cook. The manager may believe that
he can recognize at the first glance for which kind of work the labourer is fit: and yet the
psychological analysis with the methods of exact experiments may easily demonstrate that his
judgment is entirely mistaken. Moreover, although such practical psychologists of the street
or of the office may develop a certain art of recognizing particular features in the individual,
they cannot formulate the laws and cannot lay down those permanent relations from which others
may learn.

Yet even this claim of the psychological scholar seems idle pride. Had the world really to
wait for his exact statistics and his formulæ of correlation of mental traits in order to get
general statements and definite descriptions of the human types and of the mental diversities?
Are not the writings of the wise men of all times full of such psychological observations?
Has not the consciousness of the nations expressed itself in an abundance of sayings and songs,
of proverbs and philosophic words, which contains this naïve psychological insight into the
characters and temperaments of the human mind? We may go back thousands of years to the contemplations
of oriental wisdom, we may read the poets of classic antiquity, or Shakespeare, or Goethe,
we may study what the great religious leaders and statesmen, the historians and the jurists,
have said about man and his behaviour; and we find an over-abundance of wonderful sayings with
which no textbooks of psychology can be compared.

This is all true. And yet, is it not perhaps all entirely false? Can this naïve psychology
of the ages, to which the impressionism and the wisdom of the finest minds have so amply contributed,
really make superfluous the scientific efforts for the psychology of groups and correlations
and individual traits? It seems almost surprising that this overwhelmingly rich harvest of
prescientific psychology has never been examined from the standpoint of scientific psychology,
and that no one has sifted the wheat from the chaff. The very best would be not only to gather
such material, but to combine the sayings of the naïve psychologists in a rounded system of
psychology. In all ages they surely must have been among the best observers of mankind, as
even what is not connected with the name of an individual author, but is found in proverbs
or in the folk-epics of the nations, must have originated in the minds of individual leaders.
My aim here is more modest: I have made my little pilgrimage through literature to find out
in a tentative fashion whether the supply of psychology, outside of science, is really so rich
and valuable as is usually believed. What I wish to offer, therefore, is only a first collection
of psychological statements, which the prescientific psychologists have proclaimed, and surely
will go on proclaiming, and ought to go on proclaiming, as they do it so beautifully, where
we scientists have nothing but tiresome formulæ.

Let us begin at the beginning. There has never been a nation whose contemplation was richer
in wisdom, whose view of man was subtler and more suggestive, than those of old India. The
sayings of its philosophers and poets and thinkers have often been gathered in large volumes
of aphorisms. How many of these fine-cut remarks about man contain real psychology? The largest
collection which I could discover is that of Boehtlinck, who translated seventy-five hundred
Indian sayings into German. Not a few of them refer to things of the outer world, but by far
the largest part of them speaks of man and of man's feeling and doing. "And then--and then you
must come and see us. You will understand me better after that, and our situation will not be
so wretched as it is now."

"I do not think it likely I shall come to see you."

"Then it will not be my fault or Eustacia's, Mother. Good-bye!"

He kissed her cheek, and departed in great misery, which was several hours in lessening itself
to a controllable level. The position had been such that nothing more could be said without,
in the first place, breaking down a barrier; and that was not to be done.

No sooner had Yeobright gone from his mother's house than her face changed its rigid aspect for
one of blank despair. After a while she wept, and her tears brought some relief. During the rest
of the day she did nothing but walk up and down the garden path in a state bordering on stupefaction.
Night came, and with it but little rest. The next day, with an instinct to do something which
should reduce prostration to mournfulness, she went to her son's
room, and with her own hands arranged it in order, for an imaginary
time when he should return again. She gave some attention to her flowers,
but it was perfunctorily bestowed, for they no longer charmed her.

It
was a great relief when, early in the afternoon, Thomasin paid her
an unexpected visit. This was not the first meeting between the relatives
since Thomasin's marriage; and past blunders having been in a rough
way rectified, they could always greet each other with pleasure and
ease. “Inclination to lies, falsehood, foolishness,
greediness, hastiness, uncleanliness, and cruelty are inborn faults of the woman”; or “Water
never remains in an unbaked vessel, flour in a sieve, nor news in the mind of women”; or “The
mind of a woman is less stable than the ear of an elephant or the flash of lightning.” On the
other hand we read: “True women have twice as much love, four times as much endurance, and
eight times as much modesty as men”; or “The appetite of women is twice as large, their understanding
four times as large, their spirit of enterprise six times as large, and their longing for love
eight times as large as that of men.” Again we read: “The character of women is as changeable
as a wave of the sea; their affection, like the rosy tint of a cloud in the evening sky, lasts
just for a moment”; or “When women have a man's money, they let him go, as he is no longer
of any use to them.”

The same one-sidedness and epigrammatic exaggeration can always be felt where whole groups
of men are to be characterized. “The faults of the dwarf are sixty, of the red-haired man eighty,
of the humpback a hundred, and of the one-eyed man innumerable.”

But let us rather turn to sayings in which the subtlety of psychological observation deserves
admiration: “The drunkard, the careless, the insane, the fatigued, the angry, the hungry, the
greedy, the timid, the hasty, and the lover know no law”; “If a man commits a crime, his voice
and the colour of his face become changed, his look becomes furtive, and the fire is gone from
his eye”; “The best remedy for a pain is no longer to think of it; if you think of it, the
pain will increase”; “A greedy man can be won by money, an angry man by folding the hands,
a fool by doing his will, and an educated man by speaking the truth”; “The wise man can recognize
the inner thoughts of another from the colour of his face, from his look, from the sound of
his words, from his walk, from the reflections in his eyes, and from the form of his mouth”;
“The good and bad thoughts, however much they are hidden, can be discovered from a man when
he talks in his sleep or in his drunkenness”; “The ignorant can be satisfied easily, and still
more easily the well educated, but a man who has become confused by a little knowledge cannot
be won over even by Brahma”; “Good people are pacified by fair treatment, even if they have
been very angry, but not common people; gold, though it is hard, can be melted, but not grass”;
“By too great familiarity we produce low esteem, by too frequent visits, indifference; in the
Malaja mountains a beggar woman uses the sandalwood tree for firewood”; “The silly man steps
in without being invited, talks much without being questioned, and trusts him who does not
deserve confidence”; “New knowledge does not last in the mind of the uneducated any more than
a string of pearls about the neck of a monkey”; “The inner power of great men becomes more
evident in their misfortune than in their fortune; the fine perfume of aloes wood is strongest
when it falls into the fire”; “The anger of the best man lasts an instant, of the mediocre
man six hours, of the common man a day and a night, and the rascal will never get rid of it”;
“The scholar laughs with his eyes, mediocre people show their teeth when they laugh, common
people roar, and true men of wisdom never laugh”; “Truthfulness and cleverness can be found
out in the course of a conversation, but modesty and restraint are visible at the first glance”;
“Grief destroys wisdom, grief destroys scholarship, grief destroys endurance; there is no perturbation
of the mind like grief.” Often we hardly know whether a psychological observation or a metaphor
is given to us. In any case we may appreciate the fineness of a saying like this: “Even a most
translucent, beautiful, perfectly round and charming pearl can be strung on a thread as soon
as it has been pierced; so a mind which longs for salvation, perfectly pure, free from quarrel
with any one and full of goodness, will nevertheless be bound down to the earthly life as soon
as it quarrels with itself.” On the borderland of psychology we may find sayings like these:
“As a tailor's needle fastens the thread in the garment, so the thread of our earthly life
becomes fastened by the needle of our desires”; “An elephant kills us if he touches us, a snake
even if he smells us, a prince even if he smiles on us, and a scoundrel even if he adores us.”
But there is one saying which the most modern psychologist would accept, as it might just as
well be a quotation from a report of the latest exact statistics. The Indian maxim says: “There
is truth in the claim that the minds of the sons resemble more the minds of the fathers, those
of the daughters more those of the mothers.”

We may leave the banks of the Ganges and listen to the wisdom of Europe. Antiquity readily
trusted the wonderful knowledge of men which Homer displays. He has instinctively delineated
the characters with the inner truth of life. How far was this art of the creative poet accompanied
by the power of psychological abstraction? I do not think that we can find in the forty-eight
books of Homer even a dozen contributions to our unwritten system of the naïve psychology of
the nations. Almost every word which deals with man's mind reflects the moral and religious
values and is thus removed from pure psychology into ethics. Or we find comparisons which suggestively
illuminate the working of the mind without amplifying our psychological understanding. Nor
can we call metaphors like this psychology: “He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like
a city that is broken down and without walls.”

Let us turn for a moment to the greatest knower of men in mediæval days, to Dante. How deeply
his poetic eye looked into the hearts of men, how living are the characters in his “Divine
Comedy”; and yet he left us hardly any psychological observations. Some psychology may be acknowledged
in words like these: “The man in whose bosom thought on thought awakes is always disappointed
in his object, for the strength of the one weakens the other”; “When we are wholly absorbed
by feelings of delight or of grief, our soul yields itself to this one object, and we are no
longer able to direct our thoughts elsewhere”; “There is no greater grief than to remember
our happy time in misery.” It is hardly psychology if we hear, “The bad workman finds fault
with his tools”; or, “Likeness ever gives birth to love”; or “The wisest are the most annoyed
to lose time.”

From Dante we naturally turn to Shakespeare. We have so often heard that he is the greatest
psychologist, and yet we ought not to forget that such a popular classification does not in
itself really mean that Shakespeare undertakes the work of the psychologist. It does mean that
he creates figures with the temperament, character, thought, and will so similar to life and
so full of inner mental truth that the psychologist might take the persons of the poet's imagination
as material for his psychological studies. But this by no means suggests that Shakespeare phrased
abstract judgments about mental life; and as we seek his wisdom in his dramatic plays, it may
be taken for granted that in this technical sense he must be a poor psychologist, because he
is a great dramatist. Does not the drama demand that every word spoken be spoken not from the
author's standpoint, but from the particular angle of the person in the play? And this means
that every word is embedded in the individual mood and emotion, thought, and sentiment of the
speaker. A truly psychological statement must be general and cannot be one thing for Hamlet
and another for Ophelia. The dramatist's psychological sayings serve his art, unfolding before
us the psychological individuality of the speaker, but they do not contribute to the textbooks
of psychology, which ought to be independent of personal standpoints. And yet what a stream
of verses flows down to us, which have the ring of true psychology!

       *       *       *       *       *

We all know it, and we know it so well and feel so much with Cæsar or with Lear or with Othello
or with Macbeth, that we instinctively take it all for true psychology, while it after all
covers just the exceptional cases of the dramatic situation.

No! If we are to seek real generalities, we must not consult the playwright. Perhaps we may
find the best conditions for general statement where we do not even have to deal with an individual,
but can listen to the mind of the race and can absorb its wisdom from its proverbs. Let us
take the word proverb in its widest sense, including popular sayings which have not really
the stamp of the proverb. There is surely no lack of sharply coined psychology. This is true
of all countries. I find the harvest richest in the field of the German proverbs, but almost
as many in the field of the English, and a large number of sayings are common to the two countries.
Very characteristic psychological remarks can be found among the Russian proverbs, and not
a few among those in Yiddish. But this type of psychology is sufficiently characterized, if
we confine ourselves here to the English proverbial phrases. Often they need a commentary in
order to be understood in their psychological truth. We hear in almost all countries: “Children
and fools speak the truth.” As a matter of course we all know that their chance of speaking
the objective truth is very small. What is psychologically tenable is only that they are unable
to hide the subjective truth. Many such phrases are simply epigrams where the pleasure in the
play of words must be a substitute for the psychological truth; for instance: “Long hair and
short wit.” Not a few contradict one another, and yet there is not a little wisdom in sayings
like these: “Beware of a silent dog and still water”; “Misery loves company”; “Hasty love is
soon hot and soon cold”; “Dogs that put up many hares kill none”; “He that will steal an egg
will steal an ox”; “Idle folks have the least leisure”; “Maids say no and take”; “A boaster
and a liar are cousins german”; “A young twig is easier twisted than an old tree”; “Imitation
is the sincerest flattery”; “Pride joined with many virtues chokes them all”; “Offenders never
pardon”; “The more wit, the less courage”; “We are more mindful of injuries than of benefits”;
“Where there's a will, there's a way”; “An idle brain is the devil's workshop”; “Anger and
haste hinder good counsel”; “Wise men change their minds, fools never”; “Sudden joy kills sooner
than excessive grief”; “Lazy folks take the most pains”; “Nature passes nurture”; “Necessity
is the mother of invention”; “We are apt to believe what we wish for”; “Where your will is
ready, your foot is light.”

All these proverbs and the maxims of other nations may be true, but can we deny that they are
on the whole so trivial that a psychologist would rather hesitate to proclaim them as parts
of his scientific results? As far as they are true they are vague and hardly worth mentioning,
and where they are definite and remarkable they are hardly true. We shall after all have to
consult the individual authors to gather the subtler observations on man's behaviour, even
though they furnish only semi-naïve psychology. But the English contributions are so familiar
to every reader that it may be more interesting to listen to the foreigners. Every nation has
its thinkers who have the reputation of being especially fine knowers of men. The French turn
most readily to La Rochefoucauld, and the Germans to Lichtenberg. Certainly a word of La Rochefoucauld
beside the psychologizing proverb looks like the scintillating, well-cut diamond beside a moonstone.
Or what psychologist would believe Lichtenberg when he claims: “All men are equal in their
mental aptitudes, and only their surroundings are responsible for their differences”? He observes
better when he says: “An insolent man can look modest when he will, but a modest man can never
make himself look insolent”; or when he remarks: “Nothing makes a man old more quickly than
the thought that he is growing older”; or “Men do not think so differently about life as they
talk about it”; or “I have always found that intense ambition and suspicion go together”; or
“I am convinced that we not only love ourselves in loving others, but that we also hate ourselves
in hating others.” Often his captivating psychological words are spoiled by an ethical trend.
For instance, he has hardly the right to say: “In the character of every man is something which
cannot be broken; it is the skeleton of his character.” But he balances such psychological
rashness by fine observations like these: “The character of a man can be recognized by nothing
more surely than by the joke he takes amiss”; and “I believe that we get pale from fright also
in darkness, but I do not think that we would turn red from shame in the dark, because we are
pale on our own account, but we blush on account of others as well as on account of ourselves.”
And we are in the midst of the up-to-date psychology when we read what he said a hundred years
ago: “From the dreams of a man, if he report them accurately enough, we might trace much of
his character, but one single dream is not sufficient; we must have a large number for that.”

I add a few characteristic words of distinctly psychological temper from the great nonpsychological
authors of modern times. Lessing says: “The superstition in which we have grown up does not
lose its power over us when we see through it; not all who laugh about their chains are free”;
or again, “We are soon indifferent to the good and even to the best, when it becomes regular”;
“The genius loves simplicity, while the wit prefers complexity”; “The characteristic of a great
man is that he treats the small things as small, and the important things as important”; “Whoever
loses his mind from love would have lost it sooner or later in any case.” But on the whole,
Lessing was too much of a fighter to be truly an objective psychologist. We may put more confidence
in Goethe's psychology: “Where the interest fades away, the memory soon fails, too”; “The history
of man is his character”; “From nature we have no fault which may not become a virtue, and
no virtue which may not become a fault”; “A quiet, serious woman feels uncomfortable with a
jolly man, but not a serious man with a jolly woman”; “Whatever we feel too intensely, we cannot
feel very long”; “It is easy to be obedient to a master who convinces when he commands”; “Nobody
can wander beneath palms without punishment; all the sentiments must change in a land where
elephants and tigers are at home”; “A man does not become really happy until his absolute longing
has determined its own limits”; “Hate is an active displeasure, envy a passive one, and it
is therefore not surprising that envy so easily turns into hate”; “No one can produce anything
important unless he isolate himself”; “However we may strive for the general, we always remain
individuals whose nature necessarily excludes certain characteristics, while it possesses certain
others”; “The only help against the great merits of another is love”; “Man longs for freedom,
woman for tradition”; “A talent forms itself in solitude, a character in the stream of the
world”; “The miracle is the dearest child of belief”; “It is not difficult to be brilliant
if one has no respect for anything.”

Whoever falls into the habit of looking for psychologizing maxims in his daily reading will
easily bring home something which he picks up in strolling through the gardens of literature.
Only we must always be on our guard lest the beautifully coloured and fragrant flowers which
we pluck are poisonous. Is it really good psychology when Vauvenargues writes: “All men are
born sincere and die impostors,” or, when Brillat-Savarin insists: “Tell me what you eat, and
I shall tell you who you are”? Or can we really trust Mirabeau: “Kill your conscience, as it
is the most savage enemy of every one who wants success”; or Klopstock: “Happiness is only
in the mind of one who neither fears nor hopes”; or Gellert: “He who loves one vice, loves
all the vices”? Can we believe Chamfort: “Ambition more easily takes hold of small souls than
great ones, just as a fire catches the straw roof of the huts more easily than the palaces”;
or Pascal: “In a great soul, everything is great”; or the poet Bodenstedt when he sings: “A
gray eye is a sly eye, a brown eye is roguish and capricious, but a blue eye shows loyalty”? "And
I see the young bride's little head!" said Grandfer, peeping in the
same direction, and discerning Thomasin, who was waiting beside her
aunt in a miserable and awkward way. "Not quite settled in yet--well,
well, there's plenty of time." Lessing tells us: “All great men are modest”;
Goethe: “Only rascals are modest.” The psychology of modesty is probably more neatly expressed
in the saying of Jean Paul: “Modest is he who remains modest, not when he is praised, but when
he is blamed”: and Ebner-Eschenbach adds: “Modesty which comes to consciousness, comes to an end.”

But in our system of naïve psychology, we ought not to omit such distinctly true remarks as
Rabelais' much-quoted words: “The appetite comes during the eating”; or Fox's words: “Example
will avail ten times more than precept”; or Moltke's: “Uncertainty in commanding produces uncertainty
in obedience”; or Luther's: “Nothing is forgotten more slowly than an insult, and nothing more
quickly than a benefaction.” It is Fichte who first said: “Education is based on the self-activity
of the mind.” Napoleon coins the good metaphor: “A mind without memory is a fortress without
garrison.” Buffon said what professional psychologists have repeated after him: “Genius is
nothing but an especial talent for patience.” Schumann claims: “The talent works, the genius
creates.” We may quote from Jean Paul: “Nobody in the world, not even women and princes, is
so easily deceived as our own conscience”; or from Pascal: “Habit is a second nature which
destroys the original one.” Nietzsche says: “Many do not find their heart until they have lost
their head”; Voltaire: “The secret of ennui is to have said everything”; Jean Paul: “Sorrows
are like the clouds in a thunderstorm; they look black in the distance, but over us hardly
gray.” Once more I quote Nietzsche: “The same emotions are different in their rhythm for man
and woman: therefore men and women never cease to misunderstand each other.”

This leads us to the one topic to which perhaps more naïve psychology has been devoted than
to any other psychological problem, the mental difference between men and women. Volumes could
be filled, and I think volumes have been filled, with quotations about this eternal source
of happiness and grief. But if we look into those hundreds of thousands of crisp sayings and
wise maxims, we find in the material of modern times just what we recognized in the wisdom
of India. Almost all is metaphor and comparison, or is practical advice and warning, or is
enthusiastic praise, or is maliciousness, but among a hundred hardly one contains psychology.
And if we really bring together such psychologizing observations, we should hardly dare to
acknowledge that they deserve that right of generality by merit of which they might be welcomed
to our psychological system. Bruyere insists: “Women are extreme; they are better or worse
than men”; and the same idea is formulated by Kotzebue: “When women are good they stand between
men and angels; when they are bad, they stand between men and devils.” Rousseau remarks: “Woman
has more esprit, and man more genius; the woman observes, and the man reasons.” Jean Paul expresses
the contrast in this way: “No woman can love her child and the four quarters of the globe at
the same time, but a man can do it.” Grabbe thinks: “Man looks widely, woman deeply; for man
the world is the heart, for woman the heart is the world.” Schiller claims: “Women constantly
return to their first word, even if reason has spoken for hours.” Karl Julius Weber, to whom
German literature has to credit not a few psychological observations, says: “Women are greater
in misfortune than men on account of the chief female virtue, patience, but they are smaller
in good fortune than men, on account of the chief female fault, vanity.” Yet as to patience,
a German writer of the seventeenth century, Christoph Lehmann, says: “Obedience and patience
do not like to grow in the garden of the women.” But I am anxious to close with a more polite
German observation. Seume holds: “I cannot decide whether the women have as much reason as
the men, but I am perfectly sure that they have not so much unreason.” And yet: “How hard it
is for women to keep counsel,” and how many writers since Shakespeare have said this in their
own words.

The poets, to be sure, feel certain that in spite of all these inner contradictions, they know
better than the psychologists, and where their knowledge falls short, they at least assure
the psychologist that he could not do better. Paul Heyse, in his booklet of epigrammatic stanzas,
writes a neat verse which, in clumsy prose, says: “Whoever studies the secrets of the soul
may bring to light many a hidden treasure, but which man fits which woman no psychologist will
ever discover.” To be sure, as excuse for his low opinion of us psychologists, it may be said
that when he wrote it in Munich thirty years ago there was no psychological laboratory in the
university of his jolly town and only two or three in the world. "You think too much of my influence
over menfolk indeed, reddleman. If I had such a power as you imagine I would go straight and
use it for the good of anybody who has been kind to me--which Thomasin Yeobright has not particularly,
to my knowledge."

"Can it be that you really don't know of it--how much she had always thought of you?"

"I have never heard a word of it. Although we live only two miles
apart I have never been inside her aunt's house in my life."

The
superciliousness that lurked in her manner told Venn that thus far
he had utterly failed. He inwardly sighed and felt it necessary to
unmask his second argument.

"Well, leaving that out of the question,
'tis in your power, I assure you, Miss Vye, to do a great deal of
good to another woman." The mathematical statistics of the professional students
of the mind and their test experiments in the laboratories are certainly less picturesque,
but they have the one advantage that the results are true. Mankind has no right to deceive
itself with half-true, naïve psychology of the amateur, when our world is so full of social
problems which will be solved only if the aptitudes and the workings of the mind are clearly
recognized and traced. The naïve psychology is sometimes stimulating and usually delightful,
but if reliable psychology is wanted, it seems after all that only one way is open—to consult
the psychologists.

                                THE END

                        THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS
                          GARDEN CITY, N. Y.

                       BOOKS BY HUGO MÜNSTERBERG

    Psychology and Life, Boston, 1899
    Grundzüge der Psychologie, Leipzig, 1900
    American Traits, Boston, 1902
    Die Amerikaner, Berlin, 1904
    The Americans, New York, 1904
    Principles of Art Education, New York, 1905
    The Eternal Life, Boston, 1905
    Science and Idealism, Boston, 1906
    Philosophie der Werte, Leipzig, 1907
    On the Witness Stand, New York, 1908
    Aus Deutsch Amerika, Berlin, 1908
    The Eternal Values, Boston, 1909
    Psychotherapy, New York, 1909
    Psychology and the Teacher, New York, 1910
    American Problems, New York, 1910
    Psychologie und Wirtschaftsleben, Berlin, 1912
    Vocation and Learning, St. Louis, 1912
    Psychology and Industrial Efficiency, Boston, 1913
    American Patriotism, New York, 1913
    Grundzüge der Psychotechnik, Leipzig, 1914
    Psychology and Social Sanity, New York, 1914

Obvious printer's errors have been fixed. See below for the full list. The list of books by
Hugo Münsterberg has been moved from the beginning to the end of the project.

                             Errors fixed

page viii—typo fixed: changed 'pyschology' to 'psychology' page 067—typo fixed: changed 'pulsebeat'
to 'pulse-beat' page 086—spelling normalized: changed 'world-wide' to 'worldwide' page 281—typo
fixed: changed 'mratial' to 'martial' page 283—spelling normalized: changed 'onesided' to 'one-sided'
page 299—spelling normalized: changed 'onesidedness' to 'one-sidedness' page 315—typo fixed:
changed 'Eschenback' to 'Eschenbach'

