"Gee," said Bobby, "won't we have something to tell the kids now? Gee! We'll sure make 'em
sore they wasn't along. Think of us a-talkin' to old Adam Ward's daughter, herself. Gee! Some
stunt--I'll tell the world."

They had reached the foot of the old stairway and were discussing whether or not they dared
prolong their absence from home by paying a visit to the Interpreter, when a man appeared on
the road from town. Bobby caught sight of the approaching stranger first, and the boy's freckled
countenance lighted with excited interest and admiration.

"Hully Gee!" he exclaimed, catching Maggie by the arm. "Would yer look who's a-comin'!"

The man was not, in his general appearance, one to inspire a feeling of confidence. He was
a little above medium height, with fat shoulders, a thick neck, and dark, heavy features with
coarse lips showing through a black beard trimmed to a point, and small black eyes set close
above a large nose with flaring nostrils. His clothing was good, and he carried himself with
assurance. But altogether there was about him the unmistakable air of a foreigner.

Bobby continued in an excited whisper, "That there's Jake Vodell we've heard Dad an' the men
talkin' so much about. He's the guy what's a-goin' to put the fear of God into the Mill bosses
and rich folks. He's a-goin' to take away old Adam Ward's money an' Mill, an' autermobiles,
an' house an'--everything, an' divide 'em all up 'mong us poor workin' folks. Gee, but he's
a big gun, I'm tellin' yer!"

The man came on to the foot of the stairs and stopped before the children. For a long moment
he looked them over with speculative interest. "Well," he said, abruptly, "and who are you?
That you belong in this neighborhood it is easy to see."

"We're Bobby and Maggie Whaley," answered the boy.

The man's black eyebrows were lifted, and he nodded his head reflectively. "Oh-ho, you are
Sam Whaley's kids, heh?"

"Uh-huh," returned Bobby. "An' I know who yer are, too."

"So?" said the man.

"Uh-huh, yer Jake Vodell, the feller what's a-goin' to make all the big bugs hunt their holes,
and give us poor folks a chance. Gee, but I'd like to be you!"

The man showed his strong white teeth in a pleased smile. "You are all right, kid," he returned.
"I think, maybe, you will play a big part in the cause sometime--when you grow up."

Bobby swelled out his chest with pride at this good word from his hero. "I'm big enough right
now to put a stick o' danermite under old Adam Ward's castle, up there on the hill."

Little Maggie caught her brother's arm. "Bobby, yer ain't a-goin'--"

The man laughed. "That's the stuff, kid," he said. "But you better let jobs like that alone--until
you are a bit older, heh?"

"Mag an' me has been up there to the castle all this afternoon," bragged the boy. "An' we talked
with old Adam's daughter, too, an'--an' everything."

The man stared at him. "What is this you tell me?"

"It's so," returned Bobby, stoutly, "ain't it, Mag? An' the other day Helen Ward, she give
us a ride, in her autermobile--while she was a-visitin' with the Interpreter up there."

Jake Vodell's black brows were drawn together in a frown of disapproval. "So this Adam Ward's
daughter, too, calls on the Interpreter, heh! Many people, it seems, go to this Interpreter."
To Bobby he said suddenly, "Look here, it will be better if you kids stay away from such people--it
will get you nothing to work yourselves in with those who are not of your own class!"

"Yes, sir," returned Bobby, dutifully.

"I will tell you what you can do, though," continued the man. "You can tell your father that
I want him at the meeting to-night. Think you can remember, heh?"

"Yer bet I can," replied the boy. "But where'll I tell him the meetin' is?"

"Never you mind that," returned the other. "You just tell him I want him--he will know where.
And now be on your way."

To Bobby's utter amazement, Jake Vodell went quickly up the steps that led to the Interpreter's
hut.

"Gee!" exclaimed the wondering urchin. "What do yer know about that, Mag? He's a-goin' to see
our old Interpreter. Gee! I guess the Interpreter's one of us all right. Jake Vodell wouldn't
be a-goin' to see him if he wasn't."

As they trudged away through the black dust, the boy added, "Darn it all, Mag, if the Interpreter
is one of us what's the princess lady goin' to see him for?"

CHAPTER VII

THE HIDDEN THING

Hiding in the shrubbery, Adam Ward chuckled and grinned with strange glee as he listened to
his wife calling for him. Here and there about the grounds she searched anxiously; but the
man kept himself hidden and enjoyed her distress. At last, when she had come so near that discovery
was certain, he suddenly stepped out from the bushes and, facing her, waited expectantly.

And now, by some miracle, Adam Ward's countenance was transformed--his eyes were gentle, his
gray face calm and kindly. His smile became the affectionate greeting of a man who, past the
middle years of life, is steadfast in his love for the mother of his grown-up children.

Mrs. Ward had been, in the years of her young womanhood, as beautiful as her daughter Helen.
But her face was lined now with care and shadowed by sadness, as though with the success of
her husband there had come, also, regrets and disappointments which she had suffered in silence
and alone.

She returned Adam's smile of greeting, when she saw him standing there, but that note of anxiety
was still in her voice as she said gently, "Where in the world have you been? I have looked
all over the place for you."

He laughed as he went to her--a laugh of good comradeship. "I was just sitting over there under
that tree," he answered. "I heard you when you called the first time, but thought I would let
you hunt a while. The exercise will do you good--keep you from getting too fat in your old age."

She laughed with him, and answered, "Well, you can just come and talk to me now, while I rest."

Arm in arm, they went to the rustic seat in the shade of the tree where, a few minutes before,
he had so aimlessly broken the twigs.

But when they were seated the man frowned with displeasure. "Alice, I wish to goodness there
was some way to make these men about the place keep a closer watch of things."

She glanced at him quickly. "Has something gone wrong, Adam?"

"Nothing more than usual," he answered, harshly. "There are always a lot of prowlers around.
But they don't stay long when I get after them." He laughed, shortly--a mirthless, shamefaced
laugh.

"I am sorry you were annoyed," she said, gently.

"Annoyed!" he returned, with the manner of a petulant child. "I'll annoy them. I tell you I
am not going to stand for a lot of people's coming here, sneaking and prying around to see
what they can see. If anybody wants to enjoy a place like this let him work for it as I have."

She waited a while before she said, as if feeling her way toward a definite point, "It has
been hard work, hasn't it, Adam? Almost too hard, I fear. Did you ever ask yourself if, after
all, it is really worth the cost?"

"Worth the cost! I am not in the habit of paying more than things are worth. This place cost
me exactly--"

She interrupted him, quietly, "I don't mean that, dear. I was not thinking of the money. I
was thinking of what it has all cost in work and worry and--and other things."

"It has all been for you and the children, Alice," he answered, wearily; and there was that
in his voice and face which brought the tears to her eyes. "You know that, so far as I am personally
concerned, it doesn't mean a thing in the world to me. I don't know anything outside of the
Mill myself."

She put her hand on his arm with a caressing touch. "I know--I know--and that is just what
troubles me. Perhaps if you would share it more--I mean if you could enjoy it more--I might
feel different about it. We were all so happy, Adam, in the old house."

When he made no reply to this but sat with his eyes fixed on the ground she said, pleadingly,
"Won't you put aside all the cares and worries of the Mill now, and just be happy with us, Adam?"

The man moved uneasily.

"You know what the doctors say," she continued, gently. "You really--"

He interrupted impatiently, "The doctors are a set of fools. I'll show them!"

She persisted with gentle patience. "But even if the doctors are wrong about your health, still
there is no reason why you should not rest after all your years of hard work. I am sure we
have everything in the world that any one could possibly want. There is not the shadow of a
necessity to make you go on wearing your life out as you have been doing."

"Much you know about what is necessary for me to do," he retorted. "A man isn't going to let
the business that he has been all his life building up go to smash just because he has made
money enough to keep him without work for the rest of his days."

"There are other things that can go to smash besides business, Adam," she returned, sadly.
"And I am sure that the Mill will be safe enough now in John's hands."

"John!" he exclaimed, bitterly. "It's John and his crazy ideas that I am afraid of."

She returned, quickly, with a mother's pride, "Why, Adam! You have said so many times how wonderfully
well John was doing, and what a splendid head he had for business details and management. It
was only last week that you told me John was more capable now than some of the men that have
been in the office with you for several years."

Adam Ward rose and paced uneasily up and down before her. "You don't understand at all, Alice.
It is not John's business ability or his willingness to get into the harness that worries me.
It is the fool notions that he picked up somewhere over there in the war--there, and from that
meddlesome old socialist basket maker."

"Just what notions do you mean, Adam? Is it John's friendship with Charlie Martin that you fear?"

"His friendship with young Martin is only part of it. I am afraid of his attitude toward the
whole industrial situation. Haven't you heard his wild, impracticable and dangerous theories
of applying, as he says, the ideals of patriotism, and love of country, and duty to humanity,
and sacrifice, and heroism, and God knows what other nonsense, to the work of the world? You
know as well as I do how he talks about the comradeship of the mills and factories and workshops
being like the comradeship of the trenches and camps and battlefields. His notions of the relation
between an employer and his employees would be funny if they were not so dangerous. Look at
his sympathy with the unions! And yet I have shown him on my books where this union business
has cost me hundreds of thousands of dollars! Comradeship! Loyalty! I tell you I know what
I'm talking about from experience. The only way to handle the working class is to keep them
where they belong. Give them the least chance to think you are easy and they are on your neck.
If I had my way I'd hold them to their jobs at the muzzle of a machine gun. McIver has the
right idea. He is getting himself in shape right now for the biggest fight with labor that
he has ever had. Everybody knows that agitator Jake Vodell is here to make trouble. The laboring
classes have had a long spell of good times now and they're ripe for anything. All they need
is a start and this anarchist is here to start them. And John, instead of lining up with McIver
and getting ready to fight them to a finish, is spending his time hobnobbing with Charlie Martin
and listening to that old fool Interpreter."

"Come, dear," she said, soothingly. "Come and sit down here with me. Don't let's worry about
what may happen."

He obeyed her with the manner of a fretful child. And presently, as she talked, the cloud lifted
from his gray, haggard face, and he grew calm. Soon, when she made some smiling remark, he
even smiled back at her with the affectionate companionship of their years.

"You will try not to worry about things so much, won't you, Adam?" she said, at last. "For
my sake, won't you?"

"But I tell you, Alice, there is serious trouble ahead."

"Perhaps that is all the more reason why you should retire now," she urged. He stirred uneasily,
but she continued, "Just suppose the worst that could possibly happen should happen, suppose
you even had to give up the Mill to Pete Martin and the men, suppose you lost the new process
and everything, and we were obliged to give up our home here and go back to live in the old
house--it would still be better than losing you, dear. Don't you know that to have you well
and strong would be more to Helen and John and to me than anything else could possibly be?"

Mrs. Ward knew, as the words left her lips, that she had said the wrong thing. She had heard
him rave about his ownership of the new process too many times not to know--while any mention
of his old workman friend Peter Martin always threw him into a rage. But in her anxiety the
forbidden words had escaped her.

She drew back with a little gasp of fear at the swift change that came over his face. As if
she had touched a hidden spring in his being the man's countenance was darkened by furious
hatred and desperate fear. His trembling lips were ashen; the muscles of his face twitched
and worked; his eyes blazed with a vicious anger beyond all control. Springing to his feet,
he faced her with a snarling exclamation, and in a voice shaking with passion, cried, "Pete
Martin! What is he? Who is he? Everything he has in the world he owes to me. Haven't I kept
him in work all these years? Haven't I paid him every cent of his wages? Look at his home.
Not many working men have been able to own a place like that. What would he have done without
the money I have given him every pay day? I could have turned him out long ago--kicked him
out of a job without a cent. He's had all that's coming to him--every penny. I built up the
Mill. That new process is mine--it's patented in my name. I have had the best lawyers I could
hire to protect it on every possible point. If it hadn't been for my business brain there wouldn't
be any new process. What could Pete Martin have done with it--the fool has no more business
sense than a baby. I introduced it--I exploited it--I built it up and made it worth what it
is, and there isn't a court in the world that wouldn't say I have a legal right to it."

In vain Mrs. Ward tried to soothe him with reassuring words, pleading with him to be calm.

"I know they're after me," he raved. "They have tried all sorts of tricks. There is always
some sneaking spy watching for a chance to get me, but I'll fix them. I built the business
up and I can tear it down. Let them try to take anything away from me if they dare. I'll burn
the Mill and the whole town before I'll give up one cent of my legal rights to Pete Martin
or any of his tribe."

Forgetting his companion, the man suddenly started off across the grounds, waving his arms
and shaking his fists in wild gestures as he continued his tirade against his old fellow workman.
Mrs. Ward knew from experience the uselessness of trying to interfere until he had exhausted
himself.

      *       *       *       *       *

As Helen was returning to the house after her talk with the children, she saw her mother coming
slowly from that part of the grounds where the young woman had watched her father. It was evident,
even at a distance, that Mrs. Ward was greatly distressed. When the young woman reached her
mother's side, Mrs. Ward said, simply, "Your father, dear--he is terribly upset. Go to him,
Helen, you can always do more for him than any one else--he needs you."

It was not an easy task for Helen Ward to face her father just then. As she went in search
of him she tried to put from her mind all that she had seen and to remember only that he was
ill. She found him in the most distant and lonely part of the grounds, sitting with his face
buried in his hands--a figure of hopeless despair.

While still some distance away, she forced herself to call cheerily, "Hello, father."

As he raised his head, she turned to pick a few flowers from a near-by bed. When he had had
a moment to regain, in a measure, his self-control, she went toward him, arranging her blossoms
with careful attention.

Adam Ward watched his daughter as she drew near, much as a condemned man might have watched
through the grating of a prison window.

"What is it, father?" she asked, gently, when she had come close to his side. "Another one
of your dreadful nervous headaches?"

He put a shaking hand to his brow. "Yes," he said wearily.

"I am so sorry," she returned, sitting down beside him. "You have been thinking too hard again,
haven't you?"

"Yes, I guess I have been thinking too hard."

"But you're going to stop all that now, aren't you?" she continued, cheerily. "You're just
going to forget the old Mill, and do nothing but rest and play with me."

"Could I learn to play, do you think, Helen?"

"Why, of course you could, father, with me to teach you. That's the best thing I do, you know."

He watched her closely. "And you don't think that I--that I am no longer capable of managing
my affairs?"

She laughed gayly. "What a silly question--you capable--you, father, the best brain--the best
business executive in Millsburgh. You know that is what everybody says of you. You are just
tired, and need a good rest, that is all."

The man's drooping shoulders lifted and his face brightened as he said, slowly, "I guess perhaps
you are right, daughter."

"I am sure of it," she returned, eagerly. Then she added brightly, as if prompted by a sudden
inspiration, "I'll tell you what you do--ask the Interpreter."

"Ask the Interpreter!"

She nodded, smiling as if she had put a puzzling conundrum to him.

"You mean for me to ask that paralyzed old basket maker's advice? You mean, ask him if I should
retire from business?"

Again she nodded with a little laugh; but under her laughter there was a note of earnestness.

"And don't you know," he said, "that it is the Interpreter who is at the bottom of all my trouble?"

"Father!"

"The Interpreter, I tell you, is back of the whole thing. He is the brains of the labor organizations
in Millsburgh and has been for years. Why, it was the Interpreter who organized the first union
in this district. He has done more to build them up than all the others put together. Pete
Martin and Charlie, the ringleaders of the Mill workers' union, are only his active lieutenants.
I haven't a doubt but that he is responsible for this agitator Jake Vodell's coming to Millsburgh.
That miserable shack on the cliff is the real headquarters of labor in this part of the country.
Your Interpreter is a fine one for me to go to for advice. His hut is a fine place for your
brother to spend his spare time. It would be a fine thing, right now, with this man Vodell
in town, for me to resign and leave the Mill in the hands of John, who is already in the hands
of the Interpreter and the Martins and their Mill workers' union!"

As Adam finished, the deep sonorous tones of the great Mill whistle sounded over the community.
It was the signal for the closing of the day's work.

Obedient to the habit of years, the Mill owner looked at his watch. In his mind he saw the
day force trooping from the building and the night shift coming in. Throughout the entire city,
in office and shop and store and home, the people ordered their days by the sound of that whistle,
and Adam Ward had been very proud of this recognition accorded him.

Wearily, as one exhausted by a day of hard labor, this man who so feared the power of the Interpreter
looked up at his daughter. "I wish I could rest," he said.

CHAPTER VIII

WHILE THE PEOPLE SLEEP

The Interpreter's hands were busy with his basket weaving; his mind seemingly was occupied
more with other things. Frequently he paused to look up from his work and, with his eyes fixed
on the Mill, the Flats and the homes on the hillside, apparently considered the life that lay
before him and of which he had been for so many years an interested observer and student. On
the opposite side of the table, silent Billy was engaged with something that had to do with
the manufacturing interests of their strange partnership.

When Jake Vodell reached the landing at the top of the stairway, he stopped to look about the
place with curious, alert interest, noting with quick glances every object in the immediate
vicinity of the hut, as if fixing them in his mind. Satisfied at last by the thoroughness of
his inspection, he went toward the house, but his step on the board walk made no sound. At
the outer door of the little hut the man halted again, and again he looked quickly about the
premises. Apparently there was no one at home. Silently he entered the room and the next instant
discovered the two men on the porch.

The Interpreter's attention at the moment was fixed upon his work and he remained unaware of
the intruder's presence, while Jake Vodell, standing in the doorway, regarded the old basket
maker curiously, with a contemptuous smile on his bearded lips.

But Billy Rand saw him. A moment he looked at the man in the doorway inquiringly, as he would
have regarded any one of the Interpreter's many visitors; then the deaf and dumb man's expression
changed. Glancing quickly at his still unobserving companion, he caught up a hatchet that lay
among the tools on the table and, with a movement that was not unlike the guarding action of
a huge mastiff, rose to his feet. His face was a picture of animal rage; his teeth were bared,
his eyes gleamed, his every muscle was tense.

The man in the doorway was evidently no coward, but the smile vanished from his heavy face
and his right hand went quickly inside his vest. "What's the matter with you?" he said, sharply,
as Billy started toward him with deliberate menace in his movement.

At the sound of the man's voice the Interpreter looked up. One glance and the old basket maker
caught the wheels of his chair and with a quick, strong movement rolled himself between the
two men--so close to Billy that he caught his defender by the arm. Facing his enraged companion,
the Interpreter talked to him rapidly in their sign language and held out his hand for the
hatchet. The silent Billy reluctantly surrendered the weapon and drew back to his place on
the other side of the table, where he sat glaring at the stranger in angry watchfulness.

The man in the doorway laughed harshly. "They told me I would find a helpless old cripple up
here," he said. "I think you are pretty well protected at that."

Regarding the stranger gravely, the Interpreter apologized for his companion. "You can see
that Billy is not wholly responsible," he explained. "He is little more than a child mentally;
his actions are often apparently governed wholly by that strange instinct which seems to guide
the animals. He is very devoted to me."

"He seems to be in earnest all right," said the stranger. "He is a husky brute, too."

The Interpreter, regarding the man inquiringly, almost as if he were seeking in the personality
of his visitor the reason for Billy's startling conduct, replied, simply, "He would have killed
you."

With a shrug of his thick shoulders, the stranger uninvited came forward and helped himself
to a chair, and, with the air of one introducing a person of some importance, said, "I am Vodell--Jake
Vodell. You have heard of me, I think, heh?"

"Oh, yes. Indeed, I should say that every one has heard of you, Mr. Vodell. Your work has given
you even more than national prominence, I believe."

The man was at no pains to conceal his satisfaction. "I am known, yes."

"It is odd," said the Interpreter, "but your face seems familiar to me, as if I had met you
before."

"You have heard me speak somewhere, maybe, heh?"

"No, it cannot be that. You have never been in Millsburgh before, have you?"

"No."

"It is strange," mused the old basket maker.

"It is the papers," returned Vodell with a shrug. "Many times the papers have my picture--you
must have seen."

"Of course, that is it," exclaimed the Interpreter. "I remember now, distinctly. It was in
connection with that terrible bomb outrage in--"

"Sir!" interrupted the other indignantly. "Outrage--what do you mean, outrage?"

"I was thinking of the innocent people who were killed or injured," returned the Interpreter,
calmly. "I believe you were also prominent in those western strikes where so many women and
children suffered, were you not?"

The labor agitator replied with the exact manner of a scientific lecturer. "It is unfortunate
that innocent persons must sometimes be hurt in these affairs. But that is one of the penalties
that society must pay for tolerating the conditions that make these industrial wars necessary."

"If I remember correctly, you were in the South, too, at the time that mill was destroyed."

"Oh, yes, they had me in jail there. But that was nothing. I have many such experiences. They
are to me very commonplace. Wherever there are the poor laboring men who must fight for their
rights, I go. The mines, shops, mills, factories--it is all the same to me. I go wherever I
can serve the Cause. I have been in America now ten years, nearly eleven."

"You are not, then, a citizen of this country?"

Jake Vodell laughed contemptuously. "Oh, sure I am a citizen of this country--this great America
of fools and cowards that talk all the time so big about freedom and equality, while the capitalist
money hogs hold them in slavery and rob them of the property they create. I had to become a
citizen when the war came, you see, or they would have sent me away. But for that I would make
myself a citizen of some cannibal country first." The old basket maker's dark eyes blazed with
quick fire and he lifted himself with sudden strength to a more erect position in his wheel
chair. But when he spoke his deep voice was calm and steady. "You have been in our little city
nearly a month, I understand."

"Just about. I have been looking around, getting acquainted, studying the situation. One must
be very careful to know the right men, you understand. It pays, I find, to go a little slow
at first. We will go fast enough later." His thick lips parted in a meaning grin.

The Interpreter's hands gripped the wheels of his chair.

"Everybody tells me I should see you," the agitator continued. "Everywhere it is the same.
They all talk of the Interpreter. 'Go to the Interpreter,' they say. When they told me that
this great Interpreter is an old white-headed fellow without any legs, I laughed and said,
'What can he do to help the laboring man? He is not good for anything but to sit in a wheel
chair and make baskets all the day. I need men.' But they all answer the same thing, 'Go and
see the Interpreter.' And so I am here."

When the Interpreter was silent, his guest demanded, harshly, "They are all right, heh? You
are a friend to the workingman? Tell me, is it so?"

The old basket maker spoke with quiet dignity. "For twenty-five years Millsburgh has been my
home, and the Millsburgh people have been my friends. You, sir, have been here less than a
month; I have known you but a few minutes."

Jake Vodell laughed understandingly. "Oh-ho, so that is it? Maybe you like to see my credentials
before we talk?"

The Interpreter held up a hand in protest. "Your reputation is sufficient, Mr. Vodell."

The man acknowledged the compliment--as he construed it--with a shrug and a pleased laugh.
"And all that is said of you by the laboring class in your little city is sufficient," he returned.
"Even the men in McIver's factory tell me you are the best friend that labor has ever had in
this place." He paused expectantly.

The man in the wheel chair bowed his head.

"And then," continued Jake Vodell, with a frown of displeasure, "when I come to see you, to
ask some questions about things that I should know, what do I hear? The daughter of this old
slave-driver and robber--this capitalist enemy of the laboring class--Adam Ward, she comes
also to see this Interpreter who is such a friend of the people."

The Interpreter laughed. "And Sam Whaley's children, they come too."

"Oh, yes, that is better. I know Sam Whaley. He is a good man who will be a great help to me.
But I do not understand this woman business."

"I have known Miss Ward ever since she was born; I worked in the Mill at the same bench with
her father and Peter Martin," said the man in the wheel chair, with quiet dignity.

"I see. It is not so bad sometimes to have a friend or two among these millionaires when there
is no danger of it being misunderstood. But this man, who was once a workman and who deserted
his class--this traitor, her father--does he also call on you, Mr. Interpreter?"

"Once in a great while," answered the Interpreter.

Jake Vodell laughed knowingly. "When he wants something, heh?" Then, with an air of taking
up the real business of his visit to the little hut on the cliff, he said, "Suppose now you
tell me something about this son of Adam Ward. You have known him since he was a boy too--the
same as the girl?"

"Yes," said the Interpreter, "I have known John Ward all his life."

Something in the old basket maker's voice made Jake Vodell look at him sharply and the agitator's
black brows were scowling as he said, "So--you are friends with him, too, I guess, heh?"

"I am, sir; and so is Captain Charlie Martin, who is the head of our Mill workers' union, as
you may have heard."

"Exactly. That is why I ask. So many of the poor fools who slave for this son of Adam Ward
in the Mill say that he is such a fine man--so kind. Oh, wonderful! Bah! When was the wolf
whelped that would be kind to a rabbit? You shall tell me now about the friendship between
this wolf cub of the capitalist Mill owner and this poor rabbit, son of the workman Peter Martin
who has all his life been a miserable slave in the Mill. They were in the army together, heh?"

"They enlisted in the same company when the first call came and were comrades all through the
worst of the fighting in France."

"And before that, they were friends, heh?"

"They had been chums as boys, when the family lived in the old house next door to the Martins.
But during the years that John was away in school and college Adam moved his family to the
place on the hill where they live now. When John was graduated and came home to stay, he naturally
found his friends in another circle. His intimacy with Pete Martin's boy was not renewed--until
the war."

"Exactly," grunted Jake Vodell. "And how did Adam Ward like it that his boy should go to war?
Not much, I think. It was all right for the workman's boy to go; but the Mill owner's son--that
was different, heh?"

There was a note of pride in the Interpreter's voice, as he answered, "Adam was determined
that the boy should not go at all, even if he were drafted. But John said that it was bad enough
to let other men work to feed and clothe him in ordinary times of peace without letting them
do his fighting for him as well."

"This Adam Ward's son said that!" exclaimed the agitator. "Huh--it was for the effect--a grand-stand
play."

"He enlisted," retorted the Interpreter. "And when his father would have used his influence
to secure some sort of commission with an easy berth, John was more indignant than ever. He
said if he ever wore shoulder straps they would be a recognition of his service to his country
and not, as he put it, a pretty gift from a rich father. So he and Charlie Martin both enlisted
as privates, and, as it happened, on the same day. Under such circumstances it was quite as
natural that their old friendship should be reestablished as that they should have drifted
apart under the influence of Adam Ward's prosperity."

Jake Vodell laughed disagreeably. "And then this wonderful son of your millionaire Mill owner
comes out of the war and the army exactly as he went in, nothing but a private--not even a
medal--heh? But this workman from the Mill, he comes back a captain with a distinguished service
medal? I think maybe Private Ward's father and mother and sister liked that--no?"

Disregarding these comments, the Interpreter said, "Now that I have answered your questions
about the friendship of John Ward and Charlie Martin, may I ask just why you are so much interested
in the matter?"

The agitator gazed at the man in the wheel chair with an expression of incredulous amazement.
"Is it possible you do not understand?" he demanded. "And you such a friend to the workingman!
But wait--one more thing, then I will answer you. This daughter of Adam Ward--she is also good
friends with her old playmate who is now Captain Martin, is she? The workman goes sometimes
to the big house on the hill to see his millionaire friends, does he?"

The Interpreter answered, coldly, "I can't discuss Miss Ward with you, sir."

"Oh-ho! And now I will answer your question as to my interest. This John Ward is already a
boss in the Mill. His father, everybody tells me, is not well. Any time now the old man may
retire from the business and the son will have his place as general manager. He will be the
owner. The friendship between these two men is not good--because Charlie Martin is the leader
of the union and there can be no such friendship between a leader of the laboring class and
one of the employer class without great loss to our Cause. You will see. These rich owners
of the Mill, they will flatter and make much of this poor workman captain because of his influence
among the people who slave for them, and so any movement to secure for the workmen their rights
will be defeated. Do you understand now, Mister basket maker, heh?"

The Interpreter bowed his head.

The agitator continued. "Already I find it very hard to accomplish much with this Mill workers'
union. Except for our friend, Sam Whaley, and a few others, the fools are losing their class
loyalty. Their fighting spirit is breaking down. It will not do, I tell you. At the McIver
factory it is all very different. It will be easy there. The workingmen show the proper spirit--they
will be ready when I give the word. But I am not pleased with the situation in this Mill of
Adam Ward's. This fine friendship between the son of the owner and the son of the workman must
stop. Friendship--bah!--it is a pretense, a sham, a trick."

The man's manner, when he thus passed judgment upon the comradeship of John and Charlie, was
that of an absolute monarch who was righteously annoyed at some manifestation of disloyalty
among his subjects. His voice was harsh with the authority of one whose mandates are not to
be questioned. His countenance was dark with scowling displeasure.

"And you, too, my friend," he went on, glaring from under his black brows at the old man in
the wheel chair, "you will be wise if you accept my suggestion and be a little careful yourself.
It is not so bad, perhaps, this young woman coming to see you, but I am told that her brother
also comes to visit with the Interpreter. And this leader of the Mill workers' union, Charlie
Martin, he comes, too. Everybody says you are the best friend of the working people. But I
tell you there cannot be friendship between the employer class and the laboring class--it must
be between them always war. So, Mr. Interpreter, you must look out. The time is not far when
the people of Millsburgh will know for sure who is a friend to the labor class and who is a
friend to the employer class."

The Interpreter received this warning from Jake Vodell exactly as he had listened to Bobby
Whaley's boyish talk about blowing up the castle of Adam Ward on the hill.

Rising abruptly, the agitator, without so much as a by-your-leave, went into the house where
he proceeded to examine the books and periodicals on the table. Billy started from his place
to follow, but the Interpreter shook his head forbiddingly, and while Jake Vodell passed on
to the farther corner of the room and stood looking over the well filled shelves of the Interpreter's
library, the old basket maker talked to his companion in their silent language.

When this foreign defender of the rights of the American laboring class returned to the porch
he was smiling approval. "Good!" he said. "You are all right, I think. No man could read the
papers and books that you have there, and not be the friend of freedom and a champion of the
people against their capitalist masters. We will have a great victory for the Cause in Millsburgh,
comrade. You shall see. It is too bad that you do not have your legs so that you could take
an active part with me in the work that I will do."

The Interpreter smiled. "If you do not mind, I would like to know something of your plans.
That is," he added, courteously, "so far as you are at liberty to tell me."

"Certainly I will tell you, comrade," returned the other, heartily. "Who can say--it may be
that you will be of some small use to me after all." His eyes narrowed slyly. "It may be that
for these Mill owners to come to you here in your little hut is perhaps not so bad when we
think about it a little more, heh? The daughter of Adam Ward might be led to say many foolish
little things that to a clever man like you would be understood. Even the brother, the manager
of the Mill--well, I have known men like him to talk of themselves and their plans rather freely
at times when they thought there was no harm. And what possible harm could there be in a poor
crippled old basket maker like you, heh?" The man laughed as though his jest were perfectly
understood and appreciated by his host--as, indeed, it was.

"But about my plans for this campaign in Millsburgh," he went on. "You know the great brotherhood
that I represent and you are familiar with their teachings of course." He gestured comprehensively
toward the Interpreter's library.

The man in the wheel chair silently nodded assent.

Jake Vodell continued. "I am come to Millsburgh, as I go everywhere, in the interests of our
Cause. It is my experience that I can always work best through the unions."

The Interpreter interrupted. "Oh, one of our Millsburgh unions sent for you then? I did not know."

The agitator shrugged his shoulders impatiently. "No--no--I was not sent for. I was sent. I
am here because it was reported that there was a good opportunity to advance the Cause. No
union brings me. I come to the unions, to work with them for the freedom of the laboring class."

"And of what union are you a member, sir?" asked the Interpreter.

"Me! Ha! I am not a member of any of your silly American unions! I belong to that greater union,
if you please, which embraces them all. But your unions know and receive me as a leader because
of the work that I do for all. Our Cause is the cause of the working people of America, as
it is the cause of the laboring classes in England, and France, and Russia, and Germany, and
everywhere in the world."

Again the old basket maker bowed his silent assent.

"You have, in this place," continued the agitator, "one strong union of the Mill workers. In
the other shops and factories and in the trades it is like McIver's factory, the men are not
so well organized."

Again the Interpreter interrupted. "The working people of Millsburgh, generally, receive the
highest wage paid anywhere in the country, do they not?"

"Ah, but surely that is not the question, comrade. Surely you understand that all the laboring
people of America must be united in one brotherhood with all the other countries of the world,
so that they, the producers of wealth, shall be able to take possession of, and operate, the
industries of this country, and finally take this government away from the capitalist class
who are now the real owners of what you call your 'land of the free and the home of the brave.'
Bah! You fool Americans do not know the first meaning of the word freedom. You are a nation
of slaves. If you were as brave as you sing, you very soon would be your own masters."

"And your plan for Millsburgh?" asked the Interpreter, calmly.

"It is simple. But for this John Ward and his friendship with Charlie Martin that so deceives
everybody, it will be easy. The first step in my campaign here will be to call out the employees
of McIver's factory on a strike. I start with McIver's workmen because his well-known position
against the laboring class will make it easy for me to win the sympathy of the public for the
strikers."

"But," said the Interpreter, "the factory union is working under an agreement with McIver."

The self-appointed savior of the American working people shrugged his heavy shoulders disdainfully.
"That is no matter--it is always easy to find a grievance. When the factory men have walked
out, then will come the sympathetic strike of your strong Mill workers' union. All the other
labor organizations will be forced to join us, whether they wish to or not. I shall have all
Millsburgh so that not a wheel can turn anywhere. The mills--the factories--the builders--the
bakeries-- everything will be in our hands and then, my comrade, then!"

The man rose to his feet and stood looking out over the life that lay within view from the
Interpreter's balcony-porch, as if possessed with the magnitude of the power that would be
his when this American community should be given into his hand.

Silent, watchful Billy stirred uneasily.

The Interpreter, touching his companion's arm, shook his head.

Jake Vodell, deep in his ambitious dream, did not notice. "The time is coming, comrade," he
said, "and it is nearer than the fool Americans think, when the labor class will rise in their
might and take what is theirs. My campaign here in Millsburgh, you must know, is only one of
the hundreds of little fires that we are lighting all over this country. The American people,
they are asleep. They have drugged themselves with their own talk of how safe and strong and
prosperous they are. Bah! There is no people so easy to fool. They think we strike for recognition
of some union, or that it is for higher wages, or some other local grievance. Bah! We use for
an excuse anything that will give us a hold on the labor class. These silly unions, they are
nothing in themselves. But we--we can use them in the Cause. And so everywhere--North, South,
East, West--we light our little fires. And when we are ready--Boom! One big blaze will come
so quick from all points at once that it will sweep the country before the sleeping fools wake
up. And then--then, comrade, you shall see what will happen to your capitalist vultures and
your employer swine, who have so long grown fat on the strength of the working class."

A moment longer he stood as if lost in the contemplation of the glory of that day, when, in
the triumph of his leadership, the people of the nation he so despised and hated would rise
in bloody revolution against their own government and accept in its stead the dictatorship
of lawless aliens who profess allegiance to no one but their own godless selves.

Then he turned back to the Interpreter with a command, "You, comrade, shall keep me informed,
heh? From these people of our enemy class who come here to your hut, you will learn the things
I will want to know. I shall come to you from time to time, but not too often. But, you must
see that your watchdog there has better manners for me, heh?" He laughed and was gone.

At the club that evening, Jim McIver sat with a group of men discussing the industrial situation.

"They're fixing for a fight all right," said one. "What do you think, Jim?"

The factory owner answered, "They can have a fight any time they want it. Nothing but a period
of starvation will ever put the laboring class back where it belongs and the sooner we get
it over the better it will be for business conditions all around."

In the twilight dust and grime of the Flats, a woman sat on the doorstep of a wretched house.
Her rounded shoulders slouched wearily--her tired hands were folded in her lap. She stared
with dull, listless eyes at the squalid homes of her neighbors across the street.

In a room back of a pool hall of ill-repute, the man Jake Vodell sat in conference with three
others of his brotherhood. A peculiar knock sounded at the door. Vodell drew the bolt. Sam
Whaley entered. "My kids told me you wanted me," said the workman. Long into the night, on
the balcony porch of the hut on the cliff, John Ward and Captain Charlie Martin talked with
the Interpreter. As they talked, they watched the lights of the Mill, the Flats, the business
streets, and the homes.

CHAPTER IX

THE MILL

It was pay day at the Mill.

No one, unless he, at some period in his life, has been absolutely dependent upon the wages
of his daily toil, can appreciate a pay day. To experience properly the thrill of a pay day
one must have no other source of income. The pay check must be the only barrier between one
and actual hunger. Bobby and Maggie Whaley knew the full meaning of pay day. Their mother measured
life itself by that event.

Throughout the great industrial hive that morning there was an electrical thrill of anticipation.
Smiles were more frequent; jests were passed with greater zest; men moved with a freer step,
a more joyous swing. The very machinery seemed in some incomprehensible way to be animated
with the spirit of the workmen, while the droning, humming, roaring voice of the Mill was unquestionably
keyed to a happier note. In the offices among the bookkeepers, clerks, stenographers and the
department heads, the same brightening of the atmosphere was noticeable. Nor was the spirit
of the event confined to the Mill itself; throughout the entire city--in the stores and banks,
the post office, the places of amusement, in the homes on the hillside and in the Flats--pay
day at the Mill was the day of days.

It was an hour, perhaps, after the whistle had started the big plant for the afternoon.

John Ward was deep in the consideration of some business of moment with the superintendent,
George Parsons--a sturdy, square-jawed, steady-eyed, middle-aged man, who had come up from
the ranks by the sheer force of his natural ability.

      *       *       *       *       *

There is nothing at all unusual about John Ward. He is simply a good specimen of the more intelligent
class of our young American manhood, with, it might be, a more than average mind for business,
which he had inherited from his father. He is, in short, a fair type of the healthy, clean-living,
straight-thinking, broad-gauged, big-hearted young citizen such as one may find by the hundreds
of thousands in the many fields of our national activities. In our arts and industries, in
our banks and commercial houses, in our factories and newspapers, on our farms and in our professions,
in our educational institutions, among our writers and scientists, in our great transportation
organizations, and in the business of our government, our John Wards are to be found, ready
to take the places left to them by the passing of their fathers.

Since his return from the war, the young man had devoted himself with the enthusiasm of a great
purpose to a practical study of his father's big industrial plant. Adam still held the general
management, but his son knew that the time must come when the responsibility of that position
would fall to him.

With John's inherited executive ability and his comradeship, plus the driving force of his
fixed and determined purpose, it was not strange that he so quickly gained the loyal support
and cooperation of his father's long-trained assistants. His even-tempered friendliness and
ready recognition of his dependence upon his fellow workers won their love. His industry, his
clear-headed, open-minded consideration of the daily problems presented, with his quick grasp
of essential details, commanded their admiring respect. Under the circumstance of his father's
nervous trouble and the consequent enforced absence of Adam from his office for more and more
frequent periods, it was inevitable that John, by common, if silent, consent of the executive
heads, should be advanced more and more toward the general manager's desk.

The superintendent, gathering up his blue prints and memoranda, arose. "And will that be all,
sir?" he asked, with a smile.

Nearly every one smiled when he finished an interview with Adam Ward's son; probably because
John himself nearly always smiled when he ended a consultation or gave an order.

"That's all from my side, George," he said, leaning back in his chair and looking up at the
superintendent in his open, straightforward way that so surely invited confidence and trust.
"Have you anything else on your mind?"

"Nary a thing, John," returned the older man, and with a parting "so long" he started toward
the door that opened into the Mill.

With that smile of genuine affection still lingering on his face, John watched the sturdy back
of the old superintendent as if, for the moment, his thoughts had swung from George Parsons'
work to George Parsons himself.

The superintendent opened the door and was about to step out when he stopped suddenly and with
a quick, decided movement drew back into the room and closed the door again. To the young man
in the other end of the big office it looked as though the superintendent had seen something
that startled him. Another moment and George was again bending over John's desk.

"The old man is out there, John."

"What! Father! Why I had no idea that he was coming down to-day." A look of anxiety came into
the frank gray eyes. "He has not been so well lately, George. I wonder why he didn't come to
the office first as usual."

"He sometimes slips in back that way, you know," returned the superintendent.

"He really ought not to be here," said the young man. "I wish--" He hesitated.

"He's generally in a state of mind when he comes in like that," said George. "You're not needing
a goat, are you, boy?"

John smiled. "There's not a thing wrong in the plant so far as I know, George."

"I don't know of anything either," returned the other, "but we may not know all the way. There's
one thing sure, the old man ought not to be wandering through the works alone. There's some
of those rough-necks would--well it's too darned easy, sometimes, for accidents to happen,
do you see? I'll rustle out there and stick around convenient like. You'd better stay where
you are as if you didn't know he was on the job. And remember, son, if you should need a goat,
I'm qualified. If anything has happened--whether it has or he only thinks it has--just you
blame it on to old George. I'll understand."

The work was at the height of its swing when burly Max Gardner paused a second to straighten
his back and wipe the sweat from his sooty face. As he stooped again to his heavy task, he
said to his mates in a voice that rumbled up from the depths of his naked, hairy chest, "Get
a gate on y'--get a gate on y'--y' rough-necks. 'Tis th' boss that's a-lookin' 'round to see
who he'll be tyin' th' can to next."

The men laughed.

"There's one thing sure," said Bill Connley, who looked as though his body were built of rawhide
stretched over a framework of steel, "when John Ward ties the can to a man, that man knows
what 'tis for. When he give Jim Billings his time last week, he says to him, says he, 'Jim,
I'm sorry for y'. Not because I'm fir'in' y',' says he, 'but because y're such a loafer that
y're no good to yerself nor to anybody else--y're a disgrace to the Mill,' says he, 'and to
every honest working man in it.' An' Jim, he never give a word back--just hung his head an'
got out of sight like a dog with his tail between his legs after a good swift kick."

"An' th' young boss was right at that," commented sturdy Soot Walters. "Jim was a good man
when he was new on the job, but since he got the wrinkles out of his belly, he's been killin'
more time than any three men in the works."

"Pass me that pinch bar, Bill," called Dick Grant from the other side. As he reached for the
tool, his glance took in the figure that had caught the eye of big Max. "Holy Mike!" he exclaimed,
"'tis the old man himself."

Every man in the group except Max turned his face toward Adam Ward, who stood some distance
away, and a very different tone marked the voice of Bill Connley as he said, "Now what d'ye
think brings that danged old pirate here to look us over this day?"

"Who the devil cares?" growled Scot, as, with an air of sullen indifference, they turned again
to their work.

      *       *       *       *       *

No one seeing the Mill owner as he viewed his possessions that day could have believed that
this was the wretched creature that Helen had watched from the arbor. Away from the scenes
of his business life Adam Ward was like some poor, nervous, half-insane victim of the drug
habit. At the Mill, he was that same drug fiend under the influence of his "dope."

His manner was calm and steady, with no sign of nervousness or lack of control. His gray face--which,
in a way, was the face of a student--gave no hint of the thoughts and emotions that stirred
within him. As he looked about the great industrial institution to which he had given himself,
body, mind and soul, all the best years of his life, his countenance was as expressionless
as the very machines of iron and steel and wood among which he moved--a silent, lonely, brooding
spirit. No glow of worthy pride in the work of his manhood, no gleam of friendly comradeship
for his fellow workmen, no joy of his kinship with the great humanity that was here personified
shone in his eyes or animated his presence. Cold and calculating, he looked upon the human
element in the Mill exactly as he looked upon the machinery. Men cost him a certain definite
sum of dollars; they must be made to return to him a certain increase in definite dollars on
that cost. The living bodies, minds, and souls that, moving here and there in the haze of smoke
and steam and dust, vitalized the inanimate machinery and gave life and intelligent purpose
to the whole, were no more to him than one of his adding machines in the office that, mechanically
obedient to his touch, footed up long columns of dollars and cents. It is not strange that
the humanity of the Mill should respond to the spirit of its owner with the spirit of his adding
machines and give to him his totals of dollars and cents--with nothing more.

Quickly the feeling of Adam Ward's presence spread throughout the busy plant. Smiling faces
grew grim and sullen. In the place of good-natured jest and cheerful laugh there were muttered
curses and contemptuous epithets. The very atmosphere seemed charged with antagonism and rebellious
hatred.

"Wad ye look at it?" said one. "And they tell me that white-faced old devil used to work along
side of Pete and the Interpreter at that same bench where Pete's a-workin' yet."

"He did that," said another. "I was a kid in the Mill at the time; 'twas before he got hold
of his new process."

"Pete Martin is a better man than Adam Ward ever was or will be at that--process or no process,"
said a third, while every man within hearing endorsed the sentiment with a hearty word, an
oath or a pointed comment.

"But the young boss is a different sort, though," came from the first speaker.

"He is that!"

"The boy's all right."

"John's a good man."

A workman with a weak face and shifty eyes paused in passing to say, "You'll find out how different
the boy is onct he's put to the test. He's the same breed, an' it's just like Jake Vodell said
last night, there ain't one of the greedy capitalist class that wouldn't nail a laboring man
to the cross of their damnable system of slavery if they dast."

A silence fell over the group.

Then a dry voice drawled, "Jake Vodell ain't never overworked himself as anybody knows of,
has he? As for you, Sam Whaley, I'm thinkin' it would take somethin' more than a crucifyin'
to get much profit out of you, the way you mooch around."

There was a general laugh at this and Sam Whaley went on his weak way to do whatever it was
that he was supposed to be doing.

"Sam's all right, Bob," said one who had laughed. "His heart is in the right place."

"Sure he is," agreed Bob. "But I sometimes can't help thinkin', just the same, that if I was
a-ownin' and a-workin' slaves, I'd consider him a mighty poor piece of property."

When Adam Ward entered the office, some time later, he walked straight to his son's desk, without
so much as a glance or a nod of recognition toward any other soul in the big room.

"I want to talk with you, John," he said, grimly, and passed on into his private office.

The closing of the door of that sacred inner room behind John was the signal for a buzz of
excited comments.

"Lordy," gasped a stenographer to her nearest neighbor, "but I'm sorry for poor young Mr. Ward--did
you see the old man's face?"

The half-whispered remark expressed, with fair accuracy, the general sentiment of the entire force.

Adam Ward did not sit down at his desk, but going to a window he stood looking out as though
deep in thought.

"Father," said John, at last, "what is it? Has anything happened?"

Adam turned slowly, and it was evident that he was holding his self-control by a supreme effort
of will. "I have made up my mind to quit," he said. "From to-day on you will take my place
and assume my responsibilities in the Mill."

"I am glad, father," said John, simply, "You really should be free from all business cares.
As for my taking your place in the Mill," he smiled, "no one could ever do that, father."

"You have full control and absolute authority from to-day on," returned Adam. "I shall never
put my foot inside the doors of the plant or the office again."

"But, father!" cried John. "There is no need for you to--"

Adam interrupted him with an imperious gesture. "There is no use arguing about it," he said,
coldly. "But there are two or three things that I want to tell you--that I think you ought
to know. You can take them from me or not, as you please. My ideas and policies that made this
institution what it is to-day will probably be thrown aside as so much worthless junk, but
I am going to give you a word or two of warning just the same."

John knew that when his father was in this mood there was nothing to do but to keep silent.
But the expression of the old Mill owner's face filled his son's heart with pity, and the boy
could not refrain from saying, "I am sorry you feel that way about it, father, because really
you are all wrong. Can't we sit down and talk it over comfortably?"

"I prefer to stand," returned Adam. "I can say all I have to say in a few words. I am retiring
because I know, now, after"--he hesitated--"after the last two nights, that I must. I am turning
the Mill over to you because I would rather burn it to the ground than see it in the hands
of any one outside the family. I believe, too, that the only way to get the wild, idiotic ideas
of that old fool basket maker out of your head is to make you personally responsible for the
success or failure of this business. I have watched you long enough to know that you have the
ability to handle it, and I am convinced that once you realize how much money you can make,
you will drop all your sentimental nonsense and get your feet on solid ground."

John Ward's cheeks flushed, but he made no reply to his father's pointed observations.

"I had those same romantic notions about work and business myself when I was your age," continued
Adam, "but experience taught me better. Experience will teach you." He paused and went to stand
at the window again.

John waited.

Presently Adam faced about once more. "I suppose you have noticed that McIver is greatly interested
in your sister Helen?"

"I imagined so," returned John, soberly. "Well, he is. He wants to marry her. If she will only
be sensible and see it right, it is a wonderful opportunity for us. McIver made over a million
out of the war. His factory is next to this in size and importance and it is so closely related
to the Mill that a combination of the two industries, with the control of the new process,
would give you a tremendous advantage. You could practically put all competitors out of business.
McIver has approached me several times on the proposition but I have been holding off, hoping
that Helen would accept him, so that their marriage would tie the thing up that much tighter.
You and McIver, with the family relation established by Helen, would make a great team." He
hesitated and his face worked with nervous emotion as he added, "There is something about the
new process that--perhaps--you should know--I--" He stopped abruptly to pace up and down the
room in nervous excitement, as if fighting for the mastery of the emotions aroused by this
mention of his patented property.

As John Ward watched his father and felt the struggle within the man's secret self, the room
seemed suddenly filled with the invisible presence of that hidden thing. The younger man's
eyes filled with tears and he cried in protest, "Father--father--please don't--"

For a moment Adam Ward faced his son in silence. Then, with a sigh of relief, he muttered,
"It's all right, John; just one of my nervous attacks. It's gone now."

Changing the subject abruptly, he said, "I must warn you, my boy--keep away from the Interpreter.
Have nothing to do with him; he is dangerous. And watch out for Pete Martin and Charlie, too.
They are all three together. This agitator, Jake Vodell, is going to make trouble. He is already
getting a start with McIver's men. You have some radicals right here on your pay roll, but
if you stick with McIver and follow his lead you will come through easily and put these unions
where they belong. That's all, I guess," he finished, wearily. "Call in your superintendent."

"Just a moment, father," said John Ward, steadily. "It is not fair to either of us for me to
accept the management of the Mill without telling you that I can't do all that you have suggested."

Adam looked at his son sharply. "And what can't you do?" he demanded.

"I shall never work with McIver in any way," answered John slowly. "You know what I think of
him and his business principles. Helen's interest in him is her own affair, but I have too
great a sense of loyalty to my country and too much self-respect ever to think of McIver as
anything but a traitor and an enemy."

"And what else?" asked Adam.

"I will not promise to keep away from the Interpreter. I reserve the right to choose my own
friends and business associates, and I will deal with the employees of the Mill and with the
unions without regard to McIver's policies or any consideration of his interest in any way
whatever."

For a long moment Adam Ward looked at his son who stood so straight and uncompromisingly soldier-like
before him. Suddenly, to John's amazement, his father laughed. And there was not a little admiration
and pride in the old Mill owner's voice as he said, "I see! In other words, if you are going
to be the boss, you don't propose to have any strings tied to you."

"Would you, sir?" asked John.

"No, I wouldn't," returned Adam and laughed again. "Well, go ahead. Have it your own way. I
am not afraid for you in the long run. You are too much like me not to find out where your
own interests lie, once you come squarely up against the situation. I only wanted to help you,
but it looks as though you would have to go through the experience for yourself. It's all right,
son, go to it! Now call George."

When the superintendent entered the private office, Adam Ward said, briefly, "George, I am
turning the Mill over to John here. From to-day on he is the manager without any strings on
him in any way. He has the entire responsibility and is the only authority. He accounts to
no one but himself. That is all."

Abruptly Adam Ward left the private office. Without even a look toward the men in the big outer
room who had served with him for years, he passed on out to the street.

When the whistle sounded, John went out into the Mill to stand near the window where the workmen
passing in line received their envelopes.

From every part of the great main building, from the yards and the several outer sheds and
structures they came. From furnace and engine and bench and machine they made their way toward
that given point as scattered particles of steel filings are drawn toward a magnet. The converging
paths of individuals touched, and two walked side by side. Other individuals joined the two
and as quickly trios and quartets came together to form groups that united with other similar
groups; while from the mass thus assembled, the thin line was formed that extended past the
pay clerk's window and linked the Mill to the outer world.

In that eager throng of toilers Adam Ward's son saw men of almost every race: Scotchmen greeted
Norwegians; men from Ireland exchanged friendly jests with men from Italy; sons of England
laughed with the sons of France; Danes touched elbows with Dutchmen; and men from Poland stood
shoulder to shoulder with men whose fathers fought with Washington. And every man was marked
alike with the emblems of a common brotherhood--the brotherhood of work. Their faces were colored
with the good color of their toil--with the smoke of their furnaces, and the grime of their
engines, and the oil from their machines mixed with the sweat of their own bodies. Their clothing
was uniform with the insignia of their united endeavor. And to the newly appointed manager
of the Mill, these men of every nation were comrades in a common cause, spending the strength
of their manhood for common human needs. He saw that only in the work of the world could the
brotherhood of man be realized; only in the Mill of life's essential industries could the nations
of the earth become as one.

In that gathering of workmen the son of Adam Ward saw men of many religions, sects and creeds:
Christians and pagans; Catholics and Protestants; men who worshiped the God of Abraham and
men who worshiped no God; followers of strange fanatical spiritualism and followers of a stranger
materialism. And he saw those many shades of human beliefs blended and harmonized--brought
into one comprehensive whole by the power of the common necessities of human life.

He saw that the unity of the warring religions of the world would not be accomplished in seminaries
of speculative theological thought, but that in the Mill of life the spiritual brotherhood
of all mankind would be realized. In work, he saw the true worship of a common God whose vice-regent
on earth is humanity itself.

In that pay-day assembly John saw men of middle age to whom the work into which they daily
put the strength of their lives meant nothing less than the lives of their families. In the
families dependent upon the Mill he saw the life of the nation dependent upon the nation's
industries. As he saw in the line men old and gray and bent with the toil of many years, he
realized how the generation of this day is indebted for every blessing of life--for life itself,
indeed--to these veterans of the Mill who have given, their years in work that the nation might,
through its industries, live and, in the building up of its industries, grow strong.

As he watched the men of his own age, he thought how they, too, must receive the torch from
the failing hands of their passing fathers, and in the Mill prove their manhood's right to
carry the fire of their country's industrial need.

And there were boys on the edge of manhood, who must be, by the Mill, trained in work for the
coming needs of their country; who must indeed find their very manhood itself in work, or through
all their years remain wards of the people--a burden upon humanity--the weakness of the nation.
For as surely as work is health and strength and honor and happiness and life, so surely is
idleness disease and weakness and shame and misery and death.

The home builder, the waster, the gambler, the loyal citizen, the slacker, the honest and dishonest--they
were all there at the pay window of the Mill. And to each the pay envelope meant a different
thing. To big Max the envelope meant an education for his son. To Bill Connley it meant food
and clothing for his brood of children. To young Scot it meant books for his study. To others
it meant medicine or doctors for sick ones at home. To others it meant dissipation and dishonor.
To all alike those pay envelopes meant Life.

As these men of the Mill passed the son of Adam Ward, there were many smiling nods and hearty
words of greeting. Now and then one would speak a few words about his work. Others passed a
laughing jest. Many who were his comrades in France gave him the salute of their military days--half
in fun, but with a hint of underlying seriousness that made the act a recognition of his rank
in the industrial army.

And John returned these greetings in the same good spirit of fellowship. To one it was, "Hello,
Tony, how is that new baby at your house?" To another, whose hand was swathed in a dirty bandage,
"Take care of that hand, Mack; don't get funny with it just because it's well enough to use
again." To another, "How is the wife, Frank, better? Good, that's fine." Again it was, "You
fellows on number six machine made a record this week." Again, "Who's the hoodoo on number
seven furnace?--four accidents in six days is going some--better look around for your Jonah."
And again, "I heard about that stunt of yours, Bill; the kid would have been killed sure if
you hadn't kept your head and nerve. It was great work, old man." And to a lad farther down
the line, "You'll know better next time, won't you, son?" But there were some who passed John
Ward with averted faces or downcast eyes. Here and there there were sneering, vicious glances
and low muttered oaths and curses and threats. Not infrequently the name of Jake Vodell was
mentioned with approved quotations from the agitator's speeches of hatred against the employer
class.

The last of the long line of workmen was approaching the window when Pete Martin greeted the
son of his old bench mate with a smile of fatherly affection and pride.

"Hello, Uncle Pete," returned John. "Where is Charlie?"

"I'm sure I don't know, John," the old man answered, looking about. "I supposed he had gone
on, I was a little slow myself."

"There he is," said John, as the soldier workman came running from a distant part of the building.

When Captain Charlie came up to them, his father moved on to the window so that for a moment
the two friends were alone.

"It's come, Charlie," said John, in a low tone. "Father told me and gave it out to the superintendent
to-day."

"Hurrah!" said Charlie Martin, and he would have said more but his comrade interrupted him.

"Shut up, will you? We must go out to the hill to-morrow for a talk. I'll come for you early."

"Right!" said Charlie with a grin, "but may I be permitted to say congratulations?"

"Congratulations your foot!" returned the new general manager. "It's going to be one whale
of a job, old man."

The last of the stragglers came near and Charlie Martin moved on, in his turn, to the pay window.

When John arrived home in the late afternoon, his sister met him with many joyful exclamations.
"Is father in earnest? Are you really to take his place, John?"

John laughed. "You would have thought he was in earnest if you had heard him." Then he asked,
soberly, "Where is father, Helen; is he all right?"

"He has been shut up in his room all alone ever since he told us," she returned, sadly. "I
do hope he will be better now that he is to have complete rest."

As if determined to permit no cloud to mar the joy of the occasion, she continued, with eager
interest, "Do tell me about it, brother. Were the men in the office glad? Aren't you happy
and proud? And how did the workmen take it?"

"The people in the office were very nice," he answered, smiling back at her. "Good old George
looked a little like he wanted to laugh and cry at the same time. The men in the plant don't
know yet, except Charlie--I told him."

A little shadow fell over Helen's happy face and she looked away. "I suppose of course you
would tell Charlie Martin the first thing," she said, slowly. Then, throwing her arm suddenly
about his neck, she kissed him. "You are a dear, silly, sentimental old thing, but I am as
proud as I can be of you."

"As for that," returned John, "I guess it must run in the family somehow. I notice little things
now and then that make me think my sister may not always be exactly a staid, matter-of-fact
old lady owl."

When he had laughed at her blushes, and had teased her as a brother is in duty bound, he said,
seriously, "Will you tell me something, Helen? Something that I want very much to know--straight
from you."

"What is it, John?"

"Are you going to marry Jim McIver?"

"How do you know that he wants me?"

"Father told me to-day. Don't fence please, dear. Either tell me straight out or tell me to
mind my own business."

She replied with straightforward honesty, "Mr. McIver has asked me, John, but I can't tell
you what my answer will be. I don't know myself."

CHAPTER X

CONCERNING THE NEW MANAGER

When the Mill whistle sounded at the close of that pay day, Mary was sitting under the tree
in the yard with her sewing basket--a gift from the Interpreter--on the grass beside her chair.
The sunlight lay warm and bright on the garden where the ever industrious bees were filling
their golden bags with the sweet wealth of the old-fashioned flowers. Bright-winged butterflies
zigzagged here and there above the shrubbery along the fence and over her head; in the leafy
shadows of the trees her bird friends were cheerfully busy with their small duties. Now and
then a passing neighbor paused to exchange a word or two of their common interests. Presently
workmen from the Mill went by--men of her father's class who lived in that vicinity of well-kept
cottage homes; and each one called a greeting to the daughter of his friend.

And so, at last, Peter Martin himself and Captain Charlie turned in at the little white gate
and came to sit down on the grass at her feet.

"You are late to-day," said Mary, smiling. "I suppose you both have forgotten that the vegetable
garden is to be hoed this afternoon and that you, Charlie, promised to beat the rugs for me."

Captain Charlie stretched himself lazily on the cool grass. "We should worry about gardens
and rugs and things," he returned. "This is the day we celebrate."

The father laughed quietly at his daughter's look of puzzled inquiry.

"The day you celebrate?" said Mary. "Celebrate what?"

Charlie answered with a fair imitation of a soapbox orator, "This, my beloved sister, is the
day of our emancipation from the iron rule of that cruel capitalist, who has for so many years
crushed the lives of his toiling slaves in his Mill of hell, and coined our heart's blood into
dollars to fill his selfish coffers of princely luxury. Down through the ringing ages of the
future this day will be forever celebrated as the day that signals the dawning of a new era
in the industrial world of--uh-wow! Stop it!"

Captain Charlie was ticklish and the toe of Mary's slippered foot had found a vital spot among
his ribs.

"You sound like that Jake Vodell," she said. "Stop your nonsense this minute and tell me what
you mean or--" Her foot advanced again threateningly.

Captain Charlie rolled over to a safe distance and sat up to grin at her with teasing impudence.

"What's the matter with him, father?" she demanded.

But Pete only laughed and answered, "I guess maybe he thinks he's going to get promoted to
some higher-up position in the Mill."

"No such luck for me!" said Charlie quickly. "John will need me too much right where I am."

A bright color swept into Mary's cheeks and her eyes shone with glad excitement. "Do you mean
that John--that his father has--" She looked from her father's face to her brother and back
to her father again.

Pete nodded silently.

"You've guessed it, sister," said Charlie. "Old Adam walked out for good to-day, turned the
whole works over to John--troubles, triumphs, opportunities, disasters and all. And it's a
man's sized job the boy has drawn, believe me--especially right now, with Jake Vodell as busy
as he is."

"The men in the Mill were all pleased with the change, weren't they?" asked Mary.

"They will be, when they hear of it," answered Captain Charlie, getting to his feet. "That
is," he added, as he met his father's look, "most of them will be."

"There's some in the Mill that it won't make any difference to, I'm afraid," said Peter Martin,
soberly.

Then the two men went into the house to, as they said, "clean up"--an operation that required
a goodly supply of water with plenty of soap and a no little physical effort in the way of
vigorous rubbing.

When her father and brother were gone, Mary Martin sat very still. So still was she that a
butterfly paused in its zigzag flight about the yard to rest on the edge of the work basket
at her side. At last the young woman rose slowly to her feet, dropping the sewing she had held
on the other things in the basket. The startled butterfly spread its gorgeous wings and zigzagged
away unnoticed. Crossing the little lawn, Mary made her way among the flowers in the garden
until she stood half hidden in the tall bushes which grew along the fence that separated the
Martin home from the neglected grounds about the old house. When her father and brother went
to their pleasant task in the vegetable garden she was still standing there, but the men did
not notice.

      *       *       *       *       *

Later, when Mary called the men to supper, the change in the management of the Mill was again
mentioned. And all during the evening meal it was the topic of their conversation. It was natural
that the older man should recall the days when he and Adam and the Interpreter had worked together.

"The men generally showed a different spirit toward their work in those days," said the veteran.
"They seemed to have a feeling of pride and a love for it that I don't see much of now. Of
late years, it looks as though everybody hates his job and is ashamed of what he is doing.
They all seem to think of nothing but their pay, and busy their minds with scheming how they
can get the most and give the least. It's the regular thing to work with one eye on the foreman
and the other on the clock, and to count it a great joke when a job is spoiled or a breakdown
causes trouble." All of which was a speech of unusual length for Pete Martin. Captain Charlie
asked, thoughtfully, "And don't you think, father, that Adam looks on the work of the Mill
in exactly that spirit of 'get the most for the least' without regard to the meaning and purpose
of the work itself?"

"There's no reason to doubt it, son, that I can see," returned the old workman.

"I have often wondered," said Charlie, "how much the attitude of the employees toward their
work is due to the attitude of their employers toward that same work."

The old workman returned, heartily, "We'll be seeing a different feeling in the Mill under
John, I am thinkin'--he's different."

"I should say he is different," agreed Charlie, quickly. "John would rather work at his job
for nothing than do anything else for ten times the salary he draws. But was Adam always as
he is now?"

"About his work do you mean?"

"Yes."

Adam Ward's old comrade answered, slowly, "I've often wondered that myself. I can't say for
sure. As I look back now, I think sometimes that he used to have an interest in the work itself
at first. Takin' his development of the new process and all--it almost seems that he must have
had. And yet, there's some things that make me think that all the time it meant nothing to
him but just what he could get out of it for himself."

"Helen will be happy over the change, won't she?" remarked Mary.

"Helen!" ejaculated Captain Charlie, with more emphasis perhaps than the occasion demanded.

"She won't give it so much as a thought. Why should she? She can go on with her dinners and
card parties and balls and country club affairs with the silk-hatted slackers of her set, just
the same as if nothing had happened."

Mary laughed. "Seems to me I have heard something like that before--'silk-hatted slackers'--it
sounds familiar."

Captain Charlie watched her suspiciously.

The father laughed quietly.

"Oh, yes," she exclaimed, with an air of triumph. "It was Bobby Whaley who said it. I remember
thinking at the time that it probably came to him from his father, who of course got it from
Jake Vodell. Silk-hatted slackers--sounds like Jake, doesn't it, father?"

Captain Charlie grinned sheepishly. "I know it was a rotten thing to say," he admitted. "Some
of the best and bravest men in our army were silk-hatters at home. They were in the ranks,
too, a lot of them--just like John Ward. And some of the worst cowards and shirkers and slackers
that ever lived belonged to our ancient and noble order of the horny-handed sons of toil, that
Jake Vodell orates about. But what gets me, is the way some of those fellows who were everything
but slackers in France act, now that they are back home. Over there they were on the job with
everything they had, to the last drop of their blood. But now that they are back in their own
home country again, they have simply thrown up their hands and quit--that is, a lot of them
have. They seem to think that the signing of the Armistice ended it all and that they can do
nothing now for the rest of their lives. Who was it said, 'Peace hath her victories,' or something
like that? Well, peace hath her defeats, too. I'll be hanged if I can understand how a man
who has it in him to be a one hundred per cent American hero in war can be a Simon-pure slacker
in times of peace."

As he finished, Captain Charlie pushed his chair back from the table and, finding his pipe,
proceeded to fill it with the grim determination of an old-time minuteman ramming home a charge
in his Bunker Hill musket.

Later the two men went out to enjoy their pipes on the lawn in the cool of the evening. They
were discussing the industrial situation when Mary, having finished her household work for
the night, joined them.

"I forgot to tell you," she said, "that Jake Vodell called to-day."

"Again!" exclaimed Charlie.

"If Vodell wants to talk with us he'll have to come when we are at home," said Pete Martin,
slowly, looking at his daughter.

With a laugh, the young woman returned, "But I don't think that it was you or Charlie that
he wanted to see this time, father."

"What did he want?" demanded her brother quickly.

"He wanted me to go with him to a dance next Tuesday," she answered demurely.

"Huh," came in a tone of disgust from Charlie.

The father asked, quietly, "And what did you say to him, Mary?"

"I told him that I went to dances only with my friends."

"Good!" said Captain Charlie.

"And what then?" asked Pete.

"Then," she hesitated, "then he said something about my being careful that I had the right
sort of friends and referred to Charlie and John."

"Yes?" said Mary's father.

"He said that the only use John Ward had for Charlie was to get a line on the union and the
plans of the men--that his friendship was only a pretext in order that he might use Charlie
as a sort of spy and that the union men wouldn't stand for it."

Captain Charlie muttered something under his breath that he could not speak aloud in the presence
of his sister.

Pete Martin deliberately knocked the ashes from his pipe.

"Then," continued Mary, "he talked about how everybody knew that John was nothing but a"--she
laughed mockingly at her brother--"a silk-hatted swell who couldn't hold his job an hour if
it wasn't that his father owned the Mill, and that Charlie was a hundred times more competent
to manage the business. He said that anybody could see how Charlie's promotion in the army
proved him superior to John, who was never anything but a common private."

Captain Charlie laughed aloud. "John and I understand all about that superiority business.
I was lucky, that's all--our captain just happened to be looking in my direction. Believe me,
good old John was just as busy as I ever dared to be, only it was his luck to be busy at some
other point that the captain didn't see."

"Is that all Jake had to say, daughter?"

"No," answered the young woman, slowly. "I--I am afraid I was angry at what he called John--I
mean at what he said about Charlie and John's friendship--and so I told him what I thought
about him and Sam Whaley and their crowd, and asked him to go and not come back again except
to see you or Charlie."

"Good for you, Mary!" exclaimed her brother.

But the old workman said nothing.

"And how did Jake take his dismissal?" asked Charlie, presently.

"He went, of course," she answered. "But he said that he would show me what the friendship
of a man of John Ward's class meant to a working man; that the union men would find out who
the loyal members were and when the time came they would know whom to reward and whom to treat
as traitors to the Cause."

For a little while after this the three sat in silence. At last Peter Martin rose heavily to
his feet. "Come, Charlie, it is time we were on our way to the meeting; we mustn't be late,
you know."

When her father and brother were gone to the meeting of the Mill workers' union, Mary Martin
locked the door of the cottage and walked swiftly away.

It was not far to the Interpreter's hut, and presently the young woman was climbing the old
zigzag stairway to the little house on the edge of the cliff above. There was no light but
the light of the stars--the faint breath of the night breeze scarcely stirred the leaves of
the bushes or moved the tall weeds that grew on the hillside. At the top of the stairs Mary
paused to look at the many lights of the Flats, the Mill, the business houses, the streets
and the homes, that shone in the shadowy world below.

She was about to move toward the door of the hut when the sound of voices coming from the balcony-porch
halted her. The Interpreter was speaking. She could not distinguish his words, but the deep
tones of the old basket maker's voice were not to be mistaken. Then the young woman heard some
one reply, and the laughing voice that answered the Interpreter was as familiar to Mary Martin
as the laugh of her own brother. The evening visitor to the little hut on the cliff was the
son of Adam Ward.

Very softly Mary Martin stole back down the zigzag steps to the road below. Slowly she went
back through the deep shadows of the night to her little home, with its garden of old-fashioned
flowers, next door to the deserted house where John Ward was born.

Late that night, while John was still at the Interpreter's hut, Adam Ward crept alone like
some hunted thing about the beautiful grounds of his great estate. Like a haunted soul of wretchedness,
the Mill owner had left his bed to escape the horror of his dreams and to find, if possible,
a little rest from his torturing fears in the calm solitude of the night.

      *       *       *       *       *

When Pete Martin, with Captain Charlie and their many industrial comrades, had returned to
their homes after the meeting of their union, five men gathered in that dirty, poorly lighted
room in the rear of Dago Bill's pool hall.

The five men had entered the place one at a time. They spoke together in low, guarded tones
of John Ward and his management of the Mill, of Pete Martin and Captain Charlie, of the Interpreter
and McIver.

And three of those five men had come to that secret place at Jake Vodell's call, directly from
the meeting of the Mill workers' union.

CHAPTER XI

COMRADES

Mary was in the flower garden that Sunday forenoon when John Ward stopped his big roadster
in front of the Martin cottage.

It was not at all unusual for the one-time private, John, to call that way for his former superior
officer. Nearly every Sunday when the weather was fine the comrades would go for a long ride
in John's car somewhere into the country. And always they carried a lunch prepared by Captain
Charlie's sister.

Sometimes there might have been a touch of envy in Mary's generous heart, as she watched the
automobile with her brother and his friend glide away up the green arched street. After all,
Mary was young and loved the country, and John Ward's roadster was a wonderful machine, and
the boy who had lived in the old house next door had been, in her girlhood days, a most delightful
comrade and playfellow.

The young woman could no more remember her first meeting with John or his sister Helen than
she could recall the exact beginning of her acquaintance with Charlie. From her cradle days
she had known the neighbor children as well as she had known her own brother. Then the inevitable
separation of the playmates had come with Adam Ward's increasing material prosperity. The school
and college days of John and Helen and the removal of the family from the old house to the
new home on the hill had brought to them new friends and new interests--friends and interests
that knew nothing of Pete Martin's son and daughter. But in Mary's heart, because it was a
woman's heart, the memories of the old house lived. The old house itself, indeed, served to
keep those memories alive.

John did not see her at first, but called a cheery greeting to her father, who with his pipe
and paper was sitting under the tree on the lawn side of the walk.

Mary drew a little back among the flowers and quietly went on with her work.

"Is Charlie here, Uncle Pete?" asked John, as he came through the gate.

"He's in the house, I think, John, or out in the back yard, maybe," answered the old workman.
And, then, in his quiet kindly way, Peter Martin spoke a few words to Adam Ward's son about
the change in the management of the Mill--wishing John success, expressing his own gratification
and confidence, and assuring him of the hearty good will that prevailed, generally, among the
employees.

Presently, as the two men talked together, Mary went to express her pleasure in the promotion
of her old playmate to a position of such responsibility and honor in the industrial world.
And John Ward, when he saw her coming toward him with an armful of flowers, must at least have
noticed the charming picture she made against that background of the garden, with its bright-colored
blossoms in the flood of morning sunlight.

Certainly the days of their childhood companionship must have stirred in his memory, for he
said, presently, "Do you know, Mary, you make me think of mother and the way she used to go
among her flowers every Sunday morning when we lived in the old house there." He looked thoughtfully
toward the neighboring place.

"How is your mother these days, John?" asked Mary's father.

"She is well, thank you, Uncle Pete," returned John. "Except of course," he added, soberly,
"she worries a good deal about father's ill health."

"Your father will surely be much better, now that he is relieved from all his business care,"
said Mary.

"We are all hoping so," returned John.

There was an awkward moment of silence.

As if the mention of his father's condition had in some way suggested the thought, or, perhaps,
because he wished to change the subject, John said, "The old house looks pretty bad, doesn't
it? It is a shame that we have permitted it to go to ruin that way."

Neither Peter Martin nor his daughter made reply to this. There was really nothing they could say.

John was about to speak again when Captain Charlie, coming from the house with their lunch
basket in his hand, announced that he was ready, and the two men started on their way.

Standing at the gate, Mary waved good-by as her brother turned to look back. Even when the
automobile had finally passed from sight she stood there, still looking in the direction it
had gone.

Peter Martin watched his daughter thoughtfully.

Without speaking, Mary went slowly into the house.

Her father sat for some minutes looking toward the door through which she had passed. At last
with deliberate care he refilled his pipe. But the old workman did not, for an hour or more,
resume the reading of his Sunday morning paper.

Beyond a few casual words, the two friends in the automobile seemed occupied, each with his
own thoughts. Neither asked, "Where shall we go?" or offered any suggestion for the day's outing.
As if it were understood between them, John turned toward the hill country and sent the powerful
machine up the long, winding grade, as if on a very definite mission. An hour's driving along
the ridges and the hillsides, and they turned from the main thoroughfare into a narrow lane
between two thinly wooded pastures. A mile of this seldom traveled road and John stopped his
car beside the way. Here they left the automobile, and, taking the lunch basket, climbed the
fence and made their way up the steep side of the hill to a clump of trees that overlooked
the many miles of winding river and broad valley and shaded hills. The place was a favorite
spot to which they often came for those hours of comradeship that are so necessary to all well-grounded
and enduring friendships.

"Well, Mister Ward," said Captain Charlie, when they were comfortably seated and their pipes
were going well, "how does it feel to be one of the cruel capitalist class a-grindin' the faces
off us poor?"

The workman spoke lightly, but there was something in his voice that made John look at him
sharply. It was a little as though Captain Charlie were nerving himself to say good-by to his
old comrade.

The new general manager smiled, but it was a rather serious smile. "Do you remember how you
felt when you received your captain's commission?" he asked.

"I do that," returned Charlie. "I felt that I had been handed a mighty big job and was scared
stiff for fear I wouldn't be able to make good at it."

"Exactly," returned John. "And I'll never forget how I felt when they stepped you up the first
time and left me out. And when you had climbed on up and Captain Wheeler was killed and you
received your commission, with me still stuck in the ranks--well--I never told you before but
I'll say now that I was the lonesomest, grouchiest, sorest man in the whole A.E.F. It seemed
to me about then that being a private was the meanest, lowest, most no-account job on earth,
and I was darned near deserting and letting the Germans win the war and be hanged. I thought
it would serve the Allies right if I was to let 'em get licked good and plenty just for failing
to appreciate me."

Captain Charlie laughed.

"Oh, yes, you can laugh," said the new general manager of the Mill. "It's darned funny now,
but I can tell you that there wasn't much humor in it for me then. We had lived too close together
from that first moment when we found ourselves in the same company for me to feel comfortable
as a common buck private, watchin' you strut around in the gentleman officer class, and not
daring even to tell you to go to--"

"You poor old fool," said Charlie, affectionately. "You knew my promotion was all an accident."

"Exactly," returned John dryly. "We've settled all that a hundred times."

"And you ought to have known," continued Captain Charlie, warmly, "that my feeling toward you
would have been no different if they had made me a general."

"Sure, I ought to have known," retorted John, with an air of triumph.

And then it appeared that John Ward had a very definite purpose in thus turning his comrade's
mind to their army life in France. "And you should have sense enough to understand that my
promotion in the Mill is not going to make any difference in our friendship. Your promotion
was the result of an accident, Charlie, exactly as my position in the Mill to-day is the result
of an accident. Your superior officer happened to see you. I happen to be the son of Adam Ward.
If I should have known then that your rank would make no difference in your feeling toward
me, you have got to understand now that my position can make no difference in my feeling toward
you."

Charlie Martin's silence revealed how accurately John had guessed his Mill comrade's hidden
thoughts.

The new manager continued, "The thing that straightened me out on the question of our different
ranks was that scrap where Captain Charlie and Private John found themselves caught in the
same shell hole with no one else anywhere near except friend enemy, and somebody had to do
something darned quick. Do you remember our argument?"

"Do I remember!" exclaimed Charlie. "I remember how you said it was your job to take the chance
because I, being an officer, was worth more to the cause and because the loss of a private
didn't matter so much anyhow."

John retorted quickly, "And you said that it was up to you to take the chance because it was
an officer's duty to take care of his men."

"And then," said Charlie, "you told me to go to hell, commission and all. And I swore that
I'd break you for insolence and insubordination if we ever got out of the scrape alive."

"And so," grinned John, "we compromised by pulling it off together. And from that time on I
felt different and was as proud of you and your officer's swank as if I had been the lucky
guy myself."

"Yes," said Captain Charlie, smiling affectionately, "and I could see the grin in your eyes
every time you saluted."

"No one else ever saw it, though," returned Private Ward, proudly.

"Don't think for a minute that I overlooked that either," said Captain Martin. "If any one
else had seen it, I would have disciplined you for sure."

"And don't you think for a minute that I didn't know that, too," retorted John. "I could feel
you laying for me, and every man in the company knew it just as be knew our friendship. That's
what made us all love you so. We used to say that if Captain Charlie would just take a notion
to start for Berlin and invite us to go along the war would be over right there."

Charlie Martin laughed appreciatively. Then he said, earnestly, "After all, old man, it wasn't
an officers' war and it wasn't a privates' war, was it? Any more than it was the war of America,
or England, or France, or Australia, or Canada--it was our war. And that, I guess, is the main
reason why it all came out as it did."

"Now," said John, with hearty enthusiasm, "you are talking sense."

"But it is all very different now, John," said Charlie, slowly. "Millsburgh is not France and
the Mill is not the United States Army."

"No," returned John, "and yet there is not such a lot of difference, when you come to think
it out."

"We can't disguise the facts," said Captain Martin stubbornly.

"We are not going to disguise anything," retorted John. "I had an idea how you would feel over
my promotion, and that is why I wanted you out here to-day. You've got to get this 'it's all
very different now' stuff out of your system. So go ahead and shoot your facts."

"All right," said Charlie. "Let's look at things as they are. It was all very well for us to
moon over what we would do if we ever got back home when we knew darned well our chances were
a hundred to one against our ever seeing the old U.S. again. We spilled a lot of sentiment
about comradeship and loyalty and citizenship and equality and all that, but--"

"Can your chatter!" snapped John. "Drag out these facts that you are so anxious to have recognized.
Let's have a good look at whatever it is that makes you rough-neck sons of toil so superior
to us lily-fingered employers. Go to the bat."

"Well," offered Charlie, reluctantly, "to begin with, you are a millionaire, a university man,
member of select clubs; I am nothing but a common workman."

John returned, quickly, "We are both citizens of the United States. In the duties and privileges
of our citizenship we stand on exactly the same footing, just as in the army we stood on the
common ground of loyalty. And we are both equally dependent upon the industries of our country--upon
the Mill, and upon each other. Exactly as we were both dependent upon the army and upon each
other in France."

"You are the general manager of the Mill, practically the owner," said Charlie. "I am only
one of your employees."

The son of Adam Ward answered scornfully, "Yes, over there it was Captain Charlie Martin and
Private John Ward of the United States Army. I suppose it is a lot different now that it is
Captain John Ward and Private Charlie Martin of the United States Industries."

Charlie continued, "You live in a mansion in a select district on the hill, I live in a little
cottage on the edge of the Flats!"

"Over there it was officers' quarters and barracks," said John, shortly.

Charlie tried again, "You wear white collars and tailored clothes at your work--I wear dirty
overalls."

"We used to call 'em uniforms," barked John.

Captain Charlie hesitated a little before he offered his next fact, and when he spoke it was
with a little more feeling. "There are our families to take into account too, John. Your sister--well--isn't
it a fact that your sister would no more think of calling on Mary than she would think of putting
on overalls and going to work in the Mill?"

It was John's turn now to hesitate.

"Don't you see?" continued Charlie, "we belong to different worlds, I tell you, John."

Deliberately Helen's brother knocked the ashes from his pipe and refilled it with thoughtful care.

Then he said, gravely, "Helen doesn't realize, as we do, old man. How could she? The girl has
not had a chance to learn what the war taught us. She is exactly like thousands of other good
women, and men, too, for that matter. They simply don't understand. Good Lord!" he exploded,
suddenly "when I think what a worthless snob I was before I enlisted I want to kick my fool
self to death. But we are drifting away from the main thought," he finished.

"Oh, I don't know," returned the other.

"I thought we were discussing the question of rank," said John.

"Well," retorted Charlie, dryly, "isn't that exactly the whole question as your sister sees it?"

"You give me a pain!" growled John. "I'll admit that Helen, right now, attaches a great deal
of importance to some things that--well, that are not so very important after all. But she
is no worse than I was before I learned better. And you take my word she'll learn, too. Sister
visits the old Interpreter too often not to absorb a few ideas that she failed to acquire at
school. He will help her to see the light, just as he helped me. But for him, I would have
been nothing but a gentleman slacker myself--if there is any such animal. But what under heaven
has all this to do with our relation as employer and employee in the Mill? What effect would
Mary have had on you over there if she had gone to you with 'Oh, Charlie dear, you mustn't
go out in that dreadful No Man's Land to-night. It is so dirty and wet and cold. Remember that
you are an officer, Charlie dear, and let Private John go.'"

Captain Charlie laughed--this new general manager of the Mill was so like the buddie he had
loved in France. "Do you remember that night--" he began, but his comrade interrupted him rudely.

"Shut up! I've got to get this thing off my chest and you've got to hear me out. This country
of ours started out all right with the proposition that all men are created free and equal.
But ninety per cent of our troubles are caused by our crazy notions as to what that equality
really means. The rest of our grief comes from our fool claims to superiority of one sort or
another. It looks to me as though you and Helen agreed exactly on this question of rank and
I am here to tell you that you are both wrong."

Captain Charlie Martin sat up at this, but before he could speak John shot a question at him.
"Tell me, when Private Ward saluted Captain Martin as the regulations provide, was the action
held by either the officer or the private to be a recognition of the superiority of Captain
Martin or the inferiority of Private Ward--was it?"

"Not that any one could notice," answered Charlie with a grin.

"You bet your life it wasn't," said John. "Well, then," he continued, "what was it that the
salute recognized?"

"Why, it was the captain's rank."

"Exactly; and what determined that rank?"

"The number of men he commanded."

"That's it!" cried John. "The rank of the captain represented the--the"--he searched for a
word--"the oneness of all the men in his command. And so you see the thing that the individual
private really saluted as superior to himself was the oneness of all his comrades, both privates
and officers in the company."

"Sure," said Charlie, looking a little puzzled, as if he did not quite see what the manager
of the Mill was driving at. "The salute was merely a sign of the individual's surrender of
his own personal will to the authority of the rank that represented all his fellow individuals."

"Yes," said John, "and when Jack Pershing stood up there with the rest of the kings and we
paraded past, were we humiliated because we were not dressed exactly like the reviewing generals?
We were not. We stuck out our chests and pulled in our chins as if the whole show was framed
to honor us. And that is exactly what it was, Charlie, because we were all included in Pershing's
rank. The army was not honoring Pershing the man, it was honoring itself."

"Yes," said Charlie, as if he still did not quite grasp his comrade's purpose.

"Here," said John, "this is the idea. You remember how when we were kids we used to get hold
of an old magnifying glass and use it as a burning glass?"

"I remember we darned near set fire to Hank Webster's barn once," smiled Charlie.

"Well," returned John, "think of the army as a sun, and of every loyal individual soldier,
officer and private alike, as a ray of that sun and there is your true equality. Pershing's
rank was simply the burning glass that focused our two million individual rays to a point of
such equality that they could move as one. And I noticed another thing in that review, too,"
continued John, earnestly, "even if I was supposed to have my eyes front, I noticed that General
Pershing saluted the colors. And that meant simply this, that as each individual soldier honored
the whole army in his recognition of the general's rank, the army itself, through its commander,
honored the greater oneness of the nation. And so Foch's rank was a burning glass that focused
the different allied nations into a still greater oneness, and drew their strength to such
a point of equality that it lighted a fire under old Kaiser Bill."

"But what has all this to do with you and me now?" demanded Charlie. "It looks to me as though
you are the one that is getting away from the main thought."

"I am not," returned John. "It has this to do with you and me: Our little part as a nation
in that world job in France is finished all right, and the national job that we have to tackle
now, here at home, is a little different, but the principle of unity involved is exactly the
same. Our everyday work can no more be done by those who work with their hands alone than the
Germans could have been whipped by privates alone. Nor can our industries be carried on by
those who do the planning and managing alone any more than the army could have carried out
a campaign with nothing but officers."

"Oh, I see now what you are getting at," said Charlie.

"It's about time that you woke up," retorted John.

"You mean," continued Charlie, carefully, "that just as the unity of the army was in the different
ranks that focused the individual soldier rays upon one common purpose, so the true equality
of our industries is possible only through the difference in rank, such as--well, such as yours
and mine--manager and workman or employer and employee."

"Now you're getting wise," cried John. "Really at times you show signs of almost human intelligence."

Charlie returned, doubtfully, "How do you suppose Sam Whaley and a few others I could name
in our union would take to this equality stuff of yours?"

"And how do you suppose McIver and others like him would take to it?" retorted John. "All the
men in your union are not Sam Whaleys by a long shot, neither are all employers like McIver.
As I remember, you had to discipline a man now and then in Company K. And you have heard of
officers being cashiered, haven't you?"

"That's all right," returned the captain, "but how will the rank and file of our industrial
army as a whole ever get it?"

For some time John Ward did not reply to this, but sat brooding over the question, while his
former superior officer waited expectantly.

Then the manager said, earnestly, "Charlie, what was it that drew over four million American
citizens of almost every known parentage from every walk of life, and made them an army with
one purpose? And what was it that inspired one hundred million more to back them?

"I'll tell you what it was," he continued, when his companion did not answer, "it was the Big Idea.

"Oh, yes, I know there were all kinds of graft and incompetency and jealousy and mutiny and
outrages. And there were traitors and profiteers and slackers of every sort. But the Big Idea
that focused the strength of the nation as a whole, Charlie, was so much bigger than any individual
or group that it absorbed all. It took possession of us all--inspired us all--dominated and
drove us all, into every conceivable effort and sacrifice, until it made heroism a common thing.
And this Big Idea was so big that it not only absorbed disloyalty and selfishness as a great
living river takes in a few drops of poison, but it assimilated, as well, every brand of class
and caste. It made no distinction between officer and private, it ruled General Pershing and
Private Jones alike. It recognized no difference between educated and uneducated and sent university
professors and bootblacks over the top side by side. And this Big Idea that so focused the
individual rays of our nation against German imperialism was nothing more or less than the
idea of the oneness of all humanity. It may be lost in a scramble for the spoils of victory,
it is true, but it was the Big Idea that won the victory just the same."

John Ward was on his feet now, pacing back and forth. His face was flushed and eager, his eyes
were glowing, as he himself was possessed of the Big Idea which he strove to put into words.

And Captain Charlie's pipe was forgotten as he watched his friend and listened. This John Ward
was a John Ward that few people in Millsburgh knew. But Captain Charlie knew him. Captain Charlie
had seen him tested in all the ways that war tests men. In cold and hunger and the unspeakable
discomforts of mud and filth and vermin--in the waiting darkness when an impatient whisper
or a careless move to ease overstrained nerves meant a deluge of fire and death--in the wild
frenzy of actual conflict--in the madness of victory--in the delirium of defeat--in the dreary
marking time--in the tense readiness for the charge--in those many moments when death was near
enough to strip the outward husks from these two men and leave their naked souls face to face--Captain
Charlie had learned to know John Ward.

"Do you remember what the Interpreter said to us the first time we went to see him after we
got home?" demanded John.

Charlie nodded. "He said for us not to make the mistake of thinking that the war was over just
because the Armistice was signed and we were at home in Millsburgh again. I'm afraid a good
many people, though, are making just that mistake."

"I didn't understand what our old friend meant then, Charlie," continued John, "but I know
now. He meant that the same old fight between the spirit of imperialism that seeks the selfish
dominion of an individual or class and the spirit of democracy that upholds the oneness of
all for all, is still on, right here at home. The President said that the war was to make the
world safe for democracy, and there are some wild enthusiasts who say that we Americans won it."

"That 'we won the war' stuff is all bunk," interrupted Charlie, in a tone of disgust.

"'Bunk' is right," agreed John. "The old A.E.F. did have a hand, though, in putting a crimp
in the Kaiser's little plan for acquiring title to the whole human race for himself and family.
But if the American people don't wake up to the fact that the same identical principles of
human right and human liberty that sent us to France are involved in our industrial controversies
here at home, we might as well have saved ourselves the trouble of going over there at all."

"That is all true enough," agreed Captain Charlie, "but what is going to wake us up? What is
going to send us as a nation against the Kaiser Bills of capital and the Kaiser Bills of labor,
or, if you like it better, the imperialistic employers and the equally imperialistic employees?"

John Ward fairly shouted his answer, "The Big Idea, my boy--the same Big Idea that sent us
to war against imperialism over there will wake us up to drive the spirit of imperialism out
of our American industries here at home."

Charlie shook his head doubtfully. "It was different during the World War, John. Then the Big
Idea was held up before the people to the exclusion of everything else. When we think of the
speeches and parades and rallies and sermons and books and newspapers and pictures and songs
that were used in the appeal to our patriotism and our common humanity, it was no wonder that
we all felt the pull of it all. But no one now is saying anything about the Big Idea, except
for an occasional paragraph here and there. And certainly no one is making much noise about
applying it in our industries."

"Yes, I know we can't expect any such hurrah as we had when men were needed to die for the
cause in a foreign land. You go to France and get shot for humanity and you are a hero. Stay
at home and sweat for the same cause and you are a nobody. From the publicity point of view"
there seems to be a lot of difference between a starving baby in Belgium and a starving kid
in our Millsburgh Flats. But just the same it is the Big Idea that will save us from the dangers
that are threatening our industries and, through our industries, menacing the very life of
out nation."

"But how will the people get it, John?"

"I don't know how it will come; but, somehow, the appeal must be made to the loyal citizens
of this nation in behalf of the humanity that is dependent for life itself upon our industries,
exactly as the appeal was made in behalf of the humanity that looked to us for help in time
of war. We must, as a nation, learn, somehow, to feel our work as we felt our war. The same
ideals of patriotism and sacrifice and heroism that were so exalted in the war must be held
up in our everyday work. We must learn to see our individual jobs in the industrial organizations
of our country as we saw our places in the nation's army. As a people we must grasp the mighty
fact that humanity is the issue of our mills and shops and factories and mines, exactly as
it was the issue of our campaigns in France. America, Charlie, has not only to face in her
industries the same spirit of imperialism that we fought in France, but she has to contend
with the same breed of disloyal grafters, profiteers and slackers that would have betrayed
us during the war. And these traitors to our industries must be branded wherever they are found--among
the business forces or in the ranks of labor, in our schools and churches or on our farms.

"The individual's attitude toward the industries of this nation must be a test of his loyal
citizenship just as a man's attitude toward our army was a test. And Americans dare not continue
to ignore the danger that lies in the work of those emissaries who are seeking to weaken the
loyalty of our workmen and who by breeding class hatred and strife in our industries are trying
to bring about the downfall of our government and replace the stars and stripes with the flag
that is as foreign to our American independence as the flag of the German Kaiser himself."

Captain Charlie said, slowly, "That is all true, John, but at the same time you and I know
that there is no finer body of loyal citizens anywhere in the world than the great army of
our American workmen. And we know, too, that the great army of our American business men are
just as fine and true and loyal."

"Exactly," cried John, "but if these loyal American citizens who work with their hands in the
Mill and these loyal citizens who work in the office of the Mill don't hold together, in the
same spirit of comradeship that united them in the war, to defend our industries against both
the imperialism of capital and the equally dangerous imperialism of labor, we may as well run
up a new flag at Washington and be done with it."

"You are right, of course, John," said Captain Charlie, "but how?"

"You and I may not know how," retorted the other, "any more than we knew how the war was going
to be won when we enlisted. But we do know our little parts right here in Millsburgh clear
enough. As I see it, it is up to us to carry the torch of Flanders fields into the field of
our industries right here in our own home town."

He paced to and fro without speaking for a little while, the other watching him, waited.

"Of course," said John at last, "a lot of people will call us fanatics and cranks and idealists
for saying that the Big Idea, of the war must dominate us in our industrial life. And, of course,
it is going to be a darned sight harder in some ways to stand for the principles of our comradeship
here at home than it was over there. 'Don't go out into No Man's Land to-night, Captain Charlie,
it is so dirty and dark and wet and cold and dangerous; let Private John go.' But the darned
fool, Captain Charlie, went into the cold and the wet and the danger because he and Private
John were comrades in the oneness of the Big Idea."

His voice grew a little bitter as he finished. "Don't go into that awful Mill, Captain John,
it is so dirty and dangerous and you will get so tired; let Private Charlie do the work while
you stay at home and play tennis or bridge or attend to the social duties of your superior class."

With ringing earnestness Charlie Martin added, "But the darned fool fanatic and idealist Captain
John will go just the same because he and Private Charlie are comrades in the oneness of the
Big Idea of the Mill here at home."

For a few moments John stood looking into the distance as one who sees a vision, then he said,
slowly, "And the Big Idea will win again, old man, as it has always won; and the traitors and
slackers and yellow dogs will be saved with the rest, I suppose, just as they always have been
saved from themselves."

He turned to see his comrade standing at attention. Gravely Captain Charlie saluted.

      *       *       *       *       *

Perhaps Jake Vodell was right in believing that the friendship of John Ward and Charlie Martin
was dangerous to his cause in Millsburgh.

The Vodells, who with their insidious propaganda, menace America through her industrial troubles,
will be powerless, indeed, when American employers and employees can think in terms of industrial
comradeship.

CHAPTER XII

TWO SIDES OF A QUESTION

That evening the new manager of the Mill stayed for supper at the Martin cottage. It was the
first time since he had left the old house next door for his school in a distant city that
he had eaten a meal with these friends of his boyhood.

Perhaps because their minds were so filled with things they could not speak, their talk was
a little restrained. Captain Charlie attempted a jest or two; John did his best, and Mary helped
them all she could. The old workman, save for a kindly word now and then to make the son of
Adam Ward feel at home, was silent.

But when the supper was over and the twilight was come and they had carried their chairs out
on the lawn where, in their boy and girl days they had romped away so many twilight hours,
the weight of the present was lifted. While Peter Martin smoked his pipe and listened, the
three made merry over the adventures of their childhood, until the old house next door, so
deserted and forlorn, must have felt that the days so long past were come again.

It was rather late when John finally said goodnight. As he drove homeward he told himself many
times that it had been one of the happiest evenings he had ever spent. He wondered why.

The big house on the hill, as he approached the iron gates, seemed strangely grim and forbidding.
The soft darkness of the starlit night invited him to stay out of doors. Reluctantly, half
in mind to turn back, he drove slowly up the long driveway. The sight of McIver's big car waiting
decided him. He did not wish to meet the factory owner that evening. He would wait a while
before going indoors. Finding a comfortable lawn chair not far from the front of the house,
he filled his pipe.

As he sat there, many things unbidden and apparently without purpose passed in leisurely succession
through his mind. Bits of boyhood experiences, long forgotten and called up now, no doubt,
by his evening at the cottage that had once been as much his home as the old house itself.
How inseparable the four children had been! Fragments of his army life--what an awakening it
had all been for him! The coming struggle with the followers of Jake Vodell--his new responsibilities.
He had feared that his comradeship with Charlie might be weakened--well, that was settled now.
He was glad they had had their talk.

The door of the house opened and McIver came down the steps to his automobile. For a moment
Helen stood framed against the bright light of the interior, then the car rolled away. The
door was closed.

John recalled what his father had said. Would his sister finally accept McIver? For a long
time the factory owner had been pressing his suit. Would she marry him at last? A combination
of the Ward Mill and the McIver factory would be a mighty power in the manufacturing world.
He dismissed the thought. He wished that Helen were more like Mary. His sister was a wonderful
woman in his eyes--he was proud of her; but again his mind went back to the workman's home
and to his happy evening there. His own home was so different. His mother! What a splendid
old man Uncle Peter was!

John Ward's musings were suddenly disturbed by a faint sound. Turning his head, he saw the
form of a man, dark and shadowy in the faint light of the stars, moving toward the house. John
held his place silently, alert and ready. Cautiously the dark form crept forward with frequent
pauses as if to look about. Then, as the figure stood for a moment silhouetted against a lighted
window of the house, John recognized his father.

At the involuntary exclamation which escaped the younger man Adam whirled as if to run.

John spoke, quietly, "That you, father?"

The man came quickly to his son. With an odd nervous laugh, he said, "Lord, boy, but you startled
me! What are you doing out here at this time of the night?"

"Just enjoying a quiet smoke and looking at the stars," John answered, easily.

It was evident that Adam Ward was intensely excited. His voice shook with nervous agitation
and he looked over his shoulder and peered into the surrounding darkness as if dreading some
lurking danger.

"I couldn't sleep," he muttered, in a low cautious tone. "Dreams--nothing in them of course--all
foolishness--nerves are all shot to pieces."

He dropped down on the seat beside his son, then sprang to his feet again. "Did you hear that?"
he whispered, and stooping low, he tried to see into the shadows of the shrubbery behind John.

The younger man spoke soothingly. "There is nothing here, father, sit down and take it easy."

"You don't know what you're talking about," retorted Adam Ward. "I tell you they are after
me--there's no telling what they will do--poison--a gun--infernal machines through the mail--bomb.
No one has any sympathy with me, not even my family. All these years I have worked for what
I have and now nobody cares. All they want is what they can get out of me. And you--you'll
find out! I saw your car in front of Martin's again this evening. You'd better keep away from
there. Peter Martin is dangerous. He would take everything I have away from me if he could."

John tried in vain to calm his father, but in a voice harsh with passion he continued, and
as he spoke, he moved his hands and arms constantly with excited and vehement gestures.

"That process is mine, I tell you. The best lawyers I could get have fixed up the patents.
Pete Martin is an old fool. I'll see him in his grave before--" he checked himself as if fearing
his own anger would betray him. As he paced up and he muttered to himself, "I built up the
business and I can tear it down. I'll blow up the Mill. I--" his voice trailed off into hoarse
unintelligible sounds.

John Ward could not speak. He believed that his father's strange fears for the loss of his
property were due to nothing more than his nervous trouble. Peter Martin's name, which Adam
in his most excited moments nearly always mentioned in this manner, meant nothing more to John
than the old workman's well-known leadership in the Mill workers' union.

Suddenly Adam turned again to his son, and coming close asked in a whisper, "John--I--is there
really a hell, John? I mean such as the preachers used to tell about. Does a man go from this
life to the horrors of eternal punishment? Does he, son?"

"Why, father, I--" John started to reply, but Adam interrupted him with, "Never mind; you wouldn't
know any more than any one else about it. The preachers ought to know, though. Seems like there
must be some way of finding out. I dreamed--"

As if he had forgotten the presence of his son, he suddenly started away toward the house.

Not until John Ward had assured himself that his father was safely in his room and apparently
sleeping at last, did he go to his own apartment.

But the new manager of the Mill did not at once retire. He did not even turn on the lights.
For a long time he stood at the darkened window, looking out into the night. "What was it?"
he asked himself again and again. "What was it his father feared?"

In the distance he could see a tiny spot of light shining high against the shadowy hillside
above the darkness of the Flats. It was a lighted window in the Interpreter's hut.

      *       *       *       *       *

As they sat in the night on the balcony porch, Jake Vodell said harshly to the old basket maker,
"You shall tell me about this Adam Ward, comrade. I hear many things. From what you say of
your friendship with him in the years when he was a workman in the Mill and from your friendship
with his son and daughter you must know better than any one else. Is it true that it was his
new patented process that made him so rich?"

"The new process was undoubtedly the foundation of his success," answered the Interpreter,
"but it was the man's peculiar genius that enabled him to recognize the real value of the process
and to foresee how it would revolutionize the industry. And it was his ability as an organizer
and manager, together with his capacity for hard work, that enabled him to realize his vision.
It is easily probable that not one of his fellow workmen could have developed and made use
of the discovery as he has."

Jake Vodell's black brows were raised with quickened interest. "This new process was a discovery
then? It was not the result of research and experiment?"

The Interpreter seemed to answer reluctantly. "It was an accidental discovery, as many such
things are."

The agitator must have noticed that the old basket maker did not wish to talk of Adam Ward's
patented process, but he continued his questions.

"Peter Martin was working in the Mill at the time of this wonderful discovery, was he?"

"Yes."

"Oh! and Peter and Adam were friends, too?"

"Yes."

The Interpreter's guest shrugged his shoulders and scowled his righteous indignation. "And
all these years that Adam Ward has been building up this Mill that grinds the bodies and souls
of his fellow men into riches for himself and makes from the life blood of his employees the
dollars that his son and daughter spend in wicked luxury--all these years his old friend Peter
Martin has toiled for him exactly as the rest of his slaves have toiled. Bah! And still the
priests and preachers make the people believe there is a God of Justice."

The Interpreter replied, slowly, "It may be after all, sir, that Peter Martin is richer than
Adam Ward."

"How richer?" demanded the other. "When he lives in a poor little house, with no servants,
no automobiles, no luxuries of any kind, and must work every day in the Mill with his son,
while his daughter Mary slaves at the housekeeping for her father and brother! Look at Adam
Ward and his great castle of a home--look at his possessions--at the fortune he will leave
his children. Bah! Mr. Interpreter, do not talk to me such foolishness."

"Is it foolishness to count happiness as wealth?" asked the Interpreter.

"Happiness?" growled the other. "Is there such a thing? What does the laboring man know of
happiness?"

And the Interpreter answered, "Peter Martin, in the honorable peace and contentment of his
useful years, and in the love of his family and friends, is the happiest man I have ever known.
While Adam Ward--"

Jake Vodell sprang to his feet as if the Interpreter's words exhausted his patience, while
he spoke as one moved by a spirit of contemptuous intolerance. "You talk like a sentimental
old woman. How is it possible that there should be happiness and contentment anywhere when
all is injustice and slavery under this abominable capitalist system? First we shall have liberty--freedom--equality--then
perhaps we may begin to talk of happiness. Is Sam Whaley and his friends who live down there
in their miserable hovels--is Sam Whaley happy?"

"Sam Whaley has had exactly the same opportunity for happiness that Peter Martin has had,"
answered the Interpreter. "Opportunity, yes," snarled the other. "Opportunity to cringe and
whine and beg his master for a chance to live like a dog in a kennel, while he slaves to make
his owners rich. Do you know what this man McIver says? I will tell you, Mr. Interpreter--you
who prattle about a working man's happiness. McIver says that the laboring classes should be
driven to their work with bayonets--that if his factory employees strike they will be forced
to submission by the starvation of their women and children. Happiness! You shall see what
we will do to this man McIver before we talk of happiness. And you shall see what will happen
to this castle of Adam Ward's and to this Mill that he says is his."

"I think I should tell you, sir," said the Interpreter, calmly, "that in your Millsburgh campaign,
at least, you are already defeated."

"Defeated! Hah! That is good! And who do you say has defeated me, before I have commenced even
to fight, heh?"

"You are defeated by Adam Ward's retirement from business," came the strange reply.

CHAPTER XIII

THE AWAKENING

Immediately following that day when she had watched her father from the arbor and had talked
with Bobby and Maggie Whaley on the old road, Helen Ward had thrown herself into the social
activities of her circle as if determined to find, in those interests, a cure for her discontent
and unhappiness.

Several times she called for a few minutes at the little hut on the cliff. But she did not
again talk of herself or of her father to the old basket maker as she had talked that day when
she first met the children from the Flats. Two or three times she saw the children. But she
passed them quickly by with scarcely a nod of greeting. And yet, the daughter of Adam Ward
felt with increasing certainty that she could never be content with the busy nothingness which
absorbed the lives of so many of her friends. Her father, since his retirement, seemed a little
better. But she could not put out of her mind the memory of what she had seen. For her, the
dreadful presence of the hidden thing always attended him. Because she could not banish the
feeling and because there was nothing she could do, she sought relief by escaping from the
house as often as possible on the plea of social duties.

There were times when the young woman thought that her mother knew. At times she fancied that
her brother half guessed the secret that so overshadowed their home. But Mrs. Ward and her
children alike shrank from anything approaching frankness in mentioning the Mill owner's condition.
And so they went on, feeling the hidden thing, dreading they knew not what--deceiving themselves
and each other with hopes that in their hearts they knew were false.

The mother, brave, loyal soul, seeing her daughter's unhappiness and wishing to protect her
from the thing that had so saddened her own life, encouraged Helen to find what relief she
could in the pleasures that kept her so many hours from home. John, occupied by the exacting
duties of his new position, needed apparently nothing more. Indeed, to Helen, her brother's
attitude toward his work, his views of life and his increasing neglect of what she called the
obligations of their position in Millsburgh, were more and more puzzling. She had thought that
with John's advancement to the general managership of the Mill his peculiar ideas would be
modified. But his promotion seemed to have made no sign of a change in his conception of the
relationship between employer and employee, or in his attitude toward the unions or toward
the industrial situation as a whole.

Of one thing Helen was certain--her brother had found that which she, in her own life, was
somehow missing. And so the young woman observed her brother with increasing interest and a
growing feeling that approached envy. At every opportunity she led him to talk of his work
or rather of his attitude toward his work, and encouraged him to express the convictions that
had so changed his own life and that were so foreign to the tenets of Helen and her class.
And always their talks ended with John's advice: "Go ask the Interpreter; he knows; he will
make it so much clearer than I can."

But with all John's absorbing interest in his work and in the general industrial situation
of Millsburgh, which under the growing influence of Jake Vodell was becoming every day more
difficult and dangerous, the general manager could not escape the memories of that happy evening
at the Martin cottage. The atmosphere of this workman's home was so different from the atmosphere
of his own home in the big house on the hill. There was a peace, a contentment, a feeling of
security in the little cottage that was sadly wanting in the more pretentious residence. Following,
as it did, his father's retirement from the Mill with his own promotion to the rank of virtual
ownership and his immediate talk with Captain Charlie, that evening had reestablished for him,
as it were, the relationship and charm of his boyhood days. It was as though, having been submitted
to a final test, he was now admitted once more, without reserve, to the innermost circle of
their friendship.

On his way to and from his office he nearly always, now, drove past the Martin cottage. The
distance was greater, it is true, but John thought that the road was enough better to more
than make up for that. Besides, he really did enjoy the drive down the tree-arched street and
past the old house. It was all so rich in memories of his happy boyhood, and sometimes--nearly
always, in fact--he would catch a glimpse of Mary among her flowers or on the porch or perhaps
at the gate.

Occasionally this young manager of the Mill, with his strange ideas of industrial comradeship,
found it necessary to spend an evening with these workmen who were leaders in the union that
was held by his father and by McIver to be a menace to the employer class. It in no way detracted
from the value of these consultations with Captain Charlie and his father that Mary was always
present. In fact, Mary herself was in a position materially to help John Ward in his study
of the industrial problems that were of such vital interest to him. No one knew better than
did Pete Martin's daughter the actual living conditions of the class of laboring people who
dwelt in the Flats. Certainly, as he watched the progress of Jake Vodell's missionary work
among them, John could not ignore these Sam Whaleys of the industries as an important factor
in his problem.

So it happened, curiously enough, that Helen herself was led to call at the little home next
door to the old house where she had lived in those years of her happy girlhood.

      *       *       *       *       *

Helen was downtown that afternoon on an unimportant shopping errand. She had left the store
after making her purchases and was about to enter her automobile, when McIver, who chanced
to be passing, stopped to greet her.

There was no doubting the genuineness of the man's pleasure in the incident, nor was Helen
herself at all displeased at this break in what had been, so far, a rather dull day.

"And what brings you down here at this unreasonable hour?" he asked; "on Saturday, too? Don't
you know that there is a tennis match on at the club?"

"I didn't seem to care for the tennis to-day somehow," she returned. "Mother wanted some things
from Harrison's, so I came downtown to get them for her."

He caught a note in her voice that made him ask with grave concern, "How is your father, Helen?"

She answered, quickly, "Oh, father is doing nicely, thank you." Then, with a cheerfulness that
was a little forced, she asked in turn, "And why have you deserted the club yourself this afternoon?"

"Business," he returned. "There will be no more Saturday afternoons off for me for some time
to come, I fear." Then he added, quickly, "But look here, Helen, there is no need of our losing
the day altogether. Send your man on, and come with me for a little spin. The roadster is in
the next block. I'll take you home in an hour and get on back to my office."

Helen hesitated.

"The ride will do you good."

"Sure you can spare the time?"

"Sure. It will do me good, too."

"And you're not asking me just to be nice--you really want me?"

"Don't you know by this time whether I want you or not?" he returned, in a tone that brought
the color to her cheeks. "Please come!"

"All right," she agreed.

When they were seated in McIver's roadster, she added, "I really can't deny myself the thrilling
triumph of taking a business man away from his work during office hours."

"You take my thoughts away from my work a great many times during office hours, Helen," he
retorted, as the car moved away. "Must I wait much longer for my answer, dear?"

She replied, hurriedly, "Please, Jim, not that to-day. Let's not think about it even."

"All right," he returned, grimly. "I just want you to know, though, that I am waiting."

"I know, Jim--and--and you are perfectly wonderful but--Oh, can't we forget it just for an hour?"

As if giving himself to her mood, McIver's voice and manner changed. "Do you mind if we stop
at the factory just a second? I want to leave some papers. Then we can go on up the river drive."

      *       *       *       *       *

An hour later they were returning, and because it was the prettiest street in that part of
Millsburgh, McIver chose the way that would take them past the old house.

John Ward's machine was standing in front of the Martin cottage.

McIver saw it and looked quickly at his companion. There was no need to ask if Helen had recognized
her brother's car.

The factory owner considered the new manager of the Mill a troublesome obstacle in his own
plans for making war on the unions. He felt, too, that with John now in control of the business,
his chances of bringing about the combination of the two industries were materially lessened.
He had wondered, at times, if it was not her brother's influence that caused Helen to put off
giving him her final answer to his suit.

When he saw that Helen had recognized John's car, he remarked, with an insinuating laugh, "Evidently
I am not the only business man who can be lured from his office during working hours."

"Jim, how can you?" she protested. "You know John is there on business to see Charlie or his
father."

"It is a full hour yet before quitting time at the Mill," he returned.

She had no reply to this, and the man continued with a touch of malicious satisfaction, "After
all, Helen, John is human, you know, and old Pete Martin's daughter is a mighty attractive girl."

Helen Ward's cheeks were red, but she managed to control her voice, as she said, "Just what
do you mean by that, Jim?"

"Is it possible that you really do not know?" he countered.

"I know that my brother, foolish as he may be about some things, would never think of paying
serious attention to the daughter of one of his employees," she retorted, warmly.

"That is exactly the situation," he returned. "No one believes for a moment that the affair
is serious on John's part."

The color was gone from Helen's face now. "I think you have said too much not to go on now,
Jim. Do you mean that people are saying that John is amusing himself with Mary Martin?"

"Well," he returned, coolly, "what else can the people think when they see him going there
so often; when they see the two together, wandering about the Flats; when they hear his car
tearing down the street late in the evening; when they see her every morning at the gate watching
for him to pass on his way to work? Your brother is not a saint, Helen. He is no different,
in some ways, from other men. I always did feel that there was something back of all this comrade
stuff between him and Charlie Martin. As for the girl, I don't think you need to worry about
her. She probably understands it all right enough."

"Jim, you must not say such things to me about Mary! She is not at all that kind of girl. The
whole thing is impossible."

"What do you know about Mary Martin?" he retorted. "I'll bet you have never even spoken to
her since you moved from the old house."

Helen did not speak after this until they were passing the great stone columns at the entrance
to the Ward estate, then she said, quietly, "Jim, do you always believe the worst possible
things about every one?"

"That's an odd thing for you to ask," he returned, doubtfully, as they drove slowly up the
long curving driveway. "Why?"

"Because," she answered, "it sometimes seems to me as if no one believed the best things about
people these days. I know there is a world of wickedness among us, Jim, but are we all going
wholly to the bad together?"

McIver laughed. "We are all alike in one thing, Helen. No matter what he professes, you will
find that at the last every man holds to the good old law of 'look out for number one.' Business
or pleasure, it's all the same. A man looks after his own interests first and takes what he
wants, or can get, when and where and how he can."

"But, Jim, the war--"

He laughed cynically. "The war was pure selfishness from start to finish. We fed the fool public
a lot of patriotic bunk, of course--we had to--we needed them. And the dear people fell for
the sentimental hero business as they always do." With the last word he stopped the car in
front of the house.

When Helen was on the ground she turned and faced him squarely. "Jim McIver, your words are
an insult to my brother and to ninety-nine out of every hundred men who served under our flag,
and you insult my intelligence if you expect me to accept them in earnest. If I thought for
a minute that you were capable of really believing such abominable stuff I would never speak
to you again. Good-by, Jim. Thank you so much for the ride."

Before the man could answer, she ran up the steps and disappeared through the front door.

But McIver's car was no more than past the entrance when Helen appeared again on the porch.
For a moment she stood, as if debating some question in her mind. Then apparently, she reached
a decision. Ten minutes later she was walking hurriedly down the hill road--the way Bobby and
Maggie had fled that day when Adam Ward drove them from the iron fence that guarded his estate.
It was scarcely a mile by this road to the old house and the Martin cottage.

CHAPTER XIV

THE WAY BACK

That walk from her home to the little white cottage next door to the old house was the most
eventful journey that Helen Ward ever made. She felt this in a way at the time, but she could
not know to what end her sudden impulse to visit again the place of her girlhood would eventually
lead.

As she made her way down the hill toward that tree-arched street, she realized a little how
far the years had carried her from the old house. She had many vivid and delightful memories
of that world of her childhood, it is true, but the world to which her father's material success
had removed her in the years of her ripening womanhood had come to claim her so wholly that
she had never once gone back. She had looked back at first with troubled longing. But Adam
Ward's determined efforts to make the separation of the two families final and complete, together
with the ever-increasing bitterness of his strange hatred for his old workman friend, had effectually
prevented her from any attempt at a continuation of the old relationship. In time, even the
thought of taking so much as a single step toward the intimacies from which she had come so
far, had ceased to occur to her. And now, suddenly, without plan or premeditation, she was
on her way actually to touch again, if only for a few moments, the lives that had been so large
a part of the simple, joyous life which she had known once, but which was so foreign to her now.

Nor was it at all clear to her why she was going or what she would do. As she had observed
with increasing interest the change in her brother's attitude toward the pleasures that had
claimed him so wholly before the war, she had wondered often at his happy contentment in contrast
to her own restless and dissatisfied spirit. McIver's words had suddenly forced one fact upon
her with startling clearness: John, through his work in the Mill, his association with Captain
Charlie and his visits to the Martin home, was actually living again in the atmosphere of that
world which she felt they had left so far behind. It was as though her brother had already
gone back.

And McIver's challenging question, "What do you know about Mary Martin?" had raised in her
mind a doubt, not of her brother and his relationship to these old friends of their childhood,
but of herself and all the relationships that made her present life such a contrast to her
life in the old house.

With her mind and heart so full of doubts and questionings, she turned into the familiar street
and saw her brother's car still before the Martin home.

As she went on, a feeling of strange eagerness possessed her. Her face glowed with warm color,
her eyes shone with glad anticipation, her heart beat more quickly. As one returning to well
loved home scenes after many years in a foreign land, the daughter of Adam Ward went down the
street toward the place where she was born. In front of the old house she stopped. The color
went from her cheeks--the brightness from her eyes.

In her swiftly moving automobile, nearly always with gay companions, Helen had sometimes passed
the old house and had noticed with momentary concern its neglected appearance. But these fleeting
glimpses had been so quickly forgotten that the place was most real to her as she saw it in
her memories. But now, as she stood there alone, in the mood that had brought her to the spot,
the real significance of the ruin struck her with appalling force.

Those rooms with their shattered windowpanes, their bare, rotting casements and sagging, broken
shutters appealed to her in the mute eloquence of their empty loneliness for the joyous life
that once had filled them. The weed-grown yard, the tumbledown fence, the dilapidated porch,
and even the chimneys that were crumbling and ragged against the sky, cried out to her in sorrowful
reproach. A rushing flood of home memories filled her eyes with hot tears. With the empty loneliness
of the old house in her heart, she went blindly on to the little cottage next door. There was
no thought as to how she would explain her unusual presence there. She did not, herself, really
know clearly why she had come.

Timidly she paused at the white gate. There was no one in the yard to bid her welcome. As one
in a dream, she passed softly into the yard. She was trembling now as one on the threshold
of a great adventure. What was it? What did it mean--her coming there?

Wonderingly she looked about the little yard with its bit of lawn--at the big shade tree--the
flowers--it was all just as she had always known it. Where were they?--John and Mary and Charlie?
Why was there no sound of their voices? Her cheeks were suddenly hot with color. What if Charlie
Martin should suddenly appear! As one awakened from strange dreams to a familiar home scene,
Helen Ward was all at once back in those days of her girlhood. She had come as she had come
so many, many times from the old house next door, to find her brother and their friends. Her
heart was eager with the shy eagerness of a maid for the expected presence of her first boyish
lover.

      *       *       *       *       *

Then Peter Martin, coming around the house from the garden, saw her standing there.

The old workman stopped, as if at the sight of an apparition. Mechanically he placed the garden
tool he was carrying against the corner of the house; deliberately he knocked the ashes from
his pipe and placed it methodically in his pocket.

With a little cry, Helen ran to him, her hands outstretched, "Uncle Pete!"

The old workman caught her and for a few moments she clung to him, half laughing, half crying,
while they both, in the genuineness of their affection, forgot the years.

"Is it really you, Helen?" he said, at last, and she saw a suspicious moisture in the kindly
eyes. "Have you really come back to see the old man after all these years?"

Then, with quick anxiety, he asked, "But what is the matter, child? Your father--your mother--are
they all right? Is there anything wrong at your home up on the hill yonder?"

His very natural inquiry broke the spell and placed her instantly back in the world to which
she now belonged. Drawing away from him, she returned, with characteristic calmness, "Oh, no,
Uncle Pete, father and mother are both very well indeed. But why should you think there must
be something wrong, simply because I chanced to call?"

The old workman was clearly confused at this sudden change in her manner. He had welcomed the
girl--the Helen of the old house--this self-possessed young woman was quite a different person.
She was the princess lady of little Maggie and Bobby Whaley's acquaintance, who sometimes condescended
to recognize him with a cool little nod as her big automobile passed him swiftly by.

Pete Martin could not know, as the Interpreter would have known, how at that very moment the
Helen of the old house and the princess lady were struggling for supremacy.

Removing his hat and handling it awkwardly, he said, with a touch of dignity in his tone and
manner in spite of his embarrassment, "I'm glad the folks are well, Helen. Won't you take a
seat and rest yourself?"

As they went toward the chairs in the shade of the tree, he added, "It is a long time since
we have seen you in this part of town--walking, I mean."

The Helen of the old house wanted to answer--she longed to cry out in the fullness of her heart
some of the things that were demanding expression, but it was the princess lady who answered,
"I saw my brother's car here and thought perhaps he would let me ride home with him."

The old workman was studying her now with kind but frankly understanding eyes. "John and Mary
have gone to see some of the folks that she is looking after in the Flats," he said, slowly.
"They'll be back any minute now, I should think."

She did not know what to reply to this. There were so many things she wanted to know--so many
things that she felt she must know. But she felt herself forced to answer with the mere commonplace,
"You are all well, I suppose, Uncle Pete?"

"Fine, thank you," he answered. "Mary is always busy with her housework and her flowers and
the poor sick folks she's always a-looking after--just like her mother, if you remember. Charlie,
he's working late to-day--some breakdown or something that's keeping him overtime. That brother
of yours is a fine manager, Miss Helen, and," he added, with a faint note of something in his
voice that brought a touch of color to her cheeks, "a finer man."

Again she felt the crowding rush of those questions she wanted to ask, but she only said, with
an air of calm indifference, "John has changed so since his return from France--in many ways
he seems like a different man."

"As for that," he replied, "the war has changed most people in one way or another. It was bound
to. Everybody talks about getting back to normal again, but as I see it there'll be no getting
back ever to what used to be normal before the war started."

She looked at him with sudden, intense interest. "How has it so changed every one, Uncle Pete?
Why can't people be just as they were before it happened? The change in business conditions
and all that, I can understand, but why should it make any difference to--well, to me, for
example?"

The old workman answered, slowly, "The people are thinking deeper and feeling deeper. They're
more human, as you might say. And I've noticed generally that the way the people think and
feel is at the bottom of everything. It's just like the Interpreter says, 'You can't change
the minds and hearts of folks without changing what they do.' Everybody ain't changed, of course,
but so many of them have that the rest will be bound to take some notice or feel mighty lonesome
from now on."

Helen was about to reply when the old workman interrupted her with, "There come John and Mary now."

The two coming along the street walk to the gate did not at first notice those who were watching
them with such interest. John was carrying a market basket and talking earnestly to his companion,
whose face was upturned to his with eager interest. At the gate they paused a moment while
the man, with his hand on the latch, finished whatever it was that he was saying. And Helen,
with a little throb of something very much like envy in her heart, saw the light of happiness
in the eyes of the young woman who through all the years of their girlhood had been her inseparable
playmate and loyal friend.

When John finally opened the gate for her to pass, Mary was laughing, and the clear ringing
gladness in her voice brought a faint smile of sympathy even to the face of the now coolly
conventional daughter of Adam Ward.

Mary's laughter was suddenly checked; the happiness fled from her face. With a little gesture
of almost appealing fear she put her hand on her companion's arm.

In the same instant John saw and stood motionless, his face blank with amazement. Then, "Helen!
What in the world are you doing here?"

John Ward never realized all that those simple words carried to the three who heard him. Peter
Martin's face was grave and thoughtful. Mary blushed in painful embarrassment. His sister,
calm and self-possessed, came toward them, smiling graciously.

"I saw your roadster and thought I might ride home with you. Uncle Pete and I have been having
a lovely little visit. It is perfectly charming to see you again like this, Mary. Your flowers
are beautiful as ever, aren't they?"

"But, Helen, how do you happen to be wandering about in this neighborhood alone and without
your car?" demanded the still bewildered John.

"Don't be silly," she laughed. "I was out for a walk--that is all. I do walk sometimes, you
know." She turned to Mary. "Really, to hear this brother of mine, one would think me a helpless
invalid and this part of Millsburgh a very dangerous community."

Mary forced a smile, but the light in her eyes was not the light of happiness and her cheeks
were still a burning red.

"Don't you think we should go now, John?" suggested Helen.

The helpless John looked from Mary to her father appealingly.

"Better sit down awhile," Pete offered, awkwardly.

John looked at his watch. "I suppose we really ought to go." To Mary he added, "Will you please
tell Charlie that I will see him to-morrow?"

She bowed gravely.

Then the formal parting words were spoken, and Helen and John were seated in the car. Mary
had moved aside from the gate and stood now very still among her flowers.

      *       *       *       *       *

Before John had shifted the gears of his machine to high, he heard a sound that caused him
to look quickly at his sister. Little Maggie's princess lady was sobbing like a child.

"Why, Helen, what in the world--"

She interrupted him. "Please, John--please, don't--don't take me home now. I--I--Let us stop
here at the old house for a few minutes. I--I can't go just yet."

Without a word John Ward turned into the curb. Tenderly he helped her to the ground. Reverently
he lifted aside the broken-down gate and led her through the tangle of tall grass and weeds
that had almost obliterated the walk to the front porch. Over the rotting steps and across
the trembling porch he helped her with gentle care. Very softly he pushed open the sagging door.

CHAPTER XV

AT THE OLD HOUSE

From room to room in the empty old house the brother and sister went silently or with low,
half-whispered words. They moved softly, as if fearing to disturb some unseen tenant of those
bare and dingy rooms. Often they paused, and, drawing close to each other, stood as if in the
very presence of some spirit that was not of their material world. At last they came to the
back porch, which was hidden from the curious eyes of any chance observer in the neighborhood
by a rank growth of weeds and bushes and untrimmed trees.

As John Ward looked at his sister now, that expression of wondering amazement with which he
had greeted her was gone. In its place there was gentle understanding.

With a little smile, Helen sat down on the top step of the porch and motioned him to a seat
beside her. "Won't you tell me about it, John?" she said, softly.

"Tell you about what, Helen?"

"About everything--your life, your work, your friends." She made a little gesture toward the
cottage next door.

They could see the white gable through the screen of tangled boughs.

"What is it that has changed you so?" she went on. "Your interests are so different now. You
are so happy and contented--so--so alive--and I"--her voice broke--"I feel as if you were going
away off somewhere and leaving me behind. I am so miserable. John, won't you tell me about things?"

"You poor old girl!" exclaimed John with true brotherly affection. "I've been a blind fool.
I ought to have seen. That's nearly always the way, though, I guess," he went on, reflectively.
"A fellow gets so darned interested trying to make things go right outside his own home that
he forgets to notice how the people that he really loves most of all are getting along. It
looks as though I have not been doing so much better than poor old Sam Whaley, after all."

He paused and seemed to be following his thoughts into fields where only he could go. Helen
moved a little closer, and he came back to her.

"I never dreamed that you were feeling anything like this, sister. I knew that you were worried
about father, of course, as we all are, but aside from that you seemed to be so occupied with
your various interests and with McIver--" He paused, then finished, abruptly, "Look here, Helen,
what about you and McIver anyway; have you given him his answer yet?"

"Has that anything to do with it?" she answered, doubtfully. "There is nothing that I can tell
you about McIver. I don't seem to be able to make up my mind, that is all. But McIver is only
a part of the whole trouble, John. Oh, can't you understand! How am I to know whether or not
I want to marry him or any one else until--until I have found myself--until I know where I
really belong."

He looked at her blankly for a second, then a smile broke over his face. "By George!" he exclaimed
"that is exactly what I had to do--find myself and find where I belonged. I never dreamed that
my sister might be compelled to go through the same experience."

"Was it your army life that helped you to know?"

His face was serious now. "It was the things I saw and experienced while in France."

"Tell me," she demanded. "I mean, tell me some of the things that you men never talk about--the
things you were forced to think and feel and believe--that showed you your own real self--that
changed you into what you are to-day."

And because John Ward was able that afternoon to understand his sister's need, he did as she
asked. It may have been the influence of the old house that enabled him to lay bare for her
those experiences of his innermost self--those soul adventures about which, as she had so truly
said, men never talk. Certainly he could never have spoken in their home on the hill as he
spoke in that atmosphere from which their father and his material prosperity had so far removed
them. And Helen, as she listened, knew that she had found at last the key to all in her brother's
life that had so puzzled her.

But after all, she reflected, when he had finished, John's experience could not solve her problem.
She could not find herself in the things that he had thought and felt.

"If only I could have been with you over there." she murmured.

"But, Helen," he cried, eagerly, "it is all right here at home. The same things are happening
all about us every day--don't you understand? The one biggest thing that came to me out of
the war is the realization that, great and terrible though it was, it was in reality only a
part of the greater war that is being fought all the time."

She shook her head with a doubtful smile at his earnestness.

And then he tried to tell her of the Mill as he saw it in its relation to human life--of the
danger that threatened the nation through the industrial situation--of the menace to humanity
that lay in the efforts of those who were setting class against class in a deadly hatred that
would result in revolution with all its horrors. He tried to make her feel the call of humanity's
need in the world's work, as it was felt in the need of the world's war. He sought to apply
for her the principles of heroism and comradeship and patriotism and service to this war that
was still being waged against the imperialistic enemies of the nation and the race.

But when he paused at last, she only smiled again, doubtfully. "You are wonderful in your enthusiasm,
John dear," she said, "and I love you for it. I think I understand you now, and for yourself
it is right, of course, but for me--it is all so visionary--so unreal."

"And yet," he returned, "you were very active during the war--you made bandages and lint and
sweaters, and raised funds for the Red Cross. Was it all real to you?"

"Yes," she answered, honestly, "it was very real John; it was so real that in contrast nothing
that I do now seems of any importance."

"But you never saw a wounded soldier--you never witnessed the horrors--you never came in actual
touch with the suffering, did you?"

"No."

"And yet you say the war was real to you."

"Very real," she replied.

"Do you think, Helen," he said, slowly, "that the Interpreter's suffering would have been more
real if he had lost his legs by a German machine gun instead of by a machine in father's mill?"

"John!" she exclaimed, in a shocked tone.

"You say the suffering away over there in France was real to you," he continued. "Well, less
than a mile from this spot, I called this afternoon on a man who is dying by inches of consumption,
contracted while working in our office. For eight years he was absent from his desk scarcely
a day. The force nicknamed him 'Old Faithful.' When he dropped in his tracks at last they carried
him out and stopped his pay. He has no care--nothing to eat, even, except the help that the
Martins give him. Another case: A widow and four helpless children--the man was killed in McIver's
factory last week. He died in agony too horrible to describe. The mother is prostrated, the
children are hungry. God knows what will become of them this next winter. Another: A workman
who was terribly burned in the Mill two years ago. He is blind and crippled in the bargain--"

She interrupted him with a protesting cry, "John, John, for pity's sake, stop!"

"Well, why are not these things right here at home as real to you as you say the same things
were when they happened in France?" he demanded.

She did not attempt to answer his question but instead asked, gently, "Is that why you have
been going to the Flats with Mary?"

If he noticed any special significance in her words he ignored it. "Mary visits the people
in the Flats as her mother did--as our mother used to do. She told me about some of the cases,
and I have been going with her now and then to see for myself--that is all."

Then they left the old house and drove back to their pretentious home on the hill, where Adam
Ward suffered his days of mental torture and was racked by his nightly dreams of hell. And
the dread shadow of that hidden thing was over them all.

      *       *       *       *       *

That night when John told the Interpreter of his afternoon with his sister the old basket maker
listened silently. His face was turned toward the scene that, save for the twinkling lights,
lay wrapped in darkness before them. And he seemed to be listening to the voice of the Mill.
When John had finished, the man in the wheel chair said very little.

But when John was leaving, the Interpreter asked, as an afterthought, "And where was Captain
Charlie this afternoon, John?"

"At the Mill," John answered. "I'm glad he wasn't at home, too; it was bad enough as it was."

"Perhaps it was just as well," said the old basket maker. And John Ward, in the darkness, could
not see that the Interpreter was smiling.

CHAPTER XVI

HER OWN PEOPLE

"A lady to see you, sir."

John did not take his eyes from the work on his desk. "All right, Jimmy, show her in."

The general manager read on to the bottom of the typewritten page, signed his name to the sheet,
placed it in the proper basket and turned in his chair.

"Helen!"

Little Maggie's princess lady was so lovely that afternoon, as she stood there framed in the
doorway of the manager's office that even her brother noticed.

She was laughing at his surprise, and there was a half teasing, half serious look in her eyes
that was irresistible.

"By George, you are a picture, Helen!" John exclaimed, with not a little brotherly pride in
his face and voice. "But what is the idea? What are you down here for--all dolled up like this?"

She blushed with pleasure at his compliment. "That is very nice of you, John; you are a dear
to notice it. Are you going to ask me to sit down, or must you put me out for interrupting?"

He was on his feet instantly. "Forgive me; I am so stunned by the unexpected honor of your
visit that I forget my manners."

When she was seated, he continued, "And now what is it? what can I do for you, sister?"

She looked about the office--at his desk and through the open door into the busy outer room.
"Are you quite sure that you have time for me?"

"Surest thing in the world," he returned, with a reassuring smile. Then to a man who at that
moment appeared in the doorway, "All right, Tom." And to Helen, "Excuse me just a second, dear."

She watched him curiously as he turned sheet after sheet of the papers the man handed him,
seeming to absorb the pages at a glance, while a running fire of quick questions, short answers,
terse comments and clear-cut instructions accompanied the examination.

Helen had never before been inside the doors of the industrial plant to which her father had
literally given his life. In those old-house days, when Adam worked with Pete and the Interpreter,
she had gone sometimes to the outer gate to meet her father when his day's work was done. On
rare occasions her automobile had stopped in front of the office. That was all.

In a vague, indefinite way the young woman realized that her education, her pleasures, the
dresses she wore, her home on the hill, everything that she had, in fact, came to her somehow
from those great dingy, unsightly buildings. She knew that people who were not of her world
worked there for her father. Sometimes there were accidents--men were killed. There had been
strikes that annoyed her father. But no part of it all had ever actually touched her. She accepted
it as a matter of course--without a thought--as she accepted all of the established facts in
nature. The Mill existed for her as the sun existed. It never occurred to her to ask why. There
was for her no personal note in the droning, moaning voice of its industry. There was nothing
of personal significance in the forest of tall stacks with their overhanging cloud of smoke.
Indeed, there had been, rather, something sinister and forbidding about the place. The threatening
aspect of the present industrial situation was in no way personal to her except, perhaps, as
it excited her father and disturbed John.

"You've got it all there, Tom," said the manager, finishing his examination of the papers.
"Good work, too. Baird will have those specifications on that Miller and Wilson job in to-morrow,
will he?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, that's the stuff!"

The man was smiling as he moved toward the door.

"Oh, Tom, just a moment."

Still smiling, the man turned back.

"I want you to meet my sister. Helen, may I present Mr. Conway? Tom is one of our Mill family,
you know, mighty important member, too--regular shark at figuring all sorts of complicated
calculations that I couldn't work out in a month of Sundays." He laughed with boyish happiness
and pride in Tom's superior accomplishments.

It was a simple little incident, but there was something in it somewhere that moved Helen Ward
strangely. A spirit that was new to her seemed to fill the room. She felt it as one may feel
the bigness of the mountains or sense the vast reaches of the ocean. These two men, employer
and employee, were in no way conscious of their relationship as she understood it. Tom did
not appear to realize that he was working for John--he seemed rather to feel that he was working
with John.

When the man was gone, she asked again, timidly, "Are you sure, brother, that I am not in the way?"

"Forget it!" he cried. "Tell me what I can do for you."

"I want to see the Mill," she answered.

John did not apparently quite understand her request. "You want to see the Mill?" he repeated.

She nodded eagerly. "I want to see it all--not just the office but where the men work--everything."

She laughed at his bewildered expression as the sincerity of her wish dawned upon him.

"But what in the world"--he began--"why this sudden interest in the Mill, Helen?"

Half teasing, half laughing, she answered, "You didn't really think, did you, John, that I
would forget everything you said to me at the old house?"

"No," he said, doubtfully. "At least, I suppose I didn't. But, honestly, I didn't think that
I had made much of an impression."

She made a little gesture of helpless resignation. "Here I am just the same and so much interested
already that I can't tear myself away. Come on, let's start--that is, if you really have the
time to take me."

Time to take her! John Ward would have lost the largest contract he had ever dreamed of securing
rather than miss taking Helen through the Mill.

      *       *       *       *       *

With an old linen duster, which had hung in the office closet since Adam Ward's day, to cover
her from chin to shoes, and a cap that John himself often wore about the plant, to replace
her hat, they set out.

Helen's first impression, as she stood just inside the door to the big main room of the plant,
was fear. To her gentle eyes the scene was one of terrifying confusion and unspeakable dangers.

Those great machines were grim and threatening monsters with ponderous jaws and arms and chains
that seemed all too light to control their sullen strength. The noise--roaring, crashing, clanking,
moaning, shrieking, hissing--was overpowering in its suggestion of the ungoverned tumult that
belonged to some strange, unearthly realm. Everywhere, amid this fearful din and these maddening
terrors, flitting through the murky haze of steam and smoke and dust, were men with sooty faces
and grimy arms. Never had the daughter of Adam Ward seen men at work like this. She drew closer
to John's side and held to his arm as though half expecting him to vanish suddenly and leave
her alone in this monstrous nightmare.

Looking down at her, John laughed aloud and put his arm about her reassuringly. "Great game,
old girl!" he said, with a wholesome pride in his voice. "This is the life!"

And all at once she remembered that this was, indeed, life--life as she had never seen it,
never felt it before. And this life game--this greatest of all games--was the game that John
played with such absorbing interest day after day.

"I can understand now why you are not so devoted to tennis and teas as you used to be," she
returned, laughing back at him with a new admiration in her face.

Then John led her into the very midst of the noisy scene. Carefully he guided her steps through
the seeming hurry and confusion of machinery and men. Now they paused before one of those grim
monsters to watch its mighty work. Now they stopped to witness the terrific power displayed
by another giant that lifted, with its great arms of steel, a weight of many tons as easily
as a child would handle a toy. Again, they stepped aside from the path of an engine on its
way to some distant part of the plant, or stood before a roaring furnace, or paused to watch
a group of men, or halted while John exchanged a few brief words with a superintendent or foreman.
And always with boyish enthusiasm John talked to her of what they saw, explaining, illustrating,
making the purpose and meaning of every detail clear.

Gradually, as she thus went closer to this life that was at first so terrifying to her, the
young woman was conscious of a change within herself. The grim monsters became kind and friendly
as she saw how their mighty strength was obedient always to the directing eye and hand of the
workmen who controlled them. The many noises, as she learned to distinguish them, came to blend
into one harmonious whole, like the instruments in a great orchestra. The confusion, as she
came to view it understandingly, resolved itself into orderly movement. As she recalled some
of the things that her brother had said to her as they sat on the back porch of the old house,
her mind reached out for the larger truth, and she thrilled to the feeling that she was standing,
as it were, in the living, beating heart of the nation. The things that she had been schooled
to hold as of the highest value she saw now for the first time in their just relation to the
mighty underlying life of the Mill. The petty refinements that had so largely ruled her every
thought and deed were no more than frothy bubbles on the surface of the industrial ocean's
awful tidal power. The male idlers of her set were suddenly contemptible in her eyes, as she
saw them in comparison with her brother or with his grimy, sweating comrades.

Presently John was saying, "This is where father used to work--before the days of the new process,
I mean. That bench there is the very one he used, side by side with Uncle Pete and the Interpreter."

Helen stared at the old workbench that stood against the wall and at the backs of the men,
as though under a spell. Her father working there!

Her brain all at once was crowded with questions to which there were no answers. What if Adam
Ward were still a workman at that bench? What if it had been the Interpreter who had discovered
the new process? What if her father had lost his legs? What if John, instead of being the manager,
were one of those men who worked with their hands? What if they had never left the old house
next door to Mary and Charlie? What if--

"Uncle Pete," said John, "look here and see who's with us this afternoon."

Mary's father turned from his work and they laughed at the expression on his face when he saw
her standing there.

And it was the Helen of the old house who greeted him, and who was so interested in what he
was doing and asked so many really intelligent questions that he was proud of her.

They had left Uncle Pete at his bench, and Helen's mind was again busy with those unanswerable
questions--so busy, in fact, that she scarcely heard John saying, "I want to show you a lathe
over here, Helen, that is really worth seeing. It is, on the whole, the finest and most intricate
piece of machinery in the whole plant." And, he added, as they drew near the subject of his
remarks, "You may believe me, it takes an exceptional workman to handle it. There are only
three men in our entire force who are ever permitted to touch it. They are experts in their
line and naturally are the best paid men we have."

As he finished speaking they paused beside a huge affair of black iron and gray steel, that
to Helen seemed an incomprehensible tangle of wheels and levers.

A workman was bending over the machine, so absorbed apparently in the complications of his
valuable charge that he was unaware of their presence.

Helen spoke close to her brother's ear, "Is he one of your three experts?"

John nodded. "He is the chief. The other two are really assistants--sort of understudies, you
know."

At that moment the man straightened up, stood for an instant with his eyes still on his work,
then, as he was turning to another part of the intricate mechanism, he saw them.

"Hello, Charlie!" said the grinning manager, and to his sister, "Surely you haven't forgotten
Captain Martin, Helen?"

In the brief moments that followed Helen Ward knew that she had reached the point toward which
she had felt herself moving for several months--impelled by strange forces beyond her comprehension.

Her brother's renewed and firmly established friendship with this playmate of their childhood
years, together with the many stirring tales that John had told of his comrade captain's life
in France, could not but awaken her interest in the boy lover whom she had, as she believed,
so successfully forgotten. The puzzling change in her brother's life interests, has neglect
of so many of his pre-war associates and his persistent comradeship with his fellow workman,
had kept alive that interest; while Captain Martin's repeated refusals to accept John's invitations
to the big home on the hill had curiously touched her woman's pride and at the same time had
compelled her respect.

The clash between John's new industrial and social convictions and the class consciousness
to which she had been so carefully schooled, with its background of her father's wretched mental
condition, the unhappiness of her home and her own repeated failures to find contentment in
the privileges of material wealth, raised in her mind questions which she had never before faced.

Her talks with the Interpreter, the slow forming of the lines of the approaching industrial
struggle, with the sharpening of the contrast between McIver and John, her acquaintance with
Bobby and Maggie, even--all tended to drive her on in her search for the answer to her problem.

And so she had been carried to the Martin cottage--to her talk with John at the old house--to
the Mill--to this.

As one may intuitively sense the crisis in a great struggle between life and death, this woman
knew that in this man all her disturbing life questions were centered. Deep beneath the many
changes that her father's material success in life had brought to her, one unalterable life
fact asserted itself with startling power: It was this man who had first awakened in her the
consciousness of her womanhood. Face to face with this workman in her father's Mill, she fought
to control the situation.

To all outward appearances she did control it. Her brother saw only a reserved interest in
his workman comrade. Captain Martin saw only the daughter of his employer who had so coldly
preferred her newer friends to the less pretentious companions of her girlhood.

But beneath the commonplace remarks demanded by the occasion, the Helen of the old house was
struggling for supremacy. The spirit that she had felt in the office when John talked with
his fellow workmen, she felt now in the presence of this workman. The power, the strength,
the bigness, the meaning of the Mill, as it had come to her, were all personified in him. A
strange exultation of possession lifted her up. She was hungry for her own; she wanted to cry
out: "This work is my work--these people are my people--this man is my man!"

It was Captain Charlie who ended the interview with the excuse that the big machine needed
his immediate attention. He had stood as they talked with a hand on one of the controls and
several times he had turned a watchful eye on his charge. It was almost, Helen thought with
a little thrill of triumph, as though the man sought in the familiar touch of his iron and
steel a calmness and self-control that he needed. But now, when he turned to give his attention
wholly to his work, with the effect of politely dismissing her, she felt as though he had suddenly,
if ever so politely, closed a door in her face.

John must have felt it a little, too, for he became rather quiet as they went on and soon concluded
their inspection of the plant.

At the office door, Helen paused and turned to look back, as if reluctant to leave the scene
that had now such meaning for her, while her brother stood silently watching her. Not until
they were back in the manager's office and Helen was ready to return to the outside world did
John Ward speak.

Facing her with his straightforward soldierly manner, he said, inquiringly, "Well?"

She returned his look with steady frankness. "I can't tell you what I think about it all now,
John dear. Sometime, perhaps, I may try. It is too big--too vital--too close. I am glad I came.
I am sorry, too."

So he took her to her waiting car.

For a moment he stood looking thoughtfully after the departing machine and then, with an odd
little smile, went back to his work.

CHAPTER XVII

IN THE NIGHT

Helen knew, even as she told the chauffeur to drive her home, that she did not wish to return
just then to the big house on the hill. Her mind was too crowded with thoughts she could not
entertain in the atmosphere of her home; her heart was too deeply moved by emotions that she
scarcely dared acknowledge even to herself.

She thought of the country club, but that, in her present mood, was impossible. The Interpreter--she
was about to tell Tom that she wished to call at the hut on the cliff, but decided against
it. She feared that she might reveal to the old basket maker things that she wished to hide.
She might go for a drive in the country, but she shrank from being alone. She wanted some one
who could take her out of herself--some one to whom she could talk without betraying herself.

Not far from the Mill a number of children were playing in the dusty road.

Helen did not notice the youngsters, but Tom, being a careful driver, slowed down, even though
they were already scurrying aside for the automobile to pass. Suddenly she was startled by
a shrill yell. "Hello, there! Hello, Miss!"

Bobby Whaley, in his frantic efforts to attract her attention, was jumping up and down, waving
his cap and screeching like a wild boy, while his companions looked on in wide-eyed wonder,
half in awe at his daring, half in fear of the possible consequence.

To the everlasting honor and glory of Sam Whaley's son, the automobile stopped. The lady, looking
back, called, "Hello, Bobby!" and waited expectantly for him to approach.

With a look of haughty triumph at Skinny and Chuck, the lad swaggered forward, a grin of overpowering
delight at his achievement on his dirty, freckled countenance.

"I am so glad you called to me," Helen said, when he was close. "I was just wishing for some
one to go with me for a ride in the country. Would you like to come?"

"Gee," returned the urchin, "I'll say I would."

"Do you think your mother would be willing for you to go?"

"Lord, yes--ma, she ain't a-carin' where we kids are jest so's we ain't under her feet when
she's a-workin'."

"And could you find Maggie, do you think? Perhaps she would enjoy the ride, too."

Bobby lifted up his voice in a shrill yell, "Mag! Oh--oh--Mag!"

The excited cry was caught up by the watching children, and the neighborhood echoed their calls.
"Mag! Oh, Mag! Somebody wants yer, Mag! Come a-runnin'. Hurry up!"

Their united efforts were not in vain. From the rear of a near-by house little Maggie appeared.
A dirty, faded old shawl was wrapped about her tiny waist, hiding her bare feet and trailing
behind. A sorry wreck of a hat trimmed with three chicken feathers crowned her uncombed hair,
and the ragged remnants of a pair of black cotton gloves completed her elegant costume. In
her thin little arms she held, with tender mother care, a doll so battered and worn by its
long service that one wondered at the imaginative power of the child who could make of it anything
but a shapeless bundle of dirty rags.

"Get a move on yer, Mag!" yelled the masterful Bobby, with frantic gestures. "The princess
lady is a-goin' t' take us fer a ride in her swell limerseen with her driver 'n' everything."

For one unbelieving moment, little Maggie turned to the two miniature ladies who, in costumes
that rivaled her own, had come to ask the cause of this unseemly disturbance of their social
affair. Then, at another shout from her brother, she discarded her finery and, holding fast
to her doll with true mother instinct, hurried timidly to the waiting automobile.

On that day when Helen had sent her servant to take them for a ride, these children of the
Flats had thought that no greater happiness was possible to mere human beings. But now, as
they sat with their beautiful princess lady between them on the deep-cushioned seat, and watched
the familiar houses glide swiftly past, even Bobby was silent. It was all so unreal--so like
a dream. Their former experience was so far surpassed that they would not have been surprised
had the automobile been suddenly transformed into a magic ship of the air, with Tom a fairy
pilot to carry them away up among the clouds to some wonderful sunshine castle in the sky.

It is true that Bobby's conscience stirred uneasily when he felt an arm steal gently about
him and he was drawn a little closer to the princess lady's side. A feller with a proper pride
does not readily permit such familiarities. It had been a long time since any one had put an
arm around Bobby--he did not quite understand.

But as for that, the princess lady herself did not quite understand either. Perhaps the sight
of little Maggie and her play lady friends so elegantly costumed for their social function
had suddenly convinced her that these children of the Flats were of her world after all. Perhaps
the shouting children had awakened memories that banished for the moment the sadness of her
grown-up years. Or it may have been simply the way that wee Maggie held her battered doll.
It may have been that the mother instinct of this wistful mite of humanity quickened in the
heart of the young woman something that was deeper, more vital, more real to her womanhood
than the things to which she had so far given herself. As the Helen of the old house had longed
to cry aloud in the Mill her recognition of her man, she hungered now with a strange woman
hunger for the feel of a child in her arms.

And so, with no care for her gown, which was sure to be ruined by this contact with the grime
of the Flats, with no question as to what people might think, with no thought for class standards
or industrial problems, the daughter of Adam Ward took the children of Sam Whaley in her arms
and carried them away from the shadow of that dark cloud that hung always above the Mill. From
the smoke and dust and filth of their heritage, she took them into the clean, sunny air of
the hillside fields and woods. From the hovels and shanties of their familiar haunts she took
them where birds made their nests and the golden bees and bright-winged butterflies were busy
among their flowers. From the squalid want and cruel neglect of their poverty she took them
into a fairyland that was overflowing with the riches that belong to childhood.

And then, when the sun was red above the bluff where the curving line of cliffs end at the
river's edge, she brought them back.

For some reason that has never been made satisfactorily clear by the wise ones who lead the
world's thinking, Bobby and Maggie must always be brought back to their home in the Flats,
the princess lady must always return to her castle on the hill.

      *       *       *       *       *

Charlie Martin was unusually quiet when he returned home from his work that day. The father
mentioned Helen's visit to the Mill, and Mary had many questions to ask, but the soldier workman,
usually so ready to talk and laugh with his sister, answered only in monosyllables or silently
permitted the older man to carry the burden of the conversation.

When supper was over and it was dark, Charlie, saying that he thought he ought to attend Jake
Vodell's street meeting that evening, left the house.

But Captain Charlie did not go to hear the agitator's soap-box oration that night. For an hour
or more, under cover of the darkness, the workman sat on the porch of the old house next door
to his home.

He had pushed aside the broken gate and made his way up the weed-tangled walk so quietly that
neither his sister nor his father, who were on the porch of the cottage, heard a sound. So
still was he that two neighborhood lovers, who paused in their slow walk, as if tempted by
the friendly shadow of the lonely old place, did not know that he was there. Then at something
her father said, Mary's laugh rang out, and the lovers moved on.

A little later Captain Charlie stole softly out of the yard and up the street in the direction
from which Helen had come the day of her visit to the old house. When the sound of his feet
on the walk could not be heard at the cottage, the workman walked briskly, taking the way that
led toward the Interpreter's hut.

One who knew him would have thought that he was going for an evening call on the old basket
maker. He saw the light of the little house on the cliff presently, and for a moment walked
slowly, as if debating whether or not he should go on as he had intended. Then he turned off
from the way to the Interpreter's and took that seldom used road that led up the hill toward
the home of Adam Ward. With a strong, easy stride he swung up the grade until he came to the
corner of the iron fence. Slowly and quietly he moved on now in the deeper shadows of the trees.
When he could see the gloomy mass of the house unobstructed against the sky, he stopped.

The lower floor was brightly lighted. The windows above were dark. With his back against the
trunk of a tree Captain Charlie waited.

An automobile came out between the stone columns of the big gate and thundered away down the
street with reckless speed. Adam Ward, thought the man under the tree--even John never drove
like that. And he wondered where the old Mill owner could be going at such an hour of the night.

Still he waited.

Suddenly a light flashed out from the windows of an upper room. A moment, and the watcher saw
the form of a woman framed in the casement against the bright background. For some time she
stood there, her face, shaded by her hands, pressed close to the glass, as if she were trying
to see into the darkness of the night. Then she drew back. The shade was drawn.

Very slowly Captain Charlie went back down the hill.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE GATHERING STORM

In the weeks immediately following her visit to the Mill, Helen Ward met the demands of her
world apparently as usual. If any one noticed that she failed to enter into the affairs of
her associates with the same lively interest which had made her a leader among those who do
nothing strenuously, they attributed it to her father's ill health. And in this they were partially
right. Ever since the day when she half revealed her fears to the Interpreter, the young woman's
feeling that her father's ill health and the unhappiness of her home were the result of some
hidden thing, had gamed in strength. Since her meeting with Captain Charlie there had been
in her heart a deepening conviction that, but for this same hidden thing, she would have known
in all its fullness a happiness of which she could now only dream.

More frequently than ever before, she went now to sit with the Interpreter on the balcony porch
of that little hut on the cliff. But Bobby and Maggie wished in vain for their princess lady
to come and take them again into the land of trees and birds and flowers and sunshiny hills
and clean blue sky. Often, now, she went to meet her brother when his day's work was done,
and, sending Tom home with her big car, she would go with John in his roadster. And always
while he told her of the Mill and led her deeper into the meaning of the industry and its relation
to the life of the people, she listened with eager interest. But she did not go again to the
Martin cottage or visit the old house.

Once at the foot of the Interpreter's zigzag stairway she met Captain Martin and greeted him
in passing. Two or three times she caught a glimpse of him among the men coming from the Mill
as she waited for John in front of the office. That was all. But always she was conscious of
him. When from the Interpreter's hut she watched the twisting columns of smoke rising from
the tall stacks, her thoughts were with the workman who somewhere under that cloud was doing
his full share in the industrial army of his people. When John talked to her of the Mill and
its meaning, her heart was glad for her brother's loyal comradeship with this man who had been
his captain over there. The very sound of the deep-toned whistle that carried to Adam Ward
the proud realization of his material possessions carried to his daughter thoughts of what,
but for those same material possessions, might have been.

For relief she turned to McIver. There was a rocklike quality in the factory owner that had
always appealed to her. His convictions were so unwavering--his judgments so final. McIver
never doubted McIver. He never, in his own mind, questioned what he did by the standards of
right and justice. The only question he ever asked himself was, Would McIver win or lose? Any
suggestion of a difference of opinion on the part of another was taken as a personal insult
that was not to be tolerated. Therefore, because the man was what he was, his class convictions
were deeply grounded, fixed and certain. In the turmoil of her warring thoughts and disturbed
emotions Helen felt her own balance so shaken that she instinctively reached out to steady
herself by him. The man, feeling her turn to him, pressed his suit with all the ardor she would
permit, for he saw in his success not only possession of the woman he wanted, but the overthrow
of John's opposition to his business plans and the consequent triumph of his personal material
interests and the interests of his class. But, in spite of the relief she gained from the strength
of McIver's convictions, some strange influence within herself prevented her from yielding.
She probably would yield at last, she told herself drearily--because there seemed to be nothing
else for her to do.

      *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, from his hut on the cliff, the Interpreter watched the approach of the industrial storm.

The cloud that had appeared on the Millsburgh horizon with the coming of Jake Vodell had steadily
assumed more threatening proportions until now it hung dark with gloomy menace above the work
and the homes of the people. To the man in the wheel chair, looking out upon the scene that
lay with all its varied human interests before him, there was no bit of life anywhere that
was not in the shadow of the gathering storm. The mills and factories along the river, the
stores and banks and interests of the business section, the farms in the valley, the wretched
Flats, the cottage homes of the workmen and the homes on the hillside, were all alike in the
path of the swiftly approaching danger.

The people with anxious eyes watched for the storm to break and made such hurried preparations
as they could. They heard the dull, muttering sound of its heavy voice and looked at one another
in silent dread or talked, neighbor to neighbor, in low tones. A strange hush was over this
community of American citizens. In their work, in their pleasures, in their home life, in their
love and happiness, in their very sorrows, they felt the deadening presence of this dread thing
that was sweeping upon them from somewhere beyond the borders of their native land. And against
this death that filled the air they seemingly knew not how to defend themselves.

This, to the Interpreter, was the almost unbelievable tragedy--that the people should not know
what to do; that they should not have given more thought to making the structure of their citizenship
stormproof.

"The great trouble is that the people don't line up right," said Captain Charlie to John and
the Interpreter one evening as the workman and the general manager were sitting with the old
basket maker on the balcony porch.

"Just what do you mean by that, Charlie?" asked John. The man in the wheel chair was nodding
his assent to the union man's remark.

"I mean," Charlie explained, "that the people consider only capital and labor, or workmen and
business men. They put loyal American workmen and imperialist workmen all together on one side
and loyal American business men and imperialist business men all together on the other. They
line up all employees against all employers. For example, as the people see it, you and I are
enemies and the Mill is our battle ground. The fact is that the imperialist manual workman
is as much my enemy as he is yours. The imperialist business man is as much your enemy as he
is mine."

"You are exactly right, Charlie," said the Interpreter. "And that is the first thing that the
Big Idea applied to our industries will do--it will line up the great body of loyal American
workmen that you represent with the great body of loyal American business men that John represents
against the McIvers of capital and the Jake Vodells of labor. And that new line-up alone would
practically insure victory. Nine tenths of our industrial troubles are due to the fact that
employers and employees alike fail to recognize their real enemies and so fight their friends
as often as they fight their foes.

"The people must learn to call an industrial slacker a slacker, whether he loafs on a park
bench or loafs on the veranda of the country club house. They have to recognize that a traitor
to the industries is a traitor to the nation and that he is a traitor whether he works at a
bench or runs a bank. They have to say to the imperialist of business and to the imperialist
of labor alike, 'The industries of this country are not for you or your class alone, they are
for all because the very life of the nation is in them and is dependent upon them.' When the
people of this country learn to draw the lines of class where they really belong there will
be an end to our industrial wars and to all the suffering that they cause."

"If only the people could be lined up and made to declare themselves openly," said John, "Jake
Vodell would have about as much chance to make trouble among us as the German Crown Prince
would have had among the French Blue Devils."

Charlie laughed.

"Which means, I suppose," said the Interpreter, "that there would be a riot to see who could
lay hands on him first."

      *       *       *       *       *

The storm broke at McIver's factory. It was as Jake Vodell had told the Interpreter it would
be--"easy to find a grievance."

McIver declared that before he would yield to the demands of his workmen, his factory should
stand idle until the buildings rotted to the ground.

The agitator answered that before his men would yield they would make Millsburgh as a city
of the dead.

Two or three of the other smaller unions supported McIver's employees with sympathetic strikes.
But the success or failure of Jake Vodell's campaign quickly turned on the action of the powerful
Mill workers' union. The commander-in-chief of the striking forces must win John Ward's employees
to his cause or suffer defeat. He bent every effort to that end.

Sam Whaley and a few like him walked out. But that was expected by everybody, for Sam Whaley
had identified himself from the day of Vodell's arrival in Millsburgh as the agitator's devoted
follower and right-hand man. But this unstable, whining weakling and his fellows from the Flats
carried little influence with the majority of the sturdy, clearer-visioned workmen.

At a meeting of the Millsburgh Manufacturing Association, McIver endeavored to pledge the organization
to a concerted effort against the various unions of their workmen.

John Ward refused to enter into any such alliance against the workmen, and branded McIver's
plan as being in spirit and purpose identical with the schemes of Jake Vodell. John argued
that while the heads of the various related mills and factories possessed the legal right to
maintain their organization for the purpose of furthering such business interests as were common
to them all, they could not, as loyal citizens, attempt to deprive their fellow workmen citizens
of that same right. Any such effort to array class against class, he declared, was nothing
less than sheer imperialism, and antagonistic to every principle of American citizenship.

When McIver characterized Vodell as an anarchist and stated that the unions were back of him
and his schemes against the government, John retorted warmly that the statement was false and
an insult to many of the most loyal citizens in Millsburgh. There were individual members of
the unions who were followers of Jake Vodell, certainly. But comparatively few of the union
men who were led by the agitator to strike realized the larger plans of their leader, while
the unions as a whole no more endorsed anarchy than did the Manufacturing Association.

McIver then drew for his fellow manufacturers a very true picture of the industrial troubles
throughout the country, and pointed out clearly and convincingly the national dangers that
lay in the threatening conditions. Millsburgh was in no way different from thousands of other
communities. If the employers could not defend themselves by an organized effort against their
employees, he would like Mr. Ward to explain who would defend them.

To all of which John answered that it was not a question of employers defending themselves
against their employees. The owners had no more at stake in the situation than did their workmen,
for the lives of all were equally dependent upon the industries that were threatened with destruction.
In the revolution that Jake Vodell's brotherhood was fomenting the American employers could
lose no more than would the American employees. The question was, How could American industries
be protected against both the imperialistic employer and the imperialistic employee? The answer
was, By the united strength of the loyal American employers and employees, openly arrayed against
the teachings and leadership of Jake Vodell, on the one hand, and equally against all such
principles and actions as had been proposed by Mr. McIver, on the other.

When the meeting closed, McIver had failed to gain the support of the association.

Realizing that without the Mill he could never succeed in his plans, the factory owner appealed
to Adam Ward himself.

The old Mill owner, in full accord with McIver, attempted to force John into line. But the
younger man refused to enlist in any class war against his loyal fellow workmen.

Adam stormed and threatened and predicted utter ruin. John calmly offered to resign. The father
refused to listen to this, on the ground that his ill health did not permit him to assume again
the management of the business, and that he would never consent to the Mill's being operated
by any one outside the family.

When Helen returned to her home in the early evening, she found her father in a state of mind
bordering on insanity.

Striding here and there about the rooms with uncontrollable nervous energy, he roared, as he
always did on such occasions, about his sole ownership of the Mill--the legality of the patents
that gave him possession of the new process--how it was his genius and hard work alone that
had built up the Mill--that no one should take his possessions from him--waving his arms and
shaking his fists in violent, meaningless gestures. With his face twitching and working and
his eyes blazing with excitement and rage, his voice rose almost to a scream: "Let them try
to take anything away from me! I know what they are going to do, but they can't do it. I've
had the best lawyers that I could hire and I've got it all tied up so tight that no one can
touch it.

"I could have thrown Pete Martin out of the Mill any time I wanted. He has no claim on me that
any court in the world would recognize. Let him try anything he dares. I'll starve him to death--I'll
turn him into the streets--he hasn't a thing in the world that he didn't get by working for
me. I made him--I will ruin him. You all think that I am sick--you think that I am crazy--that
I don't know what I am talking about. I'll show you--you'll see what will happen if they start
any thing--"

The piteous exhibition ended as usual. As if driven by some invisible fiend, the man rushed
from the presence of those whom he most loved to the dreadful company of his own fearful and
monstrous thoughts.

And the room where the wife and children of Adam Ward sat was filled with the presence of that
hidden thing of which they dared not speak.

      *       *       *       *       *

Everywhere throughout the city the people were discussing John Ward's opposition to McIver.

The community, tense with feeling, waited for an answer to the vital question, What would the
Mill workers' union do? Upon the answer of John Ward's employees to the demands of the agitator
for a sympathetic strike depended the success or failure of Jake Vodell's Millsburgh campaign.

CHAPTER XIX

ADAM WARD'S WORK

It was evening. The Interpreter was sitting in his wheel chair on the balcony porch with silent
Billy not far away. Beyond the hills on the west the sky was faintly glowing in the last of
the sun's light. The Flats were deep in gloomy shadows out of which the grim stacks of the
Mill rose toward the smoky darkness of their overhanging cloud. Here and there among the poor
homes of the workers a lighted window or a lonely street lamp shone in the murky dusk. But
the lights of the business section of the city gleamed and sparkled like clusters and strings
of jewels, while the residence districts on the hillside were marked by hundreds of twinkling,
starlike points.

The quiet was rudely broken by a voice at the outer doorway of the hut. The tone was that of
boisterous familiarity. "Hello! hello there! Anybody home?"

"Here," answered the Interpreter. "Come in. Or, I should say, come out," he added, as his visitor
found his way through the darkness of the living room. "A night like this is altogether too
fine to spend under a roof."

"Why in thunder don't you have a light?" said the visitor, with a loud freedom carefully calculated
to give the effect of old and privileged comradeship. But the laugh of hearty good fellowship
which followed his next remark was a trifle overdone "Ain't afraid of bombs, are you? Don't
you know that the war is over yet?"

The Interpreter obligingly laughed at the merry witticism, as he answered, "There is light
enough out here under the stars to think by. How are you, Adam Ward?"

From where he stood in the doorway, Adam could see the dim figure of the Interpreter's companion
at the farther end of the porch. "Who is that with you?" demanded the Mill owner suspiciously.

"Only Billy Rand," replied the man in the wheel chair reassuringly. "Won't you sit down?"

Before accepting the invitation to be seated, Adam advanced upon the man in the wheel chair
with outstretched hands, as if eagerly meeting a most intimate friend whose regard he prized
above all other relationships of life. Seizing the Interpreter's hand, he clung to it in an
excess of cordiality, all the while pouring out between short laughs of pretended gladness,
a hurried volume of excuses for having so long delayed calling upon his dear old friend. To
any one at all acquainted with the man, it would have been very clear that he wanted something.

"It seems ages since I saw you," he declared, as he seated himself at last. "It's a shame for
a man to neglect an old friend as I have neglected you."

The Interpreter returned, calmly, "The last time you called was just before your son enlisted.
You wanted me to help you keep him at home."

It was too dark to see Adam's face. "So it was, I remember now." There was a suggestion of
nervousness in the laugh which followed his words.

"The time before that," said the Interpreter evenly, "was when Tom Blair was killed in the
Mill. You wanted me to persuade Tom's widow that you were in no way liable for the accident."

The barometer of Adam's friendliness dropped another degree. "That affair was finally settled
at five thousand," he said, and this time he did not laugh.

"The time before that," said the Interpreter, "was when your old friend Peter Martin's wife
died. You wanted me to explain to the workmen who attended the funeral how necessary it was
for you to take that hour out of their pay checks."

"You have a good memory," said the visitor, coldly, as he stirred uneasily in the dusk.

"I have," agreed the man in the wheel chair; "I find it a great blessing at times. It is the
only thing that preserves my sense of humor. It is not always easy to preserve one's sense
of humor, is it, Adam Ward?"

When the Mill owner answered, his voice, more than his words, told how determined he was to
hold his ground of pleasant, friendly comradeship, at least until he had gained the object
of his visit.

"Don't you ever get lonesome up here? Sort of gloomy, ain't it--especially at nights?"

"Oh, no," returned the Interpreter; "I have many interesting callers; there are always my work
and my books and always, night and day, I have our Mill over there."

"Heh! What! Our Mill! Where? Oh, I see--yes--our Mill--that's good! Our Mill!"

"Surely you will admit that I have some small interest in the Mill where we once worked side
by side, will you not, Adam?"

"Oh, yes," laughed Adam, helping on the jest. "But let me see--I don't exactly recall the amount
of your investment--what was it you put in?"

"Two good legs, Adam Ward, two good legs," returned the old basket maker.

Again Adam Ward was at a loss for an answer. In the shadowy presence of that old man in the
wheel chair the Mill owner was as a wayward child embarrassed before a kindly master.

When the Interpreter spoke again his deep voice was colored with gentle patience.

"Why have you come to me like this, Adam Ward? What is it that you want?"

Adam moved uneasily. "Why--nothing particular--I just thought I would call--happened to be
going by and saw your light."

There had been no light in the hut that evening. The Interpreter waited. The surrounding darkness
of the night seemed filled with warring spirits from the gloomy Flats, the mighty Mill, the
glittering streets and stores and the cheerfully lighted homes.

Adam tried to make his voice sound casual, but he could not altogether cover the nervous intensity
of his interest, as he asked the question that was so vital to the entire community. "Will
the Mill workers' union go out on a sympathetic strike?"

"No."

The Mill owner drew a long breath of relief. "I judged you would know."

The Interpreter did not answer.

Adam spoke with more confidence. "I suppose you know this agitator Jake Vodell?"

"I know who he is," replied the Interpreter. "He is a well-known representative of a foreign
society that is seeking, through the working people of this country, to extend its influence
and strengthen its power."

"The unions are going too far," said Adam. "The people won't stand for their bringing in a
man like Vodell to preach anarchy and stir up all kinds of trouble."

The Interpreter spoke strongly. "Jake Vodell no more represents the great body of American
union men than you, Adam Ward, represent the great body of American employers."

"He works with the unions, doesn't he?"

"Yes, but that does not make him a representative of the union men as a whole, any more than
the fact that your work with the great body of American business men makes you their representative."

"I should like to know why I am not a representative American business man." It was evident
from the tone of his voice that the Mill owner controlled himself with an effort.

The Interpreter answered, without a trace of personal feeling, "You do not represent them,
Adam Ward, because the spirit and purpose of your personal business career is not the spirit
and purpose of our business men as a whole--just as the spirit and purpose of such men as Jake
Vodell is not the spirit and purpose of our union men as a whole."

"But," asserted the Mill owner, "it is men like me who have built up this country. Look at
our railroads, our great manufacturing plants, our industries of all kinds! Look what I have
done for Millsburgh! You know what the town was when you first came here. Look at it now!"

"The new process has indeed wrought great changes in Millsburgh," suggested the Interpreter.

"The new process! You mean that I have wrought great changes in Millsburgh. What would the
new process have amounted to if it had not been for me? Why, even the poor old fools who owned
the Mill at that time couldn't have done anything with it. I had to force it on them. And then
when I had managed to get it installed and had proved what it would do, I made them increase
their capitalization and give me a half interest--told them if they didn't I would take my
process to their competitors and put them out of business. Later I managed to gain the control
and after that it was easy." His voice changed to a tone of arrogant, triumphant boasting.
"I may not be a representative business man in your estimation, but my work stands just the
same. No man who knows anything about business will deny that I built up the Mill to what it
is to-day."

"And that," returned the Interpreter, "is exactly what Vodell says for the men who work with
their hands in cooeperation with men like you who work with their brains. You say that you
built the Mill because you thought and planned and directed its building. Jake Vodell says
the men whose physical strength materialized your thoughts, the men who carried out your plans
and toiled under your direction built the Mill. And you and Jake are both right to exactly
the same degree. The truth is that you have all together built the Mill. You have no more right
to think or to say that you did it than Pete Martin has to think or to say that he did it."

When Adam Ward found no answer to this the Interpreter continued. "Consider a great building:
The idea of the structure has come down through the ages from the first habitation of primitive
man. The mental strength represented in the structure in its every detail is the composite
thought of every generation of man since the days when human beings dwelt in rocky caves and
in huts of mud. But listen: The capitalist who furnished the money says he did it; the architect
says he did it; the stone mason says he did it; the carpenter says he did it; the mountains
that gave the stone say they did it; the forests that grew the timber say they did it; the
hills that gave the metal say they did it.

"The truth is that all did it--that each individual worker, whether he toiled with his hands
or with his brain, was dependent upon all the others as all were dependent upon those who lived
and labored in the ages that have gone before, as all are dependent at the last upon the forces
of nature that through the ages have labored for all. And this also is true, sir, whether you
like to admit it or not; just as we--you and I and Pete Martin and the others--all together
built the Mill, so we all together built it for all. You, Adam Ward, can no more keep for yourself
alone the fruits of your labor than you alone and single-handed could have built the Mill."

The Interpreter paused as if for an answer.

Adam Ward did not speak.

A flare of light from, the stacks of the Mill, where the night shift was sweating at its work,
drew their eyes. Through the darkness came the steady song of industry--a song that was charged
with the life of millions. And they saw the lights of the business district, where Jake Vodell
was preaching to a throng of idle workmen his doctrine of class hatred and destruction.

The Interpreter's manner was in no way aggressive when he broke the silence. There was, indeed,
in his deep voice an undertone of sorrow, and yet he spoke as with authority. "You were driven
here to-night by your fear, Adam Ward. You recognize the menace to this community and to our
nation in the influence and teaching of men like Jake Vodell. Most of all, you fear for yourself
and your material possessions. And you have reason to be afraid of this danger that you yourself
have brought upon Millsburgh."

"What!" cried the Mill owner. "You say that I am responsible?--that I brought this anarchist
agitator here?"

The Interpreter answered, solemnly, "I say that but for you and such men as you, Adam Ward,
Jake Vodell could never gain a hearing in any American city."

Adam Ward laughed harshly.

But the old basket maker continued as if he had not heard. "Every act of your business career,
sir, has been a refusal to recognize those who have worked with you. Your whole life has been
an over assertion of your personal independence and a denial of the greatest of all laws--the
law of dependence, which is the vital principle of life itself. And so you have, through these
years, upheld and exemplified to the working people the very selfishness to which Jake Vodell
appeals now with such sad effectiveness. It is the class pride and intolerance which you have
fostered in yourself and family that have begotten the class hatred which makes Vodell's plans
against our government a dangerous possibility. Your fathers fought in a great war for independence,
Adam Ward. Your son must now fight for a recognition of that dependence without which the independence
won by your father will surely perish from the earth."

At the mention of his son, the Mill owner moved impatiently and spoke with bitter resentment.
"A fine mess you are making of things with your 'dependence.'"

"It is a fine mess that you have made of things, Adam Ward, with your 'independence,'" returned
the Interpreter, sternly.

"I can tell you one thing," said Adam. "Your unions will never straighten anything out with
the help of Jake Vodell and his gang of murdering anarchists."

"You are exactly right," agreed the Interpreter. "And I can tell you a thing to match the truth
of your statement. Your combinations of employers will never straighten anything out with the
help of such men as McIver and his hired gunmen and his talk about driving men to work at the
point of the bayonet. But McIver and his principles are not endorsed by our American employers,"
continued the Interpreter, "any more than Jake Vodell and his methods are endorsed by our American
union employees. The fact is that the great body of loyal American employers and employees,
which is, indeed, the body of our nation itself, is fast coming to recognize the truth that
our industries must somehow be saved from the destruction that is threatened by both the McIvers
of capital and the Vodells of labor. Our Mill, Adam Ward, that you and Pete Martin and I built
together and that, whether you admit it or not, we built for all mankind, our Mill must be
protected against both employers and employees. It must be protected, not because the ownership,
under our laws, happens to be vested in you as an individual citizen, but because of that larger
ownership which, under the universal laws of humanity, is vested in the people whose lives
are dependent upon that Mill as an essential industry. The Mill must be saved, indeed, for
the very people who would destroy it."

"Very fine!" sneered Adam; "and perhaps you will tell me who is to save my Mill that is not
my Mill for the very people who own it and who would destroy it?"

The voice of the Interpreter was colored with the fire of prophecy as he answered, "In the
name of humanity, the sons of the men who built the Mill will save it for humanity. Your boy
John, Adam Ward, and Pete Martin's boy Charlie represent the united armies of American employers
and employees that stand in common loyalty against the forces that are, through the destruction
of our industries, seeking to bring about the downfall of our nation."

Adam Ward laughed. "Tell that to your partner Billy Rand over there; he will hear it as quick
as the American people will."

But the man in the wheel chair was not disturbed by Adam Ward's laughing.

"The great war taught the American people some mighty lessons, Adam Ward," he said. "It taught
us that patriotism is not of one class or rank, but is common to every level of our national
social life. It taught us that heroism is the birthright of both office and shop. Most of all
did the war teach us the lesson of comradeship--that men of every rank and class and occupation
could stand together, live together and die together, united in the bonds of a common, loyal
citizenship for a common, human cause. And out of that war and its lessons our own national
saviors are come. The loyal patriot employers and the loyal patriot employees, who on the fields
of war were brother members of that great union of sacrifice and death, will together free
the industries of their own country from the two equally menacing terrors--imperialistic capital
and imperialistic labor.

"The comradeship of your son with the workman Charlie Martin, the stand that John has taken
against McIver, and the refusal of the Mill workers' union to accept Vodell's leadership--is
the answer to your question, 'Who is to save the Mill?'"

"Rot!" exclaimed Adam Ward. "You talk as though every man who went to that war was inspired
by the highest motives. They were not all heroes by a good deal."

"True," returned the Interpreter, "they were not all heroes. But there was the leaven that
leavened the lump, and so the army itself was heroic."

"What about the moral degeneracy and the crime wave that have followed the return of your heroic
army?" demanded Adam.

"True, again," returned the Interpreter; "it is inevitable that men whose inherited instincts
and tendencies are toward crime should acquire in the school of war a bolder spirit--a more
reckless daring in their criminal living. But again there is the saving leaven that leavens
the lump. If the war training makes criminals more bold, it as surely makes the leaven of nobility
more powerful. One splendid example of noble heroism is ten thousand times more potent in the
world than a thousand revolting deeds of crime. No--no, Adam Ward, the world will not forget
the lessons it learned over there. The torch of Flanders fields has not fallen. The world will
carry on."

There was such a quality of reverent conviction in the concluding words of the man in the wheel
chair that Adam Ward was silenced.

For some time they sat, looking into the night where the huge bulk of the Mill with its towering
stacks and overhanging clouds seemed to dominate not only the neighboring shops and factories
and the immediate Flats, but in some mysterious way to extend itself over the business district
and the homes of the city, and, like a ruling spirit, to pervade the entire valley, even unto
the distant line of hills.

When the old basket maker spoke again, that note of strange and solemn authority was in his
voice. "Listen, Adam Ward! In the ideals, the heroism, the suffering, the sacrifice of the
war--in shell hole and trench and bloody No Man's Land, the sons of men have found again the
God that you and men like you had banished from the Mill. Your boy and Pete Martin's boy, with
more thousands of their comrades than men of your mind realize, have come back from the war
fields of France to enthrone God once more in the industrial world. And it shall come that
every forge and furnace and anvil and machine shall be an organ to His praise--that every suit
of overalls shall be a priestly robe of ministering service. And this God that you banished
from the Mill and that is to be by your son restored to His throne and served by a priesthood
of united employers and employees, shall bear a new name, Adam Ward, and that name shall be WORK."

Awed by the strange majesty of the Interpreter's voice, Adam Ward could only whisper fearfully,
"Work--the name of God shall be Work!" "Ay, Adam Ward, WORK--and why not? Does not the work
of the world express the ideals, the purpose, the needs, the life, the oneness of the world's
humanity, even as a flower expresses the plant that puts it forth? And is not God the ultimate
flowering of the human plant?"

The Mill owner spoke with timid hesitation, "Could I--do you think--could I, perhaps, help
to, as you say, put God back into the Mill?"

"Your part in the building of the Mill is finished, Adam Ward," came the solemn answer. "You
have made many contracts with men, sir; you should now make a contract with your God."

The owner of the new process sprang to his feet with an exclamation of fear. As one who sees
a thing of horror in the dark, he drew back, trembling.

That deep, inexorable voice of sorrowful authority went on, "Make a contract with your God,
Adam Ward; make a contract with your God."

With a wild cry of terror Adam Ward fled into the night.

The Interpreter in his wheel chair looked up at the stars.

      *       *       *       *       *

It seems scarcely possible that the old basket maker could have foreseen the tragic effect
of his words--and yet--

CHAPTER XX

THE PEOPLE'S AMERICA

At his evening meetings on the street, Jake Vodell with stirring oratory kindled the fire of
his cause. In the councils of the unions, through individuals and groups, with clever arguments
and inflaming literature, he sought recruits. With stinging sarcasm and withering scorn he
taunted the laboring people--told them they were fools and cowards to submit to the degrading
slavery of their capitalist owners. With biting invective and blistering epithet he pictured
their employer enemies as the brutal and ruthless destroyers of their homes. With thrilling
eloquence he fanned the flames of class hatred, inspired the loyalty of his followers to himself
and held out to them golden promises of reward if they would prove themselves men and take
that which belonged to them.

But the Mill workers' union, as an organization, was steadfast in its refusal to be dominated
by this agitator who was so clearly antagonistic to every principle of American citizenship.
Jake Vodell could neither lead nor drive them into a strike that was so evidently called in
the interests of his cause. And more and more the agitator was compelled to recognize the powerful
influence of the Interpreter. It was not long before he went to the hut on the cliff with a
positive demand for the old basket maker's open support.

"I do not know why it is," he said, "that a poor old cripple like you should have such power
among men, but I know it is so. You shall tell this Captain Charlie and his crowd of fools
that they must help me to win for the laboring people their freedom. You shall, for me, enlist
these Mill men in the cause."

The Interpreter asked, gravely, "And when you have accomplished this that you call freedom--when
you have gained this equality that you talk about--how will your brotherhood be governed?"

Jake Vodell scowled as he gazed at the man in the wheel chair with quick suspicion. "Governed?"

"Yes," returned the Interpreter. "Without organization of some sort nothing can be done. No
industries can be carried on without the concerted effort which is organization. Without the
industry that is necessary to human life the free people you picture cannot exist. Without
government--which means law and the enforcement of law--organization of any kind is impossible."

"There will have to be organization, certainly," answered Vodell.

"Then, there will be leaders, directors, managers with authority to whom the people must surrender
themselves as individuals," said the Interpreter, quietly. "An organization without leadership
is impossible."

The agitator's voice was triumphant, as he said, "Certainly there will be leaders. And their
authority will be unquestioned. And these leaders will be those who have led the people out
of the miserable bondage of their present condition."

The Interpreter's voice had a new note in it now, as he said, "In other words, sir, what you
propose is simply to substitute yourself for McIver. You propose to the people that they overthrow
their present leaders in the industries of their nation in order that you and your fellow agitators
may become their masters. You demand that the citizens of America abolish their national government
and in its place accept you and your fellows as their rulers? What assurance can you give the
people, sir, that under your rule they will have more freedom for self-government, more opportunities
for self-advancement and prosperity and happiness than they have at present?"

"Assurance?" muttered the other, startled by the Interpreter's manner.

The old basket maker continued, "Are you and your self-constituted leaders of the American
working people, gods? Are you not as human as any McIver or Adam Ward of the very class you
condemn? Would you not be subject to the same temptations of power--the same human passions?
Would you not, given the same opportunity, be all that you say they are--or worse?"

Jake Vodell's countenance was black with rage. He started to rise, but a movement of Billy
Rand made him hesitate. His voice was harsh with menacing passion. "And you call yourself a
friend of the laboring class?"

"It is because I am a friend of my fellow American citizens that I ask you what freedom your
brotherhood can insure to us that we have not now," the Interpreter answered, solemnly. "Look
there, sir." He swept, in a gesture, the scene that lay within view of his balcony porch. "That
is America--my America--the America of the people. From the wretched hovels of the incompetent
and unfortunate Sam Whaleys in the Flats down there to Adam Ward's castle on the hill yonder,
it is our America. From the happy little home of that sterling workman, Peter Martin, to the
homes of the business workers on the hillside over there, it is ours. From the business district
to the beautiful farms across the river, it belongs to us all. And the Mill there-- representing
as it does the industries of our nation and standing for the very life of our people--is our
Mill. The troubles that disturb us--the problems of injustice--the wrongs of selfishness that
arise through such employers as McIver and such employees as Sam Whaley, are our troubles,
and we will settle our own difficulties in our own way as loyal American citizens."

The self-appointed apostle of the new freedom had by this time regained his self-control. His
only answer to the Interpreter was a shrug of his thick shoulders and a flash of white teeth
in his black beard.

The old basket maker with his eyes still on the scene that lay before them continued. "Because
I love my countrymen, sir, I protest the destructive teachings of your brotherhood. Your ambitious
schemes would plunge my country into a bloody revolution the horrors of which defy the imagination.
America will find a better way. The loyal American citizens who labor in our industries and
the equally loyal American operators of these industries will never consent to the ruthless
murder by hundreds and thousands of our best brains and our best manhood in support of your
visionary theories. My countrymen will never permit the unholy slaughter of innocent women
and children, that would result from your efforts to overthrow our government and establish
a wholly impossible Utopia upon the basis of an equality that is contrary to every law of life.
You preach freedom to the working people in order to rob them of the freedom they already have.
With visions of impossible wealth and luxurious idleness you blind them to the greater happiness
that is within reach of their industry. In the name of an equality, the possibility of which
your own assumed leadership denies, you incite a class hatred and breed an intolerance and
envy that destroy the good feeling of comradeship and break down the noble spirit of that actual
equality which we already have and which is our only salvation."

"Equality!" sneered Jake Vodell. "You have a fine equality in this America of capitalist-ridden
fools who are too cowardly to say that their souls are their own. It is the equality of Adam
Ward and Sam Whaley, I suppose."

"Sam Whaley is a product of your teaching, sir," the Interpreter answered. "The equality of
which I speak is that of Adam Ward and Peter Martin as it is evidenced in the building up of
the Mill. It is the equality that is in the comradeship of their sons, John and Charlie, who
will protect and carry on the work of their fathers. It is the equality of a common citizenship--of
mutual dependence of employer and employee upon the industries, that alone can save our people
from want and starvation and guard our nation from the horrors you would bring upon it."

The man laughed. "Suppose you sing that pretty song to McIver, heh? What do you think he would
say?"

"He would laugh, as you are laughing," returned the Interpreter, sadly.

"Tell it to Adam Ward then," jeered the other. "He will recognize his equality with Peter Martin
when you explain it, heh?"

"Adam Ward is already paying a terrible price for denying it," the Interpreter answered.

Again Jake Vodell laughed with sneering triumph. "Well, then I guess you will have to preach
your equality to the deaf and dumb man there. Maybe you can make him understand it. The old
basket maker without any legs and the big husky who can neither hear nor talk--they are equals,
I suppose, heh?"

"Billy Rand and I perfectly illustrate the equality of dependence, sir," returned the Interpreter.
"Billy is as much my superior physically as I am his superior mentally. Without my thinking
and planning he would be as helpless as I would be without his good bodily strength. We are
each equally dependent upon the other, and from that mutual dependence comes our comradeship
in the industry which alone secures for us the necessities of life. I could not make baskets
without Billy's labor--Billy could not make baskets without my planning and directing. And
yet, sir, you and McIver would set us to fighting each other. You would have Billy deny his
dependence upon me and use his strength to destroy me, thus depriving himself of the help he
must have if he would live. McIver would have me deny my dependence upon Billy and by antagonizing
him with my assumed superiority turn his strength to the destruction of our comradeship by
which I also live. Your teaching of class loyalty and class hatred applied to Billy and me
would result in the ruin of our basket making and in our consequent starvation."

Again the Interpreter, from his wheel chair, pointed with outstretched arm to the scene that
lay with all its varied grades of life--social levels and individual interests--before them.
"Look," he said, "to the inequality that is there--inequalities that are as great as the difference
between Billy Rand and myself. And yet, every individual life is dependent upon all the other
individual lives. The Mill yonder is the basket making of the people. All alike must look to
it for life itself. The industries, without which the people cannot exist, can be carried on
only by the comradeship of those who labor with their hands and those who work with their brains.
In the common dependence all are equal.

"The only equality that your leadership, with its progress of destruction, can insure to American
employers and employees is an equality of indescribable suffering and death."

The old basket maker paused a moment before he added, solemnly, "I wonder that you dare assume
the responsibility for such a catastrophe. Have you no God, sir, to whom you must eventually
account?"

The man's teeth gleamed in a grin of malicious sarcasm. "I should know that you believed in
God. Bah! An old woman myth to scare fools and children. I suppose you believe in miracles also?"

"I believe in the miracle of life," the Interpreter answered; "and in the great laws of life--the
law of inequality and dependence, that in its operation insures the oneness of all things."

The agitator rose to his feet, and with a shrug of contempt, said, "Very pretty, Mr. Interpreter,
very pretty. You watch now from your hut here and you shall see what men who are not crippled
old basket makers will do with that little bit of your America out there. It is I who will
teach Peter Martin and his comrades in the Mill how to deal with your friend Adam Ward and
his class."

"You are too late, sir," said the Interpreter, as the man moved toward the door.

Jake Vodell turned. "How, too late?" Then as he saw Billy Rand rising to his feet, his hand
went quickly inside his vest.

The old basket maker smiled as he once more held out a restraining hand toward his companion.
"I do not mean anything like that, sir. I told you some time ago that you were defeated in
your Millsburgh campaign by Adam Ward's retirement from the Mill. You are too late because
you are forced now to deal, not with Adam Ward and Peter Martin, but with their sons."

"Oh, ho! and what you should say also, is that I am really forced to deal with an old basket
maker who has no legs, heh? Well, we shall see about that, too, Mr. Interpreter, when the time
comes--we shall see."

CHAPTER XXI

PETER MARTIN'S PROBLEM

It was not long until the idle workmen began to feel the want of their pay envelopes. The grocers
and butchers were as dependent upon those pay envelopes as were the workmen themselves.

The winter was coming on. There was a chill in the air. In the homes of the strikers the mothers
and their little ones needed not only food but fuel and clothing as well. The crowds at the
evening street meetings became more ominous. Through the long, idle days grim, sullen-faced
men walked the streets or stood in groups on the corners watching their fellow citizens and
muttering in low, guarded tones. Members of the Mill workers' union were openly branded as
cowards and traitors to their class. The suffering among the women and children became acute.

But Jake Vodell was a master who demanded of his disciples most heroic loyalty, without a thought
of the cost--to them.

McIver put an armed guard about his factory and boasted that he could live without work. The
strikers, he declared, could either starve themselves and their families or accept his terms.

The agitator was not slow in making capital of McIver's statements.

The factory owner depended upon the suffering of the women and children to force the workmen
to yield to him. Jake Vodell, the self-appointed savior of the laboring people, depended upon
the suffering of women and children to drive his followers to the desperate measures that would
further his peculiar and personal interests.

Through all this, the Mill workers' union still refused to accept the leadership of this man
whose every interest was anti-American and foreign to the principles of the loyal citizen workman.
But the fire of Jake Vodell's oratory and argument was not without kindling power, even among
John Ward's employees. As the feeling on both sides of the controversy grew more bitter and
intolerant, the Mill men felt with increasing force the pull of their class. The taunts and
jeers of the striking workers were felt. The cries of "traitor" hurt. The suffering of the
innocent members of the strikers' families appealed strongly to their sympathies.

When McIver's imperialistic declaration was known, the number who were in favor of supporting
Jake Vodell's campaign increased measurably.

Nearly every day now at some hour of the evening or night, Pete and Captain Charlie, with others
from among their union comrades, might have been found in the hut on the cliff in earnest talk
with the man in the wheel chair. The active head of the union was Captain Charlie, as his father
had been before him, but it was no secret that the guiding counsel that held the men of the
Mill steady cane from the old basket maker.

For John Ward the days were increasingly hard. He could not but sense the feeling of the men.
He knew that if Jake Vodell could win them, such disaster as the people of Millsburgh had never
seen would result. The interest and sympathy of Helen, the comradeship of Captain Charlie,
and the strength of the Interpreter gave him courage and hope. But there was nothing that he
could do. He felt as he had felt sometimes in France when he was called upon to stand and wait.
It was a relief to help Mary as he could in her work among the sufferers. But even this activity
of mercy was turned against him by both McIver and Vodell. The factory man blamed him for prolonging
the strike and thus working injury to the general business interests of Millsburgh. The strike
leader charged him with seeking to win the favor of the working class in order to influence
his own employees against, what he called the fight for their industrial freedom.

The situation was rapidly approaching a crisis when Peter Martin and Captain Charlie, returning
home from a meeting of their union laid one evening, found the door of the house locked.

The way the two men stood facing each other without a word revealed the tension of their nerves.
Captain Charlie's hand shook so that his key rattled against the lock. But when they were inside
and had switched on the light, a note which Mary had left on the table for them explained.

The young woman had gone to the Flats in answer to a call for help. John was with her. She
had left the note so that her father and brother would not be alarmed at her absence in case
they returned home before her.

In their relief, the two men laughed. They were a little ashamed of their unspoken fears.

"We might have known," said Pete, and with the words seemed to dismiss the incident from his mind.

But Captain Charlie did not recover so easily. While his father found the evening paper and,
settling himself in an easy-chair by the table, cleaned his glasses and filled and lighted
his pipe, the younger man went restlessly from room to room, turning on the lights, turning
them off again--all apparently for no reason whatever. He finished his inspection by returning
to the table and again picking up Mary's note.

When he had reread the message he said, slowly, "I thought John expected to be at the office
to-night."

Something in his son's voice caused the old workman to look at him steadily, as he answered,
"John probably came by on his way to the Mill and dropped in for a few minutes."

"I suppose so," returned Charlie. Then, "Father, do you think it wise for sister to be so much
with John?"

The old workman laid aside his paper. "Why, I don't know--I hadn't thought much about it, son.
It seems natural enough, considering the way you children was all raised together when you
was youngsters."

"It's natural enough all right," returned Captain Charlie, and, with a bitterness that was
very unlike his usual self, he added, "That's, the hell of it--it's too natural--too human--too
right for this day and age."

Pete Martin's mind worked rather slowly but he was fully aroused now--Charlie's meaning was
clear. "What makes you think that Mary and John are thinking of each other in that way, son?"

"How could they help it?" returned Captain Charlie. "Sister is exactly the kind of woman that
John would choose for a wife. Don't I know what he thinks of the light-headed nonentities in
the set that he is supposed to belong to? Hasn't he demonstrated his ideas of class distinctions?
It would never occur to him that there was any reason why John Ward should not love Mary Martin.
As for sister--when you think of the whole story of their childhood together, of how John and
I were all through the war, of how he has been in the Mill since we came home, of their seeing
each other here at the house so much, of the way he has been helping her with her work among
the poor in the Flats--well, how could any woman like sister help loving him?"

While the older man was considering his son's presentation of the case, Captain Charlie added,
with characteristic loyalty, "God may have made finer men than John Ward, but if He did they
don't live around Millsburgh."

"Well, then, son," said Peter Martin, with his slow smile, "what about it? Suppose they are
thinking of each other as you say?"

Captain Charlie did not answer for a long minute. And the father, watching, saw in that strong
young face the shadow of a hurt which the soldier workman could not hide.

"It is all so hopeless," said Charlie, at last, in a tone that told more clearly than words
could have done his own hopelessness. "I--it don't seem right for Mary to have to bear it, too."

"I'm sorry, son," was all that the old workman said, but Captain Charlie knew that his father
understood.

After that they did not speak until they heard an automobile stop in front of the house.

"That must be Mary now," said Pete, looking at his watch. "They have never been so late before."

They heard her step on the porch. The sound of the automobile died away in the distance.

When Mary came in and they saw her face, they knew that Charlie was right. She tried to return
their greetings in her usual manner but failed pitifully and hurried on to her room.

The two men looked at each other without a word.

Presently Mary returned and told them a part of her evening's experience. Soon after her father
and brother had left the house for the meeting of their union, a boy from the Flats came with
the word that the wife of one of Jake Vodell's followers was very ill. Mary, knowing the desperate
need of the case but fearing to be alone in that neighborhood at night, had telephoned John
at the Mill and he had taken her in his car to the place. The woman, in the agonies of childbirth,
was alone with her three little girls. The husband and father was somewhere helping Jake Vodell
in the agitator's noble effort to bring happiness to the laboring class. While Mary was doing
what she could in the wretched home, John went for a doctor, and to bring fuel and blankets
and food and other things that were needed. But, in spite of their efforts, the fighting methods
of McIver and Vodell scored another point, that they each might claim with equal reason as
in his favor--to God knows what end.

"I can't understand why you Mill men let them go on," Mary cried, with a sudden outburst of
feeling, as she finished her story. "You could fight for the women and children during the
war. Whenever there is a shipwreck the papers are always full of the heroism of the men who
cry 'women and children first!' Why can't some one think of the women and children in these
strikes? They are just as innocent as the women and children of Belgium. Why don't you talk
on the streets and hold mass meetings and drive Jake Vodell and that beast McIver out of the
country?"

"Jake Vodell and McIver are both hoping that some one will do just that, Mary," returned Captain
Charlie. "They would like nothing better than for some one to start a riot. You see, dear,
an open clash would result in bloodshed--the troops would be called in by McIver, which is
exactly what he wants. Vodell would provoke an attack on the soldiers, some one would be killed,
and we would have exactly the sort of war against the government that he and his brotherhood
are working for."

The old workman spoke. "Charlie is right, daughter; these troubles will never be settled by
McIver's way nor Vodell's way. They will be settled by the employers like John getting together
and driving the McIvers out of business--and the employees like Charlie here and a lot of the
men in our union getting together with John and his crowd and sending the Jake Vodells back
to whatever country they came from." When her father spoke John's name, the young woman's face
colored with a quick blush. The next moment, unable to control her overwrought emotions, she
burst into tears and started to leave the room. But at the door Captain Charlie caught her
in his arms and held her close until the first violence of her grief was over.

When she had a little of her usual calmness, her brother whispered, "I know all about it, dear."

She raised her head from his shoulder and looked at him with tearful doubt. "You know about--about
John?" she said, wonderingly.

"Yes," he whispered, with an encouraging smile, "I know--father and I were talking about it
before you came home. I am going to leave you with him now. You must tell father, you know.
Goodnight, dear--good-night, father."

Slowly Mary turned back into the room. The old workman, sitting there in his big chair, held
out his arms. With a little cry she ran to him as she had gone to him all the years of her life.

When she had told him all--how John that very evening on their way home from the Flats had
asked her to be his wife--and how she, in spite of her love for him, had forced herself to
answer, "No," Pete Martin sat with his head bowed as one deep in thought.

Mary, knowing her father's slow way, waited.

When the old workman spoke at last it was almost as though, unconscious of his daughter's presence,
he talked to himself. "Your mother and I used to think in the old days when you children were
growing up together that some time perhaps the two families would be united. But when we watched
Adam getting rich and saw what his money was doing to him and to his home, we got to be rather
glad that you children were separated. We were so happy ourselves in our own little home here
that we envied no man. We did not want wealth even for you and Charlie when we saw all that
went with it. We did not dream that Adam's success could ever stand in the way of our children's
happiness like this. But I guess that is the way it is, daughter. I remember the Interpreter's
saying once that no man had a right to make even himself miserable because no man could be
miserable alone."

The old workman's voice grew still more reflective. "It was the new process that made Adam
rich. He was no better man at the bench than I. I never considered him as my superior. He happened
to be born with a different kind of a brain, that is all. And he thought more of money, while
I cared more for other things. But there is a good reason why his money should not be permitted
to stand between his children and my children. There is a lot of truth, after all, in Jake
Vodell's talk about the rights of men who work with their hands. The law upholds Adam Ward
in his possessions, I know. And it would uphold him Just the same if my children were starving.
But the law don't make it right. There should be some way to make a man do what is right--law
or no law. You and John--"

"Father!" cried Mary, alarmed at his words. "Surely you are not going to hold with Jake Vodell
about such things. What do you mean about making a man do what is right--law or no law?"

"There, there, daughter," said the old workman, smiling. "I was just thinking out loud, I guess.
It will be all right for you and John. Run along to bed now, and don't let a worry come, even
into your dreams."

"I would rather give John up a thousand times than have you like Jake Vodell," she said. "You
shan't even think that way."

When she was gone, Peter Martin filled and lighted his pipe again, and for another hour sat alone.

Whether or not his thoughts bore any relation to the doctrines of Jake Vodell, they led the
old workman, on the following day, to pay a visit to Adam Ward at his home on the hill.

CHAPTER XXII

OLD FRIENDS

It was Sunday morning and the church bells were ringing over the little city as the old workman
climbed the hill to Adam Ward's estate.

There was a touch of frost in the air. The hillside back of the interpreter's hut was brown.
But the sun was bright and warm and in every quarter of the city the people were going to their
appointed places of worship. The voice of the Mill was silenced.

Pete wondered if he would find Adam at home. He had not thought about it when he left the cottage--his
mind had been so filled with the object of his visit to the man who had once been his working
comrade and friend.

But Adam Ward was not at church.

The Mill owner's habits of worship were very simply regulated. If the minister said things
that pleased him, and showed a properly humble gratification at Adam's presence in the temple
of God, Adam attended divine services. If the reverend teacher in the pulpit so far forgot
himself as to say anything that jarred Adam's peculiar spiritual sensitiveness, or failed to
greet this particular member of his flock with proper deference, Adam stayed at home and stopped
his subscription to the cause. Nor did he ever fail to inform his pastor and the officers of
the congregation as to the reason for his nonattendance; always, at the time, assuring them
that whenever the minister would preach the truths that he wanted to hear, his weekly offerings
to the Lord would be renewed. Thus Adam Ward was just and honest in his religious life as he
was in his business dealings. He was ready always, to pay for that which he received, but,
as a matter of principle, he was careful always to receive exactly what he paid for.

This Sunday morning Adam Ward was at home.

When Pete reached the entrance to the estate the heavy gates were closed. As Mary's father
stood in doubt before the iron barrier a man appeared on the inside.

"Good-morning, Uncle Pete," he said, in hearty greeting, when he saw who it was that sought
admittance.

"Good-morning, Henry--and what are you doing in there?" returned the workman, who had known
the man from his boyhood.

The other grinned. "Oh, I'm one of the guards at this institution now."

Pete looked at him blankly. "Guards? What are you guarding, Henry?"

Standing close to the iron bars of the gate, Henry glanced over his shoulder before he answered
in a low, cautious tone, "Adam."

The old workman was shocked. "What! you don't mean it!" He shook his grizzly head sadly. "I
hadn't heard that he was that bad."

Henry laughed. "We're not keepin' the old boy in, Uncle Pete--not yet. So far, our orders are
only to keep people out. Dangerous people, I mean--the kind that might want to run away with
the castle, or steal a look at the fountain, or sneak a smell of the flowers or something--y'
understand."

Pete smiled. "How do you like your job, Henry?"

"Oh, it's all right just now when the strike is on. But was you wantin' to come in, Uncle Pete,
or just passing' by?"

"I wanted to see Adam if I could."

The man swung open the gate. "Help yourself, Uncle Pete, just so you don't stick a knife into
him or blow him up with a bomb or poison him or something." He pointed toward that part of
the grounds where Helen had watched her father from the arbor. "You'll find him over there
somewhere, I think. I saw him headed that way a few minutes ago. The rest of the family are
gone to church."

"Is Adam's life really threatened, Henry?" asked Pete, as he stepped inside and the gates were
closed behind him.

"Search me," returned the guard, indifferently. "I expect if the truth were known it ought
to be by rights. He sure enough thinks it is, though. Why, Uncle Pete, there can't a butterfly
flit over these grounds that Adam ain't a yellin' how there's an aeroplane a sailin' around
lookin' fer a chance to drop a monkey wrench on his head or something."

"Poor Adam!" murmured the old workman. "What a way to live!"

"Live?" echoed the guard. "It ain't livin' at all--it's just bein' in hell before your time,
that's what it is--if you ask me."

      *       *       *       *       *

When Peter Martin, making his slow way through the beautiful grounds, first caught sight of
his old bench mate, Adam was pacing slowly to and fro across a sunny open space of lawn. As
he walked, the Mill owner was talking to himself and moving his arms and hands in those continuous
gestures that seemed so necessary to any expression of his thoughts. Once Pete heard him laugh.
And something in the mirthless sound made the old workman pause. It was then that Adam saw him.

There was no mistaking the sudden fear that for a moment seemed to paralyze the man. His gray
face turned a sickly white, his eyes were staring, his jaw dropped, his body shook as if with
a chill. He looked about as if he would call for help, and started as if to seek safety in flight.

"Good-morning, Adam Ward," said Pete Martin.

And at the gentle kindliness in the workman's voice Adam's manner, with a suddenness that was
startling, changed. With an elaborate show of friendliness he came eagerly forward. His gray
face, twitching with nervous excitement, beamed with joyous welcome. As he hurried across the
bit of lawn between them, he waved his arms and rubbed his hands together in an apparent ecstasy
of gladness at this opportunity to receive such an honored guest. His voice trembled with high-pitched
assurance of his happiness in the occasion. He laughed as one who could not contain himself.

"Well, well, well--to think that you have actually come to see me at last." He grasped the
workman's hand in both his own with a grip that was excessive in its hearty energy. With affectionate
familiarity he almost shouted, "You old scoundrel! I can't believe it is you. Where have you
been keeping yourself? How are Charlie and Mary? Lord, but it's good to see you here in my
own home like this."

While Pete was trying to make some adequate reply to this effusive and startling reception,
Adam looked cautiously about to see if there were any chance observers lurking near.

Satisfied that no one was watching, he said, nervously, "Come on, let's sit over here where
we can talk." And with his hand on Pete's arm, he led his caller to lawn chairs that were in
the open, well beyond hearing of any curious ear in the shrubbery.

Giving the workman opportunity for no more than an occasional monosyllable in reply, he poured
forth a flood of information about his estate: The architectural features of his house--the
cost; the loveliness of his trees--the cost; the coloring of his flowers--the cost; the magnificence
of his view, And all the while he studied his caller's face with sharp, furtive glances, trying
to find some clew to the purpose of the workman's visit.

Peter Martin's steady eyes, save for occasional glances at the objects of Adam's interest as
Adam pointed them out, were fixed on the Mill owner with a half-wondering, half-pitying expression.
Adam's evident nervousness increased. He talked of his Mill--how he had built it up from nothing
almost, to its present magnitude--of the city and what he had done for the people.

The old workman listened without comment.

At last, apparently unable to endure the suspense a moment longer, Adam Ward said, nervously,
"Well, Pete, out with it! What do you want? I can guess what you are here for. We might as
well get done with it."

In his slow, thoughtful manner of speech that was so different from the Mill owner's agitated
expressions, the old workman said, "I have wanted for nothing, Adam. We have been contented
and happy in our little home. But now," he paused as if his thoughts were loath to form themselves
into words.

The last vestige of pretense left Adam Ward's face as suddenly as if he had literally dropped
a mask. "It's a good thing you have been satisfied," he said, coldly. "You had better continue
to be. You know that you owe everything you have in the world to me! You need not expect anything
more."

"Have you not made a big profit on every hour's work that I have done in your Mill, Adam?"

"Whatever profit I have or have not made on your work is none of your business, sir," retorted
Adam. "I have given you a job all these years. I could have thrown you out. You haven't a thing
on earth that you did not buy with the checks you received from me. I have worn myself out--made
an invalid of myself--building up the business that has enabled you and the rest of my employees
to make a living. Every cent that I ever received from that new process I put back into the
Mill. You have had more out of it than I ever did."

Peter Martin looked slowly about at the evidence of Adam Ward's wealth. When he again faced
the owner of the estate he spoke as if doubting that he had heard him clearly. "But the Mill
is yours, Adam?" he said, at last. "And all this is yours. How--where did it come from?"

"Certainly the Mill is mine. Didn't I make it what it is? As for the place here--it came from
the profits of my business, of course. You know I was nothing but a common workman when I started
out."

"I know," returned Pete. "And it was the new process that enabled you to get control of the
Mill--to buy it and build it up--wasn't it? If you hadn't happened to have had the process
the Mill would have made all this for some one else, wouldn't it? We never dreamed that the
process would grow into such a big thing for anybody when we used to talk it over in the old
days, did we, Adam?"

Adam Ward looked cautiously around at the shrubbery that encircled the bit of lawn. There was
no one to be seen within hearing distance.

When he faced his companion again the Mill owner's eyes were blazing, but he controlled his
voice by a supreme effort of will. "Look here, Pete, I'm not going even to discuss that matter
with you. I have kept you on at the Mill and taken care of you all these years because of our
old friendship and because I was sorry for you. But if you don't appreciate what I have done
for you, if you attempt to start any talk or anything I'll throw you and Charlie out of your
jobs to-morrow. And I'll fix it, too, so you will never either of you get another day's work
in Millsburgh. That process is my property. No one has any interest in the patents in any way.
I have it tied up so tight that all the courts in the world couldn't take it away from me.
Law is law and I propose to keep what the law says is mine. I have thousands of dollars to
spend in defense of my legal rights where you have dimes. You needn't whine about moral obligations
either. The only obligations that are of any force in business are legal! If you haven't brains
enough to look after your own interests you can't expect any one else to look after them for you."

When Adam Ward finished his countenance was distorted with hate and fear. Before this simple,
kindly old workman, in whose honest soul there was no shadow of a wish to harm any one in any
way, the Mill owner was like a creature of evil at bay.

"I did not come to talk of the past, Adam Ward," said Pete, sadly. "And I didn't come to threaten
you or to ask anything for myself."

At the gentle sadness of his old friend's manner and words, Adam's eyes gleamed with vicious
triumph. "Well, out with it!" he demanded, harshly. "What are you here for?"

"Your boy and my girl love each other, Adam."

An ugly grin twisted the gray lips of Pete's employer.

But Mary's father went on as though he had not seen. "The children were raised together, Adam.
I have always thought of John almost as if he were my own son. It seems exactly right that
he should want Mary and that she should want him. There is no man in the world I would rather
it would be."

Adam listened, still grinning, as the old workman continued in his slow, quiet speech.

"I never cared before for all that the new process made for you. You wanted money--I didn't.
But it don't seem right that what you have--considering how you got it--should stand in the
way of Mary's happiness. I understand that there is nothing I can do about it, but I thought
that, considering everything, you might be willing to--"

Adam Ward laughed aloud--laughed until the tears of his insane glee filled his eyes. "So that's
your game," he said, at last, when he could speak. "You hadn't brains enough to protect yourself
to start out with and you have found out that you haven't a chance in the world against me
in the courts. So you try to make it by setting your girl up to catch John."

"You must stop that sort of talk, Adam Ward." Peter Martin was on his feet, and there was that
in his usually stolid countenance which made the Mill owner shrink back. "I was a fool, as
you say. But my mistake was that I trusted you. I believed in your pretended friendship for
me. I thought you were as honest and honorable as you seemed to be. I didn't know that your
religion was all such a rotten sham. I have never cared that you grew rich while I remained
poor. All these years I have been sorry for you because I have had so much of the happiness
and contentment and peace that you have lost. But you must understand, sir, that there are
some things that I will do in defense of my children that I would not do in defense of myself."

Adam, white and trembling, drew still farther away. "Be careful," he cried, "I can call half
a dozen men before you can move."

Pete continued as if the other had not spoken. "There is no reason in the world why John and
Mary should not marry."

Adam Ward's insane hatred for the workman and his evil joy over this opportunity to make his
old comrade suffer was stronger even than his fear. With another snarling laugh he retorted,
viciously, "There is the best reason in the world why they will never marry. I am the reason,
Pete Martin! And I'd like to see you try to do anything about it."

Mary's father answered, slowly, "I do not understand your hatred for me, Adam. All these years
I have been loyal to you. I have never talked of our affairs to any one--"

Adam interrupted him with a burst of uncontrollable rage. "Talk, you fool! Talk all you please.
Tell everybody anything you like. Who will believe you? You will only get yourself laughed
at for being the short-sighted idiot you were. That process is patented in my name. I own it.
You don't need to keep still on my account, but I tell you again that if you do try to start
anything I'll ruin you and I'll ruin your children." Suddenly, as if in fear that his rage
would carry him too far, his manner changed and he spoke with forced coldness. "I am sorry
that I cannot continue this interview, Pete. You have all that you will ever get from me--children
or no children. Go on about your business as usual and you may hold your job in the Mill as
long as you are able to do your work. I had thought that I might give you some sort of a little
pension when you got too old to keep up your end with the rest of the men."

And then Adam Ward added the crowning insolent expression of his insane and arrogant egotism.
With a pious smirk of his gray, twitching face, he said, "I want you to know, too, Pete, that
you can approach me any time without any feeling of humiliation."

He turned abruptly away and a moment later the old workman, watching, saw him disappear behind
some tall bushes.

As Pete Martin went slowly back to the entrance gate he did not know that the owner of the
estate was watching him. From bush to bush Adam crept with the stealthy care of a wild creature,
following its prey--never taking his eyes from his victim, save for quick glances here and
there to see that he himself was not observed. Not until Pete had passed from sight down the
hill road did Adam appear openly. Then, going to the watchman at the gate, he berated him for
admitting the old workman and threatened him with the loss of his position if he so offended Again.

      *       *       *       *       *

When Peter Martin arrived home he found Jake Vodell and Charlie discussing the industrial situation.
The strike leader had come once more to try to enlist the support of the old workman and his
son in his war against the employer class.

CHAPTER XXIII

A LAST CHANCE

Jake Vodell greeted the old workman cordially. "You have been to church this fine morning,
I suppose, heh?" he said, with a sneering laugh that revealed how little his interview with
Captain Charlie was contributing to his satisfaction.

"No," returned Pete. "I did not attend church this morning--I do go, though, generally."

"Oh-ho! you worship the God of your good master Adam Ward, I suppose."

But Pete Martin was in no way disturbed by the man's sarcasm. "No," he said, slowly, "I do
not think that Adam and I worship the same God."

"Is it so? But when the son goes to war so bravely and fights for his masters one would expect
the father to say his prayers to his masters' God, heh?"

Captain Charlie retorted, sharply, "The men who fought in the war fought for this nation--for
every citizen in it. We fought for McIver just as we fought for Sam Whaley. Our loyalty in
this industrial question is exactly the same. We will save the industries of this country for
every citizen alike because our national life is at stake. Did you ever hear of a sailor refusing
to man the pumps on a sinking ship because the vessel was not his personal property?"

"Bah!" growled Jake Vodell. "Your profession of loyalty to your country amuses me. Your country!
It is McIver's country--Adam Ward's country, I tell you. It is my little band of live, aggressive
heroes who are the loyal ones. We are the ones who will save the industries, but we will save
them for the laboring people alone. And you shirkers in your Mill workers' union are willing
to stand aside and let us do your fighting for you. Have you no pride for your class at all?"

"Oh, yes," returned Captain Charlie, "we have plenty of class pride. Only you see, Vodell,
we don't consider ourselves in your class. You are no more loyal to the principles of our American
unions than you are to the principles of our government. You don't represent our unions. You
represent something foreign to the interests of every American citizen. You are trying to use
our unions in your business, that is all. And because you manage to get hold of a few poor
fellows like Sam Whaley, you think you can lead the working people. If you really think our
loyalty to our country is a joke, drop in at an American Legion meeting some evening--bring
along your foreign flag and all your foreign friends. I'll promise you a welcome that will,
I think, convince you that we have some class pride after all."

The agitator rose heavily to his feet. "It is your friendship with this John Ward that makes
you turn from your own class. I have known how it would be with you. But it is no matter. You
shall see. We will make a demonstration in Millsburgh that will win the men of your union in
spite of you and your crippled old basket maker. If you had a personal grievance against Adam
Ward as so many others have you would be with me fast enough. But he and his son have made
you blind with their pretended kindness."

Pete Martin spoke now with a dignity and pride that moved Captain Charlie deeply. "Mr. Vodell,
you are wrong. My son is too big to be influenced in this matter by any personal consideration.
Whatever there is that is personal between Charlie and John or between Adam Ward and myself
will never be brought into this controversy."

Jake Vodell shrugged his heavy shoulders. "Very well--I will go now. You will see that in the
end the working people will know who are for their interests and who are against them, and
we will know, too, how to reward our friends and punish our enemies. I am sorry. I have given
you to-day your last chance. You have a pretty little place here, heh?"

There was a look in his dark face, as he gazed about appraisingly, that made Captain Charlie
go a step toward him. "You have given us our last chance? Is this a sample of the freedom that
you offer so eloquently to the people? Instead of the imperialist McIver we are to have the
imperialist Vodell, are we? Between the two of you I prefer McIver. He is at least sane enough
to be constructive in his imperialism. My father and I have lived here all our lives, as most
of our neighbors have. The majority of the workmen in this community own their homes just as
we do. We are a part of the life of this city. What have you at stake? Where is your home and
family? What is your nationality? What is your record of useful industry? Before you talk about
giving a last chance to workmen like my father you will need to produce the credentials of
your authority. We have your number, Jake Vodell. You may as well go back to the land where
you belong, if you belong anywhere on earth. You will never hang your colors in the union Mill
workers' hall. We have a flag there now that suits us. The chance you offer, last or first,
is too darned big a chance for any sane American workman to monkey with."

Jake Vodell answered harshly as he turned to go. "At least I know now for sure who it is that
makes the Mill workers such traitors to their class." He looked at Pete. "Your son has made
his position very clear. We shall see now how bravely the noble Captain will hold his ground.
As for you, well--always the old father can pray to his God for his son. It is so, heh?"

Quickly the man passed through the white gate and disappeared down the street toward the Flats.

"I am afraid that fellow means trouble, son," said Pete, slowly.

"Trouble," echoed Captain Charlie, "Jake Vodell has never meant anything but trouble."

      *       *       *       *       *

Adam Ward did not join his family when they returned from church. A nervous headache kept him
in his room.

In the afternoon John went for a long drive into the country. He felt that he must be alone--that
he must think things out, for both Mary and himself.

As he looked back on it all now, it seemed to him that he had always loved this girl companion
of his old-house days. In his boyhood he had accepted her as a part of his daily life just
as he had accepted his sister. Those years of his schooling had been careless, thoughtless
years, and followed, as they were, by his war experience, they seemed now to have had so small
a part in the whole that they scarcely counted at all. His renewed comradeship with Charlie
in the army had renewed also, through the letters that Charlie always shared with him, his
consciousness of Mary. In the months just passed his love had ripened and become a definite
thing, fixed and certain in his own mind and heart as the fact of life itself. He had no more
thought of accepting as final Mary's answer than he had of turning the management of the Mill
over to Jake Vodell or to Sam Whaley. But still there were things that he must think out.

On that favorite hillside spot where he and Charlie had spent so many hours discussing their
industrial problems, John faced squarely the questions raised by Mary's "no."

Through the chill of the fall twilight John went home to spend the evening with his mother.
But he did not speak to her of Mary. He could not, somehow, in the house that was so under
the shadow of that hidden thing.

His father was still in his room.

On his way to his own apartment after his mother had retired, John stopped at his father's
door to knock gently and ask if there was anything that he could do.

The answer came, "No, I will be all right--let me alone."

Later Helen returned from somewhere with McIver. Then John heard McIver leaving and Helen going
to her mother for their usual good-night visit.

Seeing the light under his door, as she passed, she tapped the panel and called softly that
it was tune all good little boys were fast asleep.

It was an hour, perhaps, after John had gone to bed that he was awakened by the sound of some
one stealing quietly into his room. Against the dim night light in the hall, he caught the
outline of an arm and shoulder as the intruder carefully closed the door. Reaching out to the
lamp at the head of his bed, he snapped on the light and sprang to his feet.

"Father!"

"Sh--be careful, John, they will hear you!" Adam Ward's gray face was ghastly with nervous
excitement and fear, and he was shaking as with a chill.

"No one must know I told you," he whispered, "but the new process is the source of everything
we have--the Mill and everything. If it wasn't for my patent rights we would have nothing.
You and I would be working in the Mill just like Pete and his boy."

John spoke soothingly. "Yes, father, I understand, but it will be all right--I'll take care of it."

Adam chuckled. "They're after it. But I've got it all sewed up so tight they can't touch it.
That old fool, Pete, was here to feel me out to-day."

"Pete--here!"

Adam grinned. "While you folks were at church."

"But what did he want, father?"

"They've got a new scheme now. They've set Mary after you. They figure that if the girl can
land you they'll get a chance at what I have made out of the process that way. I told him you
was too smart to be caught like that. But you've got to watch them. They'll do anything."

In spite of his pity for his father, John Ward drew from him, overcome by a feeling of disgust
and shame which he could not wholly control.

Adam, unconscious of his son's emotions, went on. "I've made it all in spite of them, John,
but I've had to watch them. They'll be after you now that I have turned things over to you,
just as they have been after me. They'll never get it, though. They'll never get a penny of
it. I'll destroy the Mill and everything before I'll give up a dollar of what I've made."

John Ward could not speak. It was too monstrous--too horrible. As one in a hideous dream, he
listened. What was back of it all? Why did his father in his spells of nervous excitement always
rave so about the patented process? Why did he hate Pete Martin so bitterly? What was this
secret thing that was driving Adam Ward insane?

Thinking to find an answer to these perplexing questions, if there was any answer other than
the Mill owner's mental condition, John forced himself to the pretense of sharing his father's
fears. He agreed with Adam's arraignment of Pete, echoed his father's expression of hatred
for the old workman, thanked Adam for warning him, boasted of his own ability to see through
their tricks and schemes and to protect the property his father had accumulated.

In this vein they talked in confidential whispers until John felt that he could venture the
question, "Just what is it about the process that they are after, father? If I knew the exact
history of the thing I would be in a much better position to handle the situation as you want,
wouldn't I?"

Adam Ward's manner changed instantly. With a look of sly cunning he studied John's face. "There
is nothing about the process, son," he said, steadily. "You know all there is to know about
it now."

But when John, thinking that his father had regained his self-control, urged him to go back
to his bed, Adam's painful agitation returned.

For some moments he paced to and fro as if in nervous indecision, then, going close to John,
he said in a low, half whisper, "John, there is something else I wanted to ask you. You have
been to college and over there in the war, you must have seen a lot of men die--" He paused.
"Yes, yes, you must have been close to death a good many times. Tell me, John, do you believe
that there is anything after--I mean anything beyond this life? Does a man's conscious existence
go on when he is dead?"

"Yes," said John, wondering at this apparent change in his father's thought. "I believe in
a life beyond this. You believe in it, too, don't you, father?"

"Of course," returned Adam. "We can't know, though, for sure, can we? But, anyway, a man would
be foolish to risk it, wouldn't he?"

"To risk what, father?"

"To risk the chance of there being no hell," came the startling answer. "My folks raised me
to believe in hell, and the preachers all teach it. And if there should be such a place of
eternal torment a man would be a fool not to fix up some way to get out of it, wouldn't he?"

John did not know what to say.

Adam Ward leaned closer to his son and with an air of secrecy whispered, "That's exactly what
I've done, John--I've worked out a scheme to tie God up in a contract that will force Him to
save me. The old Interpreter gave me the idea. You see if it should turn out that there is
no hell my plan can't do any harm and if there is a hell it makes me safe anyway."

He chuckled with insane satisfaction. "They say that God knows everything--that nobody can
figure out a way to beat Him, but I have--I have worked out a deal with God that is bound to
give me the best of it. I've got Him tied up so tight that He'll be bound to save me. Some
people think I'm crazy, but you wait, my boy--they'll find out how crazy I am. They'll never
get me into hell. I have been figuring on this ever since the Interpreter told me I had better
make a contract with God. And after Pete left this morning I got it all settled. A man can't
afford to take any chances with God and so I made this deal with Him. Hell or no hell, I'm
safe. God don't get the best of me,--And you are safe, too, son, with the new process, if you
look after your own interests, as I have done, and don't overlook any opportunities. I wanted
to tell you about this so you wouldn't worry about me. I'll go back to bed now. Don't tell
mother and Helen what we have been talking about. No use to worry them--they couldn't understand
anyway. And don't forget, John, what Pete told me about Mary. Their scheme won't work of course.
I know you are too smart for them. But just the same you've got to be on your guard against
her all the time. Never take any unnecessary chances. Don't talk over a deal with a man when
any one can hear. If you are careful to have no witnesses when you arrange a deal you are absolutely
safe. It is what you can slip into the written contract that counts--once you get your man's
signature. That's always been my way. And now I have even put one over on God."

He stole cautiously out of the room and back to his own apartment.

Outside his father's door John waited, listening, until he was convinced that sleep had at
last come to the exhausted man.

Late that same Sunday evening, when the street meeting held by Jake Vodell was over, there
was another meeting in the room back of the pool hall. The men who sat around that table with
the agitator were not criminals--they were workmen. Sam Whaley and two others were men with
families. They were all American citizens, but they were under the spell of their leader's
power. They had been prepared for that leadership by the industrial policies of McIver and
Adam Ward.

This meeting of that inner circle was in no way authorized by the unions. The things they said
Sam Whaley would not have dared to say openly in the Mill workers' organization. The plans
they proposed to carry out in the name of the unions they were compelled to make in secret.
In their mad, fanatical acceptance of the dreams that Vodell wrought for them; in their blind
obedience to the leadership he had so cleverly established; in their reckless disregard of
the consequences under the spell of his promised protection, they were as insane, in fact,
as the owner of the Mill himself.

The supreme, incredible, pitiful tragedy of it all was this: That these workmen committed themselves
to the plans of Jake Vodell in the name of their country's workmen.

CHAPTER XXIV

THE FLATS

Helen Ward knew that she could not put off much longer giving McIver a definite answer. When
she was with him, the things that so disturbed her mind and heart were less real--she was able
to see things clearly from the point of view to which she had been trained. Her father's mental
condition was nothing more than a nervous trouble resulting from overwork--John's ideals were
highly creditable to his heart and she loved him dearly for them, but they were wholly impossible
in a world where certain class standards must be maintained--the Mill took again its old vague,
indefinite place in her life--the workman Charlie Martin must live only in her girlhood memories,
those secretly sad memories that can have no part in the grown-up present and must not be permitted
to enter into one's consideration of the future. In short, the presence of McIver always banished
effectually the Helen of the old house: with him the daughter of Adam Ward was herself.

And Helen was tempted by this feeling of relief to speak the decisive word that would finally
put an end to her indecision and bring at least the peace of certainty to her troubled mind.
In the light of her education and environment, there was every reason why she should say, "Yes"
to McIver's insistent pleadings. There was no shadow of a reason why she should refuse him.
One word and the Helen of the old house would be banished forever--the princess lady would
reign undisturbed.

And yet, for some reason, that word was not spoken. Helen told herself that she would speak
it. But on each occasion she put it off. And always when the man was gone and she was alone,
in spite of the return in full force of all her disturbing thoughts and emotions, she was glad
that she had not committed herself irrevocably--that she was still free.

She had never felt the appeal of all that McIver meant to her as she felt it that Sunday. She
had never been more disturbed and unhappy than she was the following day when John told her
a little of his midnight experience with their father and how Adam's excitement had been caused
by Peter Martin's visit. All of which led her, early in the afternoon, to the Interpreter.

      *       *       *       *       *

She found the old basket maker working with feverish energy. Billy Rand at the bench in the
corner of the room was as busy with his part of their joint industry.

It was the Interpreter's habit, when Helen was with him, to lay aside his work. But of late
he had continued the occupation of his hands even as he talked with her. She had noticed this,
as women always notice such things--but that was all. On this day, when the old man in the
wheel chair failed to give her his undivided attention, something in his manner impressed the
trivial incident more sharply on her mind.

He greeted her kindly, as always, but while she was conscious of no lack of warmth in his welcome,
she felt in the deep tones of that gentle voice a sadness that moved her to quick concern.
The dark eyes that never failed to light with pleasure at her coming were filled with weary
pain. The strong face was thin and tired. As he bent his white head over the work in his lap
he seemed to have grown suddenly very weak and old.

With an awakened mind, the young woman looked curiously about the room.

She had never seen it so filled with materials and with finished baskets. The table with the
big lamp and the magazines and papers had been moved into the far corner against the book shelves,
as though he had now neither time nor thought for reading. The floor was covered thick with
a litter of chips and shavings. Even silent Billy's face was filled with anxiety and troubled
care as he looked from Helen to his old companion in the wheel chair and slowly turned back
to his work on the bench.

"What is the matter here?" she demanded, now thoroughly aroused.

"Matter?" returned the Interpreter. "Is there anything wrong here, Helen?"

"You are not well," she insisted. "You look all worn out--as if you had not slept for weeks--what
is it?"

"Oh, that is nothing," he answered, with a smile. "Billy and I have been working overtime a
little--that is all."

"But why?" she demanded, "why must you wear yourself out like this? Surely there is no need
for you to work so hard, day and night."

He answered as if he were not sure that he had heard her aright. "No need, Helen? Surely, child,
you cannot be so ignorant of the want that exists within sight of your home?"

She returned his look wonderingly. "You mean the strike?"

Bending over his work again, the old basket maker answered, sorrowfully, "Yes, Helen, I mean
the strike."

There was something in the Interpreter's manner--something in the weary, drooping figure in
that wheel chair--in the tired, deep-lined face--in the pain-filled eyes and the gentle voice
that went to the deeps of Helen Ward's woman heart.

With her, as with every one in Millsburgh, the strike was a topic of daily conversation. She
sympathized with her brother in his anxiety. She was worried over the noticeable effect of
the excitement upon her father. She was interested in McIver's talk of the situation. But in
no vital way had her life been touched by the industrial trouble. In no way had she come in
actual contact with it. The realities of the situation were to her vague, intangible, remote
from her world, as indeed the Mill itself had been, before her visit with John that day. To
her, the Interpreter was of all men set apart from the world. In his little hut on the cliff,
with his books and his basket making, her gentle old friend's life, it seemed to her, held
not one thing in common with the busy world that lay within sight of the balcony-porch. The
thought that the industrial trouble could in any way touch him came to her with a distinct shock.

"Surely," she protested, at last, "the strike cannot affect you. It has nothing to do with
your work."

"Every strike has to do with all work everywhere, child," returned the man in the wheel chair,
while his busy fingers wove the fabric of a basket. "Every idle hand in the world, Helen, whatever
the cause of its idleness, compels some other's hand to do its work. The work of the world
must be done, child--somehow, by some one--the work of the world must be done. The little Maggies
and Bobbies of the Flats down there must be fed, you know--and their mother too--yes, and Sam
Whaley himself must be cared for. And so you see, because of the strike, Billy and I must work
overtime."

Certainly there was no hint of rebuke in the old basket maker's kindly voice, but the daughter
of Adam Ward felt her cheeks flush with a quick sense of shame. That her old friend in the
wheel chair should so accept the responsibility of his neighbor's need and give himself thus
to help them, while she--

"Is there," she faltered, "is there really so much suffering among the strikers?"

Without raising his eyes from his work, he answered, "The women and children--they are so helpless."

"I--I did not realize," she murmured. "I did not know."

"You were not ignorant of the helpless women and children who suffered in foreign lands," he
returned. "Why should you not know of the mothers and babies in Millsburgh?"

"But McIver says--" she hesitated.

The Interpreter caught up her words. "McIver says that by feeding the starving families of
the strikers the strike is prolonged. He relies upon the hunger and cold and sickness of the
women and children for his victory. And Jake Vodell relies upon the suffering in the families
of his followers for that desperate frenzy of class hatred, without which he cannot gain his
end. Does McIver want for anything? No! Is Jake Vodell in need? No! It is not the imperialistic
leaders in these industrial wars who pay the price. It is always the little Bobbies and Maggies
who pay. The people of America stood aghast with horror when an unarmed passenger ship was
torpedoed or a defenseless village was bombed by order of a ruthless Kaiser; but we permit
these Kaisers of capital and labor to carry on their industrial wars without a thought of the
innocent ones who must suffer under their ruthless policies."

He paused; then, with no trace of bitterness, but only sadness in his voice, he added, "You
say you do not know, child--and yet, you could know so easily if you would. Little Bobby and
Maggie do not live in a far-off land across the seas. They live right over there in the shadow
of your father's Mill--the Mill which supplies you, Helen, with every material need and luxury
of your life."

As if she could bear to hear no more, Helen rose quickly and went from the room to stand on
the balcony-porch.

It was not so much the Interpreter's words--it was rather the spirit in which they were spoken
that moved her so deeply. By her own heart she was judged. "For every idle hand," he had said.
Her hands were idle hands. Her old white-haired friend in his wheel chair was doing her work.
His crippled body drooped with weariness over his task because she did nothing. His face was
lined with care because she was careless of the need that burdened him. His eyes were filled
with sadness and pain because she was indifferent--because she did not know--had not cared to know.

      *       *       *       *       *

The sun was almost down that afternoon when Bobby Whaley came out of the wretched house that
was his home to stand on the front doorstep. The dingy, unpainted buildings of the Flats--the
untidy hovels and shanties--the dilapidated fences and broken sidewalks--unlovely at best,
in the long shadows of the failing day, were sinister with the gloom of poverty.

High above the Mill the twisting columns of smoke from the tall stacks caught the last of the
sunlight and formed slow, changing cloud-shapes--rolling hills of brightness with soft, shadowy
valleys and canons of mysterious depths between--towering domes and crags and castled heights--grim,
foreboding, beautiful.

The boy who stood on the steps, looking so listlessly about, was not the daring adventurer
who had so boldly led his sister up the zigzag steps to the Interpreter's hut. He was not the
Bobby who had ridden in such triumph beside the princess lady so far into the unknown country.
His freckled face was thin and pinched. The skin was drawn tight over the high cheek bones
and the eyes were wide and staring. His young body that had been so sturdy was gaunt and skeletonlike.
The dirty rags that clothed him were scarcely enough to hide his nakedness. The keen autumn
air that had put the flush of good red blood into the cheeks of the golfers at the country
club that afternoon whirled about his bare feet and legs with stinging cruelty. His thin lips
and wasted limbs were blue with cold. Turning slowly, he seemed about to reenter the house,
but when his hand touched the latch he paused and once more uncertainly faced toward the street.
There was no help for him in his home. He knew no other place to go for food or shelter.

As the boy again looked hopelessly about the wretched neighborhood, he saw a woman coming down
the street. He could tell, even at that distance, that the lady was a stranger to the Flats.
Her dress, simple as it was, and her veil marked her as a resident of some district more prosperous
than that grimy community in the shadow of the Mill.

A flash of momentary interest lighted the hungry eyes of the lad. But, no, it could not be
one of the charity workers--the charity ladies always came earlier in the day and always in
automobiles.

Then he saw the stranger stop and speak to a boy in front of a house two doors away. The neighbor
boy pointed toward Bobby and the lady came on, walking quickly as if she were a little frightened
at being alone amid such surroundings.

At the gap where once had been a gate in the dilapidated fence, she turned in toward the house
and the wondering boy on the front step. She was within a few feet of the lad when she stopped
suddenly with a low exclamation.

Bobby thought that she had discovered her mistake in coming to the wrong place. But the next
moment she was coming closer, and he heard, "Bobby, is that really you! You poor child, have
you been ill?"

"I ain't been sick, if that's what yer mean," returned the boy. "Mag is, though. She's worse
to-day."

His manner was sullenly defiant, as if the warmly dressed stranger had in some way revealed
herself as his enemy.

"Don't you know me, Bobby?"

"Not with yer face covered up like that, I don't."

She laughed nervously and raised her veil.

"Huh, it's you, is it? Funny--Mag's been a-talkin' about her princess lady all afternoon. What
yer doin' here?"

Before this hollow-cheeked skeleton of a boy Helen Ward felt strangely like one who, conscious
of guilt, is brought suddenly into the presence of a stern judge.

"Why, Bobby," she faltered, "I--I came to see you and Maggie--I was at the Interpreter's this
afternoon and he told me--I mean something he said made me want to come."

"The Interpreter, he's all right," said the boy. "So's Mary Martin."

"Aren't you just a little glad to see me, Bobby?"

The boy did not seem to hear. "Funny the way Mag talks about yer all the time. She's purty
sick all right. Peterson's baby, it died."

"Can't we go into the house and see Maggie? You must be nearly frozen standing out here in
the cold."

"Huh, I'm used to freezin'--I guess yer can come on in though--if yer want to. Mebbe Mag 'd
like to see yer."

He pushed open the door, and she followed him into the ghastly barrenness of the place that
he knew as home.

Never before had the daughter of Adam Ward viewed such naked, cruel poverty. She shuddered
with the horror of it. It was so unreal--so unbelievable.

A small, rusty cookstove with no fire--a rude table with no cloth--a rickety cupboard with
its shelves bare save for a few dishes--two broken-backed chairs--that was all. No, it was
not all--on a window ledge, beneath a bundle of rags that filled the opening left by a broken
pane, was a small earthen flowerpot holding a single scraggly slip of geranium.

Helen seemed to hear again the Interpreter saying, "A girl with true instincts for the best
things of life and a capacity for great happiness."

At Bobby's call, Mrs. Whaley came from another room.

The boy did not even attempt an introduction but stood sullenly aside, waiting developments,
and the mother in her pitiful distress evidently failed to identify their visitor when Helen
introduced herself.

"I'm pleased to meet you, ma'am," she said, mechanically, and gazed at the young woman with
a stony indifference, as though her mind, deadened by fearful anxiety and physical suffering,
refused even to wonder at the stranger's presence in her home.

Helen did not know what to say--in the presence of this living tragedy of motherhood she felt
so helpless, so overwhelmed with the uselessness of mere words. What right had she, a stranger
from another world, to intrude unasked upon the privacy of this home? And yet, something deep
within her--something more potent in its authority than the conventionalities that had so far
ruled her life--assured her that she had the right to be there.

"I--I called to see Bobby and Maggie," she faltered. "I met them, you know, at the Interpreter's."

As if Helen's mention of the old basket maker awakened a spark of life in her pain-deadened
senses, the woman returned, "Yes, ma'am--take a chair. No, not that one--it's broke. Here--this
one will hold you up, I guess."

With nervous haste she dusted the chair with her apron. "You'd best keep your things on. We
don't have no fire except to cook by--when there's anything to cook."

She found a match and lighted a tiny lamp, for it was growing dark.

"Bobby tells me that little Maggie is ill," offered Helen.

Mrs. Whaley looked toward the door of that other room and wrung her thin, toil-worn hands in
the agony of her mother fear. "Yes, ma'am--she's real bad, I guess. Poor child, she's been
ailin' for some time. And since the strike--" Her voice broke, and her eyes, dry as if they
had long since exhausted their supply of tears, were filled with hopeless misery.

"We had the doctor once before things got so bad; about the time my man quit his work in the
Mill to help Jake Vodell, it was. And the doctor he said all she needed was plenty of good
food and warm clothes and a chance to play in the fresh country air."

She looked grimly about the bare room. "We couldn't have the doctor no more. I don't know as
it would make any difference if we could. My man, he's away most of the time. I ain't seen
him since yesterday mornin'. And to-day Maggie's been a lot worse. I--I'm afraid--"

Helen wanted to cry aloud. Was it possible that she had asked the Interpreter only a few hours
before if there was really much suffering in the families of the strikers? "You can see Maggie
if you want," said the mother. "She's in there."

She rose as if to show her visitor to the room.

But Helen said, quickly, "In just a moment. Mrs. Whaley, won't you tell me first--is there--is
there no one to help you?" She asked the question timidly, as if fearing to offend.

The other woman answered, hopelessly, "The charity ladies do a little, and the Interpreter
and Mary Martin do all they can. But you see, ma'am, there's so many others just like us that
there ain't near enough to go 'round."

The significance of the woman's colorless words went to Helen's heart with appalling force--"so
many others just like us." This stricken home was not then an exception. With flashing vividness
her mind pictured many rooms similar to the cold and barren apartment where she sat. She visioned
as clearly as she saw Mrs. Whaley the many other wives and mothers with Bobbies and Maggies
who were caught helplessly in the monstrous net of the strike, as these were caught. She knew
now why the Interpreter and Billy Rand worked so hard. And again she felt her cheeks burn with
shame as when the old basket maker had said, "For every idle hand--"

Helen Ward had been an active leader in the foreign relief work during the war. Her portrait
had even been published in the papers as one who was devoted to the cause of the stricken women
and children abroad. But that had all been impersonal, while this--Already in her heart she
was echoing the old familiar cry of the comparative few, "If only the people knew! If only
they could be made to see as she had been made to see! The people are not so cruel. They simply
do not know. They are ignorant, as she was ignorant."

Aloud she was saying to Bobby, as she thrust her purse in the boy's hand, "You must run quickly,
Bobby, to the nearest store and get the things that your mother needs first, and have some
one telephone for a doctor to come at once."

To the mother she added, hurriedly, as if fearing a protest, "Please, Mrs. Whaley, let me help.
I am so sorry I did not know before. Won't you forgive me and let me help you now?"

"Gee!" exclaimed Bobby, who had opened the purse. "Look-ee, mom! Gee!"

As one in a dream, the mother turned from the money in the boy's hand to Helen. "You ain't
meanin', ma'am, for us to use all that?"

"Yes--yes--don't be afraid to get what you need--there will be more when that is gone."

The poor woman did not fill the air with loud cries of hysterical gratitude and superlative
prayers to God for His blessing upon this one who had come so miraculously to her relief. For
a moment she stood trembling with emotion, while her tearless eyes were fixed upon Helen's
face with a look of such gratitude that the young woman was forced to turn away lest her own
feeling escape her control. Then, snatching the money from the boy's hands, she said, "I had
better go myself, ma'am--Bobby can come along to help carry things. If you"--she hesitated,
with a look toward that other room--"if you wouldn't mind stayin' with Maggie till we get back?"

A minute later and Helen was alone in that wretched house in the Flats--alone save for the
sick child in the next room.

The door to the street had scarcely closed when a wave of terror swept over her. She started
to her feet. She could not do it. She would call Mrs. Whaley back. She would go herself for
the needed things. But there was a strength in Helen Ward that few of her most intimate friends,
even, realized; and before her hand touched the latch of the door she had command of herself
once more. In much the same spirit that her brother John perhaps had faced a lonely night watch
in Flanders fields, Adam Ward's daughter forced herself to do this thing that had so unexpectedly
fallen to her.

For some minutes she walked the floor, listening to the noises of the neighborhood. Anxiously
she opened the door and looked out into the fast, gathering darkness. No one of her own people
knew where she was. She had heard terrible things of Jake Vodell and his creed of terrorism.
McIver had pressed it upon her mind that the strikers were all alike in their lawlessness.
What if Sam Whaley should return to find her there? She listened--listened.

A faint, moaning sound came from the next room. She went quickly to the doorway, but in the
faint light she could see only the shadowy outline of a bed. Taking the lamp she entered fearfully.

Save for the bed, an old box that served as a table, and one chair, this room was as bare as
the other. With the lamp in her hand Helen stood beside the bed.

The tiny form of little Maggie was lost under the ragged and dirty coverlet. The child's face
in the tangled mass of her unkempt hair was so wasted and drawn, her eyes, closed under their
dark lids, so deeply sunken, and her teeth so exposed by the thin fleshless lips, that she
seemed scarcely human. One bony arm with its clawlike hand encircled the rag doll that she
had held that day when Helen took the two children into the country.

As Helen looked all her fears vanished. She had no thought, now, of where she was or how she
came there. Deep within her she felt the awakening of that mother soul which lives in every
woman. She did not shrink in horror from this hideous fruit of Jake Vodell's activity. She
did not cry out in pity or sorrow. She uttered no word of protest. As she put the lamp down
on the box, her hand did not tremble. Very quietly she placed the chair beside the bed and
sat down to watch and wait as motherhood in all ages has watched and waited.

While poor Sam Whaley was busy on some mission assigned to him by his leader, Jake Vodell,
and his wife and boy were gone for the food supplied by a stranger to his household, this woman,
of the class that he had been taught to hate, held alone her vigil at the bedside of the workman's
little girl.

A thin, murmuring voice came from the bed. Helen leaned closer. She heard a few incoherent
mutterings--then, "No--no--Bobby, yer wouldn't dast blow up the castle. Yer'd maybe kill the
princess lady--yer know yer couldn't do that!"

Again the weak little voice sank into low, meaning less murmurs. The tiny, clawlike fingers
plucked at the coverlet. "Tain't so, the princess lady will find her jewel of happiness, I
tell yer, Bobby, jest like the Interpreter told us--cause her heart is kind--yer know her heart
is--kind--kind--"

Silence again. Some one passed the house. A dog howled. A child in the house next door cried.
Across the street a man's voice was raised in anger.

Suddenly little Maggie's eyes opened wide. "An' the princess lady is a-comin' some day to take
Bobby and me away up in the sky to her beautiful palace place where there's flowers and birds
an' everythin' all the time an'--an'--"

The big eyes were fixed on Helen's face as the' young woman stooped over the bed, and the light
of a glorious smile transformed the wasted childish features.

"Why--why--yer--yer've come!"

CHAPTER XXV

McIVER'S OPPORTUNITY

When the politician stopped at the cigar stand late that afternoon for a box of the kind he
gave his admirers, the philosopher, scratching the revenue label, remarked, "I see by the papers
that McIver is still a-stayin'."

"Humph!" grunted the politician with careful diplomacy.

The bank clerk who was particular about his pipe tobacco chimed in, "McIver is a stayer all
right when it comes to that."

"Natural born fighter, sir," offered the politician tentatively.

"Game sport, McIver is," agreed the undertaker, taking the place at the show case vacated by
the departing bank clerk.

The philosopher, handing out the newcomer's favorite smoke, echoed his customer's admiration.
"You bet he's a game sport." He punched the cash register with vigor. "Don't give a hang what
it costs the other fellow."

The undertaker laughed.

"I remember one time," said the philosopher, "McIver and a bunch was goin' fishin' up the river.
They stopped here early in the morning and while they was gettin' their smokes the judge--who's
always handin' out some sort of poetry stuff, you know--he says: 'Well, Jim, we're goin' to
have a fine day anyway. No matter whether we catch anything or not it will be worth the trip
just to get out into the country.' Mac, he looked at the judge a minute as if he wanted to
bite him--you know what I mean--then he says in that growlin' voice of his, 'That may do for
you all right, judge, but I'm here to tell you that when I go fishin' I go for fish.'"

The cigar-store philosopher's story accurately described the dominant trait in the factory
man's character. To him business was a sport, a game, a contest of absorbing interest. He entered
into it with all the zest and strength of his virile manhood. Mind and body, it absorbed him.
And yet, he knew nothing of that true sportsman's passion which plays the game for the joy
of the game itself. McIver played to win; not for the sake of winning, but for the value of
the winnings. Methods were good or bad only as they won or lost. He was incapable of experiencing
those larger triumphs which come only in defeat. The Interpreter's philosophy of the "oneness
of all" was to McIver the fanciful theory of an impracticable dreamer, who, too feeble to take
a man's part in life, contented himself by formulating creeds of weakness that befitted his
state. Men were the pieces with which he played his game--they were of varied values, certainly,
as are the pieces on a chess table, but they were pieces on the chess table and nothing more.
All of which does not mean that Jim McIver was cruel or unkind. Indeed, he was genuinely and
generously interested in many worthy charities, and many a man had appealed to him, and not
in vain, for help. But to have permitted these humanitarian instincts to influence his play
in the game of business would have been, to his mind, evidence of a weakness that was contemptible.
The human element, he held, must, of necessity, be sternly disregarded if one would win.

While his fellow townsmen were discussing him at the cigar stand, and men everywhere in Millsburgh
were commenting on his determination to break the strikers to his will at any cost, McIver,
at his office, was concluding a conference with a little company of his fellow employers.

It was nearly dark when the conference finally ended and the men went their several ways. McIver,
with some work of special importance waiting his attention, telephoned that he would not be
home for dinner. He would finish what he had to do and would dine at the club later in the evening.

The big factory inside the high, board fence was silent. The night came on. Save for the armed
men who guarded the place, the owner was alone.

Absorbed in his consideration of the business before him, the man was oblivious of everything
but his game. An hour went by. He forgot that he had had no dinner. Another hour--and another.

He was interrupted at last by the entrance of a guard.

"Well, what do you want?" he said, shortly, when the man stood before him.

"There's a woman outside, sir. She insists that she must see you."

"A woman!"

"Yes, sir."

"Who is she?"

"I don't know."

"Well, what does she look like?"

"I couldn't see her face, she's got a veil on."

The factory owner considered. How did any one outside of his home know that he was in his office
at that hour? These times were dangerous. "Vodell is likely to try anything," he said, aloud.
"Better send her about her business."

"I tried to," the guard returned, "but she won't go--says she is a friend of yours and has
got to see you to-night."

"A friend! Huh! How did she get here?"

"In a taxi, and the taxi beat it as soon as she got out."

Again McIver considered. Then his heavy jaw set, and he growled, "All right, bring her in--a
couple of you--and see that you stand by while she is here. If this is a Vodell trick of some
sort, I'll beat him to it."

Helen, escorted by two burly guards, entered the office.

McIver sprang to his feet with an exclamation of amazement, and his tender concern was unfeigned
and very comforting to the young woman after the harrowing experience through which she had
just passed.

Sending the guards back to their posts, he listened gravely while she told him where she had
been and what she had seen.

"But, Helen," he cried, when she had finished, "it was sheer madness for you to be alone in
the Flats like that--at Whaley's place and in the night, too! Good heavens, girl, don't you
realize what a risk you were taking?"

"I had to go, Jim," she returned.

"You had to go?" he repeated. "Why?"

"I had to see for myself if--if things were as bad as the Interpreter said. Oh, can't you understand,
Jim, I could not believe it--it all seemed so impossible. Don't you see that I had to know
for sure?"

"I see that some one ought to break that meddlesome old basket maker's head as well as his
legs," growled McIver indignantly. "The idea of sending you, Adam Ward's daughter, of all people,
alone into that nest of murdering anarchists."

"But the Interpreter didn't send me, Jim," she protested. "He did not even know that I was
going. No one knew."

"I understand all that," said McIver. "The Interpreter didn't send you--oh, no--he simply made
you think that you ought to go. That's the way the tricky old scoundrel does everything, from
what I am told."

She looked at him steadily. "Do you think, Jim, the Interpreter's way is such a bad way to
get people to do things?"

"Forgive me," he begged humbly, "but it makes me wild to think what might have happened to
you. It's all right now, though. I'll take you home, and in the future you can turn such work
over to the regular charity organizations." He was crossing the room for his hat and overcoat.
"Jove! I can't believe yet that you have actually been in such a mess and all by your lonesome,
too."

She was about to speak when he stopped, and, as if struck by a sudden thought, said, quickly,
"But Helen, you haven't told me--how did you know I was here?"

She explained hurriedly, "The doctor sent a taxi for me and I telephoned your house from a
drug store. Your man told me you expected to be late at the office and would dine at the club.
I phoned the club and when I learned that you were not there I came straight on. I--I had to
see you to-night, Jim. And I was afraid if I phoned you here at the office you wouldn't let
me come."

McIver evidently saw from her manner that there was still something in the amazing situation
that they had not yet touched upon. Coming back to his desk, he said, "I don't think I understand,
Helen. Why were you in such a hurry to see me? Besides, don't you know that I would have gone
to you, at once, anywhere?"

"I know, Jim," she returned, slowly, as one approaching a difficult subject, "but I couldn't
tell you what I had seen. I couldn't talk to you about these things at home."

"I understand," he said, gently, "and I am glad that you wanted to come to me. But you are
tired and nervous and all unstrung, now. Let me take you home and to-morrow we will talk things
over."

As if he had not spoken, she said, steadily, "I wanted to tell you about the terrible, terrible
condition of those poor people, Jim. I thought you ought to know about them exactly as they
are and not in a vague, indefinite way as I knew about them before I went to see for myself."

The man moved uneasily. "I do know about the condition of these people, Helen. It is exactly
what I expected would happen."

She was listening carefully. "You expected them to--to be hungry and cold and sick like that, Jim?"

"Such conditions are always a part of every strike like this," he returned. "There is nothing
unusual about it, and it is the only thing that will ever drive these cattle back to their
work. They simply have to be starved to it."

"But John says--"

He interrupted. "Please, Helen--I know all about what John says. I know where he gets it, too--he
gets it from the Interpreter who gave you this crazy notion of going alone into the Flats to
investigate personally. And John's ideas are just about as practical."

"But the mothers and children, Jim?"

"The men can go back to work whenever they are ready," he retorted.

"At your terms, you mean?" she asked.

"My terms are the only terms that will ever open this plant again. The unions will never dictate
my business policies, if every family in Millsburgh starves."

She waited a moment before she said, slowly, "I must be sure that I understand, Jim--do you
mean that you are actually depending upon such pitiful conditions as I have seen to-night to
give you a victory over the strikers?"

The man made a gesture of impatience. "It is the principle of the thing that is at stake, Helen.
If I yield in this instance it will be only the beginning of a worse trouble. If the working
class wins this time there will be no end to their demands. We might as well turn all our properties
over to them at once and be done with it. This strike in Millsburgh is only a small part of
the general industrial situation. The entire business interests of the country are involved."

Again she waited a little before answering. Then she said, sadly, "How strange! It is hard
for me to realize, Jim, that the entire business interests of this great nation are actually
dependent upon the poor little Maggie Whaleys."

"Helen!" he protested, "you make me out a heartless brute."

"No, Jim, I know you are not that. But when you insist that what I saw to-night--that the suffering
of these poor, helpless mothers and their children is the only thing that will enable you employers
to break this strike and save the business of the country--it--it does seem a good deal like
the Germans' war policy of frightfulness that we all condemned so bitterly, doesn't it?"

"These things are not matters of sentiment, Helen. Jake Vodell is not conducting his campaign
by the Golden Rule."

"I know, Jim, but I could not go to Jake Vodell as I have come to you--could I? And I could
not talk to the poor, foolish strikers who are so terribly deceived by him. Don't you suppose,
Jim, that most of the strikers think they are right?"

The man stirred uneasily. "I can't help what they think. I can consider only the facts as they
are."

"That is just what I want, Jim," she cried. "Only it seems to me that you are leaving out some
of the most important facts. I can't help believing that if our great captains of industry
and kings of finance and teachers of economics and labor leaders would consider all the facts
they could find some way to settle these differences between employers and employees and save
the industries of the country without starving little girls and boys and their mothers."

"If I could have my way the government would settle the difficulty in a hurry," he said, grimly.

"You mean the soldiers?"

"Yes, the government should put enough troops from the regular army in here to drive these
men back to their jobs."

"But aren't these working people just as much a part of our government as you employers? Forgive
me, Jim, but your plan sounds to me too much like the very imperialism that our soldiers fought
against in France."

"Imperialism or not!" he retorted, "the business men of this country will never submit to the
dictatorship of Jake Vodell and his kind. It would be chaos and utter ruin. Look what they
are doing in other countries."

"Of course it would," she agreed, "but the Interpreter says that if the business men and employers
and the better class of employees like Peter Martin would get together as--as John and Charlie
Martin are--that Jake Vodell and his kind would be powerless."

He did not answer, and she continued, "As I understand brother and the Interpreter, this man
Vodell does not represent the unions at all--he merely uses some of the unions, wherever he
can, through such men as Sam Whaley. Isn't that so, Jim?"

"Whether it is so or not, the result is the same," he answered. "If the unions of the laboring
classes permit themselves to be used as tools by men like Jake Vodell they must take the consequences."

He rose to his feet as one who would end an unprofitable discussion. "Come, Helen, it is useless
for you to make yourself ill over these questions. You are worn out now. Come, you really must
let me take you home."

"I suppose I must," she answered, wearily.

He went to her. "It is wonderful for you to do what you have done to-night, and for you to
come to me like this. Helen--won't you give me my answer--won't you--?"

She put out her hands with a little gesture of protest. "Please, Jim, let's not talk about
ourselves to-night. I--I can't."

Silently he turned away to take up his hat and coat. Silently she stood waiting.

But when he was ready, she said, "Jim, there is just one thing more."

"What is it, Helen?"

"Tell me truly: you could stop this strike, couldn't you? I mean if you would come to some
agreement with your factory men, all the others would go back to work, too, wouldn't they?"

"Yes," he said, "I could."

She hesitated--then falteringly, "Jim, if I--if I promise to be your wife will you--will you
stop the strike? For the sake of the mothers and children who are cold and hungry and sick,
Jim--will you--will you stop the strike?"

For a long minute, Jim McIver could not answer. He wanted this woman as a man of his strength
wants the woman he has chosen. At the beginning of their acquaintance his interest in Helen
had been largely stimulated by the business possibilities of a combination of his factory and
Adam Ward's Mill. But as their friendship had grown he had come to love her sincerely, and
the more material consideration of their union had faded into the background. Men like McIver,
who are capable of playing their games of business with such intensity and passion, are capable
of great and enduring love. They are capable, too, of great sacrifices to principle. As he
considered her words and grasped the full force of her question his face went white and his
nerves were tense with the emotional strain.

At last he said, gently, "Helen, dear, I love you. I want you for my wife. I want you more
than I ever wanted anything. Nothing in the world is of any value to me compared with your
love. But, dear girl, don't you see that I can't take you like this? You cannot sell yourself
to me--even for such a price. I cannot buy you." He turned away.

"Forgive me, Jim," she cried. "I did not realize what I was saying. I--I was thinking of little
Maggie--I--I know you would not do what you are doing if you did not think you were right.
Take me home now, please, Jim."

      *       *       *       *       *

Silently they went out to his automobile. Tenderly he helped her into the car and tucked the
robe about her. The guards swung open the big gates, and they swept away into the night. Past
the big Mill and the Flats, through the silent business district and up the hill they glided
swiftly--steadily. And no word passed between them.

They were nearing the gate to the Ward estate when Helen suddenly grasped her companion's arm
with a low exclamation.

At the same moment McIver instinctively checked the speed of his car.

They had both seen the shadowy form of a man walking slowly past the entrance to Helen's home.

To Helen, there was something strangely familiar in the dim outlines of the moving figure.
As they drove slowly on, passing the man who was now in the deeper shadows of the trees and
bushes which, at this spot grew close to the fence, she turned her head, keeping her eyes upon him.

Suddenly a flash of light stabbed the darkness. A shot rang out. And another.

Helen saw the man she was watching fall.

With a cry, she started from her seat; and before McIver, who had involuntarily stopped the
car, could check her, she had leaped from her place beside him and was running toward the fallen
man.

With a shout "Helen!" McIver followed.

As she knelt beside the form on the ground McIver put his hand on her shoulder. "Helen," he
said, sharply, as if to bring her to her senses, "you must not--here, let me--"

Without moving from her position she turned her face up to him. "Don't you understand, Jim?
It is Captain Charlie."

Two watchmen on the Ward estate, who had heard the shots, came running up.

McIver tried to insist that Helen go with him in his roadster to the house for help and a larger
car, but she refused.

When he returned with John, the chauffeur and one of the big Ward machines, after telephoning
the police and the doctor, Helen was kneeling over the wounded man just as he had left her.

She did not raise her head when they stood beside her and seemed unconscious of their presence.
But when John lifted her up and she heard her brother's voice, she cried out and clung to him
like a frightened child.

The doctor arrived just as they were carrying Captain Charlie into the room to which Mrs. Ward
herself led them. The police came a moment later.

While the physician, with John's assistance, was caring for his patient, McIver gave the officers
what information he could and went with them to the scene of the shooting.

He returned to the house after the officers had completed their examination of the spot and
the immediate vicinity just in time to meet John, who was going out. Helen and her mother were
with the doctor at the bedside of the assassin's victim.

McIver wondered at the anguish in John Ward's face. But Captain Charlie's comrade only asked,
steadily, "Did the police find anything, Jim?"

"Not a thing," McIver answered. "What does the doctor say, John?"

John turned away as if to hide his emotion and for a moment did not answer. Then he spoke those
words so familiar to the men of Flanders' fields, "Charlie is going West, Jim. I must bring
his father and sister. Would you mind waiting here until I return? Something might develop,
you know."

"Certainly, I will stay, John--anything that I can do--command me, won't you?"

"Thank you, Jim--I'll not be long."

      *       *       *       *       *

While he waited there alone, Jim McIver's mind went back over the strange incidents of the
evening: Helen's visit to the Whaley home and her coming to him. Swiftly he reviewed their
conversation. What was it that had so awakened Helen's deep concern for the laboring class?
He had before noticed her unusual interest in the strike and in the general industrial situation--but
to-night--he had never dreamed that she would go so far. Why had she continued to refuse an
answer to his pleading? What was Charlie Martin doing in that neighborhood at that hour? How
had Helen recognized him so quickly and surely in the darkness? The man, as these and many
other unanswerable questions crowded upon him, felt a strange foreboding. Mighty forces beyond
his understanding seemed stirring about him. As one feels the gathering of a storm in the night,
he felt the mysterious movements of elements beyond his control.

He was disturbed suddenly by the opening of an outer door behind him. Turning quickly, he faced
Adam Ward.

Before McIver could speak, the Mill owner motioned him to be silent.

Wondering, McIver obeyed and watched with amazement as the master of that house closed the
door with cautious care and stole softly toward him. To his family Adam Ward's manner would
not have appeared so strange, but McIver had never seen the man under one of his attacks of
nervous excitement.

"I'm glad you are here, Jim," Adam said, in a shaking whisper. "You understand these things.
John is a fool--he don't believe when I tell him they are after us. But you know what to do.
You have the right idea about handling these unions. Kill the leaders; and if the men won't
work, turn the soldiers loose on them. You said the right thing, 'Drive them to their jobs
with bayonets.' Pete Martin's boy was one of them, and he got what was coming to him to-night.
And John and Helen brought him right here into my house. They've got him upstairs there now.
They think I'll stand for it, but you'll see--I'll show them! What was he hanging around my
place for in the night like this? I know what he was after. But he got what he wasn't looking
for this time and Pete will get his too, if he--"

"Father!"

Unnoticed, Helen had come into the room behind them. In pacing the open door she had seen her
father and had realized instantly his condition. But the little she had heard him say was not
at all unusual to her, and she attached no special importance to his words.

Adam Ward was like a child, abashed in her presence.

She looked at McIver appealingly. "Father is excited and nervous, Jim. He is not at all well,
you know."

McIver spoke with gentle authority, "If you will permit me, I will go with him to his room
for a little quiet talk. And then, perhaps, he can sleep. What do you say, Mr. Ward?"

"Yes--yes," agreed Adam, hurriedly.

Helen looked her gratitude and McIver led the Mill owner away.

When they were in Adam's own apartment and the door was shut McIver's manner changed with startling
abruptness. With all the masterful power of his strong-willed nature he faced his trembling
host, and his heavy voice was charged with the force of his dominating personality.

"Listen to me, Adam Ward. You must stop this crazy nonsense. If you act and talk like this
the police will have the handcuffs on you before you know where you are."

Adam cringed before him. "Jim--I--I--do they think that I--"

"Shut up!" growled McIver. "I don't want to hear another word. I have heard too much now. Charlie
Martin stays right here in this house and your family will give him every attention. His father
and sister will be here, too, and you'll not open your mouth against them. Do you understand?"

"Yes--yes," whispered the now thoroughly frightened Adam.

"Don't you dare even to speak to Mrs. Ward or John or Helen as you have to me. And for God's
sake pull yourself together and remember--you don't know any more than the rest of us about
this business--you were in your room when you heard the shots."

"Yes, of course, Jim--but I--I--"

"Shut up! You are not to talk, I tell you--even to me."

Adam Ward whimpered like a child.

For another moment McIver glared at him; then, "Don't forget that I saw this affair and that
I went over the ground with the police. I'm going back downstairs now. You go to bed where
you belong and stay there."

He turned abruptly and left the room.

But as he went down the stairway McIver drew his handkerchief from his pocket and wiped the
perspiration from his brow.

"What in God's name," he asked himself, "did Adam Ward's excited fears mean? What terrible
thing gave birth to his mad words? What awful pattern was this that the unseen forces were
weaving? And what part was he, with his love for Helen, destined to fill in it all?" That his
life was being somehow woven into the design he felt certain--but how and to what end? And
again the man in all his strength felt that dread foreboding.

      *       *       *       *       *

When Peter Martin and his daughter arrived with John at the big house on the hill, Mrs. Ward
met them at the door.

The old workman betrayed no consciousness of the distance the years of Adam Ward's material
prosperity had placed between these two families that in the old-house days had lived in such
intimacy.

Mary hesitated. It must have been that to the girl, who saw it between herself and the happy
fulfillment of her womanhood, the distance seemed even greater than it actually was.

