"Anderson, you are a liar, and the falsehoods which you have uttered, only serve to increase
your guilt, and confirm me in my resolution to sacrifice both you and that guilty woman who
lies yonder. Can I disbelieve the evidence of my own eyes? Must I go into particulars, and
say that last night, at about this hour, in the kitchen--ha! you turn pale--you tremble--your
guilt is confessed. I would have killed you last night, Anderson, but I had not the weapons.
This knife and pistol I purchased to-day, and I shall use them!

"Try and revive that harlot, for I would speak with her ere she dies!"

Anderson mechanically obeyed. Placing the insensible form of Mrs. Romaine upon a sofa, he sprinkled
water upon her face, and she was soon restored to a state of consciousness. For a few moments
she gazed about her wildly; and then, when her eyes settled upon her husband, and she saw the
terrible weapons with which he was armed, she covered her face with her hands and trembled
in an agony of terror, for she knew that her life was in the greatest possible danger.

Romaine now addressed his wife in a tone of calmness which was, under the circumstances, far
more terrible than the most violent outburst of passion:

"Harriet," said he--"I now fully comprehend your reasons for requesting to be allowed to occupy
a separate apartment. You desired an opportunity to gratify your licentious propensities without
any restraint. Woman, why have you used me thus? Have I deserved this infamous treatment? Have
I ever used you unkindly, or spoken a harsh word to you? Do you think that I will tamely wear
the horns which you and your paramour have planted upon my brow? Do you think that I will suffer
myself to be made an object of scorn, and allow myself to be pointed at and ridiculed by a
sneering community?"

"Forgive me," murmured the unhappy wife--"I will not offend again. I acknowledge that I have
committed a grievous sin; but Heaven only knows how sincerely I repent of it!"

"Your repentance comes too late," said Romaine, hoarsely--"Heaven may forgive you, but I shall
not! You say that you will not offend again. Having forever destroyed my happiness, my peace
of mind, and my honor, you will not offend again! You shall not have the opportunity, wretched
woman. You shall no longer survive your infamy. You and the partner of your guilt must die!"

With these words, Romaine cocked his pistol and approached his wife, saying, in a low, savage
tone that evinced the desperate purpose of his heart--

"Take your choice, madam; do you prefer to die by lead or by steel?"

The miserable woman threw herself upon her knees, exclaiming--

"Mercy, husband--mercy! Do not kill me, for I am not prepared to die!"

"You call me husband now--you, who have so long refused to receive me as a husband. Come--I
am impatient to shed your blood, and that of your paramour. Breathe a short prayer to Heaven,
for mercy and forgiveness, and then resign your body to death and your soul to eternity!"

So saying the desperate and half-crazy man raised on high the glittering knife. Poor Mrs. Romaine
uttered a shriek, and, before she could repeat it, the knife descended with the swiftness of
lightning, and penetrated her heart. Her blood spouted all over her white dress, and she sank
down at the murderer's feet, a lifeless corpse!

Paralyzed with horror, I could neither move nor speak. Anderson also stood motionless, like
a bird which is subjected to the fascinating gaze of a serpent. Notwithstanding the terrible
danger in which he was placed, he seemed to be rooted to the spot and incapable of making a
single effort to save himself by either resistance or flight.

The scene was most extraordinary, thrilling and awful. The luxurious chamber--the failing lamp--the
murderer, holding in his hand the bloody knife--the doomed Anderson, whose soul was quivering
on the brink of the dread abyss of eternity; all these combined to form a spectacle of the
most strange and appalling character.

Romaine now raised his pistol and took deliberate aim at Anderson, saying,

"My work is but half done; it is your turn now! Are you ready?"

"Do not shoot me like a dog," implored the unfortunate young man, who, to do him justice, possessed
a considerable amount of courage--"give me, at least, some chance for my life. If I have wronged
you, and I candidly confess that I have, I am ready to give you the satisfaction of a gentleman.
Give me a pistol, place me upon an equal footing with yourself, and we will settle the matter
as becomes men of honor. This boy, here, will be a witness of the affair."

To this proposition, Romaine scornfully replied,

"I admire your assurance, sir.--After seducing the wife, you want a chance to shoot the husband.
Well, as I am an accommodating man, it shall be as you say, for I am sick of life and care
not if I am killed. But I have no other pistol. Stay!--suppose we toss up a coin, and thus
decide which of us shall have this weapon, with the privilege of using it. Here is a quarter
of a dollar; I will throw it up in the air, and when it falls upon the floor, if the head is
uppermost, the pistol is mine; but if the tail is uppermost, the pistol shall be yours. I warn
you that if I win, I shall show you no mercy; and, if you win, I shall expect none from you.
Do you agree to this?"

"I do," replied Anderson, firmly, "and I thank you for your fairness."

Romaine threw up the coin, which spun around in the air and landed upon the carpet. How strange
that it should have become the province of that insignificant coin to decide which of those
two men must die!

Romaine calmly took the dim lamp from the table, and knelt down upon the carpet in a pool of
his wife's blood.

"Watch me closely, and see that I do not touch the coin," said he, as he bent eagerly over
the life-deciding quarter of a dollar.

How my heart beat at that moment, and what must have been the sensation of poor Anderson!

"The head is uppermost, and I have won!" said Romaine, in a hoarse whisper--"come and see for
yourself."

"I am satisfied, your word is sufficient," said Anderson, with a shudder, as he folded his
arms across his breast and seemed to abandon himself to profound despair.

Romaine's pale face assumed an expression of savage delight, as he raised the pistol and pointed
it at the head of his intended victim, saying--

"Then, sir, nothing remains but for me to avail myself of the favor which fortune has conferred
upon me. Young man, in five seconds I shall fire!"

"Hold!" cried Anderson, "I have a favor to ask, which I am sure you will not refuse to grant
me. Before I die, let me write a couple of letters, and make a few notes of the manner in which
I wish my property to be disposed of. It is the last request of a dying man."

"It is granted," said Romaine, "there, upon that escritoire, are writing materials. But make
haste, for I am impatient to finish this disagreeable business."

Anderson sat down, and began to write rapidly. I longed to rush out and give the alarm, so
that the impending tragedy might be averted; but I feared that any movement on my part might
result in the passage of a bullet through my brain, and therefore I remained quiet, for which
I am sure, no sensible reader will blame me.

Poor Anderson! tears gushed from his eyes and streamed down his cheeks while he was writing
one of the letters, which, as I afterwards ascertained, was addressed to a young lady to whom
he was engaged to be married. He wrote two letters, folded, sealed and directed them; these
he handed to me, saying--

"Have the kindness to deliver these letters to the persons to whom they are addressed. Will
you faithfully promise to do this?"

I promised, of course; he shook hands with me, and bade me farewell; then, calmly turning towards
Romaine, he announced his readiness to die. Up to that moment, I had tried to persuade myself
that Anderson's life would be spared, thinking that Romaine must have had enough of blood after
slaying his wife in that barbarous manner. But I was doomed to be terribly disappointed. Scarcely
had Anderson muttered the words, "I am ready to die," when Romaine pulled the trigger of the
upraised pistol, and the young merchant fell dead upon the floor, the bullet having penetrated
his brain.

"Now I am satisfied, for I have had my revenge," said the murderer, coolly, as he wiped the
perspiration from his pallid brow.

"Blood-thirsty villain!" exclaimed I, unable longer to restrain my indignation--"you will swing
upon the gallows for this night's work!"

"Not so," rejoined Romaine, calmly, "for I do not intend to survive this wholesale butchery,
and did not, from the first. I was determined that Anderson should die, at all events. He won
the pistol, for the coin fell with the tail uppermost. Had he stooped to examine it, I would
have blown out his brains, just the same. But hark! the boarders and inmates of the house have
been aroused by the report of the pistol, and they are hastening here. The gallows--no, no,
I must avoid that! They shall not take me alive. Now, may heaven have mercy upon my guilty soul!"

With these words the unhappy man seized the Bowie knife and plunged it into his heart, thus
adding the crime of suicide to the two atrocious murders which he had just committed.

Scarcely had this crowning point of the fearful tragedy been enacted, when a crowd of people,
half-dressed and excited, rushed into the room. Among them was the beautiful widow, Mrs. Raymond.
On seeing the bleeding corpse of Romaine stretched upon the floor, she gave utterance to a
piercing scream and fell down insensible.

In the horror and confusion that prevailed, I was unnoticed. I determined to leave the house,
never to return, for I dreaded being brought before the public, as a witness, being a great
hater of notoriety in any shape. (The reader may smile at this last remark; but I assure him,
or her, that my frequent appearance before the public as a writer, has been the result of necessity--not
of inclination.)

Accordingly, I left the house unobserved, and took lodgings for the remainder of the night
at a hotel. But sleep visited me not, for my mind was too deeply engrossed with the bloody
scenes which I had witnessed, to suffer the approach of "tired nature's sweet restorer." In
the morning I arose early, and investigated the condition of my finances. The result of this
examination was highly satisfactory, for I found that I was the possessor of a considerable
sum of money.

I walked about the city until noon, uncertain how to act. I felt a strong disposition to travel,
and see the world;--but I could not make up my mind in what direction to go. After a sumptuous
dinner at Sandy Welch's "Terrapin Lunch,"--one of the most famous restaurants of the day--I
indulged in a contemplative walk up Broadway. Such thoughts as these ran through my mind:--"I
cannot help contrasting my present situation with the position I was in, three years ago. Then
I was almost penniless, and gladly breakfasted on dry bread at a street pump; now I have three
hundred dollars in my pocket, and have just dined like an epicurean prince. Then I was clad
in garments that were coarse and cheap; now I am dressed in the finest raiment that money could
procure. Then I had no trade; now I have a profession which will be to me an unfailing means
of support. But, alas! then I was comparatively innocent, and ignorant of the wicked ways of
the world; now, although only fifteen years of age, I am too thoroughly posted up on all the
mysteries of city follies and vices. No matter: there's nothing like experience, after all."

Comforting myself with this philosophical reflection, I strolled on. A newsboy came along,
bawling out, at the top of his voice--"Here's the extra Sun, with a full account of the two
murders and suicide in William street last night--only one cent!" Of course I purchased a copy;
and, upon perusing the account, I could not help smiling at the ludicrous and absurd exaggerations
which it contained. It was a perfect modern tragedy of Othello, with Romaine as the Moor, Mrs.
Romaine as Desdemona, and Anderson as a sort of cross between Iago and Michael Cassio. I was
not alluded to in any way whatever, which caused me to rejoice exceedingly.[D]

Suddenly remembering the two letters which had been confided to my care by the unfortunate
Anderson, I resolved to deliver them immediately. One was directed to a Mr. Sargent, in Pine
street. I soon found the place, which was a large mercantile establishment. Over the door was
the sign "Anderson & Sargent." This had been poor Anderson's place of business, and Sargent
had been his partner. I entered, found Mr. Sargent in the counting-room, and delivered to him
the letter. He opened it, read it through coolly, shrugged his shoulders, and said--

"I have already been made acquainted with the full particulars of this melancholy affair. Anderson
was a clever fellow, and I'm sorry he's gone, although his death will certainly promote my
interests. He gives me, in this letter, every necessary instruction as to the disposition of
his property, and he also directs me to present you with the sum of two hundred dollars, both
as an acknowledgement of your services and as a token of his friendship. I will fill out a
check for the amount immediately."

This instance of Anderson's kindness and generosity, almost at the very moment of his death,
deeply affected me; and, at the same time, I could not help feeling disgusted with the heartlessness
displayed by Sargent, who regarded the tragical death of his partner merely as an event calculated
to advance his own interests.

Having received the check, I withdrew from the august presence of Mr. Sargent, who was a tall,
thin, hook-nosed personage, of unwholesome aspect and abrupt manners. I drew the money at the
bank, and then hastened to deliver the other letter, which was addressed to Miss Grace Arlington,
whose residence was designated as being situated in one of the fashionable squares up-town.
I had no difficulty in finding the house, which was of the most elegant and aristocratic appearance.
My appeal to the doorbell was responded to by a smart-looking female domestic, who, on learning
my errand, ushered me into the presence of her mistress. Miss Grace Arlington was a very lovely
and delicate young lady, whose soft eyes beamed with tenderness and sensibility, whose voice
was as sweet as the music of an angel's harp, while her step was as light as the tread of a
fairy whose tiny feet will not crush the leaves of a rose. When I handed her the letter, and
she recognized the well known handwriting, she bestowed upon me a winning and grateful smile
which I shall never forget. My heart misgave me as she opened the missive, for I could well
divine its contents; and I almost reproached myself for being the messenger of such evil tidings.
I watched her closely as she read. She was naturally somewhat pale, but I saw her face grow
ghastly white before she had read two lines. When she had finished the perusal of the fatal
letter, she pressed her hand upon her breast, murmured "Oh God!" and would have fallen to the
floor if I had not caught her in my arms.

"Curses on my stupidity!" I muttered, as I placed her insensible form upon a sofa--"I ought
to have prepared her gradually for the terrible announcement which I knew that letter to contain!"

I rang the bell furiously, and the almost deafening summons was answered by half-a-dozen female
servants, who, on seeing the condition of their young Mistress, set up a loud chorus of screams.
The uproar brought Mr. Arlington, the father of the young lady, to the scene. He was a fine-looking
old gentleman, a retired merchant and a millionaire. I hastened to explain to him all that
had occurred, and Anderson's letter, which lay upon the floor, confirmed my statements. Mr.
Arlington was horror-struck, for he, as well as his daughter, had until that moment been in
happy ignorance of the bloody affair. The old gentleman had first established Anderson in business,
and he had always cherished for that unfortunate young man the warmest friendship. No wonder,
then, that he was overpowered when he became aware of the tragical end of him whom he had expected
so shortly to become his son-in-law.

A celebrated physician, who resided next door, was sent for. He happened to be at home, and
arrived almost instantly. He knelt down beside the broken-hearted girl, and, as his fingers
touched her wrist, a look of profound grief settled upon his benevolent face.

"Well, Doctor," exclaimed Mr. Arlington, breathlessly, "what is the matter with my child? She
will recover soon, will she not? It is merely a fainting fit produced by the reception of unwelcome
news."

"Alas, sir!" replied the Doctor, in a tone of deep sympathy, as he brushed away the tears from
his eyes--"I may as well tell you the melancholy truth at once. The sudden shock caused by
the unwelcome news you speak of, has proved fatal; your daughter is dead!"

Poor old Arlington staggered to a seat, covered his face with his hands, and moaned in the
agony of his spirits. Notwithstanding all his wealth, how I pitied him!

Seeing that I could be of no service whatever, I left the house of mourning and walked down
town in a very thoughtful mood. I had already begun to enter upon an experience such as few
youths of fifteen are ever called upon to encounter; and I wondered what the dim, uncertain
Future had in store for me.

However, as the reader will see in the next chapter, I did not long suffer my mind to be intruded
upon by melancholy reflections.

FOOTNOTES:

[D] Many of my New York readers will remember the "William Street Tragedy," to which I have
alluded. The bloody event created the most intense excitement at the time of its occurrence.
Having witnessed the horrible affair, I have truly related all the facts concerning it.

CHAPTER IV

In which I set forth upon my travels, and met with a great misfortune.

Having plenty of means at my disposal, I determined to enjoy myself to the full extent of my
physical and intellectual capacity, for I remembered the graceful words of the charming poet
who sung--

  "Go it while you're young:
  For, when you get old, you can't!"

Behold me, at the age of fifteen, fairly launched upon all the dissipations of a corrupt and
licentious city! It is not without a feeling of shame that I make these confessions; but truth
compels me to do so. I soon became thoroughly initiated into all the mysteries of high and
low life in New York. In my daily and nightly peregrinations I frequently encountered my old
friend Jack Slack; we never spoke, but on the contrary regarded each other with looks of enmity
and defiance. Stronger and stronger within me grew the presentiment that this mysterious youth
was destined to become my evil genius and the cause of a great misfortune. Therefore, whenever
I met him, I could not help shuddering with dread.

Three years passed away in this manner, and I had reached the age of eighteen, with an unimpaired
constitution and a firm belief that I was destined to exist for ever. I had lived luxuriously
upon the earnings of my pen, for I was a regular contributor to the Knickerbroker Magazine
and other popular periodicals. Having accumulated considerable money, notwithstanding my extravagance,
I resolved to take a Southern tour, visiting Philadelphia, Washington, and other cities of
note. Accordingly, one fine day, I found myself established in comfortable quarters, at the
most fashionable hotel in the "city of brotherly love." I became a regular frequenter of the
theatres and other places of amusement, and formed the acquaintance of many actors and literary
people. It was here that I had the honor of being introduced to Booth, the great tragedian,
now dead; to "Ned Forrest," the American favorite; to "Uncle" J.R. Scott, as fine a man as
ever drank a noggin of ale or ate a "dozen raw," and to Major Richardson, the author of "Wacousta,"
and the "Monk Knight of St. John," the latter being one of the most voluptuous works ever written.
Poor Major! his was a melancholy end. He was formerly a Major in the British army, and was
a gentleman by birth, education and principle. Possessing a fine person, a generous heart and
the most winning manners, he was a general favorite with his associates. He became the victim
of rapacious publishers, and grew poor. Too proud to accept of assistance from his friends,
he retired to obscure lodgings and there endeavored to support himself by the productions of
his pen. But his spirit was broken and his intellect crushed by the base ingratitude of those
who should have been his warmest friends. Often have I visited him in his garret--for he actually
occupied one; and, with a bottle of whiskey before us, we have condemned the world as being
full of selfishness, ingratitude and villainy. Winter came on, and the Major had no fuel, nor
the means of procuring any. I have repeatedly called upon him and found him sitting in the
intensely cold atmosphere of his miserable apartment, wrapped in a blanket and busily engaged
in writing with a hand that was blue and trembled with the cold. He firmly refused to receive
aid, in any shape, from his friends; and they were obliged to witness his gradual decay with
sad hearts. The gallant Major always persisted in denying that he needed anything; he swore
his garret was the most comfortable place in the world, and that the introduction of a fire
would have been preposterous; he always affirmed with a round military oath, that he "lived
like a fighting-cock," and was never without his bottle of wine at dinner; yet I once came
upon him rather unexpectedly, and found him dining upon a crust of bread and a red herring.
Sometimes, but rarely, he appeared at the theatres, and, upon such occasions, he was always
scrupulously well-dressed, for Major Richardson would never appear abroad otherwise than as
a gentleman. Want, privation and disappointment finally conquered him; he grew thin, and haggard,
and melancholy, and reserved, and discouraged the visits of his friends who used to love to
assemble at his humble lodgings and avail themselves of his splendid conversational powers,
or listen to his personal reminiscences and racy anecdotes of military life. One morning he
was found dead in his bed; and his death caused the most profound grief in the breasts of all
who knew him as he deserved to be known, and who respected him for his many excellent qualities
of head and heart. His remains received a handsome and appropriate burial; and many a tear
was shed o'er the grave of him who had been a gallant soldier and a celebrated author, but
a truly wronged and most unfortunate man.

The reader will, I am sure, pardon this digression, for I was anxious to do justice to the
memory of a much-valued friend and literary brother. I now resume the direct course of my narrative,
and come to the darkest portion of my career.

One night, in a billiard room, I had a very unpleasant encounter with an old acquaintance.
I observed, at one of the tables, a young man whose countenance seemed strangely familiar to
me, although I did not immediately recognize him. He was dressed in the extreme of fashion,
and his upper lip was darkened by an incipient moustache--the result, doubtless, of many months
of industrious cultivation. A cigar was in his mouth, and a billiard-cue was in his hand; and
he profusely adorned his conversation with the most extravagant oaths. Altogether, he seemed
to be a very "fast" young man; and I puzzled my brain in endeavoring to remember where I had
met him before.

Suddenly, he raised his eyes, and their gaze encountered mine; then I wondered that I had not
before recognized "my old friend," Jack Slack!

"This fellow is my evil genius; he follows me everywhere," thought I, turning to leave the
saloon. Would to heaven that I had never entered it! But regrets are useless now.

Jack stepped after me, and detained me. I instantly saw that trouble was about to come.

"Greenhorn," said Jack, with an air of angry reproach, as he laid his hand upon my shoulder--"why
do you so continually avoid me? What in the devil's name have I ever done to deserve this treatment?
Have I ever injured you in any way? Damn it, we are equal in age, and in disposition--let us
be friends. I can put you in a way, in this city, to enjoy the tallest kind of sport. Give
me your hand, and let's go up to the bar and take a social drink."

"Jack," said I, seriously and very calmly--"I will shake hands with you in friendship, but
I candidly confess that I do not like you; and I believe that it will be better for us both
not to associate together at all. Observe me!--I have no hard feelings against you;--you are
a clever fellow, and generous to a fault; but something whispers to me that we must not be
companions, and I therefore respectfully desire you not to speak to me again. Good night."[E]

I turned to go, but Jack placed himself directly in my path, and said, in a voice that was
hoarse with passion--

"Stay and hear me. We must not part in this way. Do you think that I will tamely submit to
be cut in a manner so disgraceful? Do you think that I am going to remain the object of an
unfounded and ridiculous prejudice? Explain yourself, and apologize, or by G----, it will be
the worse for you!"

"Explain myself--apologize!" I scornfully repeated--"you are a fool, and don't know to whom
you are talking. Let me go."

"No!" passionately screamed my enraged antagonist, who was somewhat intoxicated--"you must
stay and hear me out. I may as well throw off the mask at once. Know, then, that I hate you
like hell-fire, and that, the very first time I saw you, I resolved to make you as bad as myself.
Therefore did I induce you to drink, and visit disreputable places. The cool contempt with
which you have always treated me, had increased my hatred ten-fold. I thirst for vengeance,
and I'll fix you yet!"

"Do your worst," said I, contemptuously; and again did I essay to take my departure. Meanwhile,
during the quarrel, the frequents of the saloon had gathered around and appeared to enjoy the
scene highly.

"If he has given you any cause of offence, Jack, why don't you pitch into him?" suggested a
half-drunken fellow who bore the enviable reputation of being a most expert pickpocket.

Jack unfortunately adopted the suggestion, and struck me with all his force. I of course returned
the blow, with very tolerable effect.--Had the row commenced and terminated in mere fisticuffs
all would have been well, and I should not now be called upon to write down the details of
a bloody tragedy.

Drawing a dirk-knife from his breast, Jack attacked me with the utmost fury. I then did what
any other person, situated as I was, would have done--I acted in my own defence. "Self-defence"
is universally acknowledged to be the "first law of nature." There was I, a stranger, savagely
attacked by a young man armed with a dangerous weapon, and surrounded by his friends and associates--a
desperate set, who seemed disposed to assist in the task of demolishing me.

I quickly drew from my pocket a pistol, without which, at that time, I never travelled. Before,
however, I could cock and level it, my infuriated enemy dashed his dirk-knife into my face,
and the point entered my right eye. It was fortunate that the weapon did not penetrate the
brain, and cause my instant death.

Maddened by the horrible pain which I suffered, and believing myself to be mortally wounded,
I raised the pistol and discharged it. Jack Slack fell to the floor, a corpse, his head being
shattered to pieces. I never regretted the act.

A cry of horror and dismay burst from the lips of all present, on witnessing this dreadful
but justifiable deed of retribution.

"Gentlemen," said I, as the blood was trickling down my face--"I call upon you all to witness
that I slew this young man in self-defence. He drove me to commit the deed, and I could not
avoid it. I am willing and anxious to abide the decision of a jury of my countrymen; therefore,
send for an officer, and I will voluntarily surrender myself into his custody."

Scarcely had I uttered these words, when the excruciating torment which I suffered caused me
to faint away. When I recovered, I found myself in a prison-cell, with a bandage over my damaged
optic, and a physician feeling my pulse.

"Ah!" said I, looking around, "I am in limbo, I see. Well, I do not fear the result. But, doctor,
am I seriously injured--am I likely to kick the bucket?"

"Not at all," was the doctor's encouraging reply--"but you have lost the sight of your eye."

"Oh, is that all?" said I with a laugh--"well, I believe that it is said in the Bible somewhere,
that it is better to enter the kingdom of heaven with one eye than to go to the devil with two."

The physician departed for his home, and I departed for the land of dreams. The pain of my
wound had considerably mitigated, and I slept quite comfortably.

I have always been somewhat of a philosopher in the way of enduring the ills of life, and I
tried to reconcile myself to my misfortune and situation with as good a grace as possible.
In this I succeeded much better than might have been expected. When a person loses an eye and
is at the same time imprisoned for killing another individual, it is certainly natural for
that unfortunate person to yield to despair; but, seeing the uselessness of grief, I resolved
to "face the music" with all the courage of which I was possessed.

Two or three days passed away, and I became almost well--for, to use a common expression, I
owned the constitution of a horse. The newspapers which I was allowed to send out and purchase,
made me acquainted with something that rather surprised me, for they communicated to me the
information that Jack Slack, the young gentleman to whom I had presented a ticket of admission
to the other world, was a person whose real name was John Shaffer, alias Slippery Jack, alias
Jack Slack. His profession was that of a pickpocket, in which avocation he had always been
singularly expert. He was well known to the police, and had been frequently imprisoned. I was
gratified to see that the newspapers all justified me in what I had done, and predicted my
honorable discharge from custody. That prediction proved correct; for, after I had been in
confinement a week, the Grand Jury failed to bring a bill of indictment against me, and I was
consequently set at liberty.

Tired of Philadelphia, I went to Washington. A New York member of Congress, with whom I was
well acquainted, volunteered to show me the "lions;" and I had the honor of a personal introduction
to Mr. Van Buren and other distinguished official personages. Some people would be surprised
if they did but know of the splendid dissipation that prevails among the "dignitaries of the
nation" at Washington.

