Public sentiment has had a slight "reaction" though not sufficient to stop the crusade of lawlessness
and lynching. The spirit of christianity of the great M.E. Church was aroused to the frequent
and revolting crimes against a weak people, enough to pass strong condemnatory resolutions
at its General Conference in Omaha last May. The spirit of justice of the grand old party asserted
itself sufficiently to secure a denunciation of the wrongs, and a feeble declaration of the
belief in human rights in the Republican platform at Minneapolis, June 7. Some of the great
dailies and weeklies have swung into line declaring that lynch law must go. The President of
the United States issued a proclamation that it be not tolerated in the territories over which
he has jurisdiction. Governor Northern and Chief Justice Bleckley of Georgia have proclaimed
against it. The citizens of Chattanooga, Tenn., have set a worthy example in that they not
only condemn lynch law, but her public men demanded a trial for Weems, the accused rapist,
and guarded him while the trial was in progress. The trial only lasted ten minutes, and Weems
chose to plead guilty and accept twenty-one years sentence, than invite the certain death which
awaited him outside that cordon of police if he had told the truth and shown the letters he
had from the white woman in the case.

Col. A.S. Colyar, of Nashville, Tenn., is so overcome with the horrible state of affairs that
he addressed the following earnest letter to the Nashville American.

  Nothing since I have been a reading man has so impressed me with the
  decay of manhood among the people of Tennessee as the dastardly
  submission to the mob reign. We have reached the unprecedented low
  level; the awful criminal depravity of substituting the mob for the
  court and jury, of giving up the jail keys to the mob whenever they are
  demanded. We do it in the largest cities and in the country towns; we do
  it in midday; we do it after full, not to say formal, notice, and so
  thoroughly and generally is it acquiesced in that the murderers have
  discarded the formula of masks. They go into the town where everybody
  knows them, sometimes under the gaze of the governor, in the presence of
  the courts, in the presence of the sheriff and his deputies, in the
  presence of the entire police force, take out the prisoner, take his
  life, often with fiendish glee, and often with acts of cruelty and
  barbarism which impress the reader with a degeneracy rapidly approaching
  savage life. That the State is disgraced but faintly expresses the
  humiliation which has settled upon the once proud people of Tennessee.
  The State, in its majesty, through its organized life, for which the
  people pay liberally, makes but one record, but one note, and that a
  criminal falsehood, "was hung by persons to the jury unknown." The
  murder at Shelbyville is only a verification of what every intelligent
  man knew would come, because with a mob a rumor is as good as a proof.

These efforts brought forth apologies and a short halt, but the lynching mania was raged again
through the past three months with unabated fury.

The strong arm of the law must be brought to bear upon lynchers in severe punishment, but this
cannot and will not be done unless a healthy public sentiment demands and sustains such action.

The men and women in the South who disapprove of lynching and remain silent on the perpetration
of such outrages, are particeps criminis, accomplices, accessories before and after the fact,
equally guilty with the actual lawbreakers who would not persist if they did not know that
neither the law nor militia would be employed against them.

6 SELF-HELP

In the creation of this healthier public sentiment, the Afro-American can do for himself what
no one else can do for him. The world looks on with wonder that we have conceded so much and
remain law-abiding under such great outrage and provocation.

To Northern capital and Afro-American labor the South owes its rehabilitation. If labor is
withdrawn capital will not remain. The Afro-American is thus the backbone of the South. A thorough
knowledge and judicious exercise of this power in lynching localities could many times effect
a bloodless revolution. The white man's dollar is his god, and to stop this will be to stop
outrages in many localities.

The Afro-Americans of Memphis denounced the lynching of three of their best citizens, and urged
and waited for the authorities to act in the matter and bring the lynchers to justice. No attempt
was made to do so, and the black men left the city by thousands, bringing about great stagnation
in every branch of business. Those who remained so injured the business of the street car company
by staying off the cars, that the superintendent, manager and treasurer called personally on
the editor of the Free Speech, asked them to urge our people to give them their patronage again.
Other business men became alarmed over the situation and the Free Speech was run away that
the colored people might be more easily controlled. A meeting of white citizens in June, three
months after the lynching, passed resolutions for the first time, condemning it. But they did
not punish the lynchers. Every one of them was known by name, because they had been selected
to do the dirty work, by some of the very citizens who passed these resolutions. Memphis is
fast losing her black population, who proclaim as they go that there is no protection for the
life and property of any Afro-American citizen in Memphis who is not a slave.

The Afro-American citizens of Kentucky, whose intellectual and financial improvement has been
phenomenal, have never had a separate car law until now. Delegations and petitions poured into
the Legislature against it, yet the bill passed and the Jim Crow Car of Kentucky is a legalized
institution. Will the great mass of Negroes continue to patronize the railroad? A special from
Covington, Ky., says:

Covington, June 13.--The railroads of the State are beginning to feel very markedly, the effects
of the separate coach bill recently passed by the Legislature. No class of people in the State
have so many and so largely attended excursions as the blacks. All these have been abandoned,
and regular travel is reduced to a minimum. A competent authority says the loss to the various
roads will reach $1,000,000 this year.

A call to a State Conference in Lexington, Ky., last June had delegates from every county in
the State. Those delegates, the ministers, teachers, heads of secret and others orders, and
the head of every family should pass the word around for every member of the race in Kentucky
to stay oil railroads unless obliged to ride. If they did so, and their advice was followed
persistently the convention would not need to petition the Legislature to repeal the law or
raise money to file a suit. The railroad corporations would be so effected they would in self-defense
lobby to have the separate car law repealed. On the other hand, as long as the railroads can
get Afro-American excursions they will always have plenty of money to fight all the suits brought
against them. They will be aided in so doing by the same partisan public sentiment which passed
the law. White men passed the law, and white judges and juries would pass upon the suits against
the law, and render judgment in line with their prejudices and in deference to the greater
financial power.

