The missionary, reluctantly allowing herself to be pulled along by the hand, finds it even
as the child has said. Crowds of children, and older people too, are swarming in at the open
gateway through which has just passed the gaily decorated sedan chair. Though the courtyard
is fairly commodious, it is packed with people, talking, gesticulating, pushing to get a better
vantage point from which to view the bride when she alights. The groom and his parents are
graciously welcoming invited guests, entirely unconcerned about all the hubbub. The bridal
chair is set down to a great popping of firecrackers, the appointed welcome committee of several
girls and one older woman draws the curtain and assists the bride to her place in the yard,
and the ceremony proceeds. After it is completed, the bride is escorted with much formality
into the house, and to the bedroom prepared for her, where she is seated upon a bed resplendent
with red satin quilts. Then the guests, invited and uninvited, pour into the room. They subject
the bride and her clothes to an interested and careful scrutiny, commenting upon everything,
with much joking and laughter. As soon as one group gets tired and takes its leave, another
is ready to push in and view the "new daughter-in-law."

"The poor girl!" says the missionary. "She looks ready to drop! When will they ever leave her
to herself?"

Not until late that night--and the same performance will start again early the next morning.
Why, if there were not a continuous stream of visitors for three days, the wedding would be
thought rather a flop!

       *       *       *       *       *

The day had been a busy one. The first visitor had appeared before breakfast, a precursor of
a seemingly never-ending stream. There were uneducated country women, whose curiosity could
only be satisfied by going through every room in the missionary's house and minutely examining
each article that met their eyes. There were those who were educated and formally polite, and
dexterously steered the conversation into other channels every time we endeavored to present
the claims of Christ to them. There were Christians, some coming with their troubles, others
with plans for forwarding the work of the church, and still others with requests for us to
set a time when we could go with them to call upon their unsaved friends or relatives.

Finally at four-thirty, after we had ushered out a couple of callers, we returned, for the
first time that day, to an empty room.

"Come, quickly!" I said to my sister. "Let's go out for a walk before someone else comes!"
I felt as though I would go crazy if I did not get away--away anywhere, just so it was a place
where we could be alone. We hurriedly slipped out the back gate, around the pond, through the
back streets, and out the city gate.

"Which way do you want to go?" my sister asked.

"Oh, just anywhere into the country," I said immediately, "where there aren't any people!"

My sister stood stock-still, looking at me in amazement. "Aren't any people!" she repeated.
"Aren't any people! Where in China do you think you'll find a place where there aren't any people?"

I stood still and looked around me. The flat countryside was dotted with villages, and crisscrossed
with paths. Farmers were busy plowing their tiny fields. Coolies in groups of two and three
were returning home from the city, scattering in all directions along the many footpaths. People,
people everywhere, even out there in the country! These were the people whom I had come to
China to seek; yet if I could only get away from them for a few hours! If there were only some
wooded gully or mountain thicket where I could be out of sight of everyone! But there were
no mountains; the country was as flat as a tabletop. I mentally searched the familiar countryside
for a place of refuge. Good, fertile land, cut up into tiny fields; well-kept crops, with not
a weed anywhere; here and there a little grove of trees--surely in among the trees we could
be out of sight! But no! There was no undergrowth, no weeds, not even any fallen leaves. All
had been gathered, carefully dried, and put in the fuel pile. Why, if a strong wind came up
in the night, the owner of the trees would rise from bed and hurry out to sweep up the precious
leaves as soon as they fell, just so no unscrupulous neighbor could come and steal them before
daylight! And all the lower branches of the trees had long since been trimmed off for fuel.
A grove of trees would hide me from the sight of no one, and there was no better place.

The full force of an unpleasant fact suddenly hit me, a fact that I had never before completely
realized. There was absolutely no place that I could go to be alone! The best that I could
do was to go home to the mission station, into the house, up to my room, and close the door.
Even then, who knew how soon someone would call me?

Then, in a flash, a little story I had read in a magazine long before came to my mind. A friend
dropped in to visit a busy mother. The family was large and poor, and they lived in only one
room. It seemed to the visitor that the one room was swarming with children. The mother met
her with a beaming face.

"But how can you be so happy," asked the visitor, "when you can never get a minute to be alone?
How can you find quiet even to pray?"

"It used to trouble me," was the quick reply, "until I found out the secret. When things get
too much for me, I just throw my apron up over my head, and I am all alone with the Lord."

Dear Lord, forgive me! I thought. What about that poor mother? And what about the Lord Jesus?
He wanted solitude just as we do, and He went with His disciples across the lake to an out-of-the-way
spot to be quiet. The multitudes heard where He was going and followed by land. When He stepped
from the boat, there were thousands upon thousands waiting for Him. How did He react? Was there
anger in His heart, or resentment, at never being allowed to be alone? No; for it says that
when He saw the multitudes, He welcomed them (Luke 9:11). Dear Lord, give me that same heart
of love for the multitudes!

       *       *       *       *       *

Privacy and solitude are good things, no doubt--in moderation. Most missionaries get less of
them than they would desire. There are probably few missionaries who have not been irritated
at one time or another when their houses and their persons were subjected to amazed, or delighted,
or even half-contemptuous scrutiny by the curious. Can't they have the decency to keep out
of what is my own private business? the missionary thinks. Yet if we belong to the day, if
we are children of light, why should any act of ours, or anything belonging to us, need to
be hidden in the dark? This is not to recommend a needless parading of things that normal people
prefer to be reserved about. Let us remember, however, that people must come to know us before
they can accept our message, or before our testimony has any value to them. Why should I desire
to keep hidden anything that has to do with myself--if the sharing of that thing might help
to draw someone to the Saviour? Wouldn't you like to come too?"

I was sitting at my desk, with all the paraphernalia of Chinese study spread out before me.
I looked at my desk, looked at the clock, looked at my sister, and then asked, "How soon will
you be back?"

"Oh, we shouldn't be too long! Of course Mrs. Ning walks slowly, with her small[3] feet; but
it's only a mile, and we don't need to stay very long. You never know, but we ought to be home
in plenty of time for dinner."

Well, I thought to myself, I suppose I ought to go; but I wanted to finish translating this
chapter, and I'll be doing well to get it done in three hours. And I had thought that I'd get
it finished this morning, and be able to write letters this afternoon. Still--

Unfortunately for my peace of mind, I knew two things. One was that my sister thought that
I ought to go, and the other was that she was right.

"Well," I said finally, "I'll go; but let's not stay long."

We got our sun hats, joined Mrs. Ning, and started off. Her feet were not more than six inches
long, and she did take such tiny steps! Try as I would to walk slowly, I continually found
myself going ahead of the other two. My sister by nature is in more of a hurry to get things
done than I. Still, here she was, wandering along beside Mrs. Ning as if she had all the time
in the world, listening intently to a tale about Mrs. Ning's third aunt's cousin, and putting
in sympathetic interjections and questions now and then.

I could not seem to get interested in the story, even though Mrs. Ning was telling how she
had tried to get this third aunt's cousin to bring his troubles to the Saviour. I could not
understand all of what she said, and was unable to keep up with all the ins and outs of the
poor cousin's troubles, so finally I gave up trying. It was a beautiful day. The sky was blue,
and the wheat, high and greenish-gold, rippled in the wind. We turned off the road and followed
a little path running through the wheat fields. My sister almost unconsciously began slipping
the full heads of grain through her fingers, one after the other, as she passed. She always
loved the wheat, and so did I, but somehow today I did not want to touch it. I only wished
that we would hurry.

At last we arrived at the village, and made our way to the home of old Mrs. Woo. As usual,
a crowd of dirty, staring youngsters followed us into the house. We sat on benches that were
about eight inches wide, and sipped "tea" that could be called so only by courtesy; since,
having no tea leaves, they had instead just put a few slices of raw sweet potato into the kettle
when it went on the fire. Old Mrs. Woo was up and around again, and feeling lively.

"I'm so glad you've come! I've been telling my neighbors all about the Lord Jesus, and how
they ought to believe in Him, but I'm afraid I don't do it quite right. Now that you've come
you can tell them! Here, you, Kitten," speaking to one of the crowd of children that had followed
us into the house, "you run home and get your grandma to come. And you, Girlie, your second
great-aunt said that she wanted to believe. Run fast and tell her that the teachers have come.
All of you youngsters, you scoot home as fast as you can and get your mothers and grandmothers
to come and listen to the doctrine!"

It took quite a lot of persuasion to get the children to go; and perhaps the mothers and grandmothers
were busy. We waited in vain for quite awhile, but finally in came three or four women, one
with a cloth shoe sole she was quilting, and another carrying a baby. After quite a bustle,
they were all seated and given bowls of tea. Then out came the poster that my sister always
carried, and the Gospel was explained to them in very simple words. With great effort I managed
to keep my mind on the message, and understood most of it. I congratulated myself internally.
At last I had successfully wrested my mind from the absorbing but uncomfortable subject of
all the things that I had wanted to get done that day!

The preaching was finished. The women got up to go, assuring us that they would come with Mrs.
Woo to church the next Sunday. We got up too, and started to say good-by.

"What! Go home!" said Mrs. Woo. "Who could think of such a thing! Of course you'll stay for
dinner with me! Why, it's almost ready!" (We knew perfectly well that the only womenfolk in
the family were herself and her daughter-in-law, and that neither had left the room since the
tea had been brought in.)

My sister and Mrs. Ning protested, and even I managed to add a few polite words. But my thoughts
were not so courteous. Stay for dinner! What an idea! Why, that would mean that we would not
be home before the middle of the afternoon at the earliest! And besides, the meal would probably
be some miserable stuff that I could hardly force down! Oh, well, likely she was only asking
us in order to be polite, and did not really mean it!

With great difficulty we made our way toward the door. Mrs. Woo and her daughter-in-law hung
on us until we could hardly move, protesting loudly that they would not think of letting us
leave. My blood began to boil. I guess we had the right to go home when we wanted to! They
were actually trying to force us to stay! Well, I would not stay in any case now! This was
just too much!

We had reached the open door, and just then caught sight of an old woman hobbling rapidly across
the yard toward us.

"Oh, Girlie's second great-aunt!" called Mrs. Woo. "Here you are at last! Why didn't you come
sooner?"

"Well, I had company, and I just couldn't get away. But finally my daughter-in-law came back,
and I left them with her and came as quickly as I could. I was so afraid that the teachers
would be gone. But, oh, surely you're not leaving?"

"Oh, no, of course they're not leaving! You don't think that I would let them come under my
roof and not keep them to a meal! It will be nothing like they're used to, of course; but still
a meal is a meal! Now, just sit down, teachers, please, and Mrs. Ning. Girlie's second great-aunt
has wanted to believe for some time, but her son is very mean to her, and he won't let her
go to church. Do you think that she could believe at home?"

I could not believe my eyes. My sister and Mrs. Ning sat down obediently and began to talk
very sympathetically with the old woman who had just come. What! Were they actually going to
stay to dinner? And not a word to me, just as if what I wanted did not matter at all! They
could talk to this old lady, and tell her about the Lord, but all I could do was just sit!
Of course I was supposed to listen; but one could not put her brain to listening to this queer
Chinese all day long! And what about all those things that I had wanted to get done?

The dinner was no better than I expected. In fact, it was worse. Girlie's second great-aunt
stayed too, upon urging, and they all talked on and on. They were trying to teach her a little
prayer, and she was so stupid! Over and over and over, and still she could not say it by herself.

Finally, when I had given up all hope--I had sat in stony silence all the afternoon--we got
up, made our farewells, and started home. The sun was setting as we entered our front gate.
I was tired (why, I did not know; I had not done a thing all day), hungry (I had not been able
to eat much of the dinner, no matter how it had been urged upon me), and disgusted. And the
worst of it was that it did not seem to bother my sister a particle. She took it all as a matter
of course. Was this what I was going to have to go through; what I had come to China for? For
I began slowly to realize that today's experience was not just one isolated incident; it was
likely to happen any day in the year. Something was wrong somewhere. What?

Suddenly it came over me. It was only that I had had my day all planned out, and did not want
my plans interfered with. Because they had been interfered with, I had done nothing but sulk.
All the things I might have enjoyed I had not enjoyed at all. I had made myself miserable for
a whole day, just because my time had been disposed of by someone else, and not by me.

