General Grant says that Longstreet brought with him no troops from Richmond, but I have very
little confidence in the information collected at his headquarters.  If you can leave your
command with safety, come to Washington, as I wish to give you the views of the authorities here.

"H. W. HALLECK, Major-General, Chief-of-Staff."

In consequence of the Longstreet despatch, I felt a concern about my absence which I could
hardly repress, but after duly considering what Halleck said, and believing that Longstreet
could not unite with Early before I got back, and that even if he did Wright would be able
to cope with them both, I and my staff, with our horses, took the cars for Washington, where
we arrived on the morning of the 17th at about 8 o'clock.  I proceeded at an early hour to
the War Department, and as soon as I met Secretary Stanton, asked him for a special train to
be ready at 12 o'clock to take me to Martinsburg, saying that in view of existing conditions
I must get back to my army as quickly as possible.  He at once gave the order for the train,
and then the Secretary, Halleck, and I proceeded to hold a consultation in regard to my operating
east of the Blue Ridge.  The upshot was that my views against such a plan were practically
agreed to, and two engineer officers were designated to return with me for the purpose of reporting
on a defensive line in the valley that could be held while the bulk of my troops were being
detached to Petersburg.  Colonel Alexander and Colonel Thom both of the Engineer Corps, reported
to accompany me, and at 12 o'clock we took the train.

We arrived about dark at Martinsburg, and there found the escort of three hundred men which
I had ordered before leaving Cedar Creek.  We spent that night at Martinsburg, and early next
morning mounted and started up the Valley pike for Winchester, leaving Captain Sheridan behind
to conduct to the army the Commissioners whom the State of New York had sent down to receive
the vote of her troops in the coming Presidential election.  Colonel Alexander was a man of
enormous weight, and Colonel Thom correspondingly light, and as both were unaccustomed to riding
we had to go slowly, losing so much time, in fact, that we did not reach Winchester till between
3 and 4 o'clock in the afternoon, though the distance is but twenty-eight miles.  As soon as
we arrived at Colonel Edwards's headquarters in the town, where I intended stopping for the
night, I sent a courier to the front to bring me a report of the condition of affairs, and
then took Colonel Alexander out on the heights about Winchester, in order that he might overlook
the country, and make up his mind as to the utility of fortifying there.  By the time we had
completed our survey it was dark, and just as we reached Colonel Edwards's house on our return
a courier came in from Cedar Creek bringing word that everything was all right, that the enemy
was quiet at Fisher's Hill, and that a brigade of Grover's division was to make a reconnoissance
in the morning, the 19th, so about 10 o'clock I went to bed greatly relieved, and expecting
to rejoin my headquarters at my leisure next day. 

A little later he exclaims, 'This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen'; and almost
from that point he leaves the King to Edgar, speaking only once again in the remaining hundred
lines of the scene. In the shelter of the 'farm-house' (III. vi.) he revives, and resumes his
office of love; but I think that critic is right who considers his last words significant.
'We'll go to supper i' the morning,' says Lear; and the Fool answers 'And I'll go to bed at
noon,' as though he felt he had taken his death. When, a little later, the King is being carried
away on a litter, the Fool sits idle. He is so benumbed and worn out that he scarcely notices
what is going on. Kent has to rouse him with the words,

Come, help
to bear thy master, Thou must not stay behind.
I asked him if it sounded like a battle, and as he again said that it did not, I still inferred
that the cannonading was caused by Grover's division banging away at the enemy simply to find
out what he was up to.  However, I went down-stairs and requested that breakfast be hurried
up, and at the same time ordered the horses to be saddled and in readiness, for I concluded
to go to the front before any further examinations were made in regard to the defensive line.

We mounted our horses between half-past 8 and 9, and as we were proceeding up the street which
leads directly through Winchester, from the Logan residence, where Edwards was quartered, to
the Valley pike, I noticed that there were many women at the windows and doors of the houses,
who kept shaking their skirts at us and who were otherwise markedly insolent in their demeanor,
but supposing this conduct to be instigated by their well-known and perhaps natural prejudices,
I ascribed to it no unusual significance.  On reaching the edge of the town I halted a moment,
and there heard quite distinctly the sound of artillery firing in an unceasing roar. Concluding
from this that a battle was in progress, I now felt confident that the women along the street
had received intelligence from the battle, field by the "grape-vine telegraph," and were in
raptures over some good news, while I as yet was utterly ignorant of the actual situation. To
Gregory the party of the old king was heretical and odious--that of the new king pure and
orthodox. Though all his sympathies were with the latter, he still openly blamed and deplored
the conduct of his legates, and refused to acknowledge Rodolph as
king.  The result of my efforts in the interval was the conviction
that the travel of the sound was increasing too rapidly to be accounted for by my own rate
of motion, and that therefore my army must be falling back.

At Mill Creek my escort fell in behind, and we were going ahead at a regular pace, when, just
as we made the crest of the rise beyond the stream, there burst upon our view the appalling
spectacle of a panic-stricken army-hundreds of slightly wounded men, throngs of others unhurt
but utterly demoralized, and baggage-wagons by the score, all pressing to the rear in hopeless
confusion, telling only too plainly that a disaster had occurred at the front.  On accosting
some of the fugitives, they assured me that the army was broken up, in full retreat, and that
all was lost; all this with a manner true to that peculiar indifference that takes possession
of panic-stricken men.  I was greatly disturbed by the, sight, but at once sent word to Colonel
Edwards commanding the brigade in Winchester, to stretch his troops across the valley, near
Mill Creek, and stop all fugitives, directing also that the transportation be, passed through
and parked on the north side of the town.

As I continued at a walk a few hundred yards farther, thinking all the time of Longstreet's
telegram to Early, "Be ready when I join you, and we will crush Sheridan," I was fixing in
my mind what I should do.  My first thought was too stop the army in the suburbs of Winchester
as it came back, form a new line, and fight there; but as the situation was more maturely considered
a better conception prevailed.  I was sure the troops had confidence in me, for heretofore
we had been successful; and as at other times they had seen me present at the slightest sign
of trouble or distress, I felt that I ought to try now to restore their broken ranks, or, failing
in that, to share their fate because of what they had done hitherto.

About this time Colonel Wood, my chief commissary, arrived from the front and gave me fuller
intelligence, reporting that everything was gone, my headquarters captured, and the troops
dispersed.  When I heard this I took two of my aides-de-camp, Major. George A. Forsyth and
Captain Joseph O'Keefe, and with twenty men from the escort started for the front, at the same
time directing Colonel James W. Forsyth and Colonels Alexander and Thom to remain behind and
do what they could to stop the runaways.

For a short distance I traveled on the road, but soon found it so blocked with wagons and wounded
men that my progress was impeded, and I was forced to take to the adjoining fields to make
haste.  When most of the wagons and wounded were past I returned to the road, which was thickly
lined with unhurt  men, who, having got far enough to the rear to be out of danger, had halted,
without any organization, and begun cooking coffee, but when they saw me they abandoned their
coffee, threw up their hats, shouldered their muskets, and as I passed along turned to follow
with enthusiasm and cheers.  To acknowledge this exhibition of feeling I took off my hat, and
with Forsyth and O'Keefe rode some distance in advance of my escort, while every mounted officer
who saw me galloped out on either side of the pike to tell the men at a distance that I had
come back. In this way the news was spread to the stragglers off the road, when they, too,
turned their faces to the front and marched toward the enemy, changing in a moment from the
depths of depression, to the extreme of enthusiasm.  I already knew that even in the ordinary
condition of mind enthusiasm is a potent element with soldiers, but what I saw that day convinced
me that if it can be excited from a state of despondency its power is almost irresistible.
I said nothing except to remark as I rode among those on the road: "If I had been, with you
this morning this disaster would not have happened. We must face the other way; we will go
back and recover our camp." 

"Father," began the maiden, as they walked together, "when may we expect the duke?"

"Before long, I hope," replied the missionary; "the conventicle at Worms will decide at once which
of his barons are for and which against him. I should not be surprised to see them returning
at any moment."

"Are they in no danger from ill-disposed chieftains?" asked the lady.
"The duke will pass through a friendly country, and is too much loved
and feared to be assailed in his own dominions. Your father, I presume,
is not anxious about their safety?"

"Oh, no! He talks as if they
were invulnerable."

"At least," returned the priest, "you should
rest content with praying for them, and not distress yourself with
idle fears."  Continuing on parallel with
the pike, about midway between Newtown and Middletown I crossed to the west of it, and a little
later came up in rear of Getty's division of the Sixth Corps. When I arrived, this division
and the cavalry were the only troops in the presence of and resisting the enemy; they were
apparently acting as a rear-guard at a point about three miles north of the line we held at
Cedar Creek when the battle began.  General Torbert was the first officer to meet me, saying
as he rode up, "My God! I am glad you've come." Getty's division, when I found it, was about
a mile north of Middletown, posted on the reverse slope of some slightly rising ground, holding
a barricade made with fence-rails, and skirmishing slightly with the enemy's pickets.  Jumping
my horse over the line of rails, I rode to the crest of the elevation, and there taking off
my hat, the men rose up from behind their barricade with cheers of recognition.  An officer
of the Vermont brigade, Colonel A. S. Tracy, rode out to the front, and joining me, informed
me that General Louis A. Grant was in command there, the regular division commander, General
Getty, having taken charge of the Sixth Corps in place of  Ricketts, wounded early in the action,
while temporarily commanding the corps.  I then turned back to the rear of Getty's division,
and as I came behind it, a line of regimental flags rose up out of the ground, as it seemed,
to welcome me.  They were mostly the colors of Crook's troops, who had been stampeded and scattered
in the surprise of the morning.  The color-bearers, having withstood the panic, had formed
behind the troops of Getty. It is no defect in the Arthurian legends, or the old French romances,
or many of the stories in the Decameron, that they are improbable: it is a virtue. To criticise
them as though they were of the same species as a realistic novel,
is, we should all say, merely stupid.  At the close of this incident I crossed the little narrow valley, or depression,
in rear of Getty's line, and dismounting on the opposite crest, established that point as my
headquarters.  In a few minutes some of my staff joined me, and the first directions I gave
were to have the Nineteenth Corps and the two divisions of Wright's corps brought to the front,
so they could be formed on Getty's division, prolonged to the right; for I had already decided
to attack the enemy from that line as soon as I could get matters in shape to take the offensive.
Crook met me at this time, and strongly favored my idea of attacking, but said, however, that
most of his troops were gone.  General Wright came up a little later, when I saw that he was
wounded, a ball having grazed the point of his chin so as to draw the blood plentifully.

Wright gave me a hurried account of the day's events, and when told that we would fight the
enemy on the line which Getty and the cavalry were holding, and that he must go himself and
send all his staff to bring up the troops, he zealously fell in with the scheme; and it was
then that the Nineteenth Corps and two divisions of the Sixth were ordered to the front from
where they had been halted to the right and rear of Getty.

After this conversation I rode to the east of the Valley pike and to the left of Getty's division,
to a point from which I could obtain a good view of the front, in the mean time sending Major
Forsyth to communicate with Colonel Lowell (who occupied a position close in toward the suburbs
of Middletown and directly in front of Getty's left) to learn whether he could hold on there.
Lowell replied that he could.  When the men of these divisions saw me they began cheering and
took up the double quick to the front, while I turned back toward Getty's line to point out
where these returning troops should be placed.  Having done this, I ordered General Wright
to resume command of the Sixth Corps, and Getty, who was temporarily in charge of it, to take
command of his own division.  A little later the Nineteenth Corps came up and was posted between
the right of the Sixth Corps and Middle Marsh Brook.

All this had consumed a great deal of time, and I concluded to visit again the point to the
east of the Valley pike, from where I had first observed the enemy, to see what he was doing.
Arrived there, I could plainly see him getting ready for attack, and Major Forsyth now suggested
that it would be well to ride along the line of battle before the enemy assailed us, for although
the troops had learned of my return, but few of them had seen me. And as to the latter, if we
knew the Ghost-lore of the time better than we do, perhaps we should see nothing odd in Hamlet's
insisting on moving away and proposing the oath afresh when the Ghost intervenes.
  But at least two hours had elapsed since I
reached the ground, for it was after mid-day, when this incident of riding down the front took
place, and I arrived not later, certainly, than half-past 10 o'clock.

