SOMEWHERE IN RED GAP

by

HARRY LEON WILSON

Illustrated by John R. Neill, F. R. Gruger, and Henry Raleigh

New York Grosset & Dunlap Publishers

To GEORGE HORACE LORIMER

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I.    The Red Splash of Romance II.   Ma Pettengill and the Song of Songs III.  The Real Peruvian
Doughnuts IV.   Once a Scotchman, Always V.    Non Plush Ultra VI.   Cousin Egbert Intervenes
VII.  Kate; or, Up From the Depths VIII. Pete's B'other-in-law IX.   Little Old New York

I

THE RED SPLASH OF ROMANCE

The walls of the big living-room in the Arrowhead ranch house are tastefully enlivened here
and there with artistic spoils of the owner, Mrs. Lysander John Pettengill. There are family
portraits in crayon, photo-engravings of noble beasts clipped from the Breeder's Gazette, an
etched cathedral or two, a stuffed and varnished trout of such size that no one would otherwise
have believed in it, a print in three colours of a St. Bernard dog with a marked facial resemblance
to the late William E. Gladstone, and a triumph of architectural perspective revealing two
sides of the Pettengill block, corner of Fourth and Main streets, Red Gap, made vivacious by
a bearded fop on horseback who doffs his silk hat to a couple of overdressed ladies with parasols
in a passing victoria.

And there is the photograph of the fat man. He is very large--both high and wide. He has filled
the lens and now compels the eye. His broad face beams a friendly interest. His moustache is
a flourishing, uncurbed, riotous growth above his billowy chin.

The checked coat, held recklessly aside by a hand on each hip, reveals an incredible expanse
of waistcoat, the pattern of which raves horribly. From pocket to pocket of this gaudy shield
curves a watch chain of massive links--nearly a yard of it, one guesses.

Often I have glanced at this noisy thing tacked to the wall, entranced by the simple width
of the man. Now on a late afternoon I loitered before it while my hostess changed from riding
breeches to the gown of lavender and lace in which she elects to drink tea after a day's hard
work along the valleys of the Arrowhead. And for the first time I observed a line of writing
beneath the portrait, the writing of my hostess, a rough, downright, plain fashion of script:
"Reading from left to right--Mr. Ben Sutton, Popular Society Favourite of Nome, Alaska."

"Reading from left to right!" Here was the intent facetious. And Ma Pettengill is never idly
facetious. Always, as the advertisements say, "There's a reason!" And now, also for the first
time, I noticed some printed verses on a sheet of thickish yellow paper tacked to the wall
close beside the photograph--so close that I somehow divined an intimate relationship between
the two. With difficulty removing my gaze from the gentleman who should be read from left to
right, I scanned these verses:

    SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

    A child of the road--a gypsy I--
      My path o'er the land and sea;
    With the fire of youth I warm my nights
      And my days are wild and free.
    Then ho! for the wild, the open road!
      Afar from the haunts of men.
    The woods and the hills for my spirit untamed--
      I'm away to mountain and glen.

    If ever I tried to leave my hills
      To abide in the cramped haunts of men,
    The urge of the wild to her wayward child
      Would drag me to freedom again.

    I'm slave to the call of the open road;
      In your cities I'd stifle and die.
    I'm off to the hills in fancy I see--
      On the breast of old earth I'll lie.

    WILFRED LENNOX, the Hobo Poet,
    On a Coast-to-Coast Walking Tour.
    These Cards for sale.

I briefly pondered the lyric. It told its own simple story and could at once have been dismissed
but for its divined and puzzling relationship to the popular society favourite of Nome, Alaska.
What could there be in this?

Mrs. Lysander John Pettengill bustled in upon my speculation, but as usual I was compelled
to wait for the talk I wanted. For some moments she would be only the tired owner of the Arrowhead
Ranch--in the tea gown of a debutante and with too much powder on one side of her nose--and
she must have at least one cup of tea so corrosive that the Scotch whiskey she adds to it is
but a merciful dilution. She now drank eagerly of the fearful brew, dulled the bite of it with
smoke from a hurriedly built cigarette, and relaxed gratefully into one of those chairs which
are all that most of us remember William Morris for. Even then she must first murmur of the
day's annoyances, provided this time by officials of the United States Forest Reserve. In the
beginning I must always allow her a little to have her own way.

"The annual spring rumpus with them rangers," she wearily boomed. "Every year they tell me
just where to turn my cattle out on the Reserve, and every year I go ahead and turn 'em out
where I want 'em turned out, which ain't the same place at all, and then I have to listen patiently
to their kicks and politely answer all letters from the higher-ups and wait for the official
permit, which always comes--and it's wearing on a body. Darn it! They'd ought to know by this
time I always get my own way. If they wasn't such a decent bunch I'd have words with 'em, giving
me the same trouble year after year, probably because I'm a weak, defenceless woman. However!"

The lady rested largely, inert save for the hand that raised the cigarette automatically to
her lips. My moment had come.

"What did Wilfred Lennox, the hobo poet, have to do with Mr. Ben Sutton, of Nome, Alaska?"
I gently inquired.

"More than he wanted," replied the lady. Her glance warmed with memories; she hovered musingly
on the verge of recital. But the cigarette was half done and at its best. I allowed her another
moment, a moment in which she laughed confidentially to herself, a little dry, throaty laugh.
I knew that laugh. She would be marshalling certain events in their just and diverting order.
But they seemed to be many and of confusing values.

"Some said he not only wasn't a hobo but wasn't even a poet," she presently murmured, and smoked
again. Then: "That Ben Sutton, now, he's a case. Comes from Alaska and don't like fresh eggs
for breakfast because he says they ain't got any kick to 'em like Alaska eggs have along in
March, and he's got to have canned milk for his coffee. Say, I got a three-quarters Jersey
down in Red Gap gives milk so rich that the cream just naturally trembles into butter if you
speak sharply to it or even give it a cross look; not for Ben though. Had to send out for canned
milk that morning. I drew the line at hunting up case eggs for him though. He had to put up
with insipid fresh ones. And fat, that man! My lands! He travels a lot in the West when he
does leave home, and he tells me it's the fear of his life he'll get wedged into one of them
narrow-gauge Pullmans some time and have to be chopped out. Well, as I was saying--" She paused.

"But you haven't begun," I protested. I sharply tapped the printed verses and the photograph
reading from left to right. Now she became animated, speaking as she expertly rolled a fresh
cigarette.

"Say, did you ever think what aggravating minxes women are after they been married a few years--after
the wedding ring gets worn a little bit thin?"

This was not only brutal; it seemed irrelevant.

"Wilfred Lennox--" I tried to insist, but she commandingly raised the new cigarette at me.

