Then I saw that each taper belonged to a little boy or girl, and the groups of children were
scattered all about the church. There was a group by every side altar and chapel, all the benches
were occupied by knots of them, and there were so many circles of them seated on the pavement
that I could with difficulty make my way among them. There were hundreds of children in the
church, all dressed in their holiday apparel, and all intent upon the illumination, which seemed
to be a private affair to each one of them.

And not much effect had their tapers upon the darkness of the vast vaults above them. The tapers
were little spiral coils of wax, which the children unrolled as fast as they burned, and when
they were tired of holding them, they rested them on the ground and watched the burning. I
stood some time by a group of a dozen seated in a corner of the church. They had massed all
the tapers in the center and formed a ring about the spectacle, sitting with their legs straight
out before them and their toes turned up. The light shone full in their happy faces, and made
the group, enveloped otherwise in darkness, like one of Correggio's pictures of children or
angels. Correggio was a famous Italian artist of the sixteenth century, who painted cherubs
like children who were just going to heaven, and children like cherubs who had just come out
of it. But then, he had the Italian children for models, and they get the knack of being lovely
very young. An Italian child finds it as easy to be pretty as an American child to be good.

One could not but be struck with the patience these little people exhibited in their occupation,
and the enjoyment they got out of it. There was no noise; all conversed in subdued whispers
and behaved in the most gentle manner to each other, especially to the smallest, and there
were many of them so small that they could only toddle about by the most judicious exercise
of their equilibrium. I do not say this by way of reproof to any other kind of children.

These little groups, as I have said, were scattered all about the church; and they made with
their tapers little spots of light, which looked in the distance very much like Correggio's
picture which is at Dresden,--the Holy Family at Night, and the light from the Divine Child
blazing in the faces of all the attendants. Some of the children were infants in the nurses'
arms, but no one was too small to have a taper, and to run the risk of burning its fingers.

There is nothing that a baby likes more than a lighted candle, and the church has understood
this longing in human nature, and found means to gratify it by this festival of tapers. 

A quite different sort of evidence is to be had from the writings of Robertus Anglicus in 1271
where one gets the impression that just at this time there was active interest in the attempt to
make a weight-driven anaphoric clock and to regulate its motion by some unstated method so that
it would keep time with the diurnal rotation of the heavens:[36]

Nor
it is possible for any clock to follow the judgment of astronomy with
complete accuracy.

 In front of the organ is a choir of boys, led by a
round-faced and jolly monk, who rolls about as he sings, and lets the deep bass noise rumble
about a long time in his stomach before he pours it out of his mouth. I can see the faces of
all of them quite well, for each singer has a candle to light his music-book.

And next to the monk stands the boy,--the handsomest boy in the whole world probably at this
moment. I can see now his great, liquid, dark eyes, and his exquisite face, and the way he
tossed back his long waving hair when he struck into his part. He resembled the portraits of
Raphael, when that artist was a boy; only I think he looked better than Raphael, and without
trying, for he seemed to be a spontaneous sort of boy. And how that boy did sing! He was the
soprano of the choir, and he had a voice of heavenly sweetness. When he opened his mouth and
tossed back his head, he filled the church with exquisite melody.

He sang like a lark, or like an angel. As we never heard an angel sing, that comparison is
not worth much. I have seen pictures of angels singing, there is one by Jan and Hubert Van
Eyck in the gallery at Berlin,--and they open their mouths like this boy, but I can't say as
much for their singing. The lark, which you very likely never heard either, for larks are as
scarce in America as angels,--is a bird that springs up from the meadow and begins to sing
as he rises in a spiral flight, and the higher he mounts, the sweeter he sings, until you think
the notes are dropping out of heaven itself, and you hear him when he is gone from sight, and
you think you hear him long after all sound has ceased.

And yet this boy sang better than a lark, because he had more notes and a greater compass and
more volume, although he shook out his voice in the same gleesome abundance.

I am sorry that I cannot add that this ravishingly beautiful boy was a good boy. He was probably
one of the most mischievous boys that was ever in an organ-loft. All the time that he was singing
the vespers he was skylarking like an imp. While he was pouring out the most divine melody,
he would take the opportunity of kicking the shins of the boy next to him, and while he was
waiting for his part, he would kick out behind at any one who was incautious enough to approach
him. There never was such a vicious boy; he kept the whole loft in a ferment. When the monk
rumbled his bass in his stomach, the boy cut up monkey-shines that set every other boy into
a laugh, or he stirred up a row that set them all at fisticuffs.

And yet this boy was a great favorite. The jolly monk loved him best of all and bore with his
wildest pranks. When he was wanted to sing his part and was skylarking in the rear, the fat
monk took him by the ear and brought him forward; and when he gave the boy's ear a twist, the
boy opened his lovely mouth and poured forth such a flood of melody as you never heard. And
he did n't mind his notes; he seemed to know his notes by heart, and could sing and look off
like a nightingale on a bough. He knew his power, that boy; and he stepped forward to his stand
when he pleased, certain that he would be forgiven as soon as he began to sing. And such spirit
and life as he threw into the performance, rollicking through the Vespers with a perfect abandon
of carriage, as if he could sing himself out of his skin if he liked.

While the little angels down below were pattering about with their wax tapers, keeping the
holy fire burning, suddenly the organ stopped, the monk shut his book with a bang, the boys
blew out the candles, and I heard them all tumbling down-stairs in a gale of noise and laughter.
The beautiful boy I saw no more.

About him plays the light of tender memory; but were he twice as lovely, I could never think
of him as having either the simple manliness or the good fortune of the New England boy.