THE GHOSTS

AND OTHER LECTURES.

By Robert G. Ingersoll.

     New York, N. Y. C.
     P. FARRELL, PUBLISHER,
     1892.

     Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1878,
     by Robert G. Ingersoll
     ECKLER, PRINTER,  35 FULTON ST., N. Y.

     The idea of immortality, that like a sea has ebbed and
     flowed in the human heart, with its countless waves of hope
     and fear, beating against the shores and rocks of time and
     fate, was not born of any book, nor of any creed, nor of any
     religion. It was born of human affection, and it will
     continue to ebb and flow beneath the mists and clouds of
     doubt and darkness as long as love kisses the lips of death.

CONTENTS:

     PREFACE.
     THE GHOSTS.
     THE LIBERTY OF MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD
     LIBERTY OF WOMAN.
     THE LIBERTY OF CHILDREN.
     CONCLUSION.
     1776. THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE.
     ABOUT FARMING IN ILLINOIS.
     SPEECH AT CINCINNATI
     "THE PAST RISES BEFORE ME LIKE A DREAM."
     THE GRANT BANQUET
     A TRIBUTE TO THE Rev. ALEXANDER CLARK.
     A TRIBUTE TO EBON C. INGERSOLL,

PREFACE.

These lectures have been so maimed and mutilated by orthodox malice; have been made to appear
so halt, crutched and decrepit by those who mistake the pleasures of calumny for the duties
of religion, that in simple justice to myself I concluded to publish them.

Most of the clergy are, or seem to be, utterly incapable of discussing anything in a fair and
catholic spirit. They appeal, not to reason, but to prejudice; not to facts, but to passages
of scripture. They can conceive of no goodness, of no spiritual exaltation beyond the horizon
of their creed. Whoever differs with them upon what they are pleased to call "fundamental truths"
is, in their opinion, a base and infamous man. To re-enact the tragedies of the Sixteenth Century,
they lack only the power. Bigotry in all ages has been the same. Christianity simply transferred
the brutality of the Colosseum to the Inquisition. For the murderous combat of the gladiators,
the saints substituted the auto de fe. What has been called religion is, after all, but the
organization of the wild beast in man. The perfumed blossom of arrogance is Heaven. Hell is
the consummation of revenge.

The chief business of the clergy has always been to destroy the joy of life, and multiply and
magnify the terrors and tortures of death and perdition. They have polluted the heart and paralyzed
the brain; and upon the ignorant altars of the Past and the Dead, they have endeavored to sacrifice
the Present and the Living.

Nothing can exceed the mendacity of the religious press. I have had some little experience
with political editors, and am forced to say, that until I read the religious papers, I did
not know what malicious and slimy falsehoods could be constructed from ordinary words. The
ingenuity with which the real and apparent meaning can be tortured out of language, is simply
amazing. The average religious editor is intolerant and insolent; he knows nothing of affairs;
he has the envy of failure, the malice of impotence, and always accounts for the brave and
generous actions of unbelievers, by low, base and unworthy motives.

By this time, even the clergy should know that the intellect of the Nineteenth Century needs
no, guardian. They should cease to regard themselves as shepherds defending flocks of weak,
silly and fearful sheep from the claws and teeth of ravening wolves. By this time they should
know that the religion of the ignorant and brutal Past no longer satisfies the heart and brain;
that the miracles have become contemptible; that the "evidences" have ceased to convince; that
the spirit of investigation cannot be stopped nor stayed; that the Church is losing her power;
that the young are holding in a kind of tender contempt the sacred follies of the old; that
the pulpit and pews no longer represent the culture and morality of the world, and that the
brand of intellectual inferiority is upon the orthodox brain.

Men should be liberated from the aristocracy of the air. Every chain of superstition should
be broken. The rights of men and women should be equal and sacred--marriage should be a perfect
partnership--children should be governed by kindness,--every family should be a republic--every
fireside a democracy.

It seems almost impossible for religious people to really grasp the idea of intellectual freedom.
They seem to think that man is responsible for his honest thoughts; that unbelief is a crime;
that investigation is sinful; that credulity is a virtue, and that reason is a dangerous guide.
They cannot divest themselves of the idea that in the realm of thought there must be government--authority
and obedience--laws and penalties--rewards and punishments, and that somewhere in the universe
there is a penitentiary for the soul.

In the republic of mind, one is a majority. There, all are monarchs, and all are equals. The
tyranny of a majority even is unknown. Each one is crowned, sceptered and throned. Upon every
brow is the tiara, and around every form is the imperial purple. Only those are good citizens
who express their honest thoughts, and those who persecute for opinion's sake, are the only
traitors. There, nothing is considered infamous except an appeal to brute force, and nothing
sacred but love, liberty, and joy. The church contemplates this republic with a sneer. From
the teeth of hatred she draws back the lips of scorn. She is filled with the spite and spleen
born of intellectual weakness. Once she was egotistic; now she is envious.

Once she wore upon her hollow breast false gems, supposing them to be real. They have been
shown to be false, but she wears them still. She has the malice of the caught, the hatred of
the exposed.

We are told to investigate the bible for ourselves, and at the same time informed that if we
come to the conclusion that it is not the inspired word of God, we will most assuredly be damned.
Under such circumstances, if we believe this, investigation is impossible. Whoever is held
responsible for his conclusions cannot weigh the evidence with impartial scales. Fear stands
at the balance, and gives to falsehood the weight of its trembling hand.

I oppose the Church because she is the enemy of liberty; because her dogmas are infamous and
cruel; because she humiliates and degrades woman; because she teaches the doctrines of eternal
torment and the natural depravity of man; because she insists upon the absurd, the impossible,
and the senseless; because she resorts to falsehood and slander; because she is arrogant and
revengeful; because she allows men to sin on a credit; because she discourages self-reliance,
and laughs at good works; because she believes in vicarious virtue and vicarious vice--vicarious
punishment and vicarious reward; because she regards repentance of more importance than restitution,
and because she sacrifices the world we have to one we know not of.

The free and generous, the tender and affectionate, will understand me. Those who have escaped
from the grated cells of a creed will appreciate my motives. The sad and suffering wives, the
trembling and loving children will thank me: This is enough.

Robert G. Ingersoll.

Washington, D. C,

April 13, 1878.

THE GHOSTS.

     Let them cover their Eyeless Sockets with their
     Fleshless Hands and fade forever from the imagination of Men.

THERE are three theories by which men account for all phenomena, for everything that happens:
First, the Supernatural; Second, the Supernatural and Natural; Third, the Natural. You say,
"Oh, this is materialism!" What is matter? I take in my hand some earth:--in this dust put
seeds. Let the arrows of light from the quiver of the sun smite upon it; let the rain fall
upon it. The seeds will grow and a plant will bud and blossom. Do you understand this? Can
you explain it better than you can the production of thought? Have you the slightest conception
of what it really is? After all, can you get, beyond, above or below appearances? Can you have
a thought that was not suggested to you by what you call matter? In modern times they have
greatly decreased in number, because the second theory,--a mingling of the supernatural and
natural,--has generally been adopted. The remaining ghosts, however, are supposed to per-form
the same offices as the hosts of yore. For ages these ghosts were supposed to be the only source
of real knowledge. It was then, and still is, believed that these books are the basis of the
idea of immortality; that to give up these volumes, or rather the idea that they are inspired,
is to renounce the idea of immortality. This I deny. Kneeling was the proper position to be
assumed by the multitude. The prostrate were the good. Those who stood erect were infidels
and traitors. In the name and by the authority of the ghosts, man was enslaved, crushed, and
plundered.

From the ghosts men received, not only authority, but information of every kind. They believed
that man was the sport and prey of devils. They really thought that the very air was thick
with these enemies of man. With few exceptions, this hideous and infamous belief was universal.
Under these conditions, progress was almost impossible. Fear is religion--courage is science.
How could he disprove it? How could he show that he did not cause the storm? All storms were
at that time generally supposed to be caused by the devil--the prince of the power of the air--and
by those whom he assisted.

I implore you to remember that the believers in such impossible things were the authors of
our creeds and confessions of faith. She was also charged with having nursed devils. In my
judgment, he was right. They removed her clothing and searched for "witch spots."

In those days people believed in what was known as lycanthropy--that is, that persons, with
the assistance of the devil, could assume the form of wolves. It had changed to a human hand.
He charged his wife with being a witch. She was tried. She confessed her guilt, and was burned.
There was no impossibility for which some one was not tried and convicted. Whoever denied the
existence of witches and devils was denounced as an infidel.

At Basle, in 1470, a rooster was tried upon the charge of having laid an egg. In case they
disobeyed, they were threatened with pains and penalties. (Hammer of Witches), which was issued
by the Roman See. Popes Alexander, Leo, and Adrian, issued like bulls. About one thousand were
executed in one year in the diocese of Como. At least one hundred thousand victims suffered
in Germany alone: the last execution (in Wurtzburg ) taking place as late as 1749. Witches
were burned in Switzerland as late as 1780.

In England the same frightful scenes were enacted.

In Brown's Dictionary of the Bible, published at Edinburgh Scotland, in 1807, it is said that:
"A witch is a woman that has dealings with Satan. That such persons are among men is abundantly
plain from scripture, and that they ought to be put to death."

This work was re-published in Albany, New York, in 1816. No wonder the clergy of that city
are ignorant and bigoted even unto this day.

In 1716, Mrs. Hicks and her daughter, nine years of age, were hanged for selling their souls
to the devil, and raising a storm by pulling off their stockings and making a lather of soap.

In England it has been estimated that at least thirty thousand were hanged and burned. The
last victim executed in Scotland, perished in 1722. "She was an innocent old woman, who had
so little idea of her situation as to rejoice at the sight of the fire which was destined to
consume her. She had a daughter, lame both of hands and of feet--a circumstance attributed
to the witch having been used to transform her daughter into a pony and getting her shod by
the devil." That they abjured God and Jesus Christ, and dedicated themselves wholly to the
devil. The contracts were confirmed at a general meeting of witches and ghosts, over which
the devil himself presided; and the persons generally signed the articles of agreement with
their own blood. These contracts were, in some instances, for a few years; in others, for life.
General assemblies of the witches were held at least once a year, at which they appeared entirely
naked, besmeared with an ointment made from the bodies of unbaptized infants. "To these meetings
they rode from great distances on broomsticks, pokers, goats, hogs, and dogs. Here they did
homage to the prince of hell, and offered him sacrifices of young children, and practiced all
sorts of license until the break of day."

"As late as 1815, Belgium was disgraced by a witch trial; and guilt was established by the
water ordeal." It was thought they were like clouds, refined and subtle matter, capable of
assuming any form and penetrating into any orifice. The horrible tortures they endured in their
place of punishment rendered them extremely sensitive to suffering, and they continually sought
a temperate and somewhat moist warmth in order to allay their pangs. It was for this reason
they so frequently entered into men and women."

The devil could transport men, at his will, through the air. He could beget children; and Martin
Luther himself had come in contact with one of these children. He recommended the mother to
throw the child into the river, in order to free their house from the presence of a devil.

It was believed that the devil could transform people into any shape he pleased.

Whoever denied these things was denounced as an infidel. All the believers in witchcraft confidently
appealed to the bible. Their mouths were filled with passages demonstrating the existence of
witches and their power over human beings. That they caused tempests was proved by the action
of the devil toward Job; by the passage in the book of Revelation describing the four angels
who held the four winds, and to whom it was given to afflict the earth. They believed the devil
could carry persons hundreds of miles, in a few seconds, through the air. They believed this,
because they knew that Christ had been carried by the devil in the same manner and placed on
a pinnacle of the temple. "The prophet Habakkuk had been transported by a spirit from Judea
to Babylon; and Philip, the evangelist, had been the object of a similar miracle; and in the
same way Saint Paul had been carried in the body into the third heaven."

"In those pious days, they believed that Incubi and Succubi were forever wandering among mankind,
alluring, by more than human charms, the unwary to their destruction, and laying plots, which
were too often successful, against the virtue of the saints. Sometimes the witches kindled
in the monastic priest a more terrestrial fire. People told, with bated breath, how, under
the spell of a vindictive woman, four successive abbots in a German monastery had been wasted
away by an unholy flame."

An instance is given in which the devil not only assumed the appearance of a holy man, in order
to pay his addresses to a lady, but when discovered, crept under the bed, suffered himself
to be dragged out, and was impudent enough to declare that he was the veritable bishop. So
perfectly had he assumed the form and features of the prelate that those who knew the bishop
best were deceived.

One can hardly imagine the frightful state of the human mind during these long centuries of
darkness and superstition. To them, these things were awful and frightful realities. Hovering
above them in the air, in their houses, in the bosoms of friends, in their very bodies, in
all the darkness of night, everywhere, around, above and below, were innumerable hosts of unclean
and malignant devils.

From the malice of those leering and vindictive vampires of the air, the church pretended to
defend mankind. Pursued by these phantoms, the frightened multitudes fell upon their faces
and implored the aid of robed hypocrisy and sceptered theft.

Take from the orthodox church of to-day the threat and fear of hell, and it becomes an extinct
volcano.

Take from the church the miraculous, the supernatural, the incomprehensible, the unreasonable,
the impossible, the unknowable, and the absurd, and nothing but a vacuum remains.

Notwithstanding all the infamous things justly laid to the charge of the church, we are told
that the civilization of to-day is the child of what we are pleased to call the superstition
of the past.

Religion has not civilized man--man has civilized religion. God improves as man advances.

Let me call your attention to what we have received from the followers of the ghosts. Let me
give you an outline of the sciences as taught by these philosophers of the clouds. It was for
a long time thought that Latin words were the best,--Latin being a dead language, and known
by the clergy. Others thought that two sticks laid across each other and held before the wicked
ghost would cause it instantly to flee in dread away.

For thousands of years, the practice of medicine consisted in driving these evil spirits out
of the bodies of men.

The contortions of the epileptic, the strange twitchings of those afflicted with chorea, the
shakings of palsy, dreams, trances, and the numberless frightful phenomena produced by diseases
of the nerves, were all seized upon as so many proofs that the bodies of men were filled with
unclean and malignant ghosts.

Whoever endeavored to account for these things by natural causes, whoever attempted to cure
diseases by natural means, was denounced by the church as an infidel. To explain anything was
a crime. It was to the interest of the priest that all phenomena should be accounted for by
the will and power of gods and devils. The moment it is admitted that all phenomena are within
the domain of the natural, the necessity for a priest has disappeared. Religion breathes the
air of the supernatural. Take from the mind of man the idea of the supernatural, and religion
ceases to exist. For this reason, the church has always despised the man who explained the
wonderful. Upon this principle, nothing was left undone to stay the science of medicine. As
long as plagues and pestilences could be stopped by prayer, the priest was useful. The moment
the physician found a cure, the priest became an extravagance. It was thought to be a kind
of blasphemy to even try, by any natural means, to stay the ravages of pestilence. Formerly,
during the prevalence of plague and epidemics, the arrogance of the priest was boundless. He
told the people that they had slighted the clergy, that they had refused to pay tithes, that
they had doubted some of the doctrines of the church, and that God was now taking his revenge.
The people for the most part, believed this infamous tissue of priestcraft. They hastened to
fall upon their knees; they poured out their wealth upon the altars of hypocrisy; they abased
and debased themselves; from their minds they banished all doubts, and made haste to crawl
in the very dust of humility. Small-pox being regarded as one of the heaviest guns in the arsenal
of heaven, to spike it was the height of presumption. In a few years all of them will be under
the control of man, the gods will be left unarmed, and the threats of their priests will excite
only a smile.

The science of medicine has had but one enemy--religion. "Tales told by idiots, full of sound
and fury, signifying no thing." In those days the histories were written by the monks, who,
as a rule, were almost as superstitious as they were dishonest. They wrote as though they had
been witnesses of every occurrence they related. They wrote the history of every country of
importance. They told all the past and predicted all the future with an impudence that amounted
to sublimity, "They traced the order of St. Michael, in France, to the archangel himself, and
alleged that he was the founder of a chivalric order in heaven itself. They said that Tartars
originally came from hell, and that they were called Tartars because Tartarus was one of the
names of perdition. They declared that Scotland was so named after Scota, a daughter of Pharaoh,
who landed in Ireland, invaded Scotland, and took it by force of arms. This statement was made
in a letter addressed to the Pope in the fourteenth century, and was alluded to as a well-known
fact. The letter was written by some of the highest dignitaries, and by the direction of the
King himself."

These gentlemen accounted for the red on the breasts of robins, from the fact that these birds
carried water to unbaptized infants in hell.

Matthew, of Paris, an eminent historian of the fourteenth century, gave the world the following
piece of information: "It is well known that Mohammed was once a cardinal, and became a heretic
because he failed in his effort to be elected pope;" and that having drank to excess, he fell
by the roadside, and in this condition was killed by swine. "And for that reason, his followers
abhor pork even unto this day."

The history of Charlemagne was written by Turpin, of Rheims. He was a bishop. He assures us
that the walls of a city fell down in answer to prayer. That there were giants in those days
who could take fifty ordinary men under their arms and walk away with them. "With the greatest
of these, a direct descendant of Goliath, one Orlando had a theological discussion, and that
in the heat of the debate, when the giant was overwhelmed with the argument, Orlando rushed
forward and inflicted a fatal stab."

The history of Britain, written by the arch-. deacons of Monmouth and Oxford, was wonderfully
popular. According to them, Brutus conquered England and built the city of London. During his
time, it rained pure blood for three days. At another time, a monster came from the sea, and,
after having devoured great multitudes of people, swallowed the king and disappeared. They
tell us that King Arthur was not born like other mortals, but was the result of a magical contrivance;
that he had great luck in killing giants; that he killed one in France that had the cheerful
habit of eating some thirty men a day. That this giant had clothes woven of the beards of the
kings he had devoured. To cap the climax, one of the authors of this book was promoted for
having written the only reliable history of his country.

In all the histories of those days there is hardly a single truth. Facts were considered unworthy
of preservation. Anything that really happened was not of sufficient interest or importance
to be recorded. The great religious historian, Eusebius, ingenuously remarks that in his history
he carefully omitted whatever tended to discredit the church, and that he piously magnified
all that conduced to her glory.

The same glorious principle was scrupulously adhered to by all the historians of that time.

They wrote, and the people believed, that the tracks of Pharoah's chariots were still visible
on the sands of the Red Sea, and that they had been miraculously preserved from the winds and
waves as perpetual witnesses of the great miracle there performed.

It is safe to say that every truth in the histories of those times is the result of accident
or mistake. With the ghosts, the present is not the child of the past, nor the mother of the
future. In the domain of religion all is chance, accident, and caprice.

Do not forget, I pray you, that our creeds were written by the cotemporaries of these historians.

The same idea was applied to law.

This doctrine was the sanctification of brute force and chance. They had trials by battle,
by fire, by water, and by lot.

So in England, persons charged with crime could appeal to the corsned. The corsned was a piece
of the sacramental bread. If the defendant could swallow this piece he went acquit. Godwin,
Earl of Kent, in the time of Edward the Confessor, appealed to the corsned. He failed to swallow
it and was choked to death.

The ghosts and their followers always took delight in torture, in cruel and unusual punishments.
For the infraction of most of their laws, death was the penalty--death produced by stoning
and by fire. Sometimes, when man committed only murder, he was allowed to flee to some city
of refuge. Murder was a crime against man. There are real crimes enough without creating artificial
ones. All law should be for the preservation of the one and the destruction of the other.

Under the regime of the ghosts, laws were not supposed to exist in the nature of things. They
were supposed to be simply the irresponsible command of a ghost. These commands were not supposed
to rest upon reason, they were the product of arbitrary will.

The penalties for the violation of these laws were as cruel as the laws were senseless and
absurd. Working on the Sabbath and murder were both punished with death. The tendency of such
laws is to blot from the human heart the sense of justice. Every fact inconsistent with that
idea was discarded.

Andre Kempe, in 1569, published a work on the language of Paradise, in which he maintained
that God spoke to Adam in Swedish; that Adam answered in Danish; and that the serpent--which
appears to me quite probable--spoke to Eve in French.

The real founder of the science of language was Liebnitz, a cotemporary of Sir Isaac Newton.
He discarded the idea that all languages could be traced to one language. He maintained that
language was a natural growth. Words are the garments of thought, the robes of ideas. Some
are as rude as the skins of wild beasts, and others glisten and glitter like silk and gold.
They have been born of hatred and revenge; of love and self-sacrifice; of hope and fear, of
agony and joy. These words are born of the terror and beauty of nature. The stars have fashioned
them. In them mingle the darkness and the dawn. From everything they have taken something.
He also gave his idea as to the form of the world.

He stated that the world was a vast parallelogram; that on the outside was a strip of land,
like the frame of a common slate; that then there was a strip of water, and in the middle a
great piece of land; that Adam and Eve lived on the outer strip; that their descendants, with
the exception of the Noah family, were drowned by a flood on this outer strip; that the ark
finally rested on the middle piece of land where we now are. He accounted for night and day
by saying that on the outside strip of land there was a high mountain, around which the sun
and moon revolved, and that when the sun was on the other side of the mountain, it was night;
and when on this side, it was day.

In those blessed days, Ignorance was a king and Science an outcast.

They knew the moment this earth ceased to be the centre of the universe, and became a mere
speck in the starry heaven of existence, that their religion would become a childish fable
of the past. In the name and by the authority of the ghosts, they imprisoned the human mind,
polluted the conscience, hardened the heart, subverted justice, crowned robbery, sainted hypocrisy,
and extinguished for a thousand years the torch of reason. This great man breathed, so to speak,
the atmosphere of his time. He believed in the music of the spheres, and assigned alto, bass,
tenor, and treble to certain stars. Every idea almost was a monster. Thought was deformed.
Facts were looked upon as worthless. Only the wonderful was worth preserving. Things that actually
happened were not considered worth recording;--real occurrences were too common. Everybody
expected the miraculous.

The ghosts were supposed to be busy; devils were thought to be the most industrious things
in the universe, and with these imps, every occurrence of an unusual character was in some
way connected. There was no order, no serenity, no certainty, in anything. Everything depended
upon ghosts and phantoms. He used smoke to choke them, and incense to please them. He wore
beads and crosses. He said prayers, and hired others to say them. He fasted when he was hungry,
and feasted when he was not. He believed everything that seemed unreasonable, just to appease
the ghosts. He debauched and polluted his own mind, and toiled night and day to repair the
walls of his own prison. From the garden of his heart he plucked and trampled upon the holy
flowers of pity.

The priests reveled in horrible descriptions of hell. Concerning the wrath of God, they grew
eloquent. They denounced man as totally depraved. They made reason blasphemy, and pity a crime.
Nothing so delighted them as painting the torments and sufferings of the lost. Over the worm
that never dies they grew poetic; and the second death filled them with a kind of holy delight.
According to them, the smoke and cries ascending from hell were the perfume and music of heaven.

At the risk of being tiresome, I have said what I have to show you the productions of the human
mind, when enslaved; the effects of wide-spread ignorance--the results of fear. I want to convince
you that every form of slavery is a viper, that, sooner or later, will strike its poison fangs
into the bosoms of men.

The first great step towards progress, is, for man to cease to be the slave of man; the second,
to cease to be the slave of the monsters of his own creation--of the ghosts and phantoms of
the air.

For ages the human race was imprisoned.

Through the bars and grates came a few struggling rays of light. Against these grates and bars
Science pressed its pale and thoughtful face, wooed by the holy dawn of human advancement.

Men found that the real was the useful; that what a man knows is better than what a ghost says;
that an event is more valuable than a prophecy.

The conjurer and sorcerer were discarded, and the physician and surgeon employed. They found
that the earth was not flat; that the stars were not mere specks. They found that being born
under a particular planet had nothing to do with the fortunes of men.

The astrologer was discharged and the astronomer took his place.

They found that the earth had swept through the constellations for millions of ages. They found
that good and evil were produced by natural causes, and not by ghosts; that man could not be
good enough or bad enough to stop or cause a rain; that diseases were produced as naturally
as grass, and were not sent as punishments upon man for failing to believe a certain creed.
They found that man, through intelligence, could take advantage of the forces of nature--that
he could make the waves, the winds, the flames, and the lightnings of heaven do his bidding
and minister to his wants. They found that the ghosts knew nothing of benefit to man; that
they were utterly ignorant of geology--of astronomy--of geography;--that they knew nothing
of history;--that they were poor doctors and worse surgeons;--that they knew nothing of law
and less of justice; that they were without brains, and utterly destitute of hearts; that they
knew nothing of the rights of men; that they were despisers of women, the haters of progress,
the enemies of science, and the destroyers of liberty.

The condition of the world during the Dark Ages shows exactly the result of enslaving the bodies
and souls of men. In those days there was no freedom. The air was filled with angels, with
demons and monsters. 'Tis Him we see in art, literature, and science; and so proclaims Evolution.
"God is the universal causal law; God is the source of all force and all matter." "For us," says
Haeckel, "all nature is animated, i. e., penetrated with Divine spirit, with law, and with necessity."
We know of no matter without this Divine spirit.

The "ultimate repulsion, constituting the extension and impenetrability of the atoms of matter,"
says Dr. Samuel Brown, "could be conceived of in no other way than as the persistent existence
of the will of God himself, in whom we live and move and have our
being, and which, if but for an instant withdrawn, the whole material
universe and its forces in all their vastness, glory, and beauty,
would collapse and sink in a moment into their original nothingness."

The advancement of science, instead of depriving man of his God, only
deprives men of their earlier and ruder conceptions of Deity, only
to impart a larger and grander thought of Him.

"It is true, in the educational process some few minds have lost
sight of Him altogether, but these are the exceptional, and therefore
notable instances; with the great body of men, the conception of God
has steadily enlarged with the progress of science."[75] If science
can demonstrate that Evolution is true, then it is God's truth, and
as such it is man's religious duty to accept it; if he rejects it,
superstitiously or unreasonably, he not only defrauds himself but
insults the Author of truth.

What, then, has science demonstrated? Science has demonstrated the UNITY OF THE FORCES: Light,
heat, electricity, magnetism, motion, are all correlated to one another,
and are all mutually convertible one into another.

Heat may be said to produce electricity--electricity to produce heat; magnetism to produce
electricity--electricity, magnetism, and so on for the rest.

UNITY OF MATTER AND FORCE.--"For if matter were not force, and immediately
known as force, it could not be known at all--could not be rationally
inferred."

UNITY OF ANIMATE AND INANIMATE NATURE IN MATTER, FORM, AND FORCE.

UNITY OF THE LAWS OF DEVELOPMENT.--Hence we can proclaim the unity of all nature and of her laws
of development.

In the beautiful words of Giordano Bruno: "A spirit exists in all things, and no body is so small
but contains a part of the divine substance within itself, by which it is animated." Hence
we arrive at the sublime idea, since we can in no other way account for the ultimate cause of
anything, that it is God's spirit which pervades and sustains all nature. By this admission
we are not led to say: "There is no God but force;" but rather, "There is no force but God." God
is infinite, and therefore includes nature; but is nature all? It is all that our finite minds can
discover, 'tis true; but can there not exist another nature or world
unknown to us; and if so, since God is infinite, he will include that
world also.

Let us look to this and see what science can answer.

It will be necessary for us to consider before proceeding, what is meant by the term soul;
and this becomes a somewhat difficult task, as the term has been variously applied to signify the principle
of life in an organic body, or the first and most undeveloped stages
of individualized spiritual being, or finally, all stages of spiritual
individuality, incorporeal as well as corporeal.[76] The popular belief
is, that the soul is not material but substantial, a divine gift to
the highest alone of God's creatures; but scientific men, such as
Carl Vogt, Moleschott, Büchner, Schmidt, Haeckel, consider the phenomena
of the soul to be functions of the brain and nerves.

Schmidt says: "The soul of the new-born infant is, in its manifestations, in no way different from
that of the young animal. These are the functions of the infantine nervous system, with this
they grow and are developed together with speech."

The idea of the immortality of the soul was not aboriginal with mankind,
as Sir J. Lubbock has shown that the barbarous races possess no clear
belief of this kind, and Rajah Brook, at a missionary meeting in Liverpool,
told his hearers there that the Dyaks, a people with whom he was connected,
had no knowledge of God, of a soul, or of any future state.

The belief in a future life amongst the civilized race of mankind is almost universally prevalent.
The proofs of immortality are various. The desire that man has to live forever and his horror
of annihilation is one; the good suffer in this world and the wicked triumph--this would indicate
the necessity of future retribution. The infinite perfectibility of the human mind never reaches
its full capacity in this life; the faculty of insight which sees in an individual all its past
history at a glance is the immortal attribute and is continually on the increase; and it is
possible that Aristotle was right so far as he stated that the lower faculties of the soul,
such as sensation, imagination, feeling, memory, etc., are perishable. No matter if this be
so or not, it is certain that in the next life, where all is perfection, only the fittest attributes
will exist, the others would have perished. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul has
been defended by Marhemeke, Blasche, Weisse, Hinnichs, Fecham, J. H. Fichte, and others.

Let us look for a moment at the visible universe and see if it is not reasonable, on a scientific
basis, to admit of the existence of another universe, although it
remains unseen to us.

One can not help but be struck with the fact that energy is being dissipated in this visible
universe, that the visible universe is apparently very wasteful. Look at the sun which pours
her vast store of high-class energy into space, at the rate of 185,000 miles per second. What will
be the result of this? The answer is simple: The inevitable destruction of the visible universe.
Yes, just as the visible universe had its beginning it will have its end. But there existed
a power before the visible universe came into existence, and which
is acting in the visible universe as the ultimate cause of all phenomena.

"For we are obliged," says Herbert Spencer in his First Principles, "to regard every phenomenon
as a manifestation of some power by which we are acted upon; though omnipresence is unthinkable,
yet, as experience discloses no bounds to the diffusion of phenomena, we are unable to think
of limits to the presence of this power, while the criticisms of science teaches us that this
power is incomprehensible." And so we should expect, for a finite cannot comprehend an infinite.
It is for this and other reasons one is led to believe that the visible universe is only an
infinitesimal part of "that stupendous whole which is alone entitled to be called THE UNIVERSE."[77]
As there existed an invisible universe before the visible one came
into existence, we can conclude that there still exists an invisible
universe now, and that this invisible universe will still exist when
the present visible one has passed away.

Let us see what light our finite senses can throw on this. It is well known that all our senses
have only a certain narrow gauge within which they are able to bring us into sensible contact with
the world about us. All outside this range we are unable to reach. For example, we do not see all
forms and colors; we do not hear all sounds; we do not smell all odors; we cannot conscientiously
touch all substances; we cannot taste all flavors. Vision depends on the wave motion of light.
The length of a wave of mean red light is about 1/39000th of an inch,
that of violet 1/57500th of an inch.

But the number of oscillations of ether in a second, necessary to produce the sensation of red,
are 477,000,000,000,000, all of which enter the eye in one second. For the sensation of violet,
the eye must receive 699,000,000,000,000 oscillations in one second, as light travels 185,000
miles in one second. But when waves of light having all possible lengths act on the eye simultaneously,
the sensation of white is produced. So, as has been previously stated, without eyes the world
would be wrapped in darkness, there being no light and color outside of one's eye. So we see
our sense of sight has its limits, and we know how finite these are.

That there are vibrations of the ether on each side of our limits of vision cannot be doubted;
and if our eyes were acute enough to receive them, we could have the sensation of some color,
which must under present conditions remain forever blank.

The owl and bat can see when we cannot; their eyes can receive oscillations of ether, which pass
by without affecting us.

So with sound, which "is a sensation produced when vibrations of
a certain character are excited in the auditory apparatus of the ear."[78]
The longest wave which can give an impression has a length of about
66 ft., which is equal to 16-1/2 vibrations per second; when the wave
is reduced to three or four tenths of an inch, equal to from 38,000
to 40,000 vibrations per second, sound becomes again inaudible.

The piano, for instance, only runs between 27-1/2 vibrations in a
second up to 3,520.

Sound travels about 1,093 feet per second, and the human voice can
be heard 460 feet away, whilst a rifle can be heard 16,000 feet (3.02
miles), and very strong cannonading 575,840 feet, or 90 miles.

That there are vibrations above and below 16-1/2 and 40,000, there
is no room to doubt, as there exist ears which can hear them, such
as the hare; but to us they are as though they did not exist.

Of all our senses, the sense of smell far surpasses that of the other sense. Valentine has calculated
that we are able to perceive about the three one-hundred-millionth of a grain of musk. The minute
particle which we perceive by smell, no chemical reaction can detect,
and even spectrum analysis, which can recognize fifteen-millionths
of a grain, is far surpassed.

But this sense in man is far surpassed by the hound.

Our sense of taste is also limited, and as has been already stated,
cannot distinguish all flavors.

We can recognize by taste one part of sulphuric acid in 1000 parts of water; one drop of this on
the tongue would contain 1/2000 of a grain (3/400 of a grain) of
sulphuric acid.

The length of time needed for reaction in sensation has been determined
by Vintschgau and Hougschmied, and in a person whose sense of taste
was highly developed, the reaction time was, for common salt, 0.159
second; for sugar, 0.1639 second; for acid, 0.1676 second; and for
quinine, 0.2351 second.

Reviewing, then, the above, it is evident there are eyes which can
see what we cannot, there are ears which can hear what we cannot,
and there are animals who can smell and touch what we cannot.

"For anything we know to the contrary, then," says Savage, "a refined and spiritualized order
of existences may be the inhabitants of another and unseen world
all about us."

If there is a life very much different from and very much higher than
our present one, it is not strange we are ignorant of it.

It is impossible to make a person understand anything which is entirely
unlike all that has ever been seen or heard, for every idea in the
world that man has came to him by nature.

Everything he can think of, everything he can dream of, is borrowed
from his surroundings--everything.

"So, if an angel should come and tell of another life, it would mean
nothing to us, unless we could translate it into terms of our own
experience.

We could not understand a 'light that never was on land or sea.'
Our ignorance is not even then a probability against our belief."[80]

As
has already been stated, the visible universe must have its doom,
must end as it began, by consisting of a single mass of matter; but
is there not a more primitive state of matter than the matter such
as we know it?

Yes; and the so-called ether is that matter. It is unlike any of the forms of matter which we
can weigh and measure.

It is in some respects like unto a fluid, and in some respects like
unto a solid.

It is both hard and elastic to an almost inconceivable degree. "It fills all material bodies like a
sea in which the atoms of the material bodies are as islands, and
it occupies the whole of what we call empty space.

It is so sensitive that a disturbance in any part of it causes a 'tremor which is felt on the
surface of countless worlds.' It exerts frictions; and although the friction is infinitely
small, yet as it has an almost infinite time to work in, it will
diminish the momentum of the planets, and diminish their ability to
maintain their distance from the sun, the consequence of which will
be the planets will fall into the sun, and the solar system will end
where it begun."[81]

According to Sir William Thompson, the ultimate
atoms of matter are vortex rings, which Professor Clifford describes
as being more closely packed together (finer grained) in ether than
in matter.

And he says, "whatever may turn out to be the ultimate nature of
the ether and of molecules, we know that to some extent at least they
obey the same dynamic laws, and that they act on one another in accordance
with these laws.

Until therefore it is absolutely disproved, it must remain the simplest
and most probable assumption that they are finally made of the same
stuff, that the material molecule is in some kind of knot or coagulation
of ether."[82]

The molecule of matter such as we know, then, may
have been, and very probably was, produced by evolution from the atoms
or vortex rings of ether, according to the theory advanced by the
authors of the work called the "Unseen Universe," which I have referred
to.

The world of ether is to be regarded in some sort the obverse complement
of the world of sensible matter, so that whatever energy is dissipated
in the one is by the same act accumulated in the other; or, as Fiske
describes it, "it is like the negative plate in photography, where
light answers to shadow and shadow to light."

Every act of consciousness is accompanied by molecular displacements
in the brain, and these of course are responded to by movements in
the ethereal world.

Views of this kind were long ago entertained by Babbage, and they
have since recommended themselves to other men of science, and amongst
others to Jevon, who says: "Mr. Babbage has pointed out that if we
had power to follow and detect the manifest effects of any disturbance,
each particle of existing matter must be a register of all that has
happened.

"But the motions which accompany thought," say the authors,[84] "will also affect the invisible
order of things," and thus it follows that "thought conceived to
affect the matter of another universe, simultaneously with this, may
explain a future state."[85]

Death, then, is for the individual but
a transfer from one physical state of existence to another, according
to the "authors'"[86] idea; and so, on the largest scale, the death
or final loss of energy by the whole visible universe has its counterpart
in the acquirement of a maximum of life, the correlative unseen world.

According to this theory, therefore, as the psychical or spiritual
phenomena of the visible world only begins to be manifested with some
complex aggregate of material phenomena, therefore it is necessary
for the continuance of mind in a future state to have some sort of
material vehicle also, which the ether is supposed to supply.

"The essential weakness of such a theory as this," says Fiske, "lies
in the fact that it is thoroughly materialistic in character.

We have reason for thinking it probable that ether and ordinary matter
are alike composed of vortex rings in a quasi-frictionless fluid;
but whatever be the fate of this subtle hypothesis, we may be sure
that no theory will ever be entertained in which analysis of ether
shall require different symbols from that of ordinary matter.

In our authors' theory, therefore, the putting on of immortality
is in nowise the passage from a material to a spiritual state.

It is the passage of one kind of materially conditioned state to
another."

This theory, dealing with matter, should receive support by actual
experience, as matter is a subject of investigation.

To accept it, therefore, as being possible without any positive evidence
for its support, it remains but a weak speculation, no matter how
ingenious it may seem.

To support an after life, which is not materially conditioned, I agree
with Mr. Fiske, that although it will be unsupported by any item of
experience whatever, it may nevertheless be an impregnable assertion.

If all were to agree, what we call matter is really force, as it certainly
is, for if matter were not force it would be unthinkable, being force
it becomes thinkable; this point I have touched on before, but it
may be well to elaborate on it a little just here.

The great lesson that Berkeley taught mankind was that what we call
material phenomena are really the products of consciousness co-operating
with some unknown power (not material) existing beyond consciousness.

"We do very well to speak of matter," says Fiske, "in common parlance, but all that the word really
means is a group of qualities which have no existence apart from
our minds."

The ablest modern thinkers, then, believe that the only real things that exist are the mind and God,
and that the universe is only the infinitely varied manifestation of God in the human conscience.
It is evident, then, that matter, the only thing the materialist concedes real existence, is
simply an orderly phantasmagoria; and God and soul, which materialists regard as mere fictions
of the imagination, are the only conceptions that answer to real existence.[87]

For instance, let us see what it is we know about a table. You say you can see it; I can respond
that all you are conscious of is that the nerves of your eye have undergone a change. You
say, I can check my sight of it by touching it; to this I reply, all that you are really conscious
of is a sensation, and that something outside of you has produced it.

But that all that is outside of me is anything more than the manifestation
to me of a power or of God, is an inference and cannot be proven.

To constant manifestations of this power, always assuming the same form and characters which
can be studied, different names have been given; but that the dust of the street or beat of
our heart is anything else but that peculiar manifestation of the
infinite God, cannot be contradicted.

Mr. Savage says, "The movement of electricity along a telegraph-line
is accompanied by certain molecular changes in the wire itself; but
the wire is not electricity, neither does it produce it.

Thus modern science has found it utterly impossible to explain mind either as a part or a product
of matter. It is perfectly reasonable, then, for any man to believe in a purely intellectual
and spiritual existence, apart from any material form or substance."

To comprehend the immortal life is an impossibility; it transcends
any earthly experience of man.

The caterpillar probably knows nothing about any life higher than
that of his toilsome crawling on the ground; but that is no proof
against the fact that we know he is to become a butterfly.

  The boy knows nothing about manhood, and cannot know.

Though he sees men and their labors all about him, he has and can have no conception whatever
of what it means to be a man; it transcends all experience.[88] "The existence," says Fiske, "of
a single soul, or congeries of psychical phenomena, unaccompanied by a material body, would
be evidence sufficient to demonstrate this hypothesis. But in the nature of things, even were
there a million such souls round about us, we could not become aware of the existence of one
of them; for we have no organ or faculty for the perception of soul apart from the material structure
and activities in which it has been manifested throughout the whole course of our experience.
Even our own self-consciousness involves the consciousness of ourselves as partly material bodies.
These considerations show that our hypothesis is very different from the ordinary hypothesis
with which science deals. The entire absence of testimony does not raise a negative presumption,
except in cases where testimony is accessible."

My object has not been to prove the purely spiritual theory of a future life, but to show that
it is a theory that intelligent people can entertain as a foundation for their belief "in
the hope of immortality." O grave, where is thy victory?"

Footnotes:

[1] The Law of Disease, in College Courant, Vol.

XIV.

[2] Winchell. Evolution, p. 113.

[3] Comparative Zoology, p. 43. 1876.

[4] Huxley. Physical Basis of Life.

[5] Johnson, Ency.

[6] Comparative Anatomy--Orton, p. 32.

[7] Analytical Anatomy and Phys.--Cutter, p. 16.

[8] Biography of a Plant.

[9] See Huxley--Invertebrate Animals, Anatomy of.

[10] Phys. Basis of Life.

[11] Beginnings of Life, p. 104, Vol. I.

[12] Monthly Micros. Jour., May 1, '69, p. 294.

[13] Chem. and Phys. Balance of Organic Nature, 1848, p. 48 (trans.).

[14] Inaugural Address, Aug. 19, 1874.

[15] Haeckel--Hist. of Creation.

[16] See Haeckel--Evol. of Man.

[17] Evolution of Man, Vol. II, p. 445.

[18] Johnson's Cyclopedia, Article "Evolution."

[19] Sumner, in Johnson's Cyc.

[20] Christian Union, Vol. XIII, No. 17, p. 322.

[21] Gen. i. 1.

[22] St. John i. 1.

[23] St. John i. 3.

[24] Hist. of Creation, p. 8.

[25] Ibid., p. 324.

[26] Heb. xi. 3. Revised English Ed.

[27] Loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 323.

[28] Loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 324.


It is a question of intellectual development. Whoever holds another man responsible for his
honest thought, has a deformed and distorted brain. It is a question of intellectual development.

I saw at the same time, their musical instruments, from the tom-tom--that is, a hoop with a
couple of strings of raw hide drawn across it--from that tom-tom, up to the instruments we
have to-day, that make the common air blossom with melody.

I saw, too, their paintings, from a daub of yellow mud, to the great works which now adorn
the galleries of the world.

While looking upon these things I was forced to say that man advanced only as he mingled his
thought with his labor,--only as he got into partnership with the forces of nature,--only as
he learned to take advantage of his surroundings--only as he freed himself from the bondage
of fear,--only as he depended upon himself--only as he lost confidence in the gods.

If we are nearer free than were our fathers, it is because we have better heads upon the average,
and more brains in them.

Now, I ask you to be honest with me. It makes no difference to you what I believe, nor what
I wish to prove. I simply ask you to be honest. Divest your minds, for a moment at least, of
all religious prejudice. Act, for a few moments, as though you were men and women.

But the people said, and the king and priest said: "We want better weapons with which to kill
our fellow christians; we want better plows, better music, better paintings, and whoever will
give us better weapons, and better music, better houses to live in, better clothes, we will
robe him in wealth, and crown him with honor." Every incentive was held out to every human
being to improve these things. That is the reason the club has been changed to a cannon, the
dug-out to a steamship, the daub to a painting; that is the reason that the piece of rough
and broken stone finally became a glorified statue.

You must not, however, forget that the gentleman in the dug-out, the gentleman who was enraptured
with the music of the tom-tom, and cultivated his land with a crooked stick, had a religion
of his own. That gentlemen in the dugout was orthodox. He was never troubled with doubts. He
lived and died settled in his mind. He believed in hell; and he thought he would be far happier
in heaven, if he could just lean over and see certain people who expressed doubts as to the
truth of his creed, gently but everlastingly broiled and burned.

It is a very sad and unhappy fact that this man has had a great many intellectual descendants.
It is also an unhappy fact in nature, that the ignorant multiply much faster than the intellectual.
This fellow in the dug-out believed in a personal devil. His devil had a cloven hoof, a long
tail, armed with a fiery dart; and his devil breathed brimstone. This devil was at least the
equal of God; not quite so stout but a little shrewder. And do you know there has not been
a patentable improvement made upon that devil for six thousand years.

This gentleman in the dug-out believed that God was a tyrant; that he would eternally damn
the man who lived in accordance with his highest and grandest ideal. He believed that the earth
was flat. He believed in a literal, burning, seething hell of fire and sulphur. He had also
his idea of politics; and his doctrine was, might makes right. And it will take thousands of
years before the world will reverse this doctrine, and believingly say, "Right makes might."

All I ask is the same privilege to improve upon that gentleman's theology as upon his musical
instrument; the same right to improve upon his politics as upon his dug-out. That is all. I
ask for the human soul the same liberty in every direction. That is the only crime I have committed.
I say, let us think. Let each one express his thought. Let us become investigators, not followers,
not cringers and crawlers. If there is in heaven an infinite being, he never will be satisfied
with the worship of cowards and hypocrites. Honest unbelief, honest infidelity, honest atheism,
will be a perfume in heaven when pious hypocrisy, no matter how religious it may be outwardly,
will be a stench.

This is my doctrine: Give every other human being every right you claim for yourself. Keep
your mind open to the influences of nature. Receive new thoughts with hospitality. Let us advance.

The religionist of to-day wants the ship of his soul to lie at the wharf of orthodoxy and rot
in the sun. He delights to hear the sails of old opinions flap against the masts of old creeds.
He loves to see the joints and the sides open and gape in the sun, and it is a kind of bliss
for him to repeat again and again: "Do not disturb my opinions. Do not unsettle my mind; I
have it all made up, and I want no infidelity. Let me go backward rather than forward."

As far as I am concerned I wish to be out on the high seas. I wish to take my chances with
wind, and wave, and star. And I had rather go down in the glory and grandeur of the storm,
than to rot in any orthodox harbor whatever.

After all, we are improving from age to age. The most orthodox people in this country two hundred
years ago would have been burned for the crime of heresy. The ministers who denounce me for
expressing my thought would have been in the Inquisition themselves. Where once burned and
blazed the bivouac fires of the army of progress, now glow the altars of the church. The religionists
of our time are occupying about the same ground occupied by heretics and infidels of one hundred
years ago. The church has advanced in spite, as it were, of itself. It has followed the army
of progress protesting and denouncing, and had to keep within protesting and denouncing distance.
If the church had not made great progress I could not express my thoughts.

Man, however, has advanced just exactly in the proportion with which he has mingled his thought
with his labor. The sailor, without control of the wind and wave, knowing nothing or very little
of the mysterious currents and pulses of the sea, is superstitious. So also is the agriculturist,
whose prosperity depends upon something he cannot control. But the mechanic, when a wheel refuses
to turn, never thinks of dropping on his knees and asking the assistance of some divine power.
He knows there is a reason. He knows that something is too large or too small; that there is
something wrong with his machine; and he goes to work and he makes it larger or smaller, here
or there, until the wheel will turn. Now, just in proportion as man gets away from being, as
it were, the slave of his surroundings, the serf of the elements,--of the heat, the frost,
the snow, and the lightning,--just to the extent that he has gotten control of his own destiny,
just to the extent that he has triumphed over the obstacles of nature, he has advanced physically
and intellectually. As man develops, he places a greater value upon his own rights. Liberty
becomes a grander and diviner thing. As he values his own rights, he begins to value the rights
of others. And when all men give to all others all the rights they claim for themselves, this
world will be civilized. 

Albinoes are those individuals who are distinguished by the absence of coloring matter from
their skins; they are of frequent occurrence among men, animals and plants. Among many animals,
such as rabbits and mice, albinoes with white fur and red eyes are
so much liked that they are propagated.

This would be impossible were it not for the law of the transmission of adaptations. Hornless
cattle have descended from a single bull born in 1770 of horned parents, but whose absence of
horns was the result of some unknown cause.

The law of interrupted or latent transmission, as illustrated in grandchildren who are like the grandparents,
but quite unlike the parents. Animals often resume a form which have not existed for many generations.
One of the most remarkable instances of this kind of reversion, or
"atavism," is the fact that in some horses there sometimes appear
singular dark stripes similar to those of the zebra, quagga, and other
wild species of African horse.

Nutrition directly modifies adaptation, as is well illustrated by animals which have been bred for
domestic or other purposes.

If a farmer is breeding for fine wool he gives much different food to the sheep than he would
if he wished to obtain flesh or an abundance of fat.

Even the bodily form of man is quite different according to its nutrition. Food containing much
nitrogen produces little fat, that containing little nitrogen produces a great deal of fat.
People who by means of Banting's system, at present so popular, wish to become thin, eat only
meat and eggs--no bread, no potatoes.

Man can breed for milk in cattle, for feathers in pigeons, for colored flowers in plants, and,
in fact, for almost any desirable quality.

GEOLOGICAL RECORD.

The Geological Record (palæontology) furnishes
weighty evidence of man's descent; for the circumstantial evidence
derived from this source is written without the possibility of a mistake,
with no chance of error, on the stratified rocks. Now, admitting that I live in Turkey, and have
no chance to get any office unless I am on the side of the Koran, what should I say? Should
I make a clean breast and say, that upon my honor I do not believe it? What would you think
then of my fellow-citizens if they said: "That man is dangerous, he is dishonest."

Suppose I read the book called the bible, and when I get through I make up my mind that it
was written by men. A minister asks me, "Did you read the bible?" I answer that I did. "Do
you think it divinely inspired?" What should I reply? Should I say to myself, "If I deny the
inspiration of the scriptures, the people will never clothe me with power." What ought I to
answer? Ought I not to say like a man: "I have read it; I do not believe it." Should I not
give the real transcript of my mind? Or should I turn hypocrite and pretend what I do not feel,
and hate myself forever after for being a cringing coward. For my part I would rather a man
would tell me what he honestly thinks. I would rather he would preserve his manhood. I had
a thousand times rather be a manly unbeliever than an unmanly believer. And if there is a judgment
day, a time when all will stand before some supreme being, I believe I will stand higher, and
stand a better chance of getting my case decided in my favor, than any man sneaking through
life pretending to believe what he does not.

I have made up my mind to say my say. I

I shall do it kindly, distinctly; but I am going to do it. I know there are thousands of men
who substantially agree with me, but who are not in a condition to express their thoughts.
They are poor; they are in business; and they know that should they tell their honest thought,
persons will refuse to patronize them--to trade with them; they wish to get bread for their
little children; they wish to take care of their wives; they wish to have homes and the comforts
of life. Every such person is a certificate of the meanness of the community in which he resides:
And yet I do not blame these people for not expressing their thought. I say to them: "Keep
your ideas to yourselves; feed and clothe the ones you love; I will do your talking for you.
The church can not touch, can not crush, can not starve, cannot stop or stay me; I will express
your thoughts."

As an excuse for tyranny, as a justification of slavery, the church has taught that man is
totally depraved. Of the truth of that doctrine, the church has furnished the only evidence
there is. The truth is, we are both good and bad. The worst are capable of some good deeds,
and the best are capable of bad. The lowest can rise, and the highest may fall. That mankind
can be divided into two great classes, sinners and saints, is an utter falsehood. In times
of great disaster, called it may be, by the despairing voices of women, men, denounced by the
church as totally depraved, rush to death as to a festival. By such men, deeds are done so
filled with self-sacrifice and generous daring, that millions pay to them the tribute, not
only of admiration, but of tears. Above all creeds,-above all religions, after all, is that
divine thing,--Humanity; and now and then in shipwreck on the wide, wild sea, or 'mid the rocks
and breakers of some cruel shore, or where the serpents of flame writhe and hiss, some glorious
heart, some chivalric soul does a deed that glitters like a star, and gives the lie to all
the dogmas of superstition. All these frightful doctrines have been used to degrade and to
enslave mankind.

Away, forever away with the creeds and books and forms and laws and religions that take from
the soul liberty and reason. Down with the idea that thought is dangerous! Perish the infamous
doctrine that man can have property in man. Let us resent with indignation every effort to
put a chain upon our minds. Surely the constructive force of a crystal is due to the chemical
composition, and to its material constitution.

As the shape of the crystal and its size are influenced by surrounding
circumstances, there is, therefore, an external constructive force
at work.

The only difference between the growth of an organism and that of a crystal is, that in the
former case, in consequence of its semi-fluid state of aggregation, the newly added particles
penetrate into the interior of the organism (inter-susception), whereas inorganic substances
receive homogeneous matter from without, only by opposition or an addition of new particles to
the surface. "If we, then, designate the growth and the formation of organisms as a process
of life, we may with equal reason apply the same term with the developing
crystal." I believe in
marriage, and I hold in utter contempt the opinions of those long-haired men and short-haired
women who denounce the institution of marriage.

The grandest ambition that any man can possibly have, is to so live, and so improve himself
in heart and brain, as to be worthy of the love of some splendid woman; and the grandest ambition
of any girl is to make herself worthy of the love and adoration of some magnificent man. That
is my idea. There is no success in life without love and marriage. You had better be the emperor
of one loving and tender heart, and she the empress of yours, than to be king of the world.
The man who has really won the love of one good woman in this world, I do not care if he dies
in the ditch a beggar, his life has been a success.

I say it took millions of years to come from the condition of abject slavery up to the condition
of marriage.

But nearly every religion has accounted for all the devilment in this world by the crime of
woman. What a gallant thing that is! And if it is true, I had rather live with the woman I
love in a world full of trouble, than to live in heaven with nobody but men.

I read in a book--and I will say now that I cannot give the exact language, as my memory does
not retain the words, but I can give the substance--I read in a book that the Supreme Being
concluded to make a world and one man; that he took some nothing and made a world and one man,
and put this man in a garden. In a little while he noticed that the man got lonesome; that
he wandered around as if he was waiting for a train. There was nothing to interest him; no
news; no papers; no politics; no policy; and, as the devil had not yet made his appearance,
there was no chance for reconciliation; not even for civil service reform. Well, he wandered
about the garden in this condition, until finally the Supreme Being made up his mind to make
him a companion. So he caused a sleep to fall on this man--now understand me, I do not say
this story is true. After the sleep fell upon this man, the Supreme Being took a rib, or as
the French would call it, a cutlet, out of this man, and from that he made a woman. And considering
the amount of raw material used, I look upon it as the most successful job ever performed.

Devilment commenced. The mumps, and the measles, and the whooping-cough, and the scarlet fever
started in their race for man. They began to have the toothache, roses began to have thorns,
snakes began to have poisoned teeth, and people began to divide about religion and politics,
and the world has been full of trouble from that day to this. We send missionaries over yonder
to convert heathen there, and we send soldiers out on the plains to kill heathen here. If we
can convert the heathen, why not convert those nearest home? Why not convert those we can get
at? Why not convert those who have the immense advantage of the example of the average pioneer?

They are the men we are converting. Think of it! I tell you, when I read these things, I say
that love is not of any country; nobility does not belong exclusively to any race, and through
all the ages, there have been a few great and tender souls blossoming in love and pity.

In my judgment, the woman is the equal of the man. She has all the rights I have and one more,
and that is the right to be protected. That is my doctrine. You are married; try and make the
woman you love happy. Whoever marries simply for himself will make a mistake; but whoever loves
a woman so well that he says "I will make her happy," makes no mistake. And so with the woman
who says, "I will make him happy." There is only one way to be happy, and that is to make somebody
else so, and you cannot be happy by going cross lots; you have got to go the regular turnpike road.

If there is any man I detest, it is the man who thinks he is the head of a family--the man
who thinks he is "boss!" The fellow in the dug-out used that word "boss;" that was one of his
favorite expressions.

Imagine a young man and a young woman courting, walking out in the moonlight, and the nightingale
singing a song of pain and love, as though the thorn touched her heart--imagine them stopping
there in the moonlight and starlight and song, and saying, "Now, here, let us settle who is
'boss!'" I tell you it is an infamous word and an infamous feeling--I abhor a man who is "boss,"
who is going to govern in his family, and when he speaks orders all the rest to be still as
some mighty idea is about to be launched from his mouth. Do you know I dislike this man unspeakably?

I hate above all things a cross man. What right has he to murder the sunshine of a day?

Do you know another thing? I despise a stingy man. I do not see how it is possible for a man
to die worth fifty million of dollars, or ten million of dollars, in a city full of want, when
he meets almost every day the withered hand of beggary and the white lips of famine. How a
man can withstand all that, and hold in the clutch of his greed twenty or thirty million of
dollars, is past my comprehension. I do not see how he can do it. I should not think he could
do it any more than he could keep a pile of lumber on the beach, where hundreds and thousands
of men were drowning in the sea.

Do you know that I have known men who would trust their wives with their hearts and their honor
but not with their pocketbook; not with a dollar. When I see a man of that kind, I always think
he knows which of these articles is the most valuable. Think of making your wife a beggar!
Think of her having to ask you every day for a dollar, or for two dollars or fifty cents! "What
did you do with that dollar I gave you last week?" Think of having a wife that is afraid of
you! What kind of children do you expect to have with a beggar and a coward for their mother?
Oh, I tell you if you have but a dollar in the world, and you have got to spend it, spend it
like a king; spend it as though it were a dry leaf and you the owner of unbounded forests!
If it has got to go, let it go!

Get the best you can for your family--try to look as well as you can yourself. When you used
to go courting, how elegantly you looked! Ah, your eye was bright, your step was light, and
you looked like a prince. Do you know that it is insufferable egotism in you to suppose a woman
is going to love you always looking as slovenly as you can! Think of it! Any good woman on
earth will be true to you forever when you do your level best.

Some people tell me, "Your doctrine about loving, and wives, and all that, is splendid for
the rich, but it won't do for the poor." I tell you to-night there is more love in the homes
of the poor than in the palaces of the rich. The meanest hut with love in it is a palace fit
for the gods, and a palace without love is a den only fit for wild beasts. That is my doctrine!
You cannot be so poor that you cannot help somebody. Good nature is the cheapest commodity
in the world; and love is the only thing that will pay ten per cent, to borrower and lender
both. Do not tell me that you have got to be rich! We have a false standard of greatness in
the United States. We think here that a man must be great, that he must be notorious; that
he must be extremely wealthy, or that his name must be upon the putrid lips of rumor. It is
all a mistake. It is not necessary to be rich or to be great, or to be powerful, to be happy.
The happy, man is the successful man.

Happiness is the legal tender of the soul.

Joy is wealth.

It is not necessary to be great to be happy; it is not necessary to be rich to be just and
generous and to have a heart filled with divine affection. No matter whether you are rich or
poor, treat your wife as though she were a splendid flower, and she will fill your life with
perfume and with joy.

And do you know, it is a splendid thing to think that the woman you really love will never
grow old to you. And a woman who really loves a man does not see that he grows old; he is not
decrepit to her; he does not tremble; he is not old; she always sees the same gallant gentleman
who won her hand and heart. I like to think of it in that way; I like to think that love is
eternal. And to love in that way and then go down the hill of life together, and as you go
down, hear, perhaps, the laughter of grandchildren, while the birds of joy and love sing once
more in the leafless branches of the tree of age.

I believe in the fireside. I believe in the democracy of home. I believe in the republicanism
of the family. I believe in liberty, equality and love.

THE LIBERTY OF CHILDREN.

If women have been slaves, what shall I say of children; of the little children in alleys and
sub-cellars; the little children who turn pale when they hear their fathers' footsteps; little
children who run away when they only hear their names called by the lips of a mother; little
children--the children of poverty, the children of crime, the children of brutality, wherever
they are--flotsam and jetsam upon the wild, mad sea of life--my heart goes out to them, one
and all.

I tell you the children have the same rights that we have, and we ought to treat them as though
they were human beings. They should be reared with love, with kindness, with tenderness, and
not with brutality. That is my idea of children.

When your little child tells a lie, do not rush at him as though the world were about to go
into bankruptcy. Be honest with him. A tyrant father will have liars for his children; do you
know that?

A lie is born of tyranny upon the one hand and weakness upon the other, and when you rush at
a poor little boy with a club in your hand, of course he lies.

I thank thee, Mother Nature, that thou hast put ingenuity enough in the brain of a child, when
attacked by a brutal parent, to throw up a little breastwork in the shape of a lie.

When one of your children tells a lie, be honest with him; tell him that you have told hundreds
of them yourself. Tell him it is not the best way; that you have tried it. Tell him as the
man did in Maine when his boy left home: "John, honesty is the best policy; I have tried both."
Be honest with him. Suppose a man as much larger than you as you are larger than a child five
years old, should come at you with a liberty pole in his hand, and in a voice of thunder shout,
"Who broke that plate?" There is not a solitary one of you who would not swear you never saw
it, or that it was cracked when you got it. Why not be honest with these children? Just imagine
a man who deals in stocks whipping his boy for putting false rumors afloat! Think of a lawyer
beating his own flesh and blood for evading the truth when he makes half of his own living
that way! Think of a minister punishing his child for not telling all he thinks! Just think of it!

When your child commits a wrong, take it in your arms; let it feel your heart beat against
its heart; let the child know that you really and truly and sincerely love it. Yet some Christians,
good Christians, when a child commits a fault, drive it from the door and say: "Never do you
darken this house again." Think of that! And then these same people will get down on their
knees and ask God to take care of the child they have driven from home. I will never ask God
to take care of my children unless I am doing my level best in that same direction.

Do you know that I have seen some people who acted as though they thought that when the Saviour
said "Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven," he had
a raw-hide under his mantle, and made that remark simply to get the children within striking
distance?

I do not believe in the government of the lash. Have the picture taken. I tell you it is wrong;
it is no way to raise children! Make your home happy. Be honest with them. Divide fairly with
them in everything.

Give them a little liberty and love, and you can not drive them out of your house. They will
want to stay there. Make home pleasant. Let them play any game they wish. Do not be so foolish
as to say: "You may roll balls on the ground, but you must not roll them on a green cloth.
You may knock them with a mallet, but you must not push them with a cue. You may play with
little pieces of paper which have 'authors' written on them, but you must not have 'cards.'"
Think of it! "You may go to a minstrel show where people blacken themselves and imitate humanity
below them, but you must not go to a theatre and see the characters created by immortal genius
put upon the stage." Why? Well, I can't think of any reason in the world except "minstrel"
is a word of two syllables, and "theatre" has three.

Let children have some daylight at home if you want to keep them there, and do not commence
at the cradle and shout "Don't!" "Don't!" "Stop!" That is nearly all that is said to a child
from the cradle until he is twenty-one years old, and when he comes of age other people begin
saying "Don't!" And the church says "Don't?" and the party he belongs to says "Don't!"

I despise that way of going through this world. Let us have liberty--just a little. Call me
infidel, call me atheist, call me what you will, I intend so to treat my children, that they
can come to my grave and truthfully say: "He who sleeps here never gave us a moment of pain.
From his lips, now dust, never came to us an unkind word."

People justify all kinds of tyranny towards children upon the ground that they are totally
depraved. At the bottom of ages of cruelty lies this infamous doctrine of total depravity.
Religion contemplates a child as a living crime--heir to an infinite curse--doomed to eternal fire.

In the olden time, they thought some days were too good for a child to enjoy himself. When
I was a boy Sunday was considered altogether too holy to be happy in. Sunday used to commence
then when the sun went down on Saturday night. We commenced at that time for the purpose of
getting a good ready, and when the sun fell below the horizon on Saturday evening, there was
a darkness fell upon the house ten thousand times deeper than that of night. Nobody said a
pleasant word; nobody laughed; nobody smiled; the child that looked the sickest was regarded
as the most pious. It was an exceedingly solemn night.

Dyspepsia was in the very air you breathed. Everybody looked sad and mournful. I have noticed
all my life that many people think they have religion when they are troubled with dyspepsia.
If there could be found an absolute specific for that disease, it would be the hardest blow
the church has ever received.

On Sunday morning the solemnity had simply increased. Then we went to church. The minister
was in a pulpit about twenty feet high, with a little sounding-board above him, and he commenced
at "firstly" and went on and on and on to about "twenty-thirdly." Then he made a few remarks
by way of application; and then took a general view of the subject, and in about two hours
reached the last chapter in Revelations.

In those days, no matter how cold the weather was, there was no fire in the church. It was
thought to be a kind of sin to be comfortable while you were thanking God. The first church
that ever had a stove in it in New England, divided on that account. So the first church in
which they sang by note, was torn in fragments.

After the sermon we had an intermission. Then came the catechism with the chief end of man.
We went through with that. We sat in a row with our feet coming in about six inches of the
floor. The minister asked us if we knew that we all deserved to go to hell, and we all answered
"Yes." Then we were asked if we would be willing to go hell if it was God's will, and every
little liar shouted "Yes." Then the same sermon was preached once more, commencing at the other
end and going back. After that, we started for home, sad and solemn--overpowered with the wisdom
displayed in the scheme of the atonement. When we got home, if we had been good boys, and the
weather was warm, sometimes they would take us out to the graveyard to cheer us up a little.
It did cheer me. When I looked at the sunken tombs and the leaning stones, and read the half-effaced
inscriptions through the moss of silence and forget-fulness, it was a great comfort. The reflection
came to my mind that the observance of the Sabbath could not last always. Sometimes they would
sing that beautiful hymn in which occurs these cheerful lines:

     "Where congregations ne'er break up,
      And Sabbaths never end."

These lines, I think, prejudiced me a little against even heaven. Then we had good books that
we read on Sundays by way of keeping us happy and contented. There were Milners' "History of
the Waldenses," Baxter's "Call to the Unconverted," Yahn's "Archaeology of the Jews," and Jenkyns'
"On the Atonement." I used to read Jenkyns' "On the Atonement." I have often thought that an
atonement would have to be exceedingly broad in its provisions to cover the case of a man who
would write a book like that for a boy.

But at last the Sunday wore away, and the moment the sun went down we were free. Between three
and four o'clock we would go out to see how the sun was coming on. Sometimes it seemed to me
that it was stopping from pure meanness. But finally it went down. It had to. And when the
last rim of light sank below the horizon, off would go our caps, and we would give three cheers
for liberty once more.

Sabbaths used to be prisons. Every Sunday was a Bastile. Every christian was a kind of turnkey,
and every child was a prisoner,--a convict. In that dungeon, a smile was a crime.

It was thought wrong for a child to laugh upon this holy day. Think of that!

I have heard them preach, when I sat in the pew and my feet did not touch the floor, about
the final home of the unconverted. In order to impress upon the children the length of time
they would probably stay if they settled in that country, the preacher would frequently give
us the following illustration: "Suppose that once in a billion years a bird should come from
some far-distant planet, and carry off in its little bill a grain of sand, a time would finally
come when the last atom composing this earth would be carried away; and when this last atom
was taken, it would not even be sun up in hell." Think of such an infamous doctrine being taught
to children!

The laugh of a child will make the holiest day more sacred still.

And yet the minds of children have been polluted by this infamous doctrine of eternal punishment.
I denounce it to-day as a doctrine, the infamy of which no language is sufficient to express.

Where did that doctrine of eternal punishment for men and women and children come from? It
came from the low and beastly skull of that wretch in the dug-out. Where did he get it? It
was a souvenir from the animals. The doctrine of eternal punishment was born in the glittering
eyes of snakes--snakes that hung in fearful coils watching for their prey. It was born of the
howl and bark and growl of wild beasts. It was born of the grin of hyenas and of the depraved
chatter of unclean baboons. I despise it with every drop of my blood. Tell me there is a God
in the serene heavens that will damn his children for the expression of an honest belief! More
men have died in their sins, judged by your orthodox creeds, than there are leaves on all the
forests in the wide world ten thousand times over. Tell me these men are in hell; that these
men are in torment; that these children are in eternal pain, and that they are to be punished
forever and forever! I denounce this doctrine as the most infamous of lies. When the great
ship containing the hopes and aspirations of the world, when the great ship freighted with
mankind goes down in the night of death, chaos and disaster, I am willing to go down with the
ship. I will not be guilty of the ineffable meanness of paddling away in some orthodox canoe.
I will go down with the ship, with those who love me, and with those whom I have loved. If
there is a God who will damn his children forever, I would rather go to hell than to go to
heaven and keep the society of such an infamous tyrant. I make my choice now. I despise that
doctrine. It has covered the cheeks of this world with tears. It has polluted the hearts of
children, and poisoned the imaginations of men. It has been a constant pain, a perpetual terror
to every good man and woman and child. It has filled the good with horror and with fear; but
it has had no effect upon the infamous and base. It has wrung the hearts of the tender: it
has furrowed the cheeks of the good. This doctrine never should be preached again. What right
have you, sir, Mr. clergyman, you, minister of the gospel, to stand at the portals of the tomb,
at the vestibule of eternity, and fill the future with horror and with fear? I do not believe
this doctrine: neither do you. If you did, you could not sleep one moment. Any man who believes
it, and has within his breast a decent, throbbing heart, will go insane. A man who believes
that doctrine and does not go insane has the heart of a snake and the conscience of a hyena.

Jonathan Edwards, the dear old soul, who, if his doctrine is true, is now in heaven rubbing
his holy hands with glee, as he hears the cries of the damned, preached this doctrine; and
he said: "Can the believing husband in heaven be happy with his unbelieving wife in hell? Can
the believing father in heaven be happy with his unbelieving children in hell? Can the loving
wife in heaven be happy with her unbelieving husband in hell?" And he replies: "I tell you,
yea. Such will be their sense of justice, that it will increase rather than diminish their
bliss." There is no wild beast in the jungles of Africa whose reputation would not be tarnished
by the expression of such a doctrine.

These doctrines have been taught in the name of religion, in the name of universal forgiveness,
in the name of infinite love and charity. Do not, I pray you, soil the minds of your children
with this dogma. Let them read for themselves; let them think for themselves.

Do not treat your children like orthodox posts to be set in a row. Treat them like trees that
need light and sun and air. Be fair and honest with them; give them a chance. Recollect that
their rights are equal to yours. Do not have it in your mind that you must govern them; that
they must obey. Throw away forever the idea of master and slave.

In old times they used to make the children go to bed when they were not sleepy, and get up
when they were sleepy. I say let them go to bed when they are sleepy, and get up when they
are not sleepy.

But you say, this doctrine will do for the rich but not for the poor. Well, if the poor have
to waken their children early in the morning it is as easy to wake them with a kiss as with
a blow. Give your children freedom; let them preserve their individuality. Let your children
eat what they desire, and commence at the end of a dinner they like. That is their business
and not yours. They know what they wish to eat. If they are given their liberty from the first,
they know what they want better than any doctor in the world can prescribe. Do you know that
all the improvement that has ever been made in the practice of medicine has been made by the
recklessness of patients and not by the doctors? For thousands and thousands of years the doctors
would not let a man suffering from fever have a drop of water. Water they looked upon as poison.
But every now and then some man got reckless and said, "I had rather die than not to slake
my thirst." Then he would drink two or three quarts of water and get well. And when the doctor
was told of what the patient had done, he expressed great surprise that he was still alive,
and complimented his constitution upon being able to bear such a frightful strain. The reckless
men, however, kept on drinking the water, and persisted in getting well. And finally the doctors
said: "In a fever, water is the very best thing you can take." So, I have more confidence in
the voice of nature about such things than I have in the conclusions of the medical schools.

Let your children have freedom and they will fall into your ways; they will do substantially
as you do; but if you try to make them, there is some magnificent, splendid thing in the human
heart that refuses to be driven. And do you know that it is the luckiest thing that ever happened
for this world, that people are that way. What would have become of the people five hundred
years ago if they had followed strictly the advice of the doctors? They would have all been
dead. What would the people have been, if at any age of the world they had followed implicitly
the direction of the church? They would have all been idiots. It is a splendid thing that there
is always some grand man who will not mind, and who will think for himself.

I believe in allowing the children to think for themselves. I believe in the democracy of the
family. If in this world there is anything splendid, it is a home where all are equals.

You will remember that only a few years ago parents would tell their children to "let their
victuals stop their mouths." They used to eat as though it were a religious ceremony--a very
solemn thing. Life should not be treated as a solemn matter. I like to see the children at
table, and hear each one telling of the wonderful things he has seen and heard. I like to hear
the clatter of knives and forks and spoons mingling with their happy voices. I had rather hear
it than any opera that was ever put upon the boards. Let the children have liberty. Be honest
and fair with them; be just; be tender, and they will make you rich in love and joy.

Men are oaks, women are vines, children are flowers.

The human race has been guilty of almost countless crimes; but I have some excuse for mankind.
This world, after all, is not very well adapted to raising good people. In the first place,
nearly all of it is water. It is much better adapted to fish culture than to the production
of folks. Of that portion which is land not one-eighth has suitable soil and climate to produce
great men and women. You cannot raise men and women of genius, without the proper soil and
climate, any more than you can raise corn and wheat upon the ice fields of the Arctic sea.
You must have the necessary conditions and surroundings. Man is a product; you must have the
soil and food. The obstacles presented by nature must not be so great that man cannot, by reasonable
industry and courage, overcome them. There is upon this world only a narrow belt of land, circling
zigzag the globe, upon which you can produce men and women of talent. In the Southern Hemisphere
the real climate that man needs falls mostly upon the sea, and the result is, that the southern
half of our world has never produced a man or woman of great genius. In the far north there
is no genius--it is too cold. In the far south there is no genius--it is too warm. There must
be winter, and there must be summer. In a country where man needs no coverlet but a cloud,
revolution is his normal condition. Winter is the mother of industry and prudence. Above all,
it is the mother of the family relation. Winter holds in its icy arms the husband and wife
and the sweet children. If upon this earth we ever have a glimpse of heaven, it is when we
pass a home in winter, at night, and through the windows, the curtains drawn aside, we see
the family about the pleasant hearth; the old lady knitting; the cat playing with the yarn;
the children wishing they had as many dolls or dollars or knives or somethings, as there are
sparks going out to join the roaring blast; the father reading and smoking, and the clouds
rising like incense from the altar of domestic joy. I never passed such a house without feeling
that I had received a benediction.

Civilization, liberty, justice, charity, intellectual advancement, are all flowers that blossom
in the drifted snow. I do not know that I can better illustrate the great truth that only part
of the world is adapted to the production of great men and women than by calling your attention
to the difference between vegetation in valleys and upon mountains. You must have the proper
climate and soil.

A few years ago we were talking about the annexation of Santo Domingo to this country. I was
in Washington at the time. I was opposed to it. I was told that it was a most delicious climate;
that the soil produced everything. But I said: "We do not want it; it is not the right kind
of country in which to raise American citizens. Such a climate would debauch us. You might
go there with five thousand Congregational preachers, five thousand ruling elders, five thousand
professors in colleges, five thousand of the solid men of Boston and their wives; settle them
all in Santo Domingo, and you will see the second generation riding upon a mule, bareback,
no shoes, a grapevine bridle, hair sticking out at the top of their sombreros, with a rooster
under each arm, going to a cock fight on Sunday." Such is the influence of climate.

Science, however, is gradually widening the area within which men of genius can be produced.
We are conquering the north with houses, clothing, food and fuel. We are in many ways overcoming
the heat of the south. If we attend to this world instead of another, we may in time cover
the land with men and women of genius. I have still another excuse. I believe that man came
up from, the lower animals. I do not say this as a fact. I simply say I believe it to be a
fact. Upon that question I stand about eight to seven, which, for all practical purposes, is
very near a certainty. When I first heard of that doctrine I did not like it. I do not now
so much wonder that we once had them as that we have outgrown them.

CONCLUSION.

I have given you my honest thought. Surely investigation is better than unthinking faith. Surely
reason is a better guide than fear. This world should be controlled by the living, not by the
dead. The grave is not a throne, and a corpse is not a king. Man should not try to live on ashes.

The theologians dead, knew no more than the theologians now living. More than this cannot be
said. About this world little is known,--about another world, nothing.

Our fathers were intellectual serfs, and their fathers were slaves. The makers of our creeds
were ignorant and brutal. Every dogma that we have, has upon it the mark of whip, the rust
of chain, and the ashes of fagot.

Our fathers reasoned with instruments of torture. They believed in the logic of fire and sword.
They hated reason. They despised thought. They abhorred liberty.

Superstition is the child of slavery. Free thought will give us truth. When all have the right
to think and to express their thoughts, every brain will give to all the best it has. The world
will then be filled with intellectual wealth.

As long as men and women are afraid of the church, as long as a minister inspires fear, as
long as people reverence a thing simply because they do not understand it, as long as it is
respectable to lose your self-respect, as long as the church has power, as long as mankind
worship a book, just so long will the world be filled with intellectual paupers and vagrants,
covered with the soiled and faded rags of superstition.

As long as woman regards the bible as the charter of her rights, she will be the slave of man.
The bible was not written by a woman. Within its lids there is nothing but humiliation and
shame for her. She is regarded as the property of man. She is made to ask forgiveness for becoming
a mother. She is as much below her husband, as her husband is below Christ. She is not allowed
to speak. The gospel is too pure to be spoken by her polluted lips. Woman should learn in silence.

In the bible will be found no description of a civilized home. The free mother, surrounded
by free and loving children, adored by a free man, her husband, was unknown to the inspired
writers of the bible. They did not believe in the democracy of home--in the republicanism of
the fireside.

These inspired gentlemen knew nothing of the rights of children. They were the advocates of
brute force--the disciples of the lash. They knew nothing of human rights. Their doctrines
have brutalized the homes of millions, and filled the eyes of infancy with tears.

Let us free ourselves from the tyranny of a book, from the slavery of dead ignorance, from
the aristocracy of the air.

There has never been upon the earth a generation of free men and women. It is not yet time
to write a creed. Wait until the chains are broken--until dungeons are not regarded as temples.
Wait until solemnity is not mistaken for wisdom--until mental cowardice ceases to be known
as reverence. Wait until the living are considered the equals of the dead--until the cradle
takes precedence of the coffin. Wait until what we know can be spoken without regard to what
others may believe. Wait until teachers take the place of preachers--until followers become
investigators. Wait until the world is free before you write a creed.

1776. THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE.

     One Hundred Years Ago our Fathers retired the Gods from Politics.

THE Declaration of Independence is the grandest, the bravest, and the profoundest political
document that was ever signed by the representatives of a people. It is the embodiment of physical
and moral courage and of political wisdom.

I say of physical courage, because it was a declaration of war against the most powerful nation
then on the globe; a declaration of war by thirteen weak, unorganized colonies; a declaration
of war by a few people, without military stores, without wealth, without strength, against
the most powerful kingdom on the earth; a declaration of war made when the British navy, at
that day the mistress of every sea, was hovering along the coast of America, looking after
defenseless towns and villages to ravage and destroy. It was made when thousands of English
soldiers were upon our soil, and when the principal cities of America were, in the substantial
possession of the enemy. And so, I say, all things considered, it was the bravest political
document ever signed by man. And if it was physically brave, the moral courage of the document
is almost infinitely beyond the physical. They had the courage not only, but they had the almost
infinite wisdom, to declare that all men are created equal. Such things had occasionally been
said by some political enthusiast in the olden time, but for the first time in the history
of the world, the representatives of a nation, the representatives of a real, living, breathing,
hoping people, declared that all men are created equal. With one blow, with one stroke of the
pen, they struck down all the cruel, heartless barriers that aristocracy, that priestcraft,
that kingcraft had raised between man and man. They struck down with one immortal blow, that
infamous spirit of caste that makes a god almost a beast, and a beast almost a god. With one
word, with one blow, they wiped away and utterly destroyed all that had been done by centuries
of war--centuries of hypocrisy--centuries of injustice.

What more did they do? They then declared that each man has a right to live. And what does
that mean? It means that he has the right to make his living. It means that he has the right
to breathe the air, to work the land, that he stands the equal of every other human being beneath
the shining stars; entitled to the product of his labor--the labor of his hand and of his brain.

What more? That every man has the right to pursue his own happiness in his own way. Grander
words than these have never been spoken by man.

And what more did these men say? They laid down the doctrine that governments were instituted
among men for the purpose of preserving the rights of the people. The old idea was that people
existed solely for the benefit of the state--that is to say, for kings and nobles.

The old idea was that the people were the wards of king and priest--that their bodies belonged
to one and their souls to the other.

And what more? That the people are the source of political power. That was not only a revelation,
but it was a revolution. It changed the ideas of people with regard to the source of political
power. For the first time it made human beings men. What was the old idea? The old idea was
that no political power came from, nor in any manner belonged to, the people. The old idea
was that the political power came from the clouds; that the political power came in some miraculous
way from heaven; that it came down to kings, and queens, and robbers. That was the old idea.
The nobles lived upon the labor of the people; the people had no rights; the nobles stole what
they had and divided with the kings, and the kings pretended to divide what they stole with
God Almighty. The source, then, of political power was from above. The people were responsible
to the nobles, the nobles to the king, and the people had no political rights whatever, no
more than the wild beasts of the forest. The kings were responsible to God; not to the people.
The kings were responsible to the clouds; not to the toiling millions they robbed and plundered.

And our forefathers, in this declaration of independence, reversed this thing, and said: No;
the people, they are the source of political power, and their rulers, these presidents, these
kings, are but the agents and servants of the great, sublime people. For the first time, really,
in the history of the world, the king was made to get off the throne and the people were royally
seated thereon. The people became the sovereigns, and the old sovereigns became the servants
and the agents of the people. It is hard for you and me now to imagine even the immense results
of that change. It is hard for you and for me, at this day, to understand how thoroughly it
had been ingrained in the brain of almost every man, that the king had some wonderful right
over him; that in some strange way the king owned him; that in some miraculous manner he belonged,
body and soul, to somebody who rode on a horse--to somebody with epaulettes on his shoulders
and a tinsel crown upon his brainless head.

Our forefathers had been educated in that idea, and when they first landed on American shores
they believed it. They thought they belonged to somebody, and that they must be loyal to some
thief, who could trace his pedigree back to antiquity's most successful robber.

It took a long time for them to get that idea out of their heads and hearts. They were three
thousand miles away from the despotisms of the old world, and every wave of the sea was an
assistant to them. The distance helped to disenchant their minds of that infamous belief, and
every mile between them and the pomp and glory of monarchy helped to put republican ideas and
thoughts into their minds. Besides that, when they came to this country, when the savage was
in the forest and three thousand miles of waves on the other side, menaced by barbarians on
the one side and famine on the other, they learned that a man who had courage, a man who had
thought, was as good as any other man in the world, and they built up, as it were, in spite
of themselves, little republics. And the man that had the most nerve and heart was the best
man, whether he had any noble blood in his veins or not.

It has been a favorite idea with me that our forefathers were educated by Nature; that they
grew grand as the continent upon which they landed; that the great rivers--the wide plains--the
splendid lakes--the lonely forests--the sublime mountains--that all these things stole into
and became a part of their being, and they grew great as the country in which they lived. From the
community of amoeba morula, now arose ciliated larvæ. The cells lying on the surface extended hair-like
processes or fringes of hair, which, by striking against the water, kept the whole body rotating--the
lanceolate animals or amphioxus were thus first produced. Here we find from the synamoebæ which
crept about slowly at the bottom of the Laurentian primeval ocean by means of movements like
those of an amoeba, that the newly-formed planæa by the vibrating movements of the cilia, the
entire multicellular body acquired a more rapid and stronger motion, and passed over from the
creeping to the swimming mode of locomotion. The planæa consisted, then, of two kinds of cells--inner
ones like the amoebæ, and external "ciliated cells." The ancestors of man, which possessed the
form value of the ciliated larva, is, of course, extinct at the present day.

, male opening; [female symbol], female opening; e, ovary; f, ciliated outer-skin.--Haeckel.]

Out
of the planula, then, develops an exceedingly important animal form--the gastrula (that is,
larva with a stomach or intestine), which resembles the planula,
but differs essentially in the fact that it encloses a cavity which
opens to the outside by a mouth.

The wall of the progaster (primary stomach) consists of two layers of cells: an outer layer of
smaller ciliated cells (outer skin or ectoderm), and of an inner layer of large non-ciliated
cells (inner skin or entoderm). This exceedingly important larval form, the "gastrula," makes
its appearance in the ontogenesis of all tribes of animals. These gastræada must have existed
during the older primordial period, and they must have also included the ancestors of man. A certain
proof of this is furnished by the amphioxus, which, in spite of its blood relationship to man,
still passes through the stage of the gastrula with a simple intestine and a double intestinal
wall.[16] By motion of the cilia or fringes of the skin-layer, the
gastræa swam freely about in the Laurentian ocean.

The development of the gastræa now deviated in two directions--one branch of gastræads gave up
free locomotion, adhered to the bottom of the sea, and thus, by adopting an adhesive mode of
life, gave rise to the proascus, the common primary form of the animal plants (zoophyta). The
other branch was originated by the formation of a middle germ-layer or muscular layer, and
also by the further differentiation of the internal parts into various organs; more especially,
the first formation of a nervous system, the simplest organs of sense, the simplest organs for secretion
(kidneys), and generation (sexual organs)--this branch is the prothelmis,
the common primary worms (vermes).

Like the turbellaria of the present day, the whole surface of their body was covered with cilia,
and they possessed a simple body of an oval shape, entirely without appendages. These acoelomatous
worms did not as yet possess a true body cavity (coelom) nor blood. No member of the next higher
animals are in existence, neither are there any fossil remains, owing to the soft nature of
their body. They are therefore called soft worms, or scoleceda. They developed out of the
turbellaria of the sixth stage by forming a true body cavity (a coelom) and blood in their interior.
The nearest still living coelomati is probably the acorn worms (balanoglossus).

The form value of this stage must, moreover, have been represented by several different intermediate
stages.

Out of the four different groups of the worm tribe, the four higher
tribes of the animal kingdom were developed--the star-fishes (echinoderma)
and insects (arthropoda) on the one hand, and the molluscs (mollusca)
and vertebrated animals (vertebrata) on the other.

Out of certain coelomati, the most ancient skull-less vertebrata were directly developed. Among
the coelomati of the present day, the ascidians are the nearest relatives
of this exceedingly remarkable worm, which connect the widely differing
classes of invertebrate and vertebrate animals.

To these animals have been given the name of sack-worms (himatega). They originated out of the
worms of the seventh stage by the formation of a dorsal nerve marrow
(medulla tube), and by the formation of the spinal rod (chorda dorsalis)
which lies below it.

It is just the position of this central spinal rod or axial skeleton, between the dorsal marrow
on the dorsal side and the intestinal canal on the ventral side,
which is most characteristic of all vertebrate animals, including
man, but also of the larvæ of the ascidia.

We now come to the second half of the series of human ancestors. The skull-less animal lancelet,
which is still living, affords a faint idea of the members of this group (acrania). Since this
little animal, in its earliest embryonic state, entirely agrees with
the ascidia, and in its further development shows itself to be a true
vertebrate animal, it forms a direct transition from the vertebrata
to the invertebrata.

At this stage, most probably, the separation of the two sexes began. The simpler and most ancient
form of sexual propagation is through double-sexed individuals (hermaphroditismus). It occurs
in the great majority of plants, but only in a minority of animals; for example, in the garden-snails,
leeches, earth-worms and many other worms. Every single individual among hermaphrodites produces
within itself materials of both sexes--egg and sperm. In most of the higher plants every blossom
contains both the male organs (stamen and anther) and the female
organs (style and germ).

Every garden-snail produces in one part of its sexual gland eggs, and in another sperm. Many
hermaphrodites can fructify themselves; in others, however, copulation and reciprocal fructification
of both hermaphrodites are necessary for causing the development
of the eggs.

This latter case is evidently a transition to sexual separation (gonoehorismus).

Out of the members of the last group arose animals with skulls or
craniata, having round mouths, and which are divided into hags and
lampreys.

The hags (myxinoides) have long cylindrical worm-like bodies. The lampreys (petromyxontes) includes
those well known "nine eyes" common at the seaside.

These single-nostril animals (monorrhina) arose during the primordial period out of the skull-less
animals by the anterior end of the dorsal marrow developing into the brain, and the anterior
end of the dorsal skull into the skull. By the division of the single nostril of the members
of the last group into two lateral halves, by the formation of a sympathetic nervous system,
a jaw skeleton, a swimming bladder and two pairs of legs (breast fins or fore-legs, and ventral
fins or hind-legs), arose the primæval fish (selachii), which is best represented by the still-living
shark (squalacei).

Out of the primæval fish arose the mud-fish (dipneusta), which is very imperfectly represented
by the still-living salamander fish; the primæval fish adapting itself to land, and by the transforming
of the swimming bladder into an air-breathing lung, and of the nasal cavity (which was now open
into the mouth cavity) into air-passages.

Their organization might, in some respect, be like the ceratodus and proloptems; but this is not
certain.

The dipneusta is an intermediate stage between the selachii and amphibia. Out of the dipneusta
arose the class of amphibia, having five toes (the pentadactyla). The gill amphibians are man's
most ancient ancestors of the class amphibia. Besides possessing lungs as well as the mud-fish,
they retain throughout life regular gills like the still-living proteus and axolotl. Most gilled
batrachia live in North America.

The paddle-fins of the dipneusta changed into five-toed legs, which were afterwards transmitted
to the higher vertebrata up to man.

The gilled amphibia (sozobrachia) of the last group finally lost their gills but retained their
tail, and tailed amphibians (sozura) were produced, such as the salamander and newt of the present
day. Out of the sozura originated the primæval amniota (protamnia) by the complete loss of
the gills by the formation of the amnion of the cochlea, and of the round window in the auditory
organ, and of the organ of tears. Out of the protamnia originated the primary mammals (promammalia).
The most closely related were the ornithostoma; they differed through having teeth in their
jaws.

No fossil remains of the primary mammals have as yet been found, although they lived during
the trias period--they possessed a very highly developed jaw. From
the primary mammal arose the pouched animals (marsupialia).

Numerous representatives of this group still exist: kangaroos, pouched rats and pouched dogs.
The marsupial animals developed, very probably, in the mesolithic
epoch (during the Jura) out of the cloacal animals; by the division
of the cloaca into the rectum and the urogenital sinus, by the formation
of a nipple on the mammary gland, and the partial suppression of the
clavicles.

From the marsupialia originated a most interesting small group of semi-apes (prosimiæ), for
they are the primary forms of genuine apes and consequently of man. They developed out of handed
or ape-footed marsupials (pedumana), of rat-like appearance, by the
formation of a placenta, the loss of the marsupium and the marsupial
bones, and by the higher development of the commissures of the brain.

The still-living short-footed semi-ape (brachytarsi), especially the muki, indie and lori, possess
possibly a faint resemblance.

Out of the semi-apes developed two classes of genuine apes; but as the narrow-nosed or catarrhini
class are the only ones related to man, the others will not be considered. These narrow-nosed
apes originated by the transformation of the jaw, and by the claws on the toes changing into
nails. The still-living long-tail nose-apes and holy apes (semnopithecus)
probably resembled the oldest ancestors of this group.

The tailed apes by the loss of their tail and some of their hair covering, and by the excessive
development of that portion of their brain above the facial portion of the skull, developed
into the man-like apes (anthropoides)--such as the gorilla and chimpanzee
of Africa, and the orang and gibbon of Asia.

The human ancestors of this group existed during the miocene period. From the anthropoides
developed the ape-like men (pithecanthropi) during the tertiary period. The speechless primæval men
(alali), then, is the connecting link between the man-like apes and man. The fore-hand of the
anthropoides became the human hand, their hinder-hand a foot for
walking.

They did not possess the articulate human language of words and the higher developments, as
consciousness and the formation of ideas must have been very imperfect.

Out of the pithecanthropi men developed genuine man, by the development
of the animal language of sounds into a connected or articulate language
of words--the brain also developed higher and higher.

This transition took place, probably, at the beginning of the quaternary period, or possibly in
the tertiary.

We have now very briefly reviewed the principal outlines of the ancestors of man, showing that
man has developed from the little mass of protoplasm, as have all animals and plants. He therefore
was not spontaneously created, but was developed. The question is often asked by simple-minded
people, with much delight, Why do we not behold the interesting spectacle of the transformation
of a chimpanzee into a man, or conversely of a man by retrogression into an orang?--it only shows that
they are not acquainted with the first principles of the Doctrine of Descent. "Not one of the apes,"
says Schmidt, "can revert to the state of his primordial ancestors,
except by retrogression--by which a primordial condition is by no
means attained--he cannot divest himself of his acquired characters
fixed by heredity, nor can he exceed himself and become man; for man
does not stand in the direct line of development from the ape.

The development of the anthropoid apes has taken a lateral course from the nearest human progenitors,
and man can as little be transformed into a gorilla as a squirrel can be changed into a rat."

"Feeling
evidently,"[17] says Haeckel, "rather than understanding, induces
most people to combat the theory of their 'descent from apes.' It
is simply because the organism of the ape appears a caricature of
man, a distorted likeness of ourselves in a not very attractive form;
because the customary æsthetic ideas and self-glorification of man
are touched by this in so sensitive a point, that most men shrink
from recognizing their descent from apes.

It seems much pleasanter to be descended from a more highly developed
divine being, and hence, as is well known, human vanity has from the
earliest times flattered itself by assuming the original descent of
the race from gods or demi-gods."

EVOLUTION.

In the last chapter a description was given of the various stages in man's development, from the microscopic
monad up. It will be necessary now to describe briefly the various laws which have governed
this evolutionary chain from the monad to man. But before proceeding directly to the subject,
let us look at the doctrine of evolution as a whole, and trace it first in the formation of the
world.

The doctrine of evolution is also called the theory of development--it must not, however, be confused
with Darwinism--for they are not exactly synonymous.

Darwinism is an attempt to explain the laws or manner of evolution. Strictly speaking, only
the theory of selection should be called Darwinism, which was established in 1859.

"According to the theory of development (evolution) in its simplest
form," says Henry Hartshorne,[18] "the universe as it now exists is
a result of 'an immense series of changes,' related to and dependent
upon each other as successive steps, or rather growths, constituting
a progress; analogous to the unfolding or evolving of the parts of
a growing organism."

Herbert Spencer defined evolution as consisting in a progress from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous,
from general to special, from the simple to the complex; and this
process is considered to be traceable in the formation of worlds in
space, in the multiplication of the types and species of plants and
animals on the globe, in the origination and diversity of languages,
literature, arts and sciences, and in all changes of human institutions
and society.

Let us now apply this theory of evolution to the physical world. No determined opposition by
the mass of people is likely to be manifested to the doctrine of evolution as applied to the
physical world, or even to the vegetable or animal world up to man;
but the minute man is included--then is a voice raised up against
it, and it was for this reason that Darwin in his first work on the
"Theory of Descent" did not mention man as being included in the evolutionary
series.

He knew too well the foolish human weakness that existed.

In a recent work by Prof. Challes, he states that he regards the material universe as "a vast and wonderful
mechanism of which the least wonderful thing is its being so constructed
that we can understand it."

The following is a brief description of the various theories of the world's formation:

First Theory.--By the first theory the world is supposed to have existed from eternity under its
actual form. Aristotle embraced this doctrine, and conceived the universe to be the eternal
effect of an eternal cause; maintaining that not only the heavens and the earth, but all animate
and inanimate beings, are without beginning. To use Huxley's illustration: If you can imagine a
spectator on the earth, however far back in time, he would have seen a world "essentially similar,
though not perhaps in all its details, to that which now exists. The animals which existed
would be the ancestors of those which now exist, and like them; the plants in like manner would
be such as we have now, and like them; and the supposition is that,
at however distant a period of time you place your observer, he would
still find mountains, lands, and waters, with animal and vegetable
products flourishing upon them and sporting in them just as he finds
now."

This theory being perfectly inconsistent with facts, had to be abandoned.

Second Theory.--The second theory considers the universe eternal, but not its form. This was the
system of Epicurus and most of the ancient philosophers and poets, who imagined the world either
to be produced by fortuitous concourse of atoms existing from all
eternity, or to have sprung out of the chaotic form which preceded
its present state.

Third Theory.--By this theory the matter and form of the earth is
ascribed to the direct agency of a spiritual cause.

It is needless to say that this last theory has for its basis the popular account, generally credited
to Moses in the first chapter of Genesis. I say popular, for it certainly is not a scientific
account, nor was it the intention of the writer to make it so. The supposed object was to show
the relation between the Creator and his works. If it had been an ultimate scientific account,
the ablest minds of to-day would be unable to comprehend it, as science is progressive and constantly
changing; in fifty thousand years to come, it would still appear utterly absurd. It cannot be said
for this fact that the account is any the less true because it is not presented in scientific
phraseology; for instance, when we remark in popular language "the
sun rises," who shall say that though the expression is not astronomically
true, we do not, for all practical purposes, utter as important a
truth, as when we say, "The earth by its revolution brings us to that
point where the sun becomes visible?"

The language, also, in which the writer wrote was very imperfect; it had no equivalent to
our word "air" or "atmosphere," properly speaking, for they knew not the words. "Their nearest
approaches," according to J. Pye Smith, "were with words that denoted watery vapor condensed,
and thus rendered visible, whether floating around them or seen in the breathing of animals;
and words for smoke from substances burning; and for air in motion, wind, a zephyr whisper or a
storm." It must also be remembered, "that the Hebrews had no term for the abstract ideas which
we express by 'fluid' or 'matter.' If the writer had designed to express the idea, 'In the beginning
God created matter,' he could not have found words to serve his purpose" (Phin).

It is unnecessary to state how the Bible, which contains the so-called Mosaic account, is regarded
by the different church denominations, as undoubtedly that is familiar to every one. But with
respect to the view entertained by the scientist and critical school of Biblical scholars,
represented chiefly by modern Germans, I may state briefly: "They regard the Bible as the human
record of a divine revelation; not absolutely infallible, since there is no book written in
any human language but must partake in a measure of the imperfections of that language. Many
of this school, while admitting the Bible to contain the record of a true supernatural revelation,
do not consider it to be without positive error of historical fact, not without false coloring
from popular legend and tradition, but nevertheless a record as good as human hands could
make a truly divine revelation."[19]

There is, though, a class of thinkers that altogether reject the Bible;
that is to say, refuse to believe it to be a divine revelation.

The first words in the Mosaic account are:[20] "In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth."[21] It is seen, then, that the
so-called revelation points to a beginning.

Geology points to a time when man did not inhabit the earth; when
for him there was a beginning.

So, too, for lower organisms; so, too, for the rocky minerals; so, too, for the round world itself.
But the beginning that science points to is not an absolute beginning. Science has to start
from some point, and that point must have a scientific foundation--the foundation of science
is matter, which is inseparable from form and force. Natural science teaches that matter is
eternal and imperishable; for experience has never shown us that
even the smallest particle of matter has come into existence or passed
away.

"A naturalist," says Haeckel, "can no more imagine the coming into existence of matter than
he can imagine its disappearance, and he therefore looks upon the existing quantity of matter
in the universe as a given fact." "The creation of matter, if, indeed," says Haeckel,[24] "it ever took
place, is completely beyond human comprehension, and can therefore
never become a subject of scientific inquiry.

We can as little imagine a first beginning of the eternal phenomena
of the motion of the universe as of its final end."[25] It is evident,
then, that the absolute beginning of the universe and its absolute
end are not questions of science, and can be known only as revealed
by faith.

Paul says: "By faith we understand that the world was framed by the word of God, so that things
which are seen were not made of things which appeared."[26]

If, therefore, science makes the "history of creation" its highest and most difficult and most comprehensible
problem, it must deal with "the coming into being of the form of natural bodies." Let us look
for a minute at Kant's Cosmogony, or, as Haeckel says,[27] Kant's
Cosmological Gas Theory: "This wonderful theory," says Haeckel, "harmonizes
with all the general series of phenomena at present known to us, and
stands in no irreconcilable contradiction to any one of them.

Moreover, it is purely mechanical and monistic, makes use exclusively of the inherent forces
of eternal matter, and entirely excludes every supernatural process, every prearranged and conscious
action of a personal creator." Compare this last statement with the following: "I will, however,"
says Haeckel,[28] "not deny that Kant's grand cosmogony has some
weak points."

* * * "A great unsolved difficulty lies in the fact that the cosmological gas theory furnishes
no starting-point at all in explanation of the first impulse which caused the rotary motion in
the gas-filled universe."

Whewell[29] has pointed out, that the nebular hypothesis is null without a creative act to produce
the inequality of distribution of cosmic matter in space.

It is seen, then, that according to Kant's theory we are to suppose that millions of years ago there
appeared a nebulous mass possessing a rotary motion, and unequally distributed through space.
This is what science calls a beginning, and may assert that every physical event of a hundred
million of ages existed potentially in that nebulous mass. But this is really no explanation of
the ultimate and real cause of anything.
 Let everybody be absolutely free and independent, knowing only the sacred obligation
of honesty and affection. Let us be independent of party, independent of everybody and everything
except our own consciences and our own brains. Do not belong to any clique. Have the clear
title deeds in fee simple to yourselves, without any mortgage on the premises to anybody in
the world.

It is a grand thing to be the owner of yourself. It is a grand thing to protect the rights
of others. It is a sublime thing to be free and just.

Only a few days ago I stood in Independence Hall--in that little room where was signed the
immortal paper. A little room, like any other; and it did not seem possible that from that
room went forth ideas, like cherubim and seraphim, spreading their wings over a continent,
and touching, as with holy fire, the hearts of men.

In a few moments I was in the park, where are gathered the accomplishments of a century. Our
fathers never dreamed of the things I saw. There were hundreds of locomotives, with their nerves
of steel and breath of flame--every kind of machine, with whirling wheels and curious cogs
and cranks, and the myriad thoughts of men that have been wrought in iron, brass and steel.
And going out from one little building were wires in the air, stretching to every civilized
nation, and they could send a shining messenger in a moment to any part of the world, and it
would go sweeping under the waves of the sea with thoughts and words within its glowing heart.
I saw all that had been achieved by this nation, and I wished that the signers of the Declaration--the
soldiers of the revolution--could see what a century of freedom has produced. I wished they
could see the fields we cultivate--the rivers we navigate--the railroads running over the Alleghanies,
far into what was then the unknown forest--on over the broad prairies--on over the vast plains--away
over the mountains of the West, to the Golden Gate of the Pacific. 

Here might Work be cut out for Thousands that now pretend to want
Business; and many that now thro' Laziness decline Endeavours to support
themselves and Families, would then seek for Employment, and set to
work in Earnest, being frighten'd into Industry and Labour, through
the dreadful Apprehension of being sent to the Plantations; for such
as could not or would not maintain themselves, and all Girls and Boys
that are in no likelihood of doing this, should have their Names returned
to the Justices by the Church-Wardens and Overseers, at the Quarter-Sessions,
who upon Examination should give Orders for their Transportation;
then would the Parish be eased, and might easily have honest and laborious
People enough to do their Business and Work, without the Charge of
Abundance of lazy or poor People.

These should be sent over at the Expence of the Parish, and their
Labour would soon repay the Cost, and the Overplus might be applied
for the Service of the Parish; so that these would soon maintain the
rest of their Poor, and bring in good Gain to themselves and their
Parishioners in Time, if they were under some such Restrictions, and
had some such Privileges as the first Sort of unfortunate People here
mentioned.

But if these Methods of Transportation be thought impracticable, at the Expence, and for the
Benefit of the Government, the Counties, and the Parishes, yet might other Contrivances be found
to transport the People above specified, besides the Methods now
practiced by some to transport themselves, and by Mr. Forward and
some Merchants for sending over continually all sorts of Servants;
but the present Number is but a Trifle in respect of what might be
sent over, were Laws made for the better Encouragement thereof, and
due Regulations made for the Employment and Provision of such great
Numbers as might yearly be sent over.

 We are writing and reading more books; we are
painting and buying more pictures; we are struggling more and more to get at the philosophy
of life, of things--trying more and more to answer the questions of the eternal Sphinx. We
are looking in every direction--investigating; in short, we are thinking and working. Besides
all this, I believe the people are nearer honest than ever before. A few years ago we were
willing to live upon the labor of four million slaves. Was that honest? At last, we have a
national conscience. At last, we have carried out the Declaration of Independence. Our fathers
wrote it--we have accomplished it. The black man was a slave--we made him a citizen. We found
four million human beings in manacles, and now the hands of a race are held up in the free
air without a chain.

I have had the supreme pleasure of seeing a man--once a slave--sitting in the seat of his former
master in the Congress of the United States. I have had that pleasure, and when I saw it my
eyes were filled with tears. I felt that we had carried out the Declaration of Independence,--that
we had given reality to it, and breathed the breath of life into its every word. I felt that
our flag would float over and protect the colored man and his little children--standing straight
in the sun, just the same as though he were white and worth a million. I would protect him
more, because the rich white man could protect himself.

All who stand beneath our banner are free. Ours is the only flag that has in reality written
upon it: Liberty, Fraternity, Equality--the three grandest words in all the languages of men.

Liberty: Give to every man the fruit of his own labor--the labor of his hands and of his brain.

Fraternity: Every man in the right is my brother. 

It is sure to be near a brook for the supply of fresh water for the pot, and a washing-place for
the family rags: it generally lies under the shelter of some umbrageous tree, it will always
be found to have a view of the road, and invariably placed on the
edge of some nice short and sweet morsel of grass for the recreation
of the quadrupeds of the party.

The character of the gipsy has not been well understood. It is altogether oriental: he is quiet,
patient, sober, long suffering, pleasant in speech, indolent but handy, far from speculative, and yet
good at succedaneum: when his anger is kindled, it descends like
lightning: unlike his dog, his wrath gives no notice by grumbling:
he blazes up like one of his own fires of dried fern.

Quarrels do not often take place among them, but when they do, they are dreadful. The laws of
the country in which they sojourn have so far banished the use of knives from among them that
they only grind them, otherwise these conflicts would always be fatal.

They fight like tigers with tooth and nail, and knee and toe, and seem animated only with the spirit
of daemonism. Luckily the worst weapon they use is a stick, and, if the devil tempts, a hedge-stake.

We
have been put in mind to say something of the gipsies by having witnessed
the consequences of one of these affrays, which has brought us still
better acquainted with these singular people.

A quarrel originating in jealousy had produced results of the most serious nature. A blow on the
head with a tent-pole had evidently produced concussion of the brain if not fracture, and
the victim was lying on his straw bed in a state of profound coma. The tent was tripartite, being
formed of three main tops meeting in a centre: one was sacred to the women--the gynekeion of
the Greeks, the anderoon of the Persians: in the others were collected
the whole faction of the dying man.

Nine or ten swarthy but handsome countenances were anxiously watching the struggling breath
of their unhappy comrade--some sobbing, some grief-stricken, some sombre, none savage. An old
crone was administering ineffectual milk, perhaps the very woman who had found the same fluid
so nutritious some thirty years ago. Before, or rather, under her lay as noble a form as nature
ever moulded, with a fine dark, but thoroughly Indian face, covered with the clammy sweat of
apoplectic death. There was no want of light, the fire at the mouth every now and then sent in
a volume of illumination, and when the medical men arrived there
was scarcely a hand that did not contain a candle in the hope of aiding
their investigation.

The man died on the fourth day: the surgeons were compelled to mangle him in their search for
a fracture; after his death justice demanded a still further investigation of the corpse: and yet during
all these trying circumstances an important witness can declare that the behaviour of the supposed
lawless people was not merely decent--it was more than exemplary--it was delicate, tender, nay,
refined; it was moreover exempt from prejudice, at the same time that it was full of feeling.
Were the details in place here, it would perhaps be allowed that
few brighter examples of friendship and right feeling were to be found
than in this instance occurred among the "dark race," as they call
themselves.

New Monthly Magazine.

* * * * *

     THE GATHERER.
     

* * * * *

ARROGANCE.

Owen Feltham says: "I never yet found pride in a noble nature, nor humility in an unworthy mind.
It may seem strange to an inconsiderate eye, that such a poor violet virtue should ever dwell
with honour; and that such an aspiring fume as pride is, should ever
sojourn with a constant baseness.

The old way of farming was a great mistake. Everything was done the wrong way. It was all work
and waste, weariness and want. They used to fence a hundred and sixty acres of land with a
couple of dogs. Everything was left to the protection of the blessed trinity of chance, accident
and mistake.

When I was a farmer they used to haul wheat two hundred miles in wagons and sell it for thirty-five
cents a bushel. They would bring home about three hundred feet of lumber, two bunches of shingles,
a barrel of salt, and a cook-stove that never would draw and never did bake.

In those blessed days the people lived on corn and bacon. Cooking was an unknown art. Eating
was a necessity, not a pleasure. It was hard work for the cook to keep on good terms even with
hunger.

We had poor houses. The rain held the roofs in perfect contempt, and the snow drifted joyfully
on the floors and beds. They had no barns. The horses were kept in rail pens surrounded with
straw. Long before spring the sides would be-eaten away and nothing but roofs would be left.
Food is fuel. When the cattle were exposed to all the blasts of winter, it took all the corn
and oats that could be stuffed into them to prevent actual starvation.

In those times most farmers thought the best place for the pig-pen was immediately in front
of the house. There is nothing like sociability.

Women were supposed to know the art of making fires without fuel. The wood pile consisted,
as a general thing, of one log upon which an axe or two had been worn out in vain. There was
nothing to kindle a fire with. Pickets were pulled from the garden fence, clap-boards taken
from the house, and every stray plank was seized upon for kindling. Everything was done in
the hardest way. Everything about the farm was disagreeable. Nothing was kept in order. Nothing
was preserved. The wagons stood in the sun and rain, and the plows rusted in the fields. There
was no leisure, no feeling that the work was done. It was all labor and weariness and vexation
of spirit. The crops were destroyed by wandering herds, or they were put in too late, or too
early, or they were blown down, or caught by the frost, or devoured by bugs, or stung by flies,
or eaten by worms, or carried away by birds, or dug up by gophers, or washed away by floods,
or dried up by the sun, or rotted in the stack, or heated in the crib, or they all run to vines,
or tops, or straw, or smut, or cobs. And when in spite of all these accidents that lie in wait
between the plow and the reaper, they did succeed in raising a good crop and a high price was
offered, then the roads would be impassable. And when the roads got good, then the prices went
down. Everything worked together for evil.

Nearly every farmer's boy took an oath that he never would cultivate the soil. The moment they
arrived at the age of twenty-one they left the desolate and dreary farms and rushed to the
towns and cities. They wanted to be bookkeepers, doctors, merchants, railroad men, insurance
agents, lawyers, even preachers, anything to avoid the drudgery of the farm. Nearly every boy
acquainted with the three R's--reading, writing, and arithmetic--imagined that he had altogether
more education than ought to be wasted in raising potatoes and corn. They made haste to get
into some other business. Those who stayed upon the farm envied those who went away.

A few years ago the times were prosperous, and the young men went to the cities to enjoy the
fortunes that were waiting for them. They wanted to engage in something that promised quick
returns. They built railways, established banks and insurance companies. They speculated in
stocks in Wall Street, and gambled in grain at Chicago. They became rich. They lived in palaces.
They rode in carriages. They pitied their poor brothers on the farms, and the poor brothers
envied them.

But time has brought its revenge. The farmers have seen the railroad president a bankrupt,
and the road in the hands of a receiver. They have seen the bank president abscond, and the
insurance company a wrecked and ruined fraud. The only solvent people, as a class, the only
independent people, are the tillers of the soil.

Farming must be made more attractive. The comforts of the town must be added to the beauty
of the fields. The sociability of the city must be rendered possible in the country.

Farming has been made repulsive. The farmers have been unsociable and their homes have been
lonely. They have been wasteful and careless. They have not been proud of their business.

In the first place, farming ought to be reasonably profitable. The farmers have not attended
to their own interests. They have been robbed and plundered in a hundred ways.

No farmer can afford to raise corn and oats and hay to sell. He should sell horses, not oats;
sheep, cattle and pork, not corn. He should make every profit possible out of what he produces.
So long as the farmers of Illinois ship their corn and oats, so long they will be poor,--just
so long will their farms be mortgaged to the insurance companies and banks of the east,--just
so long will they do the work and others reap the benefit,--just so long will they be poor,
and the money lenders grow rich,--just so long will cunning avarice grasp and hold the net
profits of honest toil. When the farmers of the west ship beef and pork instead of grain,--when
we manufacture here,--when we cease paying tribute to others, ours will be the most prosperous
country in the world.

Another thing--It is just as cheap to raise a good as a poor breed of cattle. Scrubs will eat
just as much as thoroughbreds. If you are not able to buy Durhams and Alderneys, you can raise
the corn breed. By "corn breed" I mean the cattle that have, for several generations, had enough
to eat, and have been treated with kindness. Every farmer who will treat his cattle kindly,
and feed them all they want, will, in a few years, have blooded stock on his farm. All blooded
stock has been produced in this way. You can raise good cattle just as you can raise good people.
If you wish to raise a good boy you must give him plenty to eat, and treat him with kindness.
In this way, and in this way only, can good cattle or good people be produced.

Another thing--You must beautify your homes.

When I was a farmer it was not fashionable to set out trees, nor to plant vines.

When you visited the farm you were not welcomed by flowers, and greeted by trees loaded with
fruit. Yellow dogs came bounding over the tumbled fence like wild beasts. There is no sense--there
is no profit in such a life. It is not living. The farmers ought to beautify their homes. There
should be trees and grass and flowers and running vines. Everything should be kept in order--gates
should be on their hinges, and about all there should be the pleasant air of thrift. In every
house there should be a bath-room. The bath is a civilizer, a refiner, a beautifier. When you
come from the fields tired, covered with dust, nothing is so refreshing. Above all things,
keep clean. It is not necessary to be a pig in order to raise one. In the cool of the evening,
after a day in the field, put on clean clothes, take a seat under the trees, 'mid the perfume
of flowers, surrounded by your family, and you will know what it is to enjoy life like a gentleman.

In no part of the globe will farming pay better than in Illinois. You are in the best portion
of the earth. From the Atlantic to the Pacific, there is no such country as yours. The east
is hard and stony; the soil is stingy. The far west is a desert parched and barren, dreary
and desolate as perdition would be with the fires out. It is better to dig wheat and corn from
the soil than gold. Only a few days ago I was where they wrench the precious metals from the
miserly clutch of the rocks. When I saw the mountains, treeless, shrub-less, flowerless, without
even a spire of grass, it seemed to me that gold had the same effect upon the country that
holds it, as upon the man who lives and labors only for that. It affects the land as it does
the man. It leaves the heart barren without a flower of kindness--without a blossom of pity.

The farmer in Illinois has the best soil--the greatest return for the least labor--more leisure--more
time for enjoyment than any other farmer in the world. His hard work ceases with autumn. He
has the long winters in which to become acquainted with his family--with his neighbors--in
which to read and keep abreast with the advanced thought of his day. He has the time and means
for self-culture. He has more time than the mechanic, the merchant or the professional man.
If the farmer is not well informed it is his own fault. Books are cheap, and every farmer can
have enough to give him the outline of every science, and an idea of all that has been accomplished
by man.

In many respects the farmer has the advantage of the mechanic. In our time we have plenty of
mechanics but no tradesmen. In the sub-division of labor we have a thousand men working upon
different parts of the same thing, each taught in one particular branch, and in only one. We
have, say, in a shoe factory, hundreds of men, but not one shoemaker. It takes them all, assisted
by a great number of machines, to make a shoe. Each does a particular part, and not one of
them knows the entire trade. The result is that the moment the factory shuts down these men
are out of employment. Some Planters, &c. make good small Drink with Cakes of Parsimmons a kind
of Plumbs, which grow there in great Plenty; but the common small Beer is made of Molossus, which
makes extraordinary brisk good tasted Liquor at a cheap Rate, with little Trouble in brewing;
so that they have it fresh and fresh, as they want it in Winter and Summer.

And as they brew, so do they bake daily, Bread or Cakes, eating too much hot and new Bread, which
cannot be wholsom, tho' it be pleasanter than what has been baked
a Day or two.

Some raise Barley and make Malt there, and others have Malt from England,
with which those that understand it, brew as good Beer as in England,
at proper Seasons of the Year; but the common strong Malt-Drink mostly
used, is Bristol Beer; of which is consumed vast Quantities there
yearly; which being well brew'd and improv'd by crossing the Sea,
drinks exceedingly fine and smooth; but Malt Liquor is not so much
regarded as Wine, Rack, Brandy, and Rum, Punch, with Drams of Rum
or Brandy for the common Sort, when they drink in a Hurry.

The common Wine comes from Madera or Phial, which moderately drank
is fittest to cheer the fainting Spirits in the Heat of Summer, and
to warm the chilled Blood in the bitter Colds of Winter, and seems
most peculiarly adapted for this Climate: Besides this, are plentifully
drank with the better Sort, of late Years, all Kinds of French, and
other European Wine, especially Claret and Port.

Here is likewise used a great deal of Chocolate, Tea and Coffee, which, with several Sorts of Apparel,
they have as cheap, or cheaper than in England, because of the Debenture of such Goods upon their
Exportation thither: Besides, they are allowed to have Wines directly
from Madera, and other Commodities are brought from the West-Indies,
and the Continent, which cannot be brought to England without spoiling.

As

for grinding Corn, &c. they have good Mills upon the Runs and Creeks: besides Hand-Mills, Wind-Mills,
and the Indian Invention of pounding Hommony in Mortars burnt in the Stump of a Tree, with a
Log for a Pestle hanging at the End of a Pole, fix'd like the Pole of a Lave.

Though they are permitted to trade to no Parts but Great Britain,
except these Places: yet have they in many Respects better and cheaper
Commodities than we in England, especially of late Years; for the
Country may be said to be altered and improved in Wealth and polite
Living within these few Years, since the Beginning of Col. Spotswood's
Government, more than in all the Scores of Years before that, from
its first Discovery.

The Country is yearly supplied with vast Quantities of Goods from Great Britain, chiefly from
London, Bristol, Liverpool, Whitehaven, and from Scotland.

The Ships that transport these Things often call at Ireland to victual, and bring over frequently
white Servants, which are of three Kinds. 1. Such as come upon certain Wages by Agreement for
a certain Time. 2. Such as come bound by Indenture, commonly call'd Kids, who are usually to serve
four or five Years; and 3. those Convicts or Felons that are transported, whose Room they had
much rather have than their Company; for abundance of them do great Mischiefs, commit Robbery
and Murder, and spoil Servants, that were before very good: But they frequently there meet with
the End they deserved at Home, though indeed some of them prove indifferent
good.

Their being sent thither to work as Slaves for Punishment, is but a mere Notion, for few of them
ever lived so well and so easy before, especially if they are good for any thing. These are to serve
seven, and sometimes fourteen Years, and they and Servants by Indentures have an Allowance
of Corn and Cloaths, when they are out of their Time, that they may be therewith supported, till
they can be provided with Services, or otherwise settled. With these three Sorts of Servants are
they supplied from England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, among which they that have a Mind
to it, may serve their Time with Ease and Satisfaction to themselves and their Masters, especially
if they fall into good Hands.

Except the last Sort, for the most Part who are loose Villains, made tame by Wild, and then
enslaved by his Forward Namesake: To prevent too great a Stock of which Servants and Negroes many
Attempts and Laws have been in vain made.
 It is a thousand times better to have common sense without education, than education
without the sense. Boys and girls should be educated to help themselves. They should be taught
that it is disgraceful to be idle, and dishonorable to be useless.

I say again, if you want more men and women on the farms, something must be done to make farm
life pleasant. One great difficulty is that the farm is lonely. People write about the pleasures
of solitude, but they are found only in books. He who lives long alone becomes insane. A hermit
is a madman. Without friends and wife and child, there is nothing left worth living for. The
unsocial are the enemies of joy. They are filled with egotism and envy, with vanity and hatred.
People who live much alone become narrow and suspicious. They are apt to be the property of
one idea. They begin to think there is no use in anything. They look upon the happiness of
others as a kind of folly. They hate joyous folks, because, way down in their hearts, they
envy them.

In our country, farm-life is too lonely. The farms are large, and neighbors are too far apart.
In these days, when the roads are filled with "tramps," the wives and children need protection.
When the farmer leaves home and goes to some distant field to work, a shadow of fear is upon
his heart all day, and a like shadow rests upon all at home.

In the early settlement of our country the pioneer was forced to take his family, his axe,
his dog and his gun, and go into the far wild forest and build his cabin miles and miles from
any neighbor. He saw the smoke from his hearth go up alone in all the wide and lonely sky.

But this necessity has passed away, and now, instead of living so far apart upon the lonely
farms, you should live in villages. With the improved machinery which you have--with your generous
soil--with your markets and means of transportation, you can now afford to live together.

It is not necessary in this age of the world for the farmer to rise in the middle of the night
and begin his work. This getting up so early in the morning is a relic of barbarism. It has
made hundreds and thousands of young men curse the business. There is no need of getting up
at three or four o'clock in the winter morning. The farmer who persists in doing it and persists
in dragging his wife and children from their beds ought to be visited by a missionary. It is
time enough to rise after the sun has set the example. For what purpose do you get up? To feed
the cattle? Why not feed them more the night before? It is a waste of life. In the old times
they used to get up about three o'clock in the morning, and go to work long before the sun
had risen with "healing upon his wings," and as a just punishment they all had the ague; and
they ought to have it now. The man who cannot get a living upon Illinois soil without rising
before daylight ought to starve. Eight hours a day is enough for any farmer to work except
in harvest time. When you rise at four and work till dark what is life worth? Of what use are
all the improvements in farming? Of what use is all the improved machinery unless it tends
to give the farmer a little more leisure? What is harvesting now, compared with what it was
in the old time? Think of the days of reaping, of cradling, of raking and binding and mowing.
Think of threshing with the flail and winnowing with the wind. And now think of the reapers
and mowers, the binders and threshing machines, the plows and cultivators, upon which the farmer
rides protected from the sun. If, with all these advantages, you cannot get a living without
rising in the middle of the night, go into some other business. You should not rob your families
of sleep. Sleep is the best medicine in the world. It is the best doctor upon the earth. There
is no such thing as health without plenty of sleep. Sleep until you are thoroughly rested and
restored. When you work, work; and when you get through take a good, long, and refreshing rest.

You should live in villages, so that you can have the benefits of social life. You can have
a reading-room--you can take the best papers and magazines--you can have plenty of books, and
each one can have the benefit of them all. Some of the young men and women can cultivate music.
You can have social gatherings--you can-learn from each other--you can discuss all topics of
interest, and in this way you can make farming a delightful business. You must keep up with
the age. The way to make farming respectable is for farmers to become really intelligent. They
must live intelligent and happy lives. They must know something of books and something of what
is going on in the world. They must not be satisfied with knowing something of the affairs
of a neighborhood and nothing about the rest of the earth. The business must be made attractive,
and it never can be until the farmer has prosperity, intelligence and leisure.

Another thing--I am a believer in fashion. It is the duty of every woman to make herself as
beautiful and attractive as she possibly can.

"Handsome is as handsome does," but she is much handsomer if well dressed. Every man should
look his very best. I am a believer in good clothes. The time never ought to come in this country
when you can tell a farmer's wife or daughter simply by the garments she wears. I say to every
girl and woman, no matter what the material of your dress may be, no matter how cheap and coarse
it is, cut it and make it in the fashion. I believe in jewelry. Some people look upon it as
barbaric, but in my judgment, wearing jewelry is the first evidence the barbarian gives of
a wish to be civilized. To adorn ourselves seems to be a part of our nature, and this desire
seems to be everywhere and in everything. I have sometimes thought that the desire for beauty
covers the earth with flowers. It is this desire that paints the wings of moths, tints the
chamber of the shell, and gives the bird its plumage and its song. Oh daughters and wives,
if you would be loved, adorn yourselves--if you would be adored, be beautiful! There is another
fault common with the farmers of our country--they want too much land. You cannot, at present,
when taxes are high, afford to own land that you do not cultivate. Sell it and let others make
farms and homes. In this way what you keep will be enhanced in value. Farmers ought to own
the land they cultivate, and cultivate what they own. Renters can hardly be called farmers.
There can be no such thing in the highest sense as a home unless you own it. There must be
an incentive to plant trees, to beautify the grounds, to preserve and improve. It elevates
a man to own a home. It gives a certain independence, a force of character that is obtained
in no other way. A man without a home feels like a passenger. There is in such a man a little
of the vagrant. Homes make patriots. He who has sat by his own fireside with wife and children
will defend it. When he hears the word country pronounced, he thinks of his home.

Few men have been patriotic enough to shoulder a musket in defence of a boarding house.

The prosperity and glory of our country depend upon the number of our people who are the owners
of homes. Around the fireside cluster the private and the public virtues of our race. Raise
your sons to be independent through labor--to pursue some business for themselves and upon
their own account--to be self-reliant--to act upon their own responsibility, and to take the
consequences like men. Teach them above all things to be good, true and tender husbands--winners
of love and builders of homes.

A great many farmers seem to think that they are the only laborers in the world. This is a
very foolish thing. Farmers cannot get along without the mechanic. You are not independent
of the man of genius. Your prosperity depends upon the inventor. Of all beasts, the soft and
patient lamb. Of all fowls, the mild and gall-less dove. Christ is the rose of the field, and
the lily of the valley. When God appeared to Moses, it was not in the lofty cedar, nor the
sturdy oak, nor the spreading plane; but in a bush, an humble, slender, abject shrub: as if he
would, by these elections, check the conceited arrogance of man. Nothing procureth love like
humility; nothing hate, like pride. The proud man walks among daggers pointed against him; whereas
the humble and the affable, have the people for their guard in dangers. To be humble to our superiors,
is duty; to our equals, courtesy; to our inferiors, nobleness: which for all her lowness, carries
such a sway that she may command their souls. But we must take heed, we express it not in unworthy
actions. For then leaving virtue, it falls into disdained baseness, which is the undoubtable
badge of one that will betray society. So far as a man, both in words and deeds, may be free from flattery
and unmanly cowardice, he may be humble with commendation; but surely no circumstance can make
the expression of pride laudable. If ever it be, it is when it meets with audacious pride, and conquers.
Of this good it may then be author, that the affronting man, by his own folly, may learn the
way to his duty and wit. Yet this I cannot so well call pride, as an emulation of the divine
justice; which will always vindicate itself upon presumptuous ones, and is indeed said to fight
against no sin but pride."

W.G.C.

* * * * *

Curious Marriage.--In the church of St. Martin, formerly called St.
Crosse, Leicester, the marriage register contains an entry of the
names of Thomas Tilsey and Ursula Russel, the first of whom being
"deofe and also dombe," it was agreed by the bishop, mayor, and other
gentlemen of the town, that certain signs and actions of the bridegroom
should be admitted instead of the usual words enjoined by the Protestant
marriage ceremony: "First he embraced her with his armes, and tooke
her by the hande, put a ringe upon her finger, and laide his hande
upon his harte, and upon her harte, and helde up his handes towards
heaven; and, to shew his continuance to dwell with her to his lyves
ende, he did it by closing of his eyes with his hands, and digging
out the earthe with his fete, and pullinge as though he would ringe
a bell, with divers other signes approved."



Of course, the railroads are indebted to the farmers for their prosperity, and the farmers
are indebted to the railroads. Without them Illinois would be almost worthless.

A few years ago you endeavored to regulate the charges of railroad companies. The principal
complaint you had was that they charged too much for the transportation of corn and other cereals
to the East. You should remember that all freights are paid by the consumer; and that it made
little difference to you what the railroad charged for transportation to the East, as that
transportation had to be paid by the consumers of the grain. You were really interested in
transportation from the East to the West and in local freights. The result is that while you
have put down through freights you have not succeeded so well in local freights. The exact
opposite should be the policy of Illinois. Put down local freights; put them down, if you can,
to the lowest possible figure, and let through rates take care of themselves. If all the corn
raised in Illinois could be transported to New York absolutely free, it would enhance but little
the price that you would receive. What we want is the lowest possible local rate. Instead of
this you have simply succeeded in helping the East at the expense of the West. The railroads
are your friends. They are your partners. They can prosper only where the country through which
they run prospers. All intelligent railroad men know this. They know that present robbery is
future bankruptcy. They know that the interest of the farmer and of the railroad is the same.
We must have railroads. What can we do without them?

When we had no railroads, we drew, as I said before, our grain two hundred miles to market.

In those days the farmers did not stop at hotels. They slept under their wagons--took with
them their food--fried their own bacon, made their coffee, and ate their meals in the snow
and rain. Those were the days when they received ten cents a bushel for corn--when they sold
four bushels of potatoes for a quarter--thirty-three dozen eggs for a dollar, and a hundred
pounds of pork for a dollar and a half.

What has made the difference?

The railroads came to your door and they brought with them the markets of the world. They brought
New York and Liverpool and London into Illinois, and the state has been clothed with prosperity
as with a mantle. It is the interest of the farmer to protect every great interest in the state.
You should feel proud that Illinois has more railroads than any other state in this Union.
Her main tracks and side tracks would furnish iron enough to belt the globe. In Illinois there
are ten thousand miles of railways. In these iron highways more than three hundred million
dollars have been invested--a sum equal to ten times the original cost of all the land in the
state. To make war upon the railroads is a short-sighted and suicidal policy. They should be
treated fairly and should be taxed by the same standard that farms are taxed, and in no other
way. If we wish to prosper we must act together, and we must see to it that every form of labor
is protected.

There has been a long period of depression in all business. The farmers have suffered least
of all. Your land is just as rich and productive as ever. Prices have been reasonable. The
towns and cities have suffered. Stocks and bonds have shrunk from par to worthless paper. The Extent,
the Wealth, the numerous Inhabitants, the Hands employed, the Goods consumed, the Duties and
Customs occasioned by the Plantations, especially such as Virginia, are well worthy the most serious
Consideration, and claim the greatest Favour and Encouragement in
the Trade and Manufactures of those Places, which are vastly larger
than all his Majesty's Dominions in Europe, and in Time may become
as considerable; they being at present one of the chiefest Causes
and main Supports of our Trade, and bringing as much Money into the
Treasury, and the Purses of Merchants, and other People, as most other
Parts of the World to which we trade.

The Good of the Publick consists as well in the Welfare of the Subject, as in the Power and Riches
of the Prince; Regard being to be had as well to the Circumstances of the one, as the other.
Now the Advancement of Trade and Manufactures in the Plantations in the highest Degree respects
both the Sovereign and the Subject, in which both the publick and private Interest is deeply
engaged; therefore should the Plantation Trade and Manufactures be set upon the best Footing
imaginable; be carried on strenuously to the best Advantage; and be granted all reasonable Favour,
Protection, and Encouragement. They are Branches and chief Members, why then may they not continue
justly to partake of the same Privileges and Advantages that are enjoyed by England, which may
truly be esteemed their Head, to which they are inseparably joined, as being essential Parts
of the same Body Politick? I need not relate the Fable of the Head and Members, for every
one knows the Moral inferred from it; how that unless the Members travel and labour for the
Service of the Head and Body, and the Head contrives, and the Body
conveys Nourishment and Sustenance to the Members, the whole Fabrick,
both Head, Body, and Members would soon perish, and moulder to Dust.

I presume that the Application of this to Great Britain, and our Trade and Plantations may
not be altogether improper.

There can be no Room for real Apprehension of Danger of a Revolt of the Plantations in future
Ages: Or if any of them should attempt it, they might very easily be reduced by the others;
for all of them will never unite with one another; for though all
the Plantations agree in this, that they all belong to, and depend
entirely upon Great Britain; yet they have each Views different from
one another, and as strenuously pursue their separate Interests, by
various and distinct Methods.

Besides, they can't possibly be without Great Britain, to which they owe their being at first
made Colonies; and afterwards have been always supported, maintained and employed by it.
 Let
us see if we cannot, in Illinois, protect every department of industry. Let us see if all property
cannot be protected alike and taxed alike, whether owned by individuals or corporations.

Where industry creates and justice protects, prosperity dwells.

Let me tell you something more about Illinois: We have fifty-six thousand square miles of land--nearly
thirty-six million acres. Upon these plains we can raise enough to feed and clothe twenty million
people. Beneath these prairies were hidden millions of ages ago, by that old miser, the sun,
thirty-six thousand square miles of coal. The aggregate thickness of these veins is at least
fifteen feet. Think of a column of coal one mile square and one hundred miles high! All this
came from the sun. What a sunbeam such a column would be! Think of the engines and machines
this coal will run and turn and whirl! Think of all this force, willed and left to us by the
dead morning of the world! Think of the firesides of the future around which will sit the fathers,
mothers and children of the years to be! Think of the sweet and happy faces, the loving and
tender eyes that will glow and gleam in the sacred light of all these flames!

We have the best country in the world, and Illinois is the best state in that country. Is there
any reason that our farmers should not be prosperous and happy men? They have every advantage,
and within their reach are all the comforts and conveniences of life.

Do not get the land fever and think you must buy all that joins you. Get out of debt as soon
as you possibly can. A mortgage casts a shadow on the sunniest field. There is no business
under the sun that can pay ten per cent.

Ainsworth R. Spofford gives the following facts about interest: "One dollar loaned for one
hundred years at six per cent., with the interest collected annually and added to the principal,
will amount to three hundred and forty dollars. At eight per cent, it amounts to two thousand
two hundred and three dollars. At three per cent, it amounts only to nineteen dollars and twenty-five
cents. At ten per cent, it is thirteen thousand eight hundred and nine dollars, or about seven
hundred times as much. At twelve per cent, it amounts to eighty-four thousand and seventy-five
dollars, or more than four thousand times as much. At eighteen per cent, it amounts to fifteen
million one hundred and forty-five thousand and seven dollars. At twenty-four per cent, (which
we sometimes hear talked of) it reaches the enormous sum of two billion five hundred and fifty-one
million seven hundred and ninety-nine thousand four hundred and four dollars."

One dollar at compound interest, at twenty-four per cent., for one hundred years, would produce
a sum equal to our national debt.

Interest eats night and day, and the more it eats the hungrier it grows. The farmer in debt,
lying awake at night, can, if he listens, hear it gnaw. If he owes nothing, he can hear his
corn grow. Get out of debt as soon as you possibly can. You have supported idle avarice and
lazy economy long enough.

Above all let every farmer treat his wife and children with infinite kindness. Give your sons
and daughters every advantage within your power. In the air of kindness they will grow about
you like flowers. They will fill your homes with sunshine and all your years with joy. Do not
try to rule by force. A blow from a parent leaves a scar on the soul. I should feel ashamed
to die surrounded by children I had whipped. Think of feeling upon your dying lips the kiss
of a child you had struck.

See to it that your wife has every convenience. Make her life worth living. Never allow her
to become a servant. Wives, weary and worn, mothers, wrinkled and bent before their time, fill
homes with grief and shame. If you are not able to hire help for your wives, help them yourselves.
See that they have the best utensils to work with.

Women cannot create things by magic. Have plenty of wood and coal--good cellars and plenty
in them. Have cisterns, so that you can have plenty of rain water for washing.' Do not rely
on a barrel and a board. When the rain comes the board will be lost or the hoops will be off
the barrel.

Farmers should live like princes. Eat the best things you raise and sell the rest. Have good
things to cook and good things to cook with. Of all people in our country, you should live
the best. Throw your miserable little stoves out of the window. Get ranges, and have them so
built that your wife need not burn her face off to get you a breakfast. Do not make her cook
in a kitchen hot as the orthodox perdition. The beef, not the cook, should be roasted. It is
just as easy to have things convenient and right as to have them any other way.

Cooking is one of the fine arts. Give your wives and daughters things to cook, and things to
cook with, and they will soon become most excellent cooks. Good cooking is the basis of civilization.
The man whose arteries and veins are filled with rich blood made of good and well cooked food,
has pluck, courage, endurance and and noble impulses. The inventor of a good soup did more
for his race than the maker of any creed. The doctrines of total depravity and endless punishment
were born of bad cooking and dyspepsia. Remember that your wife should have the things to cook
with.

In the good old days there would be eleven children in the family and only one skillet. Everything
was broken or cracked or loaned or lost.

There ought to be a law making it a crime, punishable by imprisonment, to fry beefsteak. Broil
it; it is just as easy, and when broiled it is delicious. Fried beefsteak is not fit for a
wild beast. You can broil even on a stove. Shut the front damper--open the back one--then takeoff
a griddle. There will then be a draft downwards through this opening. Put on your steak, using
a wire broiler, and not a particle of smoke will touch it, for the reason that the smoke goes
down. If you try to broil it with the front damper open, the smoke will rise. For broiling,
coal, even soft coal, makes a better fire than wood.

There is no reason why farmers should not have fresh meat all the year round. There is certainly
no sense in stuffing yourself full of salt meat every morning, and making a well or a cistern
of your stomach for the rest of the day. Every farmer should have an ice house. Upon or near
every farm is some stream from which plenty of ice can be obtained, and the long summer days
made delightful. Dr. Draper, one of the world's greatest scientists, says that ice water is
healthy, and that it has done away with many of the low forms of fever in the great cities.
Ice has become one of the necessaries of civilized life, and without it there is very little
comfort.

Make your homes pleasant. Have your houses warm and comfortable for the winter. Do not build
a story-and-a-half house. The half story is simply an oven in which, during the summer, you
will bake every night, and feel in the morning as though only the rind of yourself was left.

Decorate your rooms, even if you do so with cheap engravings. The cheapest are far better than
none. Have books--have papers, and read them. You have more leisure than the dwellers in cities.
Beautify your grounds with plants and flowers and vines. Have good gardens. Remember that everything
of beauty tends to the elevation of man. No People can entertain their Friends with better Cheer and
Welcome; and Strangers and Travellers are here treated in the most free, plentiful, and hospitable
Manner; so that a few Inns or Ordinaries on the Road are sufficient.

As to the Weather, the Spring and Fall are not unlike those Seasons in England, only the Air is
never long foggy, nor very cloudy; but clear, sometimes of a bluish Colour, occasioned by the
thin Smoak, dispersed in the Air, from the Flames of the Woods and Leaves, which are fired
in Hunting, to drive the Beasts from their lurking Places; or in the Spring to burn the old Leaves
and Grass, that there may be the better Pasture the next Summer.

The Months of December, January and February are generally much colder, and June, July and
August are much hotter than in England; tho' sometimes 'tis on a sudden very cool in Summer, and
pretty warm in Winter, the Weather being governed by the Wind; which with sudden Storms from
the North-West, and sometimes from the West and South-West bring violent Gusts or Tempests,
with Thunder, Lightning, and Rain very terrible, but soon over.

The North West Winds are exquisitely sharp and cold, proceeding from Clouds arising from the
vast Lakes and prodigious snowy Mountains that lie to that Quarter; but the Southerly Winds and
others are very warm.

The Days and Nights are there always much nearer the Equality of twelve Hours, than in the Latitude
of England.

At the sudden Changes of the Weather, from Heat to Cold, People are apt to take Cold, often
neglecting to shift their Cloaths with the Weather; which with Abundance
of Damps and Mists from the Water, and by eating too plentifully of
some delicious Fruits, makes the People subject to Feavers and Agues,
which is the Country Distemper, a severe Fit of which (called a Seasoning)
most expect, some time after their Arrival in that Climate; but the
Goodness of God has furnished us with a perfect Catholicon for that
Sickness, viz. the Bark; which being taken and repeated in a right
Manner, seldom fails of a Cure, unless the morbifick Matter comes
to a Head again from fresh Causes, and so returns with Mastery; upon
which Recourse must be had to the same specifick Remedy; besides which
there are several Ways of Cure, but none so universal and sure as
that.

Some for Want of timely Care, through Ignorance or Obstinacy, will permit the Distemper to lurk about them
so long, till at last it has reduced them to an irrecoverable, lingering, ill Habit of Body;
especially if they live meanly, drinking too much Water, and eating
too much salt Meat; and this Cachexy generally ends their Lives with
a Dropsy, Consumption, the Jaundice, or some such Illness.

Besides this, some are troubled with the dry Gripes, proceeding from Colds (I suppose) which take
away for a long Time the Use of the Limbs of some, especially hard Drinkers of Rum; some that
have lain out in mighty cold Weather have been Frost-bitten, and
lost their Fingers or Toes.

There is no Danger of wild Beasts in traveling; for the Wolves and
Bears, which are up the Country, never attack any, unless they be
first assaulted and hurt; and the Wolves of late are much destroyed
by Virtue of a Law, which allows good Rewards for their Heads with
the Ears on, to prevent Imposition and cheating the Publick; for the
Ears are crop'd when a Head is produced.

If farmers will cultivate well, and without waste; if they will so build that their houses
will be warm in winter and cool in summer; if they will plant trees and beautify their homes;
if they will occupy their leisure in reading, in thinking, in improving their minds and in
devising ways and means to make their business profitable and pleasant; if they will live nearer
together and cultivate sociability; if they will come together often; if they will have reading
rooms and cultivate music; if they will have bath-rooms, ice-houses and good gardens; if their
wives can have an easy time; if their sons and daughters can have an opportunity to keep in
line with the thoughts and discoveries of the world; if the nights can be taken for sleep and
the evenings for enjoyment, everybody will be in love with the fields. Happiness should be
the object of life, and if life on the farm can be made really happy, the children will grow
up in love with the meadows, the streams, the woods and the old home. Around the farm will
cling and cluster the happy memories of the delightful years.

Remember, I pray you, that you are in partnership with all labor--that you should join hands
with all the sons and daughters of toil, and that all who work belong to the same noble family.

For my part, I envy the man who has lived on the same broad acres from his boyhood, who cultivates
the fields where in youth he played, and lives where his father lived and died.

I can imagine no sweeter way to end one's life than in the quiet of the country, out of the
mad race for money, place and power--far from the demands of business--out of the dusty highway
where fools struggle and strive for the hollow praise of other fools.

Surrounded by pleasant fields and faithful friends, by those I have loved, I hope to end my
days. And this I hope may be the lot of all who hear my voice. I hope that you, in the country,
in houses covered with vines and clothed with flowers, looking from the open window upon rustling
fields of corn and wheat, over which will run the sunshine and the shadow, surrounded by those
whose lives you have filled with joy, will pass away serenely as the Autumn dies.

SPEECH AT CINCINNATI

NOMINATING JAMES G. BLAINE FOR THE PRESIDENCY,

JUNE, 1876.

MASSACHUSETTS may be satisfied with the loyalty of Benjamin H. Bristow; so am I; but if any
man nominated by this convention can not carry the State of Massachusetts, I am not satisfied
with the loyalty of that State. If the nominee of this convention can not carry the grand old
Commonwealth of Massachusetts by seventy-five thousand majority, I would advise them to sell
out Faneuil Hall as a Democratic headquarters. I would advise them to take from Bunker Hill
that old monument of glory.

The Republicans of the United States demand as their leader in the great contest of 1876 a
man of intelligence, a man of integrity, a man of well-known and approved political opinions.
They demand a statesman; they demand a reformer after as well as before the election. They
demand a politician in the highest, broadest and best sense--a man of superb moral courage.
They demand a man acquainted with public affairs--with the wants of the people; with not only
the requirements of the hour, but with the demands of the future. They demand a man broad enough
to comprehend the relations of this government to the other nations of the earth. They demand
a man well versed in the powers, duties, and prerogatives of each and every department of this
government. They demand a man who will sacredly preserve the financial honor of the United
States; one who knows enough to know that the national debt must be paid through the prosperity
of this people; one who knows enough to know that all the financial theories in the world cannot
redeem a single dollar; one who knows enough to know that all the money must be made, not by
law, but by labor; one who knows enough to know that the people of the United States have the
industry to make the money, and the honor to pay it over just as fast as they make it.

The Republicans of the United States demand a man who knows that prosperity and resumption,
when they come, must come together; that when they come, they will come hand in hand through
the golden harvest fields; hand in hand by the whirling spindles and the turning wheels; hand
in hand past the open furnace doors; hand in hand by the flaming forges; hand in hand by the
chimneys filled with eager fire, greeted and grasped by the countless sons of toil.

This money has to be dug out of the earth. The baboons in Abyssinia descend in troops from the
mountains to plunder fields, and when they meet troops of another
species a fight ensues.

They commence by rolling great stones at their enemies, as they often do when attacked with fire-arms.

It
becomes a difficult task to determine how far animals exhibit any traces of such high faculties as abstraction,
general conception, self-consciousness, mental individuality. There can be no doubt, if the mental
faculties of an animal can be improved, that the higher complex faculties such as abstraction and
self-consciousness have developed from a combination of the simpler ones; this seems to be
well illustrated in the young child, as such faculties are developed by imperceptible degrees.
If there exist a class of people so inferior in their mental faculties as these, it is not difficult
for us to understand how the educated animal who possesses memory,
attention, association, and even some imagination and reason, can
become capable of abstraction, &c., in an inferior degree even to
the savage.

It certainly cannot be doubted that an animal possesses mental individuality--as when a master
returns to a dog which he has not seen for years, and the dog recognizes him at once.

One of the chief distinctions between man and animals is the faculty
of language.

Let us look at this for a moment.

"The essential differences," says Prof. Whitney, "which separate man's means of communication in
kind as well as degree from that of the other animals is that, while the latter is instinctive,
the former is in all its parts arbitrary and conventional. No man can become possessed of any
language without learning it; no animal (that we know of) has any expression which he learns,
which is not the direct gift of nature to him." Any child of parents living in a foreign country
grows up to speak the foreign speech, unless carefully guarded from doing so; or it speaks
both this and the tongue of its parent with equal readiness. A child must learn to observe and
distinguish before speech is possible, and every child begins to
know things by their name before he begins to call them.

"If it were not for the added push," says Prof. Whitney, "given by the desire of communication,
the great and wonderful power of the human soul would never move in this particular direction;
but when this leads the way, all the rest follows." And Prof. Whitney remarks that "spoken language
began, we may say, when a cry of pain, formally wrung out by real
suffering, and seen to be understood and sympathized with, was repeated
in imitation, no longer as a mere instinctive utterance, but for the
purpose of intimating to another."

The nearest approach to language are the sounds uttered by birds.

These sounds are no more innate than language is in man, as has been proved by Davies Barrington.[58]
The first attempt to sing "may be compared to the imperfect endeavor in a child to babble."
Prof. Whitney says, if the last transition forms of man "could be restored, we should find the
transition forms toward our speech to be, not at all a minor provision of natural articulate
signs, but an inferior system of conventional signs, in tone, gesture, and grimace. As between
these three natural means of expression, it is simply by a kind of process of natural selection
and survival of the fittest that the voice has gained the upper hand,
and come to be so much the most prominent that we give the name of
language (tonguiness) to all expression."

A single utterance or two at first had to do the duty of a whole
clause; afterward man learned to piece together parts of speech, and
thus arose sentences.



We are with them in the prisons of hatred and famine; but human speech can never tell what
they endured.

We are at home when the news comes that they are dead. We see the maiden in the shadow of her
first sorrow. We see the silvered head of the old man bowed with the last grief.

The past rises before us, and we see four millions of human beings governed by the lash--we
see them bound hand and foot--we hear the strokes of cruel whips--we see the hounds tracking
women through tangled swamps. We see babes sold from the breasts of mothers. Cruelty unspeakable!
Outrage infinite!

Four million bodies in chains--four million souls in fetters. All the sacred relations of wife,
mother, father and child, trampled beneath the brutal feet or might. And all this was done
under our own beautiful banner of the free. The past rises before us. We hear the roar and
shriek of the bursting shell. The broken fetters fall.

These heroes died. We look. Instead of slaves we see men and women and children. The wand of
progress touches the auction-block, the slave-pen, the whipping-post, and we see homes and
firesides and school-houses and books, and where all was want, and crime and cruelty, and fear
we see the faces of the free.

These heroes are dead. They died for liberty they died for us. They are at rest. They sleep
in the land they made free, under the flag they rendered stainless, under the solemn pines,
the sad hemlocks, the tearful willows, and the embracing vines. They sleep beneath the shadows
of the clouds, careless, alike of sunshine or of storm, each in the windowless palace of Rest.
Earth may run red with other wars--they are at peace. In the midst of battle, in the roar of
conflict, they found the serenity of death. I have one sentiment for soldiers living and dead:
Cheers for the living; tears for the dead.

THE GRANT BANQUET

AT THE PALMER HOUSE, CHICAGO, THURSDAY, NOV. 18th, 1879.

TWELFTH TOAST:

     The Volunteer Soldiers of the Union, whose valor and
     patriotism saved the world "a government of the people,
     by the people, and for the PEOPLE."

RESPONSE BY ROBERT G. INGERSOLL.

WHEN the savagery of the lash, the barbarism of the chain, and the insanity of secession confronted
the civilization of our century, the question "Will the great Republic defend itself?" trembled
on the lips of every lover of mankind.

The North, filled with intelligence and wealth--children of liberty--marshaled her hosts and
asked only for a leader. From civil life a man, silent, thoughtful, poised and calm, stepped
forth, and with the lips of victory voiced the Nation's first and last demand: "Unconditional
and immediate surrender." From that moment the end was known. That utterance was the first
real declaration of real war, and, in accordance with the dramatic unities of mighty events,
the great soldier who made it, received the final sword of the rebellion.

The soldiers of the Republic were not seekers after vulgar glory. They were not animated by
the hope of plunder or the love of conquest. They fought to preserve the homestead of liberty
and that their children might have peace. They were the defenders of humanity, the destroyers
of prejudice, the breakers of chains, and in the name of the future they slew the monster of
their time. They finished what the soldiers of the Revolution commenced. They re-lighted the
torch that fell from their august hands and filled the world again with light. They blotted
from the statute-books laws that had been passed by hypocrites at the instigation of robbers,
and tore with indignant hands from the Constitution that infamous clause that made men the
catchers of their fellow-men. They made it possible for judges to be just, for statesmen to
be humane, and for politicians to be honest. Here we have two different stages of evolution; the
protoplasma (better plasson) of the cytod undergoes differentiation, and is split up into two
kinds of albuminous substances--the inner cell-kernel (nucleus) and the outer cell-substance
(protoplasma).

Edward von Benden, in his work upon Gregarinæ, first clearly pointed out this fact, that we
must distinguish thoroughly between the plasson of cytods and the protoplasm of cells.

An irrefutable proof that such single-celled primæval animals like
the amoeba really existed as the direct ancestors of man, is furnished,
according to the fundamental law of biogeny, by the fact that the
human egg is nothing more than a simple cell.

Grander than the Greek, nobler than the Roman, the soldiers of the Republic, with patriotism
as shoreless as the air, battled for the rights of others, for the nobility of labor, fought
that mothers might own their babes, that arrogant idleness should not scar the back of patient
toil, and that our country should not be a many-headed monster made of warring states, but
a Nation, sovereign, great, and free.

Blood was water, money was leaves, and life was only common air until one flag floated over
a Republic without a master and without a slave.

And then was asked the question: "Will a free people tax themselves to pay a nation's debt?"

The soldiers went home to their waiting wives, to their glad children, and to the girls they
loved--they went back to the fields, the shops, and mines. They had not been demoralized. They
had been ennobled. They were as honest in peace as they had been brave in war. The worst Thing in their
Gardens, that I know, is the Artichoak; but this I attribute to Want of Skill and good Management.

Mulberry
Trees and Silkworms thrive there to Admiration, and Experience has proved that the Silk Manufacture
might be carried on to great Advantage. And their great leader, having put a shining band
of friendship--a girdle of clasped and happy hands--around the globe, comes home and finds
that every promise made in war has now the ring and gleam of gold.

There is another question still:--Will all the wounds of war be healed? I answer, Yes. The
Southern people must submit, not to the dictation of the North, but to the Nation's will and
to the verdict of mankind. They were wrong, and the time will come when they will say that
they are victors who have been vanquished by the right. Freedom conquered them, and freedom
will cultivate their fields, educate their children, weave for them the robes of wealth, execute
their laws, and fill their land with happy homes.

The soldiers of the Union saved the South as well as North. They made us a Nation. Their victory
made us free and rendered tyranny in every other land as insecure as snow upon volcanoes' lips.

And now let us drink to the volunteers--to those who sleep in unknown, sunken graves, whose
names are only in the hearts of those they loved and left--of those who only hear in happy
dreams the footsteps of return. No further evidence was required than the pot boiling on stick
transverse: no one hesitated to conclude that the said pot contained the corpus delicti: that
the individual missing cock was there parboiling, and that the swarthy race lolling around the
fire, or peeping from beneath the canvass roof, were resting from the unholy labours of the
night.

Crime, however, has made such rapid marches that it has long been
seen that the gipsies could not perpetrate the whole of it: and now
it is pretty clear they are, and probably have always been, innocent
of the whole of it.

It is an event of extreme rarity to see a gipsy in a court of justice,
and we have reason to believe that it has come to pass that farmers
entertain a belief that the tent of the wanderer, with its nightly
blaze and its dark shadows flitting about it, is a protection to their
property.

There is every probability in favour of the justice of this character. The life of the gipsy
is not unlucrative: his wants are few and coarse, and the calls upon him are scarcely any. He
pays no rent: he is exempt from taxes: he spends nothing in the luxury of attire: no man can
bring him in a bill.

Being himself a mender and universal repairer, he is under the necessity of demanding no man's
aid. His horse or his ass feeds on Nature's common, the hedge-side, the waste corner, the forest
thicket, well known and long haunted by him and his tribe.

Gipsies are subject to few diseases: they seldom ask the doctor's assistance but for one friendly
office, and that serves a man his lifetime. The open air, the inconstancy of their labour,
the sufficiency of their food, and the quantity of healthy exercise, necessarily render these
Arabs of civilization the healthiest part of the people.


For this man I entertained the profoundest respect. In spite of the taunts and jeers of his
brethren, he publicly proclaimed that he would treat infidels with fairness and respect; that
he would endeavor to convince them by argument and win them with love. He insisted that the
God he worshipped loved the well-being even of an atheist. In this grand position he stood
almost alone. Tender, just, and loving where others were harsh, vindictive, and cruel, he challenged
the respect and admiration of every honest man.

A few more such clergymen might drive calumny from the lips of faith and render the pulpit
worthy of respect.

The heartiness and kindness with which this generous man treated me can never be excelled.
He admitted that I had not lost, and could not lose a single right by the expression of my
honest thought. Neither did he believe that a servant could win the respect of a generous master
by persecuting and maligning those whom the master would willingly forgive.

While this good man was living, his brethren blamed him for having treated me with fairness.
But, I trust, now that he has left the shore touched by the mysterious sea that never yet has
borne, on any wave, the image of a homeward sail, this crime will be forgiven him by those
who still remain to preach the love of God.

His sympathies were not confined within the prison of a creed, but ran out and over the walls
like vines, hiding the cruel rocks and rusted bars with leaf and flower. He could not echo
with his heart the fiendish sentence of eternal fire. In spite of book and creed, he read "between
the lines" the words of tenderness and love, with promises for all the world. Above, beyond
the dogmas of his church--humane even to the verge of heresy--causing some to doubt his love
of God because he failed to hate his unbelieving fellow-men, he labored for the welfare of
mankind, and to his work gave up his life with all his heart.

Robert G. Ingersoll.

Washington, D. C,

July 11, 1879

A TRIBUTE TO EBON C. INGERSOLL,

BY HIS BROTHER ROBERT.

MAY 31, 1879

     THE RECORD OF A GENEROUS LIFE RUNS LIKE A VINE AROUND THE
     MEMORY OF OUR DEAD, AND EVERY SWEET, UNSELFISH ACT IS NOW A
     PERFUMED FLOWER. With loyal heart and with the purest hands he faithfully
discharged all public trusts.

