These latter, in searching for someone whom they might seduce, must have afterward wandered
into the presence of St. Anthony. Perhaps, too, it was they who, as succubi, emotionalized
the dreams of monks. Yet, in view of Ishtar, they could not have been very numerous in Babylon
where, however, they had a queen, Lilît, the Lilith of the Talmud, Adam's vampire wife, who
conceived with him shapes of sin. In these also the Babylonians believed, and naïvely they
represented them in forms so revolting that the sight of their own image alarmed them away.

From these shapes or, more exactly, from sin itself, it was very properly held that all diseases
came. Medicine consequently was a branch of religion. The physician was a priest. He asked
the patient: Have you shed your neighbour's blood? Have you approached your neighbour's wife?
Have you stolen your neighbour's garment? Or is it that you have failed to clothe the naked?
According to the responses he prescribed.[27]

[Footnote 27: IV. R. 50-53. Cf. Delitzch: op. cit.]

But the priest who was a physician was also a wizard. He peeped and muttered, or, more subtly,
provided enchanted philters in which simples had been dissolved. These devices failing, there
was a series of incantations, the Ritual of the Whispered Charm, in which the most potent conjuration
was the incommunicable name. To that all things yielded, even the gods.[28] But like the Shem
of the Jews, it was probably never wholly uttered, because, save to the magi, not wholly known.
In the formulæ of the necromancers it is omitted, though in practice it may have been pronounced.

[Footnote 28: Lenormant: La Magie chez les Chaldéens.]

Even that is doubtful. A knowledge of it conferred powers similar to those that have been attributed
to the Christ, and which the Sadducees ascribed to his knowledge of the tetragrammation. A
knowledge of the Babylonian Shem was as potent. It served not only men but gods. Ishtar, for
purposes of her own, wanted to get into Aralû. In the recovered epic of her descent, imperiously
she demanded entrance:

  Porter, open thy door.
  Open thy door that I may enter.
  If thou dost not open thy door,
  I will attack it, I will break down the bars,
  I will cause the dead to rise and devour the living.[29]

[Footnote 29: Records of the Past.]

Ishtar was admitted. But Aralû was the land whence none return. Once in, she could not get
out until, ultimately, the incommunicable name was uttered. The epic says that, in the interim,
there was on earth neither love nor loving. In possible connection with which incantations
have been found, deprecating "the consecrated harlots with rebellious hearts that have abandoned
the holy places."[30]

[Footnote 30: Lenormant: op. cit.]

In addition to the Ritual of the Whispered Charm, there was the Illumination of Bel, an encyclopædia
of astrology in seventy-two volumes which the suburban library of Borsippa contained. During
the captivity many Jews must have gone there. In the large light halls they were free to read
whatever they liked, religion, history, science, the romance of all three. The books, catalogued
and numbered, were ranged on shelves. One had but to ask. The service was gratis.

Babylon, then, prismatic and learned, was the most respectable place on earth. For ten thousand
years man had there consulted the stars. But though respectable, it was also equivocal. During
a period equally long--or brief--the girls of the city had loosed their girdles for Ishtar
and yielded themselves to anyone, stranger or neighbour, that asked. In the service of the
goddess their brothers occasionally feigned that they too were girls. Meanwhile, from the summit
of a seven-floored pyramid, mortals contemplated the divine. 

Many of the boys of the two companies had lived in the same neighborhood at home, and were acquainted
with each other before enlisting. The first sergeant of G was Pressley T. Rice, a grown man, and
some five or six years my senior. Within
the gates, in an enclosure ample and noble, a space that exceeded a hundred square miles, an
area sufficient for Paris quintupled, observatories and palaces rose above the roar of human
tides that swept in waves through the wide boulevards, surged over the quays, flooded the gardens,
eddied through the open-air lupanar, circled among statues of gods and bulls, poured out of
the hundred gates, or broke against the polychrome walls and seethed back in the avenues, along
which, to the high flourishes of military bands, passed armed hoplites, merchants in long robes,
cloaked bedouins, Kelts in bearskins, priests in spangled dresses, tiara'd princes, burdened
slaves, kings discrowned, furtive forms--prostitutes, pederasts, human wolves, vermin, sheep--the
flux and reflux of the gigantic city.

In that ocean, the captive Jews, if captive they were, rolled, lost as a handful of salt spilt
in the sea. Yet, from the depths, a few had swum up and, filtering adroitly, had reached the
dignity of high place. One was pontiff. Others were viceroys. In addition to being pontiff,
Daniel was chancellor of the realm. Ezra was rector of the university. As pontiff of a college
of wizards, Daniel may have known the future. As Minister of Wisdom, Ezra may have known, what
is quite as difficult, the past. For the moment there was but the present. Over it ruled Belshazzar.

Yet, ruler though he was, there were powers potenter than his own: Baalim, outraged at the
elevation of a parvenu god; a priesthood consequently disaffected; and, without, at the gates,
the foe.

It would have been interesting to have assisted at the final festival when, beneath cyclopean
arches, in the sunlight of clustered candelabra, amid the glitter of gold and white teeth,
among the fair sultanas that were strewn like flowers through the throne-room of the imperial
court, Belshazzar lay, smiling, amused rather than annoyed at the impudent menace of Cyrus.

Babylon was impregnable. He knew it. But the subtle Jews, the indignant gods, the alienated
priests to whom the Persian was a redeemer, of these he did not think. Daniel had indeed warned
him and, vaguely, he had promised something which he had since forgot.

Beyond, an orchestra was playing. Further yet, columns upheld a ceiling so lofty that it was
lost. On the adjacent wall was a frieze of curious and chimerical beasts. Belshazzar was looking
at them. In their dumb stupidity was a suggestion of the foe. The suggestion amused. Smiling
still he raised a cup. Abruptly, before it could reach his lips, it fell with a clatter on
the lapis lazuli of the floor beneath. Before him, on that wall, beneath those beasts, the
necromancy of the priesthood had projected an armless, fluidic hand that mounted, descended,
tracing with a forefinger the three luminous hierograms of his doom.

The story, a little drama, was, with the tale concerning Nebuchadnezzar, that of Daniel, and
other novels quite as strange, evolved long later in the wide leisures of Jerusalem. The fluidic
hand did not appear. Even had it zigzagged there was no Belshazzar to frighten.

Only the doom was real. Cyrus was clothed with it. To the trumpetings of heralds and the sheen
of angels' wings, triumphantly he came. Then, presently, by royal decree, the Jews, manumitted
and released, retraced their steps, burdened with spoil; with the lore of two distinct civilizations,
which, fusing in the great square letters of the Pentateuch, was to become the poetry of all
mankind.

Babylon, ultimately, with her goblin gods and harlot goddess, sank into her own Aralû. Nourished
there on dust, Lilît, with the sister vampires of eternal night, fed on her.

V

JEHOVAH

A camel's-hair tent set in the desert was the first cathedral, the earliest cloister of latest
ideals. Set not in one desert merely but in two, in the infinite of time as well as in that
of space, there was about it a limitlessness in which the past could sleep, the future awake,
and into which all things, the human, the divine, gods and romance, could enter.

The human came first. Then the gods. Then romance. The divine was their triple expansion. It
was an after growth, in other lands, that tears had watered. In the desert it was unimagined.
Only the gods had been conceived.

The gods were many and yet but one. Though plural they were singular. The subjects of impersonal
verbs, they represented the pronoun in such expressions as: it rains; it thunders. "It" was
Elohim. Already among nomad Semites monotheism had begun. Yet with this distinction. Each tribe
had separate sets of Its that guided, guarded, and scourged. Omnipresent but not omnipotent,
any humiliation to the family that they had in charge humiliated them. It made them angry,
therefore vindictive, consequently unjust. It may be that they were not very ethical. Perhaps
the bedouins were not either. Man fashions his god in proportion to his intelligence. That
of the nomad was slender. He lacked, what the Aryan shepherd possessed, the ability for mythological
invention. The defect was due to his speech, which did not lend itself to the deification of
epithets. Even had it done so, it is probable that his mode of life would have rendered the
paraphernalia of polytheism impossible. People constantly moving from place to place could
not be cumbered with idols. The Elohim were, therefore, a convenience for travellers and an
unidolatrous monotheism a necessity which the absence of vehicles imposed. On the other hand,
given every facility, it is presumable that the result would have been the same. Mythology
is the mother of poetry. Idolatry is the father of art. Neither could appeal to a people to
whom delicacy was an unknown god. Had it been known and a fetish, they could not have become
the practical people that they are. Even then they were shrewd. Their Elohim might alarm but
never delude. Israel was uncheatable even in dream.

Originally emigrants from Arabia, the nomads reached Syria, some directly, others circuitously,
by way of Padan-Aram and across the Euphrates, whence perhaps their name of Ibrim or Hebrews--Those
from beyond. In the journey Babel and Ur must have detained. These cities, with their culture
relatively deep and their observatories equally high, became, in after days, a source of legend,
of wonder, of hatred, perhaps of revelation as well.

At the time the nomads had no cosmogony or theories. The Chaldeans had both. There was a story
of creation, another of antediluvian kings and of the punishment that overtook them. There
was also a story of an emir of Ur, an old man who had benevolently killed an animal instead
of his son. The story, like the others, must have impressed. In after years the old man became
Abraham, a great person, who had conversed with the Elohim and whose descendants they were.

The story of creation also impressed. It was enlightening and comprehensible. The parallel
theory of spontaneous generation and the progressive evolution of the species which the magi
entertained, they probably never heard. Even otherwise it was too complex for minds as yet
untutored. The fables alone appealed. Mentally compressed into portable shape, carried along,
handed down, their origin afterward forgotten, they became the traditions of a nation, which,
eminently conservative, preserved what it found, among other things the name, perhaps inharmonious,
of Jhvh.[31]

[Footnote 31: Renan: Histoire du peuple d'Israël. Kuenen: De Godsdienst van Israël.]

That name, since found on an inscription of Sargon, appears to have been the title of a local
god of Sinai, whom the nomads may have identified with Elohim, particularly, perhaps, since
he presided over thunder, the phenomenon that alarmed them most and which, in consequence,
inspired the greatest awe. That awe they put into the name, the pronunciation of which, like
the origin of their traditions, they afterward forgot. Mention of it by anyone else was deemed
a capital offence, though, permissibly, it might be rendered El Shaddai, the Almighty. That
term the Septuagint translated into [Greek: ho Kyrios], a Greek form, in the singular, of the
Aramaic plural Adonai, which means Baalim, or sun lords.

That form the Vulgate gave as Dominus and posterior theology as God. The latter term, common
to all Teutonic tongues, has no known meaning. It designates that which, to the limited intelligence
of man, has been, and must be, incomprehensible. But the original term Jhvh, which, in the
seventeenth century, was developed into Jehovah, yet which, the vowels being wholly conjectural,
might have been developed into anything else, clearly appealed to wayfarers to whom Chaldean
science was a book that remained closed until Nebuchadnezzar blew their descendants back into
the miraculous Babel of their youth.

Meanwhile, apart from the name--now generally written Jahveh--apart too from the fables and
the enduring detestation which the colossal city inspired, probably but one other thing impressed,
and that was the observance of the Sabbath. To a people whose public works were executed by
forced labour, such a day was a necessity. To vagrants it was not, and, though the custom interested,
it was not adopted by them until their existence from nomad had become fixed.

At this latter period they were in Kanaan. Whether in the interval a tribe, the Beni-Israel,
went down into Egypt, is a subject on which Continental scholarship has its doubts. The early
life of the tribe's leader and legislator is usually associated with Rameses II., a pharaoh
of the XIX. dynasty. But it has been found that incidents connected with Moses must apparently
have occurred, if they occurred at all, at a period not earlier than the XXVI. dynasty, which
constitutes a minimum difference of seven hundred years. Yet, in view of the decalogue, with
its curious analogy to the negative confession in the Book of the Dead; in view also of a practice
surgical and possibly hygienic which, customary among the Egyptians, was adopted by the Jews;
in view, further, of ceremonies and symbols peculiarly Egyptian that were also absorbed, a
sojourn in Goshen there may have been.

The spoiling of the Egyptians, a roguery on which Israel afterward prided herself, is a trait
perhaps too typical to be lightly dismissed. On the other hand, if Moses were, which is at
least problematic, and if, in addition to being, he was both the nephew of a pharaoh and the
son-in-law of a priest, as such one to whom, in either quality, the arcana of the creed would
be revealed, it becomes curious that nowhere in the Pentateuch is there any doctrine of a future
life. After heartily thanking us for the payment, the letter went on to state that in all the
business dealings of H. C. Cole & Co. with Union soldiers the firm had been treated with fairness
and remarkable honesty, and they sincerely appreciated it.

Yet equally with the roguery, Moses may have been. Seen through modern criticism his figure
fades though his name persists. To that name the Septuagint tried to give an Egyptian flavour.
In their version it is always [Greek: Môusês], a compound derived from the Egyptian mô, water,
and usês, saved from, or Saved-from-the-water.[32] Per contra, the Hebrew form Mosheh is, as
already indicated, the same as the Babylonian Masû, a term which means at once leader and littérateur,
in addition to being the cognomen of a god.[33]

[Footnote 32: Josephus: Antiq. ii. 9.