During these deliberations, which, moreover, it was requisite to submit to the king at Madrid,
and to wait for the notification of his approval of them, the time passed away unprofitably,
the proceedings against the sectaries being either suspended, or at least conducted very supinely.
Since the recall of Granvella the disunion which prevailed in the higher councils, and from
thence had extended to the provincial courts of justice, combined with the mild feelings generally
of the nobles on the subject of religion, had raised the courage of the sects, and allowed
free scope to the proselytizing mania of their apostles.  The inquisitors, too, had fallen
into contempt in consequence of the secular arm withdrawing its support, and in many places
even openly taking their victims under its protection.  The Roman Catholic part of the nation.
had formed great expectations from the decrees of the synod of Trent, as well as from Egmont's
embassy to Spain; but in the latter case their hopes had scarcely been justified by the joyous
tidings which the count had brought back, and, in the integrity of his heart, left nothing
undone to make known as widely as possible.  The more disused the nation had become to severity
in matters pertaining to religion the more acutely was it likely to feel the sudden adoption
of even still more rigorous measures.  In this position of affairs the royal rescript arrived
from Spain in answer to the proposition of the bishops and the last despatches of the regent.
"Whatever interpretation (such was its tenor) Count Egmont may have given to the king's verbal
communications, it had never in the remotest manner entered his mind to think of altering in
the slightest degree the penal statutes which the Emperor, his father, had five-and-thirty
years ago published in the provinces. These edicts he therefore commanded should henceforth
be carried rigidly into effect, the Inquisition should receive the most active support from
the secular arm, and the decrees of the council of Trent be irrevocably and unconditionally
acknowledged in all the provinces of his Netherlands.  He acquiesced fully in the opinion of
the bishops and canonists as to the sufficiency of the Tridentine decrees as guides in all
points of reformation of the clergy or instruction of the people; but he could not concur with
them as to the mitigation of punishment which they proposed in consideration either of the
age, sex, or character of individuals, since he was of opinion that his edicts were in no degree
wanting in moderation.  To nothing but want of zeal and disloyalty on the part of judges could
he ascribe the progress which heresy had already made in the country.  In future, therefore,
whoever among them should be thus wanting in zeal must be removed from his office and make
room for a more honest judge.  The Inquisition ought to pursue its appointed path firmly, fearlessly,
and dispassionately, without regard to or consideration of human feelings, and was to look
neither before nor behind.  He would always be ready to approve of all its measures however
extreme if it only avoided public scandal."

This letter of the king, to which the Orange party have ascribed all the subsequent troubles
of the Netherlands, caused the most violent excitement amongst the state counsellors, and the
expressions which in society they either accidentally or intentionally let fall from them with
regard to it spread terror and alarm amongst the people.  The dread of the Spanish Inquisition
returned with new force, and with it came fresh apprehensions of the subversion of their liberties.
Already the people fancied they could hear prisons building, chains and fetters forging, and
see piles of fagots collecting.  Society was occupied with this one theme of conversation,
and fear kept no longer within bounds. Placards were affixed to houses of the nobles in which
they were called upon, as formerly Rome called on her Brutus, to come forward and save expiring
freedom. The first definite geographical fact in connection with the sojourn in the Land of Egypt
has been established by the excavations at Pithom. The historical identification of Rameses
II. with Pharaoh the oppressor also results from the monumental evidence.

One short exploration has upset a hundred theories and furnished a wonderful illustration of
the historical character of the Book of Exodus. The finding of Pithom (Succoth) is, however, only
the beginning, we hope, of a series of important discoveries.

"It would," he said, "be the height of folly in us to think of promulgating the royal edict
at the present moment; the king must be informed of the reception which, in all probability,
it will now meet.  In the meantime the inquisitors must be enjoined to use their power with
moderation, and to abstain from severity."  But if these words of the aged president surprised
the whole assembly, still greater was the astonishment when the Prince of Orange stood up and
opposed his advice.  "The royal will," he said, "is too clearly and too precisely stated; it
is the result of too long and too mature deliberation for us to venture to delay its execution
without bringing on ourselves the reproach of the most culpable obstinacy." "That I take on
myself," interrupted Viglius; "I oppose myself to, his displeasure.  If by this delay we purchase
for him the peace of the Netherlands our opposition will eventually secure for us the lasting
gratitude of the king."  The regent already began to incline to the advice of Viglius, when
the prince vehemently interposing, "What," he demanded," what have the many representations
which we have already made effected? of what avail was the embassy we so lately despatched?
Nothing!  And what then do we wait for more?  Shall we, his state counsellors, bring upon ourselves
the whole weight of his displeasure by determining, at our own peril, to render him a service
for which he will never thank us?"  Undecided and uncertain the whole assembly remained silent;
but no one had courage enough to assent to or reply to him.  But the prince had appealed to
the fears of the regent, and these left her no choice.  The consequences of her unfortunate
obedience to the king's command will soon appear.  But, on the other hand, if by a wise disobedience
she had avoided these fatal consequences, is it clear that the result would not have been the
same?  However she had adopted the most fatal of the two counsels: happen what would the royal
ordinance was to be promulgated.  This time, therefore, faction prevailed, and the advice of
the only true friend of the government, who, to serve his monarch, was ready to incur his displeasure,
was disregarded.  With this session terminated the peace of the regent: from this day the Netherlands
dated all the trouble which uninterruptedly visited their country.  As the counsellors separated
the Prince of Orange said to one who stood nearest to him, "Now will soon be acted a great
tragedy."

