Vignettes Of San Francisco

By

Almira Bailey

Vignettes

Title

  As Pilgrims Go to Rome
  At the Ferry
  The Union-Street Car
  The Latin Meets the Oriental
  The Pepper and Salt Man
  The Bay on Sunday Morning
  Safe on the Sidewalk
  Port O' Missing Men
  Market-street Scintillations
  Cafeterias
  The Open Board of Trade
  The San Francisco Police
  A Marine View
  Hilly-cum-go
  I'll Get It Changed, Lady
  Fillmore Street
  In the Lobby of the St. Francis
  The Garbage-man's Little Girl
  The Palace
  Zoe's Garden
  Children on the Sidewalk
  Feet that Pass on Market Street
  Where the Centuries Meet
  Bags or Sacks
  Portsmouth Square
  Miracles
  Impulses and Prohibitions
  Stopping at the Fairmont
  San Francisco Sings
  Van Ness Avenue
  The Blind Men and the Elephant
  You're Getting Queer
  The Ferry and Real Boats
  A Whiff of Acacia
  It Takes All Sorts
  The Fog in San Francisco
  A Block on Ashbury Heights
  The Greek Grocer
  Billboards or Art
  Golden Gate Park
  Extra Fresh
  On the California-street Car
  Western Yarns
  Mr. Mazzini and Dante
  On the Nob of Nob Hill

Vignettes of San Francisco

As Pilgrims go to Rome

In the same way that the poets have loved Rome and made their pilgrimages there--as good Moslems
travel toward Mecca, so there are some of us who have come to San Francisco. Then when we arrive
and find it all that we have dreamed, our love for it becomes its highest tribute. And I don't
know why it is sacrilege to mention Rome and San Francisco in the same breath. As for me I
greatly prefer San Francisco, although I have never been to Rome.

I love San Francisco for its youth. Other cities have become set and hard and have succumbed
to the cruel symmetry of the machine age, but not San Francisco. It is still youth untamed.
They may try, but they cannot manicure it, nor groom it, nor dress it up in a stiff white collar,
nor fetter it by not allowing a body to stretch out on the grass in Union Square or prohibiting
street-fakers and light wines served in coffee pots and doing away with wild dashing jitneys.

Then there is something about San Francisco's being away out here from everyone else, a city
all alone. New York is five hours from Boston; Philadelphia is close between New York and Washington;
Baltimore is a trolley ride away; Chicago is only overnight from all the other cities, while
Atlanta is only two sleeping car nights from her sister cities. But San Francisco, out here
as far as it can reach with one foot in the great Pacific, nearly a week from New York and
a month away from China, some people wouldn't like it, but something vagabondish in me rejoices
to have run away from them all. Especially at night when the fog comes in on the city and shuts
out even Oakland, and fog horns out of the Golden Gate call mournfully, and boats in the bay
go calling their lookout calls, I get this feeling of far-offness from the rest of the world
that is very gratifying.

And I love the sound of San Francisco, the sound of its singing--some cities roar and others
hum, but San Francisco sings. And I love the look of it and the feel of it. I love to stand,
on its hills in the mornings when the bride-veil fog is going out to sea and the smoke and
steam and fog and sunshine make one grand symphonic morning song. And I love to stand on high
hills on clear days when all her cubist houses stand bold in the sunlight and the cities across
the bay are so close to the touch. And I love its color, flowers and girls and splashes of
the Oriental. And I love its Bohemia which is not affected, but real. I love it because it
is young and live and spontaneous and humorous and beauty-loving and unashamed of anything
that is life. Oh, I don't know.

If I were in New York and it should begin to suffocate me I would run and run across the continent
and never stop once until I landed on the top of Telegraph Hill.

At the Ferry

The shrill of newsboys, the bass of older venders, the call of taxis, trolleys that proceed
all day in ordered sequence, the wide swing of traffic on the Embarcadero, a tang of salt in
the air, the atmosphere of flowers for sale, hoarse call of ferries in the bay like politicians
who have spoken too much in the open air and lost their voices, the beautifully ordered hurry
and bustle and expectancy of people on their way somewhere, and over it all the mentor of the
police.

"Help pass the time pleasantly," so does the electric piano coax away our nickels. To those
who know music it is a horrible sound, but to the rest of us its tunes are rather gay. On the
wall a defunct comedy flashes. Hypnotized, but never amused, we gaze at it as we wait for the
great doors to swing back. A woman is thrown from an auto by her husband, and in her fall displays
a pair of husky, ruffled underwear. Time was when that would have raised a howl of joy, but
no longer. She hardly touches the ground when we find ourselves gazing at an orchard of California
figs, zip, the woman picks herself up, gazes comically at the audience for a laugh and receiving
none, hops with phenomenal agility up astride of the hood of the auto, piff, a yard of Santa
Rosa hens, ping, the husband throws his wife up to the roof of a skyscraper, the commuters
gaze solemnly, biff, a scene from Santa Clara, clang, the gates are opened.

On the Sausalito side, a jammed together happy vacation crowd, grotesquely varied and elaborately
gotten-up hikers, bags and suitcases to fall all over everywhere, professorish looking men
off, "taking a book along," people laden with all the cheap magazines in the market, smartly
dressed people on their way to country homes in Marin and Sonoma, a well modulated, nicely
groomed crowd--bing, the doors slide back and everybody rushes off for a holiday.

Commuters and tourists, most of the time I'd rather be a tourist. They are easily distinguished
in the crowd, an accent from Louisiana, a woman who has just returned from the Orient, a man
with continental manners, they are easily distinguished, and the predatory red-capped porters
know them well. We are wistfully sorry to be going only to Oakland, we long to go out on the
Main Line, the out-leading, mile-wandering, venturesome Main Line. Reluctantly we turn to where
duty and necessity calls us ignominiously to the electric suburban.

The first sight of San Francisco. "Ah, this is San Francisco!" The shrill of newsboys, the
bass of older venders, the flash of electric signs. Do you prefer "Camels", "Chesterfields"
or "Fatimas"? the call of taxis, invitations to hotel buses, the wide sweep of traffic on the
Embarcadero--"So this is San Francisco."

The Union-Street Car

It is surprising how many people patronize the shabby little thing. But then it waits right
where those who leave the ferry may see it first as though it were the most important car in
town, and I have a fancy the big cars humor it a bit and give it first place. Besides, it goes
anywhere in the city, Chinatown, the Hall of Justice, the Chamber of Commerce, the Barbary
Coast, St. Francis Church--sinners, saints and merchants may travel its way--Portsmouth Square,
Telegraph Hill, Little Italy, Russian Hill, Automobile Row, Fillmore street, the Presidio and
I expect with a little coaxing it would switch about and run over to the Mission. It has actually
been known on stormy nights to take its constituents up the side streets to their very doors.

It is a surprising little boat which looks like nothing more than a bug crawling up the backs
of the hills with its antenna of khaki-wound legs sticking out fore and aft. Those who have
traveled in Ireland tell us that it is much like the jaunting cars, and it is not unlike the
Toomerville Trolley.

One night I set out to find the little thing to take me home. I was in a strange part of the
city and when my friends told me to get on and get off and get on again I did as I was told.
With blind faith I told the conductors to put me off and they did. I continued in this way
until long after midnight when I found myself at a lonely corner with no one in sight. I waited
and waited and was getting nervous when I spied a blue uniform. I looked sharply to see if
he were a motorman, a fireman or an officer from the Presidio. I am careful about these matters
since last summer when I was coming North on the President, and asked a naval officer for some
ice water. I rushed up to him and told him, which was true, that it was the first time I had
ever seen a policeman when I wanted one. This led him into a defense of the San Francisco police,
which I told him was quite unnecessary with me for I thought them the finest policemen in the
world, probably because they are so Irish.

"Irish," said he with a twinkle, "I'm not Irish."

We chatted awhile until the Union street car came along, and then that policeman who said he
wasn't Irish leaned over and whispered confidentially, "If you miss this car, there'll be another."
I suppose they get lonesome.

You see how I am wandering away from my subject. That is because I followed the Union street
car. It switches from subject to subject just like that. It begins with the wonderful retail
markets of San Francisco, and then changes abruptly to all sorts of sociological problems,
then before we know it gives us a beautiful marine view, and then drops us down where the proletariat
lives, then up to the homes of the rich and mighty, and ends in the military.

Everyone should sight-see by the little Union street car.

The Latin Meets the Oriental

In that spot where Chinatown merges into the Latin quarter there must be, I think, a Director
of Delightful Situations who holds dominion there. For instance, can you imagine anything more
subtle than a group of large fat women haranguing, in Italian-American, a poor thin Chinaman
over some bargains in vegetables?

In a place which marks the line of cleavage between the two quarters is a picture store containing
in its window religious pictures, enlarged family photographs of Filipinos, and, of course,
views of the Point Lobos cypress. There is something very appealing about that window. Pictures
of Jesus, no matter how lurid they are, never fall short of dignity. And it seems not at all
incongruous that He should be there in the midst of all those strange human contacts.

There are not only contacts between the Latin and the Oriental, but anything unusual may come
to light in that particular neighborhood. A buff cochin rooster was wandering about the street
the other day. Stepping high and picking up choice tidbits and showing off before his harem
of hens who peeked at him from their boxes, he strutted about exactly as though he had been
in his own Petaluma barnyard.

One day I saw an enormous negro running through the streets with a piece of new, green felt
bound around his stomach. Now why should a huge negro run through the street with a piece of
new green felt around his stomach? No one knows. And another time a small Chinese maiden bumped
into me because she was so absorbed in that great American institution, the funny sheet.

On one of those side streets, in there somewhere, one of those streets untoured by tourists,
I saw some Chinese boys, dressed in American "Boss of the Road" unionalls, playing baseball
and calling the call of Babe Ruth in sing-song Chinese. Then near them was an empty lot and
what do you suppose it was filled with? Scotch thistles, and edged with wild corn flowers.
Even Nature enters into the fun.

There is a story of an Italian who went through the streets somewhere on Leavenworth, calling,
"Nica fresha flowers," and from the opposite side of the street a Chinaman with flowers would
call, "Samee over here." All went well until the Chinaman began to outsell the other, when
the Italian remonstrated. "Yella for yourself, see," he said, to which the Chinaman answered,
"Go to hellee," and went on as before.

This story was told to me by very reliable eye witnesses. The buff cochin rooster and the huge
negro and all the others I saw myself. And many other strange things which I have not room
to write, I saw in that spot where Chinatown merges into the Latin quarter.

The Pepper and Salt Man

He was a man, I should say about sixty years old, a most uninteresting age, and a homely, weather-beaten
fellow too, when you stopped to look at him. His suit was pepper-and-salt, and he was just
like his suit. Good as gold, I have no doubt, a roomer of whom his landlady could say: "He
comes and he goes and is never a speck of trouble."

Still, he might have been as good as Saint Anthony but no one would ever have noticed him except
for what happened. What happened wasn't so much either but it was enough to illumine that dun,
common-place man so that everyone in the side-seating trolley was suddenly aware of his presence.
What happened was ten months old and was a girl.

A regular girl, one hundred per cent feminine. One could tell just by the way she wore her
clothes, by her daintiness, by the tilt of her bonnet and by the way smiled out from under
it. I can't describe a baby girl any more than I describe a sunset or moonlight or any of the
wonders of God--I can only say that she was everything that a baby girl should have been.

When she entered with her mother we all edged and crowded over but the pepper-and-salt man
won. Down she sat close beside him. Then you should have seen that man, the foolish, old fellow.
He turned toward her; he beamed; he mentally devoured her; he never took his eyes off her long
enough to wink.

When she seemed about to turn her restlessly bobbing head toward him, his hands moved and the
strong muscles of his face worked in excitement. Then, when she smiled his way and for an instant
there was a flash of tiny, milk teeth, that man, the old silly, made the most dreadful facial
contortion, something between a wink, a smile, a booh and a grimace.

Then when she turned from him he sat there eating her up. I saw him look reverently at her
exquisite hands and at the awkward little legs sticking out straight ahead. When her mother
arranged her ruffles he watched every move--absorbed. She would face the truth and not palter
with it, now that the crisis had really come.

What was Alan Walcott to her? Could she forget him, and dismiss him from her thoughts, and
go to the altar with another man? She went over the scenes which they had enacted together, she
recalled his words and his letters, she thought of his sorrows and trials, and remembered how he
had appealed to her for sympathy. There was good reason, she thought, why he had not written to
her, for he was barred by something more than worldly conventionality. When she, strong-minded
as she thought herself, had shrunk from the display of his love because
he still had duties to his lawful wife, she had imposed upon him her
demand for conventional and punctilious respect, and had rather despised
herself, she now remembered, for doing it.

He had obeyed her, he had observed her slightest wishes--it was for
her, not for him, to break through the silence.

How had she been able to remain so long in ignorance of his condition, to live contentedly
so many miles away from him?

As she thought of all these things in the light of her new experience,
her heart was touched again by the old sympathy, and throbbed once
more with the music which it had not known since her illness began.

It was a harp which had been laid aside and forgotten, till the owner, coming by chance into
the disused room, strung it anew, and bade it discourse the symphonies of the olden time.
 Men play around the yacht club like a lot of
school boys, and now--"Shoot," they push a long slim racer into the water. Dainty white yachts
go dipping to the waves and seem like lovely young girls in among the sturdier boats.

Now the fishermen come in from their night's work, making music all in an orderly procession,
and every boat of them a brilliant blue inside. I'd like to catch a Maine fisherman allowing
color in his boat, like a "dago" or a "wop."

Over all the swing and dip and rhythm of the sea gulls. How beautifully they accent the movement
of the symphony, like the baton of some great leader--this great beautiful Sunday morning symphony.

Then there is Alcatraz. Oh, Alcatraz, why should they have placed a prison there as a monument
to men's failure to order their lives in harmony with nature. Alcatraz, most beautiful island
in the most beautiful bay, you sound an ugly, sinister, most unhappy undertone in the morning's
symphony.

Still it is a symphony. A symphony of San Francisco Bay. Why shouldn't the composers put it
into music. We're sick of the song of the huntsman by the brasses, the strings and the wood
instruments. With Whitman we exclaim: "Come, Muse, migrate from Aeonia," and come out here
to the West, and conserve the symphony of the bay which is already composed and waiting.

And for the argument, the overture, the prelude, there could be a sailing schooner with sails
all set coming into the Golden Gate, in the full brilliant sunlight, or mysteriously through
a fog, or against a sunset sky. It should be "full and by" like that beautiful painting by
Coulter in the stock exchange of the Merchants' Building.

Symphony of San Francisco Bay, boom of fog horns, calls and answers of the ferries, chug of
the fishermen's boats, twink of lights in the harbor at night, rhythm of sea gulls, and the
brooding fog to soften it all. "Come, Muse, migrate from Aeonia."

Safe on the Sidewalk

Are there others, I wonder, who feel as I do about crossing the street? There must be. Now
I, when I cross, say Market street at Third, I run. I take my life and my bundles in my hand
and run, darting swift glances to the left and to the right. It looks "hick." I know it looks
"hick." And I care. But I prefer to be alive and countrified than sophisticated in an ambulance
and so I run.

At corners, too. I think corners are worse. For there the machines may turn around and chase
me, which they often do. It's a horrible feeling.

There must be others who feel as I do about crossing the street, but they never betray it.
I watch to see and when they cross, they just cross--that's all. Not with nonchalance exactly,
but with ease and assurance. Once I actually saw a man, a native son, I'm sure, roll a cigarette
as he crossed at a point where even the traffic cop looked nervous.

No one ever gets killed or even injured. But always everybody is getting almost killed and
almost injured. They like it. It's a sort of sport. I've noticed it more since the city's gone
dry. The game is, if you are walking, to see how close to a machine you can come and not hit it.

Street cars, machines and people all go straight ahead and they all come out right. It's the
only city where it's done with such abandon. They never stop for anything except taxis--not
even fire engines.

The secret of it is, I think, that no one ever hesitates. This is understood by all San Franciscans--that,
no one is ever going to hesitate. That's why there are no accidents. It's the unexpected in
people that makes disasters and creates a demand for traffic cops.

I try to cross the street as others cross. I choose a chalk mark and, pretending I am a native
daughter, launch out. I get on fine--suddenly a monster machine is on me. If she mocks at me,
tell her the same; but if she inquires kindly for me, shows some concern about me, whisper to
her that she may make her mind easy; but add also that away from her I feel everywhere lonely
and unhappy. I am unwell, but this I do not write to my parents. Everybody asks what is the matter
with me. I should like to answer that I have lost my good spirits. However, you know best what
troubles me!

Although there is no lack of entertainment and diversion here, I
rarely feel inclined for amusement. I look to the traffic cop for attention but, being a handsome
man, he thinks I'm trying to flirt. Policemen should be homely. So I wait until the street
is entirely empty. I wait a long time--it is empty--I run like a steer--and suddenly out of
nowhere a machine is yelling at me individually and I know no more until, breathless and red,
I reach the haven of the sidewalk.

Once I heard a horrible story of a man who lost control of his machine and ran up on to the
sidewalk.

Port O' Missing Men

They say that San Francisco is known all over as the Port o' Missing Men. That it is a city
where a man may lose himself if he chooses, and that by the same token it is a good place to
look for "my wandering boy tonight." I can believe all this especially on Third street. Third
street should be called by some other name or it should have a nickname. If it were in Seattle
it would be known as "skid row." Third street doesn't describe it at all. If I could ever forget
that, I could perhaps sometimes call men "a lot of cattle." Come to think of it, it is men
who call other men "cattle." At any rate, I like to think that no woman would ever see men
as less than the sons of mothers.

The Port o' Missing Men is like the Port of San Francisco, and these men are like boats in
from a foreign port, tramp steamers some of them, out of nowhere, going nowhere, no baggage,
no traditions, men who'll never get lost because they are on their way to Nowhere.

Yet, the majority of these men are going to some place, but where I do not know. What do they
talk about in groups down there, tall, young fellows and strong middle-aged men and reminiscent,
old ones down in the Port o' Missing Men? If they're out of work where do they sleep at night,
and what do they have to eat? And have they any women folks?

Not all kinds of men are down there, but many kinds. There are Mexicans, Sinn Feiners, old
American stock, and once in awhile a venturesome Yankee. There are lumberjacks in from the
North, and Chinamen in shuffling slippers, and philosophers and Swedes, half-breeds and just
plain men. Some are Vagabonds who can't help their roving, and others are very tired and would
like to lie over in port for or a long spell. There are Italians, and Portuguese, and many
Greeks, and turbaned Hindus, tall and skinny, always traveling in pairs like nuns. Sometimes
the Port is fairly crowded.

New England is a section of the country where men leave home, and I have heard mothers sing
with tears in their voices: "Oh, where is my wandering boy tonight?" On Third street down at
the Port o' Missing Men, I have a fancy that I would like to write back to all those mothers
that here are their boys. But, after all, what good would that do, for who can tell which is which?

Market St. Scintillations

Oh, the things our eyes discover as we walk along on Market street. Such a medley--infinite,
incongruous, comical, pathetic, motley and sublime.

Harding in a window with "pure buttermilk." He'll be in more difficult situations before he
is done, I'm thinking. An electric fan above him that keeps the buttermilk "pure" and flies
the American flag in crepe paper.

"Crabs to take home." They are freshly cooked, very large and forty cents apiece. I decide
that some I shall really buy one and take it home when I confronted with the fact that "All
Hair Goods Must Be Sold." Why, I wonder. Why must they be sold? And here are "Eggs any style,"
so close to the hair goods that I immediately visualize them as marcelled "style" and pompadoured.

"Shoes Drastically Reduced." It is the truth. The Oxfords I wear are reduced by a drastic five
dollars. Well, I couldn't go barefooted, I comfort myself and hurry on.

A shooting gallery and a man standing there trying to make up his mind to try it. A second's
glimpse of him and all that he is is revealed. One knows immediately that his favorite song
is "My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean," and that his ideal man is Governor Allen and that he is
on his way to spend his "remaining days" with his sister Lottie in Los Angeles.

Who would eat "stewed tripe Spanish." Someone must or they wouldn't advertise it on the outside
of he restaurant. Well, it takes all sorts of people to make a world. Probably the man who
would order "stewed tripe Spanish" wouldn't touch an alligator pear salad. To him alligator
pears taste exactly like lard. To the person who wouldn't eat "stewed tripe Spanish" they are
a delicacy.

A crowd around a window. On your tip-toes to see. It's that fascinating Lilliputian with a
beard and electric bowels who stands in drug store windows and administers corn cure to his
own toes with a smile.

The professional window shopper is a vagabond at heart--a loiterer by nature. Here is one gazing
in a photographer's window to discover someone he knows. These two are not professionals though
but a spring couple looking in furniture windows for nest material. And sailors wandering about,
nothing but kiddies, lonesome looking and no doubt wishing we were at War again and hospitable
once more.

Here is a "Pershing Market" and a "Grant Market," beside it. There's a lot of that in San Francisco.
Is there an "Imperial Doughnut?" Up goes a "Supreme Doughnut" next door. It's the spirit of
"I'll go you one better every time." It's the spirit of Market street.

Cafeterias

This is not to hurt the feelings of anyone, for some people are very sensitive about cafeterias.
They are cafeteria wise, they have a cafeteria class consciousness. Such people are to be admired.
They have accurate minds which enable them to choose a well-balanced meal at minimum cost.
Lacking that sort of mind, I do not get on well in cafeterias. As sure as I equip myself with
a tray and silver in a napkin and become one of the long procession, I lose all sense of proportion,
and come out at the end with two desserts, or a preponderance of starches or with too much
bread for my butter, and a surprising bill.

Those who are cafeteria wise can choose a good meal for 28 cents or 33 cents at the most. They
don't take food just because it looks delicious. They "yield not to temptation." They have
a plan and stick to it. Wise and strong-minded, they shuffle their way bravely to the end.
It is said that in time they acquire a cafeteria shuffle which one can detect even on the street.
But I don't believe it's so.

Other sections of the country have cafeterias and in some parts of the South, especially in
Louisville, they are run quite extensively. But it is in the West, especially in California,
that they have attained a dignity and even lavishness that makes them the surprise and delight
of the tourist. Irvin Cobb says that this is the cafeteria belt of which Los Angeles is the buckle.

We have music in our cafeterias. We have flowers on the tables. People don't just eat in them,
they dine. They take their guests there. Our cafeterias have galleries with rocking chairs
and stationery. They have distinctive architecture. We take visitors to see them. We brag about
them, and when we wish to be especially smart we pronounce them caffa-tuh-ree-ah.

Personally, I am proud of our cafeterias, but I do not get on in them. I enter hungry. I look
sideways to see what other folks are eating. I decide to have corned beef and cabbage and peach
short cake and nothing else. Then in the line I have the hurried feeling of people back of
me, and that I ought to make quick decisions. Everyone ought to eat salad, so I take a salad.
Then some roast beef looks good so I take that, and the girl asks briskly with a big spoon
poised, if I'll take potatoes, and I don't wish potatoes, but she makes a great nest of them
beside the meat and fills the nest with gravy and I pass on. According to Hoover or Maria Parloa
or Roosevelt, I ought to have a vegetable, and so I take two. Meanwhile I have taken bread,
but the woman ahead takes hot scones and so I do. I choose some thick-creamed cake, very fattening,
but just this once, and then, oh, I don't know. The tray is heavy and no place to put it, and
in my journeying I peek at the bill and it's over 75 cents, and when I finally sit down opposite
a stranger I find on my tray two salads, and when I chose the other I don't remember.

But cafeterias are very fine for those who have cafeteria sense.

The Open Board of Trade

Months ago one of The Journal readers suggested a story to be found down on Market street near
the Hobart building. Many times since when passing there I have thought that those street hawkers
must have a certain picturesque and even humorous value, and hoping to find it I have stopped
to listen. But the moment I stop they win me with their everlasting logic, and then blessed
if I can write them up. They have the same effect upon others. I have seen chambers of commerce
and stock exchangers and professors from Berkeley passing with a supercilious glance which
did very well so long as they kept moving. But once let them step into the magic ring and they
too became mesmerized and stood there gaping in spellbound interest. "Logic is logic, that's
all I say."

Those hawkers are artists, skilled in the arts and wiles of persuasiveness. There is one with
a long, horse-hair wig which he occasionally brushes back from his eyes with a dignified flourish.
This man has found the supreme elixir and the secret of perpetuity. He is the only man in the
world, this modern Ponce de Leon, who knows the secret. Surely we need not blush to listen
to its exposition, $2 is a small sum to pay for such a bonanza. Forty thousand people have
used it in the last thirty-nine days. Think of it. "Take it right out into the crowd and sniff
it for yourself," he urges and somehow that breaks the spell, and strong men look foolishly
at each other and move a-way.

Horoscopes, suspenders, iron watch charms, brown cakes that may pass for maple sugar, ironing
wax, laundry soap or penuchia, a book on Prohibition, mending wax and books of magic are all
there. And if she was the wronged and yet pitiful woman she pretended to be, why, instead of burying
her husband's, Musset's, and others' sins in silence, does she throw out against them those
artful insinuations and mysterious hints which are worse than open
accusations?

Probably her artistic instincts suggested that a dark background would set off more effectively
her own glorious luminousness. However, I do not think that her indiscretions and misrepresentations
deserve always to be stigmatised as intentional malice and conscious falsehood. On the contrary,
I firmly believe that she not only tried to deceive others, but that
she actually deceived herself.

The habit of self-adoration had given her a moral squint, a defect which was aggravated by
a powerful imagination and excellent reasoning faculties. For, swayed as these were by her sentiments
and desires, they proved themselves most fertile in generating flattering illusions and artful
sophisms. George Sand was indeed a great sophist. She had always in readiness an inexhaustible
store of interpretations and subterfuges with which to palliate, excuse, or even metamorphose
into their contraries the most odious of her words and actions.

It is not likely that any one ever equalled, much less surpassed,
her expertness in hiding ugly facts or making innocent things look
suspicious.

To judge by her writings and conversations she never acted spontaneously,
but reasoned on all matters and on all occasions.

At no time whatever [writes Paul Lindau in his "Alfred de Musset"]
is there to be discovered in George Sand a trace of a passion and
inconsiderateness, she possesses an imperturbable calmness.

Love sans phrase does not exist for her.

That her frivolity may be frivolity, she never will confess.

She calculates the gifts of love, and administers them in mild, well-measured
doses.

She piques herself upon not being impelled by the senses.

She considers it more meritorious if out of charity and compassion she suffers herself to be
loved.


Of course, the San Francisco police are many things beside being handsome and willing to flirt.
But these are important qualifications which, up to this time, have never had their place in
journalism. Ah, many a Raleigh and Don Quixote in the roster of the S. F. police.

A policeman is all things to all people. What a policeman is depends upon what we are. To those
who are fast, either in reputation or driving, he is a limb of the law to be either evaded
or cajoled. To the small boy he is a hero to aspire to become when grown. To the public-spirited
citizen of the reforming order he is a piece of community linen to be periodically washed in
public with a great hue in the papers about graft expose. To almost anybody in the dead of
night with burglars prowling about, he is a friend to be called--in case one has a nickel handy.

But to the great army of women who are hopelessly respectable, the policeman is something quite
different. And what we women think of the police is important. We pay taxes, we vote and we
cross the street. We like our policemen to be handsome and cavalier and, again I say, the S.
F. police are both. Any fine day they will make a funeral procession out of the motor traffic
to escort a nice woman across Market street.

It goes without saying and is an unwritten law that policemen should be Irish. I enjoy Greeks
in classic literature or in restaurants, but not as policemen. There is a saying in the city
that when Greek meets Greek they go together to get a job on the Market Street Railways. But
when they get upon the police force, I for one, shall move to the country. Policemen should
always be Irish.

And handsome. This is a woman's reason, but listen: O men, are they not, I ask, a part of the
civic beauty of the city? Is it not important that these animated equestrian statues should
be gallant men upon noble and spirited horses? And who is more imperial in the pictorial life
of the city than the officer on the Lotta Fountain pedestal by the raising of whose sceptered
hand the life of the city moves or stays. Yes, policemen should be handsome and gallant. It
is written.

A Marine View

Russian Hill had always seemed economically remote to me as an abiding place until recently
I was invited out where some people were living in a modest apartment with a good view of the
bay. And when they suggested that I try to get an apartment over there I decided to do it.

It was a beautiful morning when I started out. There stood Russian Hill and as Gibraltar bristles
with armaments so it glittered with windows facing the sea and one of them for me. Perhaps
I could get a few rooms from a nice Italian family and fix them up. Ah, the Latin quarter,
Greenwich village, the ghosts of artists haunting the place, Bohemians, enthusiasm, the lust
for adventure. I bristled with personality.

"Oh, you want a marine view," said the real estate man. "Not for that price, lady."

A "marine view." I didn't want a marine view; I only wanted one window facing the sea. Surely
with all those windows--.

I left the real estate man and began wandering about. I asked a group of Italian women and
they exclaimed in a chorus "No marine views left." I hadn't said a thing about a "marine view."
I wandered further and it was always the same. Some were smug and some were sorry but they
all spoke of a "marine view" in a certain tone of voice, as Boston people say "Boston."

It was getting hot. I could not remove my coat because my waist was a lace front. Only a hair
net restrained me from utter frumpiness. Still I was not altogether beaten and when I came
to a nice countrified looking house standing alone in the midst of modern art and a man came
out I asked him. The moment I did there came into his eyes a hunted glitter and he told me
how he had held out against them and how he had been besieged for years to rent his marine
view and wouldn't.

As I turned away I met an Irish delivery man and he said that there were dozens of vacant apartments
very reasonable and waved his hand vaguely in the direction where I'd been searching. I like
the Irish but his cheerful fibbery was the last straw and I went home.

The next day my friends called up and said that they had a marine view for me. I was to live
all summer in the apartment of the So-and-Sos while they were away. So now I am. They are artistic
and I drink my coffee from saffron colored cups on a bay green table runner over a black table
under a turquoise blue ceiling with a view of the bay from the window.

But I am humble and if some day I meet a hot, tired looking woman who can't find an apartment
on Russian Hill, I shall say: "Shucks, a marine view isn't so much."

Hilly-Cum-Go

This is a story for children, because they will know it's only fooling, while grown-up people
will believe it's true.

The cable car isn't a car at all, children, but is a hilly-cum-go, a species of rocking horse
and a grown-up kiddie-kar. It is a native of and peculiar to San Francisco, and is a loyal
member of the N. S. G. W. It has relatives in the South, and the electric dinkie that rolls
up and down between Venice and Santa Monica is its first cousin. Some say that it is distantly
related to the wheel chairs at Atlantic City. It is not at all common.

The men who run it are its Uncles. The parents live underground caring for the young kiddie-kars.
At times, if you peek down in that hole near the Fairmont and are careful not to be run over
you may see them bustling about. Before she was married, the mama was a Marjory Daw of the
Daw family, famous see-sawers. The children take after their mother.

The Uncles are very kind and pick the hilly-cum-goes up in their arms as tenderly as a woman
would. You must have seen them pick the little things up and run with them across the streets
out of the way of autos. And at night they tuck them in their little beds and hear them say
their prayer which goes:

  Oh, dear me, I hope I'm able,
  All day long to keep my cable.

These hilly-cum-goes are not run by electricity at all, but just pretend. They are run by three
things--black magic, white magic and a sense of humor. Black magic takes them up the hills,
white magic restrains them down, and the sense of humor is in the Irish conductors. You may
hear, if you listen, the magic coming out of the ground, "Kibble-kable, kibble-kable," only
fast as anything. At noon time it goes "Putter, putter, putter," and at bed-time, "Kuddle-kiddie,
kuddle-kiddie."

This magic is very, very important. Especially going down hill. Did you ever, my dears, descend
that precipice at the end of the Fillmore street line? What is it that keeps you from landing
flat on your nose on Union street? Nothing but white magic. What is it that keeps you from
shooting from the Fairmont, straight down into the St. Francis? White magic.

The sense of humor is also very important. Suppose a stout person gets on, the conductor hops
immediately to the opposite side for ballast. That takes a sense of humor. If the hilly-cum-go
is full of young people, especially sweethearts, the Uncle jiggles the hilly-cum-go horribly,
but if old people are on it goes--"See-saw, Marjory Daw," just gently.

I trust, dear children, that all these facts will make you appreciate more the hilly-cum-go,
and when you sit on it so cosy, so intimate with the street, riding along looking at the scenery,
you will be thankful, that poor old horses do not have to tug you up hill, and that you have
this sturdy little creature to haul you about. Nice little, old hilly-cum-go.

I'll Get It Changed, Lady

This expressman was a regular San Franciscan. And there is such a thing, you know, as a regular
San Franciscan. He is a native son and more. His speech betrays him. He calls a "car" a "cahh,"
and when he's surprised he says: "Yeah"! He has a permanent laugh in his eyes, and the only
thing he gets mad about is prohibition. But the particular thing that I started to say of him
is that money is to him a thing to spend. Money is an incident to life, that's all.

He said it would be a "dollar, six-bits," and I was sorry, but I only had a ten-dollar bill.
When I said that, he just reached out and took it from me, and said he'd get it changed, and
disappeared. Now, the significant thing, and the one that made him a regular San Franciscan,
was that he never dreamed that I would doubt his honesty in returning with the change. And
I didn't. It was this last that surprised me. If it had been in New York--I gasp--if it had
been in New York, no expressman would have dared do such a thing because no one would have
trusted him, and if they had been so hick as to trust him, the expressman would have had no
respect for himself if he himself were so hick as to return with the change.

I never shall forget the shock of seeing a pile of newspapers in front of a drug store, the
day I landed in San Francisco, where men took their morning paper and threw down a nickel,
and even made change for a dime. Right out on the pavement--a lot of nickels lying loose and
no one paying any attention. Why, in New York--well, it couldn't be done in New York, that's all.

It's not because San Francisco is not metropolitan. For San Francisco is essentially a city
just as Los Angeles will always be a terribly big country village. It's not at all a matter
of population. In Connecticut, we always said that Bridgeport was a city, and New Haven which
was larger, was not. It's a bing, and a zip, and a tra-la-la-lah, that makes one city a city
and another not. I can explain it no other way.

But with all its cityfiedness, there is a strange lack of suspicion, a free and easy attitude
toward mere physical money, that one finds in no other large city except San Francisco. In
the stores the clerks will say: "Shall I put it in a sack?" and you answer just as they hoped
you would: "Oh, no, I'll slip it right in my bag." In New York as soon as one did that she'd
be nabbed on the way out for a shoplifter.

Perhaps the constant use of silver money has had something to do with the matter. Paper money
can be tucked away. Silver is more spendable, everyone knows that. Break a five-dollar bill
into "iron men," and it's gone, gone. And yet it can't be the use of silver money alone that
accounts for it. Reno has silver money, and yet there is little of the old, free Western spirit
left in Reno.

No, it's something to do with San Francisco where suspicion doesn't yet grip the hearts of
men and where money is made to spend.

San Francisco, the last stand of the old, free West.

Fillmore Street

I walk along on Fillmore street. I try to walk very fast with eyes straight ahead. One needs
a strong will to take a-walking on Fillmore street and keep from spending all his money. In
fact it is better to have no money at all for then one is tempted to hold on to it.

Everything in the world is in the windows on Fillmore street--everything. There isn't a phase
of human activity that isn't represented. Every nation has left its stamp. Spain--tamales and
enchiladas. France--a pastry shop. Italy--spaghetti and raviolas. The Islands have for sale
all that's hula-hula. Here is a Hungarian restaurant. And the "O. K. Shoe Shop--While U Wait"
is pure American.

There is "Sam's Tailor Shop." I feel as though I should know this fellow Sam. Apparently he
knows me from his chummy sign. Sam, Sam--I ought to remember Sam.

Do you wish to paint and varnish? Well, here you are. Or to be shaved or have your eye-brows
arched? Walk right in. Here is a place to learn to paint china. Here are drugs, corsets, religion,
fish, statuary, cigars and choice meats all in a row. Meats, on Fillmore street, are always
"choice" or "selected" or "stall-fed." I doubt if you could get just "meat" if you tried. Next
to the meats, out on a table before a second-hand book store is romantic, old "St. Elmo" of
mid-Victorian fame. He must have come West by the "Pony Express."

I always stop, if I have time, to look at shoes to be mended. They are like people who have
fallen asleep in public, off their guard and at their very worst. Take a shoe--a real, old
shoe without a foot in it and it looks so foolish, betraying so mercilessly its owner's bumps
and peculiar toes. There is pathos there, too. A scrub woman's run-down shoes, a kiddie's scuffed-out
toes, a man's clumsy, clay-stained boots and the happy dancing slippers of a young girl.

Back of the shoes--the cobbler. Cobblers are always philosophers. Not pretty men, but thinkers.
In their little, dingy shops they sit all day with their eyes down, isolated from the "hum
and scum" about them, to the tune of their "tap, tap, tap," their minds are detached to think
and philosophize and vision.

Now we are at the corner where we turn away from Fillmore street. There is a window full of
dolls. Such a lot of homely dolls. They don't make pretty dolls any more. They make them to
look like humans. "Character" dolls they call them and they are "characters." Now, when I was
a little girl, they made dolls to look the way you wished human beings could look.--It is not
hard to turn the corner.

In the Lobby of the St. Francis

There is something about having money enough to stay at the St. Francis, and to dine there
and to wear smart clothes there that makes people step out and act sure of themselves. Even
when they can't afford it, and their stay there is a splurge or an outing, they act just as
sure and stepping. And as for the people to whom the St. Francis is but an incident they act
sure because they were born that way.

Never in my life have I seen such sure, well-dressed women as in the lobby of the St. Francis.
And I am no greenhorn at lobbies. I have reviewed in my day some of the best peacock alleys
in the country. There is the New Willard. Now when I think of the New Willard, I see frumpily
dressed dowagers talking through their lorgnettes to moth-eaten senators. The Selbach in Louisville,
the St. Charles in New Orleans are famed for their handsome women, but none are so free and
proudly sure of themselves on peacock alley as California women. No women dress as they do
either. They are not so chic as they are smart; their tailor mades, their furs, their hats
with a preponderance of orange, their well-dressed legs and feet and a reserved brilliance
that makes them the finest-looking women in the United States.

It is a fine pastime to step out from the surge of Life for a minute and let it ebb and flow
around one in the lobby of the St. Francis. Such a pageant of individual stories. An exquisitely
dressed young girl meets another there, and soon two young chaps appear and they all begin
talking silly nothings, and laughing at each other's silly jokes, and looking into each other's
foolish young eyes much as lovers have always done. A harassed business man rushes frantically
to the telegraph desk and wires his firm at Pittsburgh. Some staid, comfortably-fixed tourists
from Newton Center, Massachusetts, come in from sight-seeing and go up to their rooms and quickly
get their shoes off. A group of Elks come in, arm-linked, and start one wondering about the
enforcement of the dry law. In and out among all these moving comedies and tragedies flits
like an orange-colored butterfly a little Oriental boy, an angel-faced page goes calling "Mister
Smith," and sober looking bell-hops stand alert to the sound of "Front."

A beautiful woman steps forward and meets a handsome man and they go to dinner together, and
somehow I don't think he is her husband and wonder if she is a widow and decide that it is
none of my business. If she has a husband he is probably an "ornery" fellow who never takes
her anywhere.

Everyone who passes by me looks alert, and sure, and happy and prosperous, but I comfort myself
that probably each one of them has as much to worry about as I myself do.

The Garbage Man's Little Girl

This vignette is written because it can't help itself and carries with it a hope that someone
who reads it may know a little girl whose father is a garbage man. Suppose that you can't think
of anyone just now who is a daughter to a garbage man, it is best to read this just the same
for you never know when you may meet her.

When you do, tell her not to care too much when the children at school tease her about her
father and cry--"Phew--phew, here comes the gar-bidge-Garrr-bidge-Garrr-bidge." Tell her at
that time to try and sustain her personal integrity with philosophy. It won't do her a particle
of good but tell her just the same.

Tell her that her father is a terribly useful man. That if he should fail to function, then
the disposal of garbage would become an individual problem and that the mamas of kids whose
fathers are not garbage men would be obliged to say to their husbands--"Ed, dear, don't forget
to take the garbage bucket to the public incinerator on your way to the office."

Tell her that just because her father collects dirt, it is no disgrace. Tell her to look at
the people in good standing who peddle dirt. Tell her to look at the papers. Tell her to tell
the world that it's better any day to collect than to peddle dirt.

Tell her that when her father, up on his great smelly throne, drives around the corner of Powell
and Geary that dressed-up folk needn't disdain him so much. He's a sermon. They won't like
him as a sermon so much as a garbage man but he's a sermon just the same. The text is that
back of most things that are dainty and beautiful is the drudgery worker. Tell her that there
isn't an immaculate kitchen in San Francisco that doesn't depend upon her father.

Nor a feast at the Palace or the St. Francis. Tomato skins and the nests that cauliflowers
come in, and gnawed "T" bones. What would become of them if she had no father. And coffee grounds
and the nameless things that have been forgotten and burned by the absent-minded. Tell the
little girl about Omar Khayyam and how he might have said--.

  Oh, many a charred secret into the garbage can goes
  That from the kitchen range in blackened cloud once rose.
  Tell her that there is a professor at Yale whose father was a junk man.
  All this and more tell the garbage man's little girl.

The Palace

Someone was telling me of an old couple who lost everything they owned at the time of the fire,
and that they were very brave about it and never broke down, and even helped others, but that
when someone came running up and said: "The Palace is on fire," they both sat down on the curb
and gave way completely to grief.

And they say that after the fire the first piece of publicity which was given to the world
as a proof that San Francisco would come back, was that the Palace would be rebuilt immediately.
And a man from Virginia City, a descendant of the Comstock days, told me that in Nevada they
speak of "The Palace" as Russians speak of the Kremlin as a pivot of destiny. What I am trying
to say, of course, is that the Palace is a tradition just as the Waldorf-Astoria is a tradition,
only not at all in the same way.

The Palace is a great place for women who are alone and a place where a man may bring "the
missus" with impunity. The Palace is stylish, perhaps, but principally it is select. It suggests
to me women who wear suits of clothes, mostly dark gray, all wool and a yard wide, women who
wear two petticoats and Hanan shoes and Knox hats and who carry suit cases covered with foreign
express tags, and whom porters run to meet because they know that these women may not be so
stylish as they are generous tippers. And the Palace suggests to me afternoon teas, and that
peculiar composite chatter of women's voices which is more like the sound of birds in a flock,
and which Powys speaks of as a strange inarticulate chitter chatter which isn't really speech
at all.

The other day a well groomed young official from the hotel took me out to see the famous old
Palace bar and the beautiful Maxfield Parrish painting above it. They have taken the rail away,
and around the edge of the bar they have built a nicely finished woodwork wall which looks
exactly like a great coffin, the coffin of John Barleycorn. After the manner of my species
I wanted to see over the edge and the young man, thinking that I might be suspecting a blind
pig, boosted me up to peck over. I asked him why they didn't remove the bar entirely and he
said with unsmiling naivete that they were waiting "to see" and that they had saved the rail,
"in case."

If I were a reformer I should agitate and have that remarkably joyous and beautiful Parrish
painting placed where it could be seen. I'd take it out to some San Francisco school so that
the dear Pied Piper and all the little round kiddies running after should be a delight to school
children.

And now I have come to the end and all that I have said is that the Palace Hotel is the San
Francisco tradition and everyone in the United States knew that long ago.

Zoe's Garden

Zoe says emphatically that it is not her garden, but everybody's garden. But it is her garden
because she tends it, and every morning goes around among her flowers lovingly, giving a little
dig of dirt here, and tying some frail sisters up there and then, with her scissors, clipping,
snipping and nipping away. Yes, it is Zoe's garden.

Anything that has spunk to grow is welcome in this essentially San Franciscan garden. And no
one is allowed to bully the others. Big burly geraniums and proud dahlias must keep in their
places and give the dainty lobelia, cinnamon pinks, oxalis and candy tuft their chance. The
oxalis! How we tended it in pots in New England, and out here in California, bless its heart,
it runs around like a native daughter. And as for the fuchsia, how far it has grown from the
blue laws.

There is no formality in Zoe's garden. Marigolds go wandering about in the most trampish manner,
and poppies, because they are privileged characters, spring up as they please. Then, as though
the two of them were not sufficient California gold, there is the faithful gaillardia with
its prim little sunflower-faces smiling up at their Mother Sun.

It is a democratic garden, too. Golden rod and asters grow right in among the aristocrats.
Fancy the snubbing they would get if they once ventured into a New England garden--Hm. There
is freedom there, but not license, and every opportunity for individuality. The gladiolas,
canterbury bells, gillie flowers and fox gloves grow as prim as in a conservative English garden.
Pansies smile in their little bed, and although the nasturtium, the wild-growing, happy-go-lucky
nasturtium, goes visiting around among all his neighbors, he is never allowed to interfere
with those who wish to keep by themselves. The sweet peas stay very close to their tradition
of wire netting, but they are not snobs at all, and give of their bounty to all who call. The
sensuous jasmine is there, and the cold puritanical ceneraria and old maids' pin cushions,
with fragrance of sandalwood. The red-hot-poker grows stiff and straight, but the ragged sailor
goes uncombed and untidy still.

Cosmos is coming soon, dressed in her very feminine clothes, and the coreopsis has come on
ahead. All old-timers are represented there, honeysuckle, wormwood, petunias, rosemary, gilias,
mignonette, heliotrope and foxgloves. If they can not all be there together, all are there
at some time in the summer. Montbretia, Japanese sunflower, larkspur, columbine and gourds
all have their time and place and opportunity in this San Francisco garden. And the hollyhocks,
the bossy things, I've a mind to leave them out. Besides I know some gossip about them. When
Zoe was away to Yosemite one morning they were all leaning over from too much moonshine or
too much sunshine and--well, I won't repeat what the marigolds told me about them.

Besides it is time to come away from Zoe's garden, which is everybody's garden.

Children on the Sidewalk

When you were a little girl, when you were a little boy, where did you play? Was it in a barn?
Was it a city park? Did you hunt gophers on the plains of Iowa? Perhaps it was in a California
poppy field. Perhaps a graveyard. I played in one, and remember very vividly the grave of Josephine
Sarah Huthinson who died at the age of 11 months, and had a little lamb on the top of her stone
and an inscription: "Except ye become as little children ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven." Many delightful games we played around the grave of little Josephine.

Wherever childhood found us we played, and out of our environment and often in spite of it,
lived in a delightful world of our own into which no grownup ever really entered. Now, you
and I, grownup, walk along the sidewalks of San Francisco and all we see under our calloused
old feet is a sidewalk. But to children even a sidewalk blossoms with possibilities. Who but
a child invented: "Step on a crack, you break your mother's back." Only the other day I saw
a kiddie avoiding every crack and muttering some incantation as he walked along.

And out of the sidewalk grew all the different types of kiddie kars and coasters that are so
prevalent. I saw a whole load of children zipping down a steep San Francisco hill the other
day much as we children coasted down winter hills on wicked "double rippers." A hill and gravity
and a lot of kids, what possibilities. And out of the sidewalk have evolved those nameless
explosives that have been so popular over the recent Fourth. A row of kids sitting on a curb,
one of them darts out to the car track, a car comes, great expectancy from the kids, terrific
noise, annoyed looks on the faces of sour adults, unbounded joy from a row of kids sitting
on the curb.

Recently I saw a tomboy who had organized the children in her block, and had confiscated an
alley between two straight gray houses, and I don't know what the game was but it entailed
trips on a car down the alley and a very bossy motorman, and "turns," over which everyone quarreled.

Some dainty little Chinese girls were playing a sidewalk game with a white stone which was
a version of an old, old child game. The child would hop to the stone and kick it away and
hop to it again until she missed, the object being to beat her opponent in the distance traveled.
And I saw some exquisite little Japanese girls playing jump rope and chanting one of the numerous
litanies that go with that beautiful game.

The sidewalks of San Francisco. They are full of adventure. Robert Louis Stevenson would have
seen it all. But to our dull eyes are only gray cement block. Just a sidewalk to us and to
kiddies there are mountains in which Roy Gardner hides, and woods, and Tom Mix on a horse dashes
right past us and we never see him at all.

Feet That Pass on Market St.

There is something about walking along Market street with the procession of people that passes
all day, ah, how shall I express it? It is thrilling and it is amusing; it is cosmic and it
is puny. It is often ridiculous and always sublime. Sometimes when we are in most of a hurry
the consciousness of the procession will come to us. It is as though we were one of a moving
crowd that never began and will never end. At such times we listen to the sound of their feet,
the steady, unceasing step by step, an endless tramp as though it were beating out the rhythm--"Eternity,
eternity, eternity."

As we pass voices call to us from the wayside, a cripple so far down below us on the very ground
offering his silent pencils; the allurement of flowers; a hoarse newsboy with his old, old
face screwed into a thousand anxious wrinkles; a blind man, silent supplicant, twirling his
thumbs; and from the windows the call of strawberries at 15 cents a basket. Overhead an aeroplane
hums its way and receives from us the tribute of an upward glance. We gaze upward and think
how many years before our day aeroplanes were flying overhead in the dreams of men who passed
and passed in the long procession.

Idly we glimpse faces that pass us in the procession that meets ours. We pass them and are
never the wiser for the struggle and tragedy that may be going on behind their show of brave
masks. A man clutching his last dime and wondering whether to spend it for rolls and coffee
or coffee and rolls. A business man absorbed and a lady pondering deeply some detail of her
dress. A young girl with soft un-massaged chin hurrying to keep a tryst with her "friend,"
and country folks, their feet sore on the unaccustomed pavements, glad to be going home soon.

It is such an orderly procession and although they all seem to be walking along forever, there
is an order in their going and each is on his way. Each one is free to go to his own place
and yet no one is free. No one is free to leave the procession once he gets into it. Once a
man is born he's done for.

Let him veer one iota from that procession and soon there will come rumbling up to the curb
a big black Maria and off he's whisked away from his fellows. Let him but get into the wrong
house or take the wrong overcoat or chuck the wrong person under the chin--Pff! Let him forget
where the long procession leads and wander about a free spirit and his wanderings will lead
him to the madhouse.

I love to be one of the procession that marches forever up and down Market street, such a brave
procession.

Where the Centuries Meet

She was a tourist and she had just finished Sing Fat's. As she passed out of the door she said
smugly to her companion--"I don't see anything so wonderful here."

I was standing right there and said I: "Madame, if you have been through Sing Fat's and have
failed, to see anything wonderful then you should go home and give yourself the Benet test
which is used to test the intelligence of children." Oh, of course, I didn't say this so that
the lady could hear. The bravest speeches we humans make are never aloud. Then I continued:
"Madame, you may travel far in mileage but you will never take anything back to Dingville,
Kansas, richer than a souvenir ash tray."

Why, just to take a trip from Sing Fat's to the White House is a tremendous journey if one
has the perceiving faculty. In Sing Fat's a bit of old Cloissonne, tiny pieces of enamel on
silver, done with infinite pains by hand labor, perhaps centuries ago, grown beautiful with
age. In the White House georgette flowers, exquisite things made for the passing minute, a
whiff and a whim and off they go. Just in these two there is a meeting of the centuries, Handcraft
Days and the Machine Age--B. C. and A. D.--the oldest civilization in the world and the newest.

The most interesting thing in Chinatown are the Chinese. To some they all look alike, but to
me they seem very human and individual and folksy. I find myself paraphrasing: "But for the
grace of God there goes John Bradford," and when I meet a crafty looking old Chinaman this
whimsy comes to me, "If Deacon Bushnell who passed the plate in the Centerville Methodist Church
had been a Chinaman this is the way he would have looked." They are such small town folks.
Even with the steady cycle of tourists they gaze at each newcomer as though he were the latest
comer to Podunk. One day with a friend I called on a Chinese girl, and all the large family
and their friends gathered around and discussed us and laughed among themselves and pointed
at us. It was embarrassing but I was never once conscious of rudeness, simply a childlike curiosity
and honesty.

In Chinatown the other day a peddler was selling spectacles and somehow the old men trying
them on and squinting for "near" and for "far," seemed so quaint and countrified and like a
lot of old Yankees around a country store trying to get a "new pair of eyes, by Heck." In Chinatown
the tong men do not seem at all real and the hair raising movie serial with its Chinatown terrors,
Buddhist idols that open and swallow the movie actors and floors that drop into dungeons, seem
very remote.

Bags or Sacks

"Do you like cafeterias?" I asked.

"Don't know," he answered, "I've never played them."

"What religion do you follow?" another man asked me.

In a mining camp they told me to take such and such a "trail."

The point is, that we did not talk that way where I came from. Of course, I hasten to say,
we doubtless talked some other way just as peculiar. And if I could detect our colloquialisms
I would write a lot about them but alas I can't. I was in the West two years before I noticed
that a "trolley" is a "street car."

A woman in a mining camp said to the stage driver, "I want out at the bank because I don't
want to pack this sack of silver." In the first place we wouldn't have had a sack of silver
and if we had, it would have been in a "bag" not a "sack," and we never "pack" things and we
never "want out."

In the East we never refer to our locality as "this country," as in the West and South. We
do not take the name of our state either as "Californian" or "Kentuckian." One never hears
of a "Connecticutian" or a "Massachusettisian." "One feels oppressed with so much loveliness. It
is beyond expression."

"Silence is most eloquent, perhaps, in a place like this," said Lettice.

"What can one say that is worth saying, or that has not been said before?"

She was sitting on a fragment of fallen stone, her hands loosely clasped round her knees, her
eyes fixed wistfully and dreamily upon the faint amethystine tints
of the distant hills.

Brooke Dalton looked down at her with an anxious eye. He did not altogether like this pensive mood of
hers; there was something melancholy in the drooping curves of her lips, in the pathos of her
wide gaze, which he did not understand. He tried to speak lightly, in hopes of recalling her
to the festive mood in which they had all begun the day.

"You remind me of two friends of mine who are just home from Egypt. They say that when they first
saw the Sphinx they sat down and looked at it for two hours without
uttering a word."

"You would not have done that, Brooke," said Mrs. Hartley, a little maliciously.

"But why not? I think it was the right spirit," said Lettice, and again lapsed into silence.

"Look at the Duomo, how well it stands out in the evening light!" exclaimed Edith. "Do you remember
what Michael Angelo said when he turned and looked at it before riding away to Rome to build St.
Peter's? 'Come te non voglio: meglio di te non posso.'"

"I am always struck by his generosity of feeling towards other artists,"
remarked Mrs. Hartley.

"Except towards Raffaelle, perhaps. But think of what he said of Santa Maria Novella, that it
was beautiful as a bride, and that the Baptistery gates were worthy of Paradise. It is only the
great who can afford to praise so magnificently."

Again there was a silence. Then Mrs. Hartley and Edith professed to be attracted by a group of
peasant children who were offering flowers and fruit for sale; and
they strolled to some little distance, talking to them and to a black-eyed
cantadina, whose costume struck them as unusually gay.

They even walked a little in the shade of the cypresses, with which the palazzo seemed to be
guarded, as with black and ancient sentinels; but all this was more for the sake of leaving Brooke
alone with Lettice than because they had any very great interest in the Italian woman and her
children, or the terraced gardens of the Villa Mozzi. For the time of separation was at hand.
The Daltons were returning very shortly to England, and Brooke had not yet carried out his intention
of asking Lettice Campion to be his wife. He had asked Mrs. Hartley that day to give him a
chance, if possible, of half an hour's conversation with Lettice
alone; but their excursion had not hitherto afforded him the coveted
opportunity.

Now, however, it had come; but while Lettice sat looking towards
the towers of Florence with that pensive and abstracted air, Brooke
Dalton shrank from breaking in upon her reverie.

In truth, Lettice was in no talkative mood. She had been troubled in her mind all day, and for
some days previously, and it was easier for her to keep silence than
for any of the rest.

If she had noticed the absence of Mrs. Hartley and Edith, she would probably have risen from
her seat and insisted on joining them; but strong in the faith that they were but a few steps
away from her, she had thrown the reins of restraint upon the necks
of her wild horses of imagination, and had been borne away by them
to fields where Brooke's fancy was hardly likely to carry him--fields
of purely imaginative joy and ideal beauty, in which he had no mental
share. It was rest and refreshment to her to do this, after the growing
perplexity of the last few days. A fat Italian granddaddy washes a kiddie's hand from the fountain and a man
with a demijohn and a sense of humor goes smilingly down the path and what he has in the demijohn
is none of our business.

"To make on the whole, a family happier for his presence." It is noon and a bride has brought
lunch for herself and her husband off the job in his white overalls, and the two eat together
on the beautiful grassy slope. The poplar trees around Stevenson's fountain whisper poetry
all day long and the little iron boat on top looks sad not to be sailing away on high adventure
to the South Sea islands.

"To renounce when it shall be necessary and not be embittered." A woman with a baby carriage
comes by. Something tender and sane and everyday and basic about her and her baby. A Chinese
woman passing looks for all the world like a black and iridescent purple grackle in her shiny
black coat and shiny black pants and shiny black shoes and shiny black hair, although the grackle
has a prouder strut than her dancing little trot.

"To keep a few friends and those without capitulation." Where, oh where, do all the men come
from who lie stretched out on the grass? I've seen the very same men lying on Boston Common,
and when my father was a boy he said he saw them there. Hats over their eyes or else blinking
up at the blue sky. Then on the curb facing the Hall of Justice, philosophers up from the water
front or fresh from box cars, everyone with a story that Stevenson would have got from them.

"Above all on the same grim conditions to keep friends with himself." On the bench an enormous
woman with a hat that looks like a schooner atop of a great pompadour wave and on the very
same bench a mummied old Chinese as thin as a wafer. An aeroplane hums above and Stevenson's
little boat looks envious. Where did Captain Montgomery of the sloop Portsmouth stand when
he planted the flag in 1848? The Mission bell, so many miles to Dolores, so many miles to Rafael.
Ring, Mission bell, ring and show us where the El Camino Real will lead us all by and by. We
who pass all day, show us the way, Mission bell.--"here is a task for all that a man has of
fortitude and delicacy."

Miracles

  "Why, who makes much of a miracle?
  As for me, I know of nothing else but miracles.
  Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan,
  Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the sky,
  Or wade with naked feet along the beach just in the edge of the water,
  Or stand under trees in the woods,
  Or sit at table at dinner with the rest,
  Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car."
        --Walt Whitman.

If man or woman be at all sensitive to life, he must react to the commonplace much as Whitman
did. Such a person may be hurrying along about his business with perhaps no time for reflection
and yet in a flash, the miracle of life will come to him through the slightest happening.

A little girl on the ferry sitting with her mother takes from her small prim bag a set of doll
clothes, and fondles them and smoothes them much like a pullet with her first chickens. The
sight of those square, little, gingham dresses, trimmed with scraps of lace and silk and with
awkward sleeves standing straight out, brought to me, on that Oakland ferry, all my childhood
again, and I was cuddled close between the surface roots of a great elm and from the nearby
lane came the sight and scent of Bouncing Bet, Joe Pye Weed, Tansy, Yarrow, Golden Rod, Boneset,
and over in the meadow the sight of cows and the smell of peppermint and water cress, beside
a little stream.

The moment I write it down in physical words it becomes somehow less miraculous. The mind is
so infinite and the human being so essentially mental, that the spoken or written word may
never express them.

The sight of electric lights flashing at night, the view of the city from a cable car, the
wonder of great trucks bearing down upon us like fiery-eyed dragons, a bunch of poppies growing
close to the roots of a billboard in the heart of the city, and the silhouette of a young girl,
wind-blown, so that her straight slender figure shows more beautiful than the statue that tops
Union Square. Up Kearny street the glimpse of eucalyptus trees on the top of Telegraph Hill
standing out against the pink sunset sky, the postman with his pack of human messages on his
back, the spirit of Robert Louis Stevenson in Portsmouth Square, and a row of old, old men
sitting in the sun on Union Square discussing the Universe.

Did you ever stand listening to the seals just at nightfall, and did their weird, low call
stir you to a feeling of kinship with all the creatures of the great deep, and did you lose
yourself there out under the cold, dark water in that mysterious untamed world of the sea that
is older than the land?

I don't know what it's all about. I only know we need more poets. Still every man who reacts
to life and feels it to be a miracle, he is himself a poet. Even Whitman could only articulate
in terms of wonder.

Impulses and Prohibitions

One day last week a man--a regular man, neither a decided proletarian nor a typical bourgeois--but
just a man was walking along. He was dressed in average clothes, he was shaved and carried
a suit case and didn't look out of work and was evidently going somewhere.

He was walking along with this suit case--it was on Larkin near McAllister about two o'clock
on one of those superb days of last week--and he came to a place where there was a stretch
of grass near the sidewalk. I think he was hot and the suit case was getting heavy....

At any rate when he saw that grass, tall, dark green and fragrant, he immediately lay down
on it, pulled his hat over his eyes and, I expect, went to sleep. It sounds so free and easy
written down. Which makes it no less significant.

First, it was significantly Western. An Easterner or a Middle Westerner would have thought
it over first. Then the fact that the man was so average made it significant. If he had looked
like a vagabond it would have been not even an incident. It is we who are respectable who are
fettered by Grundy. It was a logical thing to do and natural and terribly human, but most of
us can't do the logical thing and natural even if inside we do feel terribly human. Especially
these spring days. Today at noon I would like to have gone up on the grass in Union Square
and taken my shoes off. Why didn't I? Not because of the police--but Grundy.

Now a Piute Indian woman could have done it. Her stockings too. A Piute Indian woman when she's
tired she sits down right in the street, right where she's tired. But you and I, when we are
weary we may sigh--"Wish I could sit down." But we can't, not until we've gone down the street
and up in the elevator to some particular place where Grundy says we may sit.

The most significant thing about that man on the grass was that he was in the heart of a great
city. Cities are like homes. Some you're comfortable in--some you're not. Now, San Francisco,
it is a real city, with all the metropolitan lares and penates, dignified and vividly active.
And yet there is no city in the country whose children may be as "at home" as here. It is the
only city I know of that has forgotten to provide itself with nasty little "Keep Off The Grass"
signs. It will probably never be an altogether prohibition town.

Stopping at the Fairmont

It is best to say at the very beginning that if one is tremendously wealthy he will not enjoy
this dissertation on staying at high class hotels. If one has more than two bathrooms in his
home and can afford chicken when it is not Sunday and turkey when it is not Christmas and could
stay at the Fairmont all winter if he preferred, then these words will mean nothing to him.

She has gone, this friend of mine. All winter she has been staying at the Fairmont. Much of
the time I, too, have been staying at the Fairmont as her guest. So it is with a sense of double
bereavement that I write.

Talk to me no more of the comfort of cozy little homes. Give me a hotel where I am treated
as though I were a Somebody. Where I have but to press a button and a liveried servant comes
running as though I were Mary, Queen of England, or Clara Kimball Young. And plenty of hot
water for baths and lots of enormous towels and, as soon as one's butter is gone, another piece,
and fresh butter at that. Pitchers of ice water and a strapping big man standing so solicitously
and watching one's every mouthful. It makes me feel as though I were the Shah of Persia. At
home I don't feel at all like the Shah of Persia.

I came across something the other day that Boswell quotes Dr. Johnson as saying on this same
subject: "There is no private house in which people may enjoy themselves as at a capital tavern.

This friend of mine can go to the room telephone and say, so incidentally, "Room service, please,"
and order a meal in her room with almost negligence. That, I say, is elegance. Taxis, too,
are another test. I never order a taxi without a feeling of sea-sickness. Even when someone
else is paying the bill I can't sit back in comfort. Always they are ticking off the minutes
as though they were my last on this earth.

They are simple tests that divide the plebeian from the patrician. Was it Kipling who wrote:

  "If you can order breakfast in your room and not feel reckless,
  If you can ride in taxis with aplomb,
  If you can read the menu and not the prices,
  Then, you're a qualified patrician, son."

After my friend had gone I went back to the hotel and someone else was in her room and no one
treated me as though I were the Queen of Sheba and I went out into a cold, indifferent world
where no one cares when my glass is empty, where no chair is pushed under me at table and where,
alas, I must sugar my own tea or go without.

San Francisco Sings

Some Cities roar and others hum, but San Francisco sings. Especially on Saturday at noon and
downtown. Saturday noon in San Francisco is like nothing else anywhere but Saturday noon in
San Francisco. And Saturday noon is like the noon of no other day but Saturday. On Sunday they're
off. On Saturday noon everybody's on the street.

There are more flowers on Saturday noon. On the street stands great plumes of gold acacia,
riots of daffodils, banks of violets, white, waxy camellias and branches of Japanese peach
blossoms. It's still winter by the calendar but it's spring in San Francisco. Everywhere you
turn a man or boy from the country with baskets of the spring flowers. All you want to carry
for two bits and a nice bunch for a dime. Big, fat men and oldish men with young twinkles in
their eyes sell them, unromantic, but very nice to deal with.

There are the flowers and there are the women. No women in the country so beautiful. No women
in the world wear color as they do. Their colors are never primitive, never gaudy, but gorgeous
and vivid and alive, seldom do you see a woman dressed in black, and black hats almost never.
Sit in the gallery of any church on Sunday morning when the sun comes pouring in and it is
as though you were looking down on flowers.

Never two alike in the Saturday noon crowd and yet the same type. Free women, happy women,
regular women. Women who can recall a judge or so and still be graceful and dainty. It is very
significant that a San Francisco woman stands at the very pinnacle of the city, graceful and
alert on that tall slender column in Union Square.

And the Saturday noon men--men?--men? In describing color what can one say of men? Well, it's
not their fault that they can't wear pretty clothes. They make a nice grey background for the
women and a very desirable audience and that's the best I can do for them.

The street musicians, they contribute a lot to the Saturday noon atmosphere. And when we drop
a penny into their cups, perhaps it is not so much pity as pay for the joy their piping gives
us. And the people who call papers, of whom the blind are the dearest of all. There's a blind
man on Powell street who sounds exactly as though he were saying Mass.

Dearie me, I can't describe it. All its lilt and rhythm and color and humanness as well. And
ladies walking along with huge white balloons from the White House as though they had been
blowing bubbles from some great clay pipes. And a plump, rosy Chinese woman so dainty in her
breeches with her shiny, black hair bound in a head dress of jade and opal and turquoise.

We need more poets.

Van Ness Avenue

Van Ness avenue is sole. Nowhere in the wide world does the proud and culminating automobile
own and dominate such a wide and sweeping display boulevard.

The automobile, what a magnificent animal it is, long, low, luxurious, purring softly, full
of a great reserve, ready to dart forward, not to the cruel touch of a spur or bit, but to
the magic touch of a button. It is the culminating achievement of this period of the machine
age. The airplane, clumsy and awkward as yet, belongs for its consummation to the men of tomorrow.
The automobile is the zenith of today's accomplishment, and that is why men speak of it as
"super" this and "super" that.

The machine age has its own cruelties and its own, ugliness, but it also has its own art and
its own beauty, of which the automobile and the houses which men have built to accommodate
it, are the consummate art. Not all will agree with me here. The critics will damn me with
disdain, and the King of Van Ness, who ought to agree, but is too busy talking cars, will only
remark, if he listens at all: "Pretty good dope at that." But argumentatively I proceed.

Not that I can name them. I am only sure, really sure, of a Ford. But I admire them with a
great pride in my human kind. They sit so majestically in their palaces on Van Ness, great
limousines, powerful roadsters, luxurious touring cars, waiting there on display and containing
in themselves all the skill, energy, artifice, and beauty of line, color and trim that the
machine age can produce.

And the buildings on Van Ness strike a new and independent note in architecture. All that the
ages have contributed of arches, columns, coloring and lighting are utilized and made into
palaces of great dignity and beauty. There is something about the arched and windowed walls
and the spacious, open look of the buildings that is entirely distinctive and Van Ness. It
is not Mission, Grecian or Colonial, but it is all of them. It is as new and distinctive as
the service stations that have sprung out of the automobile needs. If we dared we would call
it entirely American.

And the printing that high lights each building is an achievement in modern art. Who but Americans
would dream of using printing instead of gargoyles or classic medallions as ornamentation.
Some of it is very beautiful and almost none is ugly. The use of the word "Paige," the printing
of "Buick," the "H" of Hupmobile, the Mercury "A" of Arnold are to me very beautiful.

Van Ness avenue. It is exactly like its name. A long wide sweep for the regal motor car, the
most wonderful and proudest automobile row in the world. The ghosts of the old, aristocratic
and residential before-the-fire Van Ness have seen to it that even commercialized it shall
still be--Van Ness.

The Blind Men and the Elephant

You live in San Francisco and I live in San Francisco, and so does the man who owns the peanut
wagon on the corner, and none of us live in the same San Francisco--funny. We're like the blind
men who each gave a different version of the elephant.

To some, San Francisco is always eight o'clock in the morning or six o'clock at night, swinging
on the straps homeward, swallow their dinners and to a show in the evening. Such people never
have wandered through Golden Gate Park of an afternoon or sunned themselves on the benches
of Union Square. They have never seen San Francisco by week-day sunlight.

Then there are home women and leisure women to whom San Francisco is always afternoon, down-town
in the shopping district with ladies in pretty clothes passing each other on the street or
in and out of the sweet-scented stores.

To some, San Francisco is always night. A taxi-driver who used to be a newsboy down on the
old Barbary Coast. He has never seen anything but the night life of the city. Not bad, but
night provincial--a sort of male version of Trilby.

The neighborhood of Merchants Exchange on California Street is San Francisco to hundreds of
men. They ride out to the golf links and into the country on Sunday. Occasionally they go to
New York, but when they return San Francisco is limited to the neighborhood where men inquire
anxiously--"Is she picking up any in the East?"

No matter how wealthy, no matter how poor, to each of us San Francisco is very much limited
in the confines of what each of us is interested in. It's funny when you stop to think about
it. How the Master of Marionettes must laugh at us when he sees us together. Perhaps some night
after the show, the traffic cop raises his imperial hand and there, waiting to pass, the taxi
driver of the night and a dear little home woman with her husband, and Mr. Chamber-of-Commerce
and close to him a man who has never seen San Francisco by week day sunlight. There they all
wait looking out of their eyes on San Francisco and each seeing it so differently.

San Francisco is one thing to you and another thing to me and something entirely different
to the man on the peanut stand.

You're Getting Queer

Everyone ought to have--well, what is it that everyone ought to have? No, not a machine, not
necessarily a garden and not even a camera. Everyone ought to have children. If not children
of their own, then borrowed ones or nieces or nephews or the neighbor's kids. Everyone ought
to have children.

People who have no children anywhere in their environment to whom they can talk intimately
soon become queer and lop-sided. They may not always realize it but others will find them awkward
and stilted and covered with cobwebs and dust. Such people will be found hard to get on with
and full of snippiness. It is half what ails folks, that so many of them have no children in
their lives and it affects them like malnutrition. The concert- giver, a clever pianist and composer,
who enjoyed in his day a good reputation in Germany, Russia, and Poland, produced at every matinee
a new pianoforte concerto by one of the best composers-- sometimes
one of his own--and was assisted by the quartet party of Bielawski,
a good violinist, leader in the orchestra, and professor at the Conservatorium.

Although Arnold's stay was not of long duration, his departure did not leave the town without good
pianists.
 Children are so honest until we teach them to say that they're
sorry when they're not, and to listen to stories that bore them and to pretend not to like
Jazz when all the time they do.

Contact with children takes us back to the genesis of our being and revives in us something
primitive and honest and natural. I saw a man recently being led out of a grown-up meeting
by the hand of a child and he looked so cross about it and was so obviously trying to maintain
his dignity while the child hurried him up the aisle. I thought how silly. When a child has
to leave a meeting he has to, that's all, and there's no use in arguing or getting cross about
it. And really how good it was for that pompous individual to get taken down a peg by the terribly
human appeal of a little child.

All of us ought to find some children to tell stories to for our own sakes. And then when we
have gotten Jack up the beanstalk and into the ogre's kitchen, and the ogre says in an awful
voice--"I smell a human being," perhaps there will come to us some of the old thrill that we
had forgotten.

If you don't know any children intimately, children who call you "George" or "Auntie Flo,"
children who run to meet you, children who hurt your pockets with anticipation, children to
whom you read the funnies or whom you take to the movies, children for whom you may revive
your childhood tricks of making a blade of grass squawk, or wiggling your scalp, or cutting
out a row of dancing paper dolls, then hurry and get acquainted even if you are driven to pick
them up. If you don't, then as sure as you're alive, you'll find yourself growing queer.

The Ferry and Real Boats

As a matter of fact the ferry isn't a boat at all. It is more like a house or a street car
or a park full of pretty benches. It doesn't sail, it only plies, plies between two given points
at stated intervals, and could anything be more dull. Nothing is more prosaic than a ferry
unless it be an ironing board.

Even a barge is superior, and a barge doesn't pretend to be a boat. A barge goes somewhere
and it gets mussed up by the real salt sea, and so do flat, old scows, honest and rough and
sea-going. Any boat in the bay is superior to the effeminate ferry. Even the boat to Sacramento
has a bit more atmosphere. As for tug boats, they are little, but O-my as they pull the great,
impotent barges after them. Pilot boats have quite an air making the big, dignified steamers
look foolish being yanked here and there. The tidy fisherman's motor boats look rather unimaginative,
all tied in rows at Fisherman's Wharf, but they go somewhere, sometimes away down the coast
and from their sides the long nets reach away down into the sea itself.

How the real boats in the bay must despise the ferry. Think of being called a boat and never
once sailing out of the Golden Gate. How maddening it must be. If the ferry had any spirit
at all, some day it would just switch about and go chunking out to sea. Imagine then the concern
of the staid commuters from Oakland and Alameda to say nothing of the citizens of Berkeley
and Marin County, to find themselves being borne away from their vegetable gardens and fresh
eggs out to sea in a wooden boat.

I suppose there are many people living right here in San Francisco who have never sailed away
out of the Golden Gate, people who have been bound economically or by love or duty, and have
had to ply like the ferry daily between two given points. But can there be a man who has seen
tall-masted schooners and long-bodied ocean-going steamers pass in and out of the alluring
Golden Gate, and has never longed to sail away to the enchanted South Seas, or to Alaska. Such
a man is not a man any more than the ferry is a boat.

If I could choose the boat I'd sail away upon, it would not be a coast-wise steamer, nor the
prim Alaska packers nor even the steamers to the Orient. I'd choose me a four-masted schooner,
carrying freight and going somewhere, anywhere, no one knows where. And then some day the wind
would die or some night the wind would howl and there would come to me a great longing for
or a ferry that should take me home at night in a safe and prosaic manner.

A Whiff of Acacia

In Connecticut now, and in Illinois and in Utah too, it is lilac time. Lilac time--I'll stop,
if you please, to say the words over lovingly. In San Francisco now the lilacs are in bloom
but it is not lilac time. In Golden Gate Park the rhododendrons are blossomed into gorgeous
mounds of color but they are not an event in San Francisco, only an incident. In "The Trail
of the Lonesome Pine" set in the mountains of Virginia, they are the dominant background.

Poppies and lupine and many others are the flower tradition of California but they are not
what I mean here. It is an impression of mine that San Francisco more than any other city has
taken the traditional plants and flowers of other sections and made them into a composite that
makes up the plant atmosphere of this city.

Take roses and geraniums and callas, none of which are epochal because they are always at hand.
But with old Mrs. Deacon Rogers in Connecticut who nursed her calla through the long winter
that she might take it to church on Easter Sunday, the calla was history.

Even the camellia San Franciscans take very philosophically. It has not, for instance, the
supremacy that Dumas gives it in "Camille." In Sacramento they feature it more and an Easterner
who saw them picking it in branches instead of single flowers, exclaimed: "Why, they think
they're oleanders."

The plant and flower atmosphere of a community is very important. Some child is now growing
up in the city, who some day will be far away when there will come to him a whiff, perhaps
of acacia, and in an instant there will come surging over him all the feel and urge and thrill
and wistfulness and dreams of his childhood, and he will be once more in the atmosphere of
San Francisco. It will not include winter and summer but an all-round-the-year-ness, it will
not mean a flower, but flowers, cherry blossoms from Japan, acacia from Australia, and the
best from everywhere which all together will mean to him--San Francisco.

The smell of the acacia, which he knew as the wattle, inspired Kipling to write those words

  "Smells are surer than sounds or sights
  To make your heart strings crack."

Perhaps many others see with me this difference between San Francisco and the rest of the country,
as though nature here expresses herself in bounty more than in resurrection. Oh, well, whether
it be "lilac time" or "all the time" to each locality there is its own beauty and, as for me,
I have yet to find, in all my travels, the "place that God forgot."

It Takes All Sorts

"Hey, hey," called the tall, nervous man with the fat, little wife, waving his arms at the
conductor for fear he would be carried past his corner.

"It takes all sorts of people to make a world," remarked the sensible-looking woman beside me.

It is not the first time that I have been impressed with the philosophy of those words. Who
said them first, I wonder. "It takes all sorts of people to make a world." That is, if we only
had one sort or even a number of sorts we would have no world. To make a world there must be
all sorts, including the funniest folks we ever knew.

I looked from the sensible woman with her well-chosen clothes to the woman across the way.
This second woman was a sort of dressed-up-and-no-place-to-go type, with a squirt of Cashmere
Bouquet in the center of her handkerchief. And nothing on that went with anything else she
had on. And a hat which one knew was a hat, because it was on her head, otherwise it might
have passed for almost anything.

The woman beside me wouldn't have been caught dead looking like the second woman. Yet she should
have been thankful for her. For it is only by contrast that the well-groomed look smart, and
the overdressed look fussy. Whether that is Einstein's theory of relativity or not, I don't
know. I only know that, "It takes all sorts of people to make a world."

There we sit on parade in these side-seater cars, and what we are is revealed so pitilessly
to all who sit across from us. It is as though Fate were making jokes of us and sits us down
beside the antitheses of ourselves. Such a one of Nature's jokes I saw recently. They were
two men. The first was the sort whom one calls an "old boy." A racy individual, well-fed with
a round front, an Elk, of course, a city man, reeking of good cigars, and an appraising eye
out for a good-looking woman.

Beside him sat a man who had been studying birds in the Park. Berkeley was written all over
him. A thin, pure type. He was dressed in field glasses and a bag full of green weeds and stout
walking boots. There was an ecstatic glint in his eye which meant that he had discovered a
long-billed, yellow-tailed Peruvian fly-catcher, "very rare in these parts."

So there they sat packed in so close and so terribly far apart, both so necessary to the making
of a world.

And as they sat a boy entered the car with a shoe-box, full of holes, and out of the holes
came a "peep" and then another. And the Berkeley man lost his abstracted look and the man-about-town
laid down his paper and pretty soon the boy lifted the lid a bit and both men peeked in.

The Fog in San Francisco

Sunsets in the desert, spring in New England, black-green oaks lying on tawny hills in Marin
County, fields of cotton on red soil in Georgia, surf on the rocks of Maine, moonlight on Mobile
Bay, and the way the fog comes upon San Francisco on summer afternoons.

Sometimes when all its hills lie sparkling in the sunshine and children play on the sidewalks,
young fellows whistle, business autos go zippity-ip around the corners, and the whole city
is out of doors or hanging out of the windows, then suddenly in great billows the fog comes
rolling in through the Golden Gate, and between the hills right up the streets into the city.

Then immediately all is changed and everything is nearer and more intimate and nothing of the
city is left but the street you're on. Then you hurry home for supper and home seems good and
sometimes you even light a little fire in the grate.

Still it is not a cold fog, it is not a wet fog, it is never an unkind fog. It comes swiftly,
but very gently, and lays its cool, dainty hand on your face lovingly. Hands are so different,
sticky or wet or clammy or hot, but the hand of the San Francisco fog is the hand of a kind
nurse on a tired head.

It is very beautiful too. My, but I've seen fogs that were ugly, and heard the fisherman say
"She's pretty thick tonight." San Francisco fog is not like that, but like great billows of
a bride's veil. Then in the morning when the sun comes it chases the bride and her veil out
so fast, and they go out to sea together, sunshine and fog.

The other morning I awakened very early and there in the square of my window was a hard, black
cube against a white background. I lay there and blinked and wondered where that telephone
pole had come from, which like Jack's beanstalk, had grown there overnight. Then I saw that
the fog had shut out the whole world and brought that pole close, and made it seem big and
formidable and ugly.

The fog makes some people lose their perspective, and for others it only wraps with a great
kindness the whole world and blots out all ugliness. But upon everyone, upon the just and unjust,
this San Francisco fog lays its gentle hand lovingly and with an ineffable kindness.

A Block on Ashbury Heights

Sometimes in the afternoons when the mothers are out shopping and the youngsters have not yet
returned from school our block looks so deserted and wind-swept and dull. The houses are so
much alike. They all sit there in a row with their poker faces like close-mouthed Yankees refusing
to divulge any secrets. But from the bow-windows where I sit and type, in spite of their silence
the house fronts have become individualized into so many human stories.

I never stop to look out but somehow the stories get in through the window. For instance, I
would not be so rude as to stare at the family washing which once a week is hung on the flat
top of a neighbor's garage, but those clothes up there have a way of flapping in the wind so
conspicuously that I cannot help see. There is the man of the house and his, shall I say garments,
kick themselves about like some staid old deacon having his fling. You advised me to choose a poet.
But you know I am an undecided being, and succeeded only once in my life in making a good choice.

The
many dinners, soirees, concerts, and balls which I have to go to only bore me. I am sad, and
feel so lonely and forsaken here. But I cannot live as I would! I must dress, appear with a
cheerful countenance in the salons; but when I am again in my room
I give vent to my feelings on the piano, to which, as my best friend
in Vienna, I disclose all my sufferings.

I have not a soul to whom I can fully unbosom myself, and yet I must meet everyone like a
friend. There are, indeed, people here who seem to love me, take my portrait, seek my society;
but they do not make up for the want of you [his friends and relations].

I lack inward peace, I am at rest only when I read your [his friends' and relations'] letters,
and picture to myself the statue of King Sigismund, or gaze at the ring [Constantia's], that
dear jewel. Forgive me, dear Johnnie, for complaining so much to you; but my heart grows lighter
when I speak to you thus.

To you I have indeed always told all that affected me. Did you receive my little note the day
before yesterday? Perhaps you don't care much for my scribbling, for you are at home; but I
read and read your letters again and again.

Dr. Freyer has called on me several times; he had learned from Schuch
that I was in Vienna.

 Then at
night they all return, drawn by some tie of love or habit or despair, each to his right place
in the long row of houses, which have been sitting there all day with their poker faces, waiting.

The Greek Grocer

He had just opened a store on our street and in a Lady Bountiful spirit of helping him out,
I went in to do a little trading. I told him I would like a can of baked beans. Baked beans,
but he didn't seem to understand. So pointing over the counter where they were in plain sight,
I said with all my teeth and tongue: "Baaked Beens." He followed my finger. "Oh," he said correcting
me, "You min Purrk ind Bins."

That was the beginning and for weeks that Greek has been correcting my pronunciation. There
is no use to argue about it. The fellow has no reverence for Noah Webster and besides there
are more Greeks, nowadays, than Yankees, and their way is probably getting to be the right
way. Sometimes I think it is we who are the "foreigners."

Once it was cauliflower. Now, I say cauliflower exactly as it is spelled but that isn't right.
It is "Culliefleur," said staccato. And honey--one day I wanted honey and after I had sung
"Hunnie, hunnie" in high C, and he didn't understand, I went around and picked out a jar of
it. "Oh," he said reproachfully, "you min hawney."

A Scotch woman had a scene with him the other day over some "paeper." There is no way of spelling
it as she said it. She kept repeating it and he kept getting the wrong thing. No, she didn't
want paper but "paeper"--seasoning for the table--salt and "paeper." The more excited she got,
the more Scotch she got and the more confused he. Then, when they were both fairly hysterical,
I discovered that it was pepper.

Then you should have heard that Greek scold. He told her that it was "Pip-RR."

And she said back, "Paeper."

Then they argued and never once did either one of them get it "Pepper."

"Paeper."

"Pip-RR."

"Paeper."

"Pip-RR."

One day I heard him laying down the law to a woman who had dared question his price of "Rust
Bif." He told her what he had to pay for it in "Cash Mawney" and asked her if she could do
so, to explain. "Explin--you kin explin--explin." But she couldn't explain. So, chastened,
she meekly bought the roast beef at his price.

Yesterday a U. C. girl was in and asked, "You are a Greek, are you not?"

"Naw," he answered, "you min Grrik."

Billboards or Art

If you like billboards you are not artistic. Take it or leave it. That's the criterion. It's
not my verdict. Ask those who know, the literary clubs, the art clubs and our distinguished
guests from Europe. I can remember away back when Pierre Loti visited this country and was
so shocked at the glaring billboards that marred the beauty of New York harbor and blinded
his continental eyes with their gaudy colors.

Now, I would like to be both artistic and fond of billboards. I can't be both. So I choose--billboards.
Everyone who reads these words must make his choice.

I not only enjoy them; I think they are beautiful. A lovely splash of color in the grayness
of the city, a sincere expression of American life, so sincere that the critics who take their
opinions from Europe never have been able to sneer us out of them.

We must admit, those of us who admire billboards, that the critics had their justification
in the early days. We have not forgotten the days when mortgaged farmers prostituted their
barns by selling advertising rights to Hood's Sarsaparilla and Carter's Little Liver Pills
and to Lydia Pinkham, and when Bull Durham marred every green meadow from Boston to Washington.
Billboards were an unsavory addition to the landscape then. But the modern art of bill posting
is quite a different thing and in California it has reached its highest development. Segregated
spots of color in the dun cities, surrounded by well manicured lawns, supported by classic
figures in white and lighted by dainty top lights. And out along the boulevards, how lovely
they are at night, luminous breaks along the dark highways, suggesting so tactfully the kind
of tire to use or the sort of mattress to lie upon.

The critic has had his mission. He has forced the Poster man. Fortunately though young America
has not taken him seriously. If he had this country would have missed some of its most distinctive
contributions to Art. The electric sign for instance. That was condemned as vigorously as the
billboard. And today, tell me, anybody, anywhere what is more beautiful in all the world than
the dancing lights of Market Street at night. In what a unique and vital way they express the
life of the great modern city.

And anything that expresses Life, whether that life be mediaeval or the life of the machine
age, that is Art. There.

How pleased everyone is to know that the pretty Palmolive girl who "kept her girl complexion"
is married and has a sweet little daughter who has inherited her mother's skin.

I don't always take the posters seriously. Now, I don't believe that that man "would walk a
mile for a Camel." He'd borrow one first. And "contented cows." Cows are always contented.
All I've known. But they may have had bolshevikish notions recently, cud strikes, perhaps.
Hence the accent on "contented cows," to reassure us that there is no "Red" propaganda in the
milk. Then, there is the parrot; what a long time it takes to teach him to say "Gear-ardelly."
And that sentimental touch, "If pipes could talk." They do.

Sometimes, in an absent-minded way, I get them confused, movies and merchandise, and find myself
wondering who's starring in "Nucoa." Then there's that ecclesiastical looking party, the patron
of Bromo-Quinine, whom I always take for some bearded movie star.

But to return to their artistic merits, they are artistic. Take those same "contented cows."
What could be more futurist than the coal black sky under which they so contentedly graze?
Or the henna hills so far away, or the purple grass they chew. Matisse and Picasso, great modernists,
could not out-do those cows.

The cigarette men are particularly interesting. A bit over done. One cannot help wonder what
enthusiasm they would have left for a gorgeous sunset having spent so much on, a cigarette.
But I expect they are good men at heart and not so sensuous as they appear. There's that jolly
old boy who hasn't had such a good smoke in sixty years. One wonders if his teeth are his own.
They all have teeth. Everyone has teeth these days. It would be a change to see someone on
a billboard with his mouth shut.

Golden Gate Park

Enter slowly, by foot is much the better way, and join the long, loitering procession.

Black-green foliage, the curious old-green of trees that never wither and never resurrect.
Something very foreign or is it San Francisco? Cubist effects of the horizontally-lined cypress,
vertical lines of the eucalyptus, and the soft, down-dropping of the willow trees and pepper.

Women on the benches tatting, reading, resting. A retired Kansan widower passes, glances sidewise.
Well, no harm in looking at a comely woman. Gossip of mothers over baby carriages, "Only nine
months old! Mine is a year. Well, we think he's pretty fine."

Comes the sight-seeing bus. Blare of the megaphone. "Seventeen miles of driveway, boost, boast,
greatest in the world."

All day long the swings are swinging, rhythmic, slow to the touch of loving hands. Then at
night when all is still and dark, they go on swinging dream children, rhythmic, slow.

Down the slide into the soft sand. Grandpa tending Nellie's children: "Careful there." Ding,
ding like the sound of a temple bell the whirling, dizzy iron rings clang against their iron
pole. Tramp of the patient little burros. "Mother, I want another cone."

Bum-ti-bum, too-too-too, ta-ta-ta, ta-ta-tahh, the band. It had been very difficult to persuade
her that her interests were safe in the hands of Lettice's brother, and even now she had occasional
misgivings on that point.

Sydney went on quickly.

"A book lying close to your hand, you mean?"
"She said a certain book," Mr. Milton interjected.

"You must make
allowance for her," said the judge. "You know she is French, and you
should follow her in two languages at once. No doubt she meant 'some
book or other.' The point has no importance."

People with accumulative minds wander through the museum, very interesting, "Just look at this
mosaic, John." Exhibit of modern art in the gallery. "Portrait of a girl," only a daub to the
wayfaring man. Lovers in secluded places stealing a kiss, caught by the middle-aged. "Silly
young things," wistfully.

Once all parks were private grounds. Free now to the poorest serf. Well, there's something
century-gained. Some people say the world's growing worse all the time. Perhaps, perhaps....

Who cares. Lying flat on your back close to the smell of the earth, the great kind mother.
Up, up at the sky, how deep, how blue. Is there a God? There must be Something; look at each
perfect blade of grass. An airplane across the blue. There's something gained.

Automobiles in stately procession proud as horses ever were. Automobiles proudly rolling, swings
swinging, people passing, and the swimming of all the water fowls, the swans, the Japanese
ducks and the little mud hens. Infinitude of movement, infinitude of life, ineffable beauty.
There must be a God. There must be Something back of it all.

Extra Fresh

Some one in San Francisco keeps hens. Not only hens, but a rooster. I distinctly heard him
crow. It was in the very early morning, and like Tennyson's "Queen of the May"--lying broad
awake--"I did not hear the dog howl, mother, but I did hear this crow."

It is Ralph Waldo Trine, I think, who says that "So long as there remaineth in it the crow
of a cock or the lay of a hen a city is not a city." But I would not base the citifiedness
of a city upon the mere crow of a cock any more than on the census. It is a vulgar criterion.

For human nature is human nature and nothing betrays human nature like hens. It is not surprising,
therefore, that some woman has sneaked into the city limits a mess of hens. Neither is it an
aspersion on the police.

Besides this was to be about eggs.

Has anyone noticed how eggs of late years are never just eggs, but classified? The hens seem
to lay them classified. There are hen eggs and pullet eggs and large hen eggs and small hen
eggs and large pullet eggs and small pullet eggs and strictly fresh eggs and ranch eggs and
choice eggs and large dark eggs and all-mixed eggs and fresh cracked eggs and mixed color eggs
and small brown and, oh, hundreds of sub-divisions.

The very latest I noticed were "dirty" eggs, 2 cents cheaper. I look next for "small dirty
eggs." Why should they sound so unrefined? More so some way than "small dirty boys." But an
artist must paint life as he sees it and I saw these "dirty" eggs on that bazaar--and bizarre--of
diversities--Fillmore street.

On Haight street I saw "extra fresh eggs" and how an egg can be more than "fresh" I fail to
see. Now, a man may be "extra fresh," but an egg is different. Even if it left the hen early
it would still be only "fresh." Well, the grocer probably knows.

Every adjective he uses has its significance. Take "ranch" eggs, how pastoral they sound and
fanned by fresh zephyrs. The same with "yard" eggs, such an "out in the open--let the rest
of the world go by" impression they confer. And so reassuring, too, as though they couldn't
have been manufactured for Woolworth's.

There is much, I find, to be written about eggs.

Isn't it "up-looking," as Mr. Wilson would say, that they are so cheap now?

I cannot help wondering if that woman's hens--the hens that went with the crow--if they laid
well when eggs were so high.

On the California-Street Car

She was a little black girl about four years old, riding with her mother on the observation
seat of the California street car. She was a little black girl and didn't know the difference--she
might have been as white as milk for all she knew. Do you not see that what you have said makes
the old liking impossible?"

"Yes--I know it. And I have thrown away all because I wanted more! I spoke too suddenly. But
do not, at any rate, forbid me still to nurse my hope.

I will try and be patient. I will come to you again for my answer--when? In a month--in six
months? Tell me only one thing--there is no one who has forestalled
me? You are not pledged to another?"

Lettice stood up--the effort
was necessary in order to control her beating heart and trembling
nerves. The smoke and steam rising, touched into color by the sun, softened
it into a great mystery with forms and hulks coming into relief through the mists. For a moment
it wasn't a city but a magnificent singing of the morning.

In a dull, inert way I suppose all of us, the grownup people, glimpsed some of its beauty.
But we were all intent upon the business of the day--we didn't look out very far--.

But the little black girl who didn't know any better, the little black girl raised her two
arms above her head and exclaimed in a high, joyous child voice--"GEE WHIZ!"

Western Yarns

The men around the corner store at home were forever telling stories about the big yarns that
Were told in the West. One of the favorites was that ancient one of the Western town that was
so healthy they had to kill a man to start a graveyard.

Having been brought up on this tradition of Western yarns, I have been surprised since living
here never to have heard a single story that didn't sound perfectly reasonable. But it has
dawned on me recently that the "Yarns" are true. Therefore, they are no longer yarns, but facts.

Here is an oil boom story I heard first-hand the other day. I believe it, but you couldn't
get those men around the corner store to believe it--.

It was in a dusty town where everyone rushed in to make quick money and never mind about the
main street even if they did have to plough through dust to their knees. Then one day a heavy
rain came that made the street one slough of soft oozy clay which no one could cross.

Then enters the hero. Even while they stood dismayed, gazing at each other across the clay,
he appeared with a mud sled and took them all across for 50 cents a passenger and $1 if you
had a bundle.

Now, I believe it. Didn't I see the man who had been there and paid his four-bits to cross?
Imagine, if you can, though, trying to make those Yankees around the corner store believe that
there was a town where one had to pay 50 cents to cross a narrow country road in a mud sled.

I believed a man who told me a story down in Kern County last summer. We were riding over the
desert and I asked the stage driver the name of a low yellow bush that grows down there. He
was an interesting fellow, that stage driver, who had been a buccaroo all his life and apparently
knew all about the sage brush country. And when he didn't know he was not lacking in an answer.
I like a man like that. Answer, I say, whether you know or not.

He said with great assurance that the little, low, yellow bush was "Mexican saddle blanket"
or "Tinder bush," this last because it burns like tinder in the fall of the year.

"Why, that bush is so dry," he said, "that once when I lighted it to cook my bacon for breakfast
it traveled so fast that by the time my bacon was cooked I was five miles from camp."

I laughed--I couldn't help it when I imagined that six-footer traveling across the desert with
a frying pan over that low bush. I laughed because it was so real to me, but he misunderstood,
and said so sort of hurt, "Don't you believe me?"

And I told him I did. And I did. And I do. Five miles isn't a great distance to travel over
the desert after one's bacon.

Mr. Mazzini and Dante

Mr. Mazzini will never be rich. He takes too much time for philosophy and gossiping with the
women, and he loves a joke too well, and his heart is too kind. He is a universal type, as
old as the world is old, Theocritus knew him well.

"You pick me out some good cantaloupes," I said with deadly tact, and Mr. Mazzini answered
that it couldn't be done and that melons were like men, that there was no sure way of picking
them out for their kindness of heart. Then he took time over the melons to tell me how his
mother in Italy, who was evidently something of a match-maker, had gotten fooled on a young
man who was both "laze" and "steenge" in his youth but who made a very good husband. 

"This is a great work you have produced, and I always knew that you would do great things.
Count me not last of those who praise you, and who look to see your future triumphs. ALAN WALCOTT."

He
put the letter in an envelope, sealed and addressed it. Mr. Mazzini
owns his own store, and yet when he throws in a few extra, as he always does, because they
are soft or a little specked, he will wink and glance slyly around just as though he were putting
one over on the boss.

One morning I saw him sweeping out his store and he wore a woman's sweeping cap with the strings
tied under his grisly old chin. When I saw him I just stood and laughed aloud, and he asked
me why not, and said that a sweeping cap was just as good for a man as for a woman, and then
he stopped his sweeping and gave me quite a male feminist talk. And he has a horse, Mr. Mazzini
has, a fat old plug that peeks around his blinders as humorously as his master. Oh, I could
just keep on talking about Mr. Mazzini for pages, but I started to speak of Dante.

I like the Italians and I like the Latin quarter where they live. I like it better than Ashbury
Heights for instance. I like the way the Italians use their windows to look out of and to lean
out of, and I like the way they have socialized the sidewalk. It's all a matter of taste, and
I wouldn't criticize the people of Ashbury Heights simply because they use their well-curtained
windows only to admit the light, and do not lean out and gossip with their neighbors and yell
to their children, "Mahree, Mahree," nor sit out on their steps in the evening and play Rigoletto
on the accordion. It's all a matter of taste.

Six hundred years ago Dante was an Italian, but he is much more than that today. After six
centuries Dante belongs to all those and only those who can read him with appreciation and
pleasure. On the latter occasion he relates that he went with him to an organ recital given by
Hesse, the previously-mentioned Adolf Hesse of Breslau, of whom Chopin now remarked that he
had talent and knew how to treat his instrument. A waiter, in Il Trovatore, a rarely honest
man, acknowledged to me that he could not read Dante, and that every time he tried he got mad
and threw the book away.

Dante belongs to the literary elect of all nations, Dante belongs to the great internationale
of the immortals. Dante belongs to Eternity. And for that matter so does Mr. Mazzini.

On the Nob of Nob Hill

On the very nob of Nob Hill there is the ruin of a mansion which was the Whittell home. In
ruins it still is a mansion. In ruins it is grander than any place around because it belonged
to the grand days.

There is an enclosed garden in the rear after the fashion of old Spanish gardens in Monterey.
And between the boards that cover a door in the high wall, one may peek and catch a glimpse
of hollyhocks in a row and roses running wild, trellises of green lattice and ghosts of beautiful
ladies having afternoon tea.

To one side of the mansion there is a formal garden that hugs up close to the ivy-covered walls
of the house. It is such a garden as one sees in elaborately illustrated copies of Mother Goose
"with silver bells and cockle shells." It's so beautiful that it doesn't seem real. California
gardens are like that, and to those of us from bleak countries they look like pictures out
of books. There is this well-groomed garden of the living present hugging up close to the ruins
of yesterday and then, if you please, Mother Nature, with her penchant for whimsy, has grown
right up against these two a riot of purple and gold lupine, a product of her own unaided husbandry.

I am not much on allegory nor sermonizing, but I declare San Francisco gets me started. And
when walking along about one's business, one sees such a vivid picture, the allegory forces
itself. The grandeur of yesterday, the serious beauty of today, and then the wild flowers that
covered the hills before man interfered and will live on after man has gone into dust to make
new flowers.

Such a contemplation would make some people blue but it gives me a feeling of something basic
and secure and eternal in all this strange puzzle of life. It was a beautiful day up there
on the tip-toe of Nob Hill. What a beautiful view they must have had from the mansion windows.
The same sky and the same banks of heavy soft white clouds.

The nob of Nob Hill, how close it is to the sky.

The Leighton Press San Francisco, Cal

