For two days they ran along the coast with a fair wind; but on the 14th a head wind and heavy
sea drove them into the shelter of a deep harbour called by Columbus Puerto del Principe, which
is the modern Tanamo.  The number of islands off this part of the coast of Cuba confirmed Columbus
in his profound geographical error; he took them to be "those innumerable islands which in
the maps of the world are placed at the end of the east."  He erected a great wooden cross
on an eminence here, as he always did when he took possession of a new place, and made some
boat excursions among the islands in the harbour.  On the 17th of November two of the six youths
whom he had taken on board the week before swam ashore and escaped.  When he started again
on his voyage he was greatly inconvenienced by the wind, which veered about between the north
and south of east, and was generally a foul wind for him.  There is some difference of opinion
as to what point of the wind the ships of Columbus's time would sail on; but there is no doubt
that they were extremely unhandy in anything approaching a head wind, and that they were practically
no good at all at beating to windward.  The shape of their hulls, the ungainly erections ahead
and astern, and their comparatively light hold on the water, would cause them to drift to leeward
faster than they could work to windward.  In this head wind, therefore, Columbus found that
he was making very little headway, although he stood out for long distances to the northward.
On Wednesday, November 21st, occurred a most disagreeable incident, which might easily have
resulted in the Admiral's never reaching Spain alive.  Some time in the afternoon he noticed
the Pinta standing away ahead of him in a direction which was not the course which he was steering;
and he signalled her to close up with him.  No answer, however, was made to his signal, which
he repeated, but to which he failed to attract any response.  He was standing south at the
time, the wind being well in the north-east; and Martin Alonso Pinzon, whose caravel pointed
into the wind much better than the unhandy Santa Maria, was standing to the east.  When evening
fell he was still in sight, at a distance of sixteen miles.  Columbus was really concerned,
and fired lombards and flew more signals of invitation; but there was no reply.  In the evening
he shortened sail and burned a torch all night, "because it appeared that Martin Alonso was
returning to me; and the night was very clear, and there was a nice little breeze by which
to come to me if he wished."  But he did not wish, and he did not come.

Martin Alonso has in fact shown himself at last in his true colours.  He has got the fastest
ship, he has got a picked company of his own men from Palos; he has got an Indian on board,
moreover, who has guaranteed to take him straight to where the gold is; and he has a very agreeable
plan of going and getting it, and returning to Spain with the first news and the first wealth.
It is open mutiny, and as such cannot but be a matter of serious regret and trouble to the
Admiral, who sits writing up his Journal by the swinging lamp in his little cabin.  To that
friend and confidant he pours out his troubles and his long list of grievances against Martin
Alonso; adding, "He has done and said many other things to me."  Up on deck the torch is burning
to light the wanderer back again, if only he will come; and there is "a nice little breeze"
by which to come if he wishes; but Martin Alonso has wishes quite other than that.

The Pinta was out of sight the next morning, and the little Nina was all that the Admiral had
to rely upon for convoy.  They were now near the east end of the north coast of Cuba, and they
stood in to a harbour which the Admiral called Santa Catalina, and which is now called Cayo
de Moa. As the importance of the Nina to the expedition had been greatly increased by the defection
of the Pinta, Columbus went on board and examined her.  He found that some of her spars were
in danger of giving way; and as there was a forest of pine trees rising from the shore he was
able to procure a new mizzen mast and latine yard in case it should be necessary to replace
those of the Nina.  The next morning he weighed anchor at sunrise and continued east along
the coast.  He had now arrived at the extreme end of Cuba, and was puzzled as to what course
he should take.  Believing Cuba, as he did, to be the mainland of Cathay, he would have liked
to follow the coast in its trend to the south-west, in the hope of coming upon the rich city
of Quinsay; but on the other hand there was looming to the south-west some land which the natives
with him assured him was Bohio, the place where all the gold was.  He therefore held on his
course; but when the Indians found that he was really going to these islands they became very
much alarmed, and made signs that the people would eat them if they went there; and, in order
further to dissuade the Admiral, they added that the people there had only one eye, and the
faces, of dogs.  As it did not suit Columbus to believe them he said that they were lying,
and that he "felt" that the island must belong to the domain of the Great Khan.  He therefore
continued his course, seeing many beautiful and enchanting bays opening before him, and longing
to go into them, but heroically stifling his curiosity, "because he was detained more than
he desired by the pleasure and delight he felt in seeing and gazing on the beauty and freshness
of those countries wherever he entered, and because he did not wish to be delayed in prosecuting
what he was engaged upon; and for these reasons he remained that night beating about and standing
off and on until day."  He could not trust himself, that is to say, to anchor in these beautiful
harbours, for he knew he would be tempted to go ashore and waste valuable time exploring the
woods; and so he remained instead, beating about in the open sea.

As it was, what with contrary winds and his own indecision as to which course he should pursue,
it was December the 6th before he came up with the beautiful island of Hayti, and having sent
the Nina in front to explore for a harbour, entered the Mole Saint Nicholas, which he called
Puerto Maria.  Towards the east he saw an island shaped like a turtle, and this island he named
Tortuga; and the harbour, which he entered that evening on the hour of Vespers, he called Saint
Nicholas, as it was the feast of that saint.  Once more his description flounders among superlatives:
he thought Cuba was perfect; but he finds the new island more perfect still.  The climate is
like May in Cordova; the tracts of arable land and fertile valleys and high mountains are like
those in Castile; he finds mullet like those of Castile; soles and other fish like those in
Castile; nightingales and other small birds like those in Castile; myrtle and other trees and
grasses like those in Castile! But he was deaf as ony adder, and only cried, him and his brither
baith, for the officers to throw me oot at the window.

Then one of the officers blew a whistle, and I kenned what that was for.

"'Nae guards wi' biggonets for Kennedy McClure,' says I. 'Here's for ye! Come on, ye spangled
rogues--the whole thieving dollop of ye!'

"And with that I let drive amang them, and there's twa o' the dukes and at least yin o' the officers
that will not show their faces for a day or two. The leddies would not think them bonny. They
are signed 'Kennedy of Supsorrow--his mark!' Oh--no! But they were ower mony for me at the
last. They got me aff my feet and flang me into the street wi' a clash that near split the
paving-stanes. Then, when the low ribaldry o' the toon was gettin' my birses up, and they had
sent to fetch the guard, up comes this bonny young leddy, and speerited me awa' in a coach, me
swearin' ootragious and maist unwillin'--just like a fool tyke that hasna had eneuch o' a fecht.
Syne she brushes me and cossets me, and so here I am, madam, at your service, and no fit for
the company of my betters, being but a landward man with little education and by nature a
man of wrath far beyond ithers."

CHAPTER XXVIII

THE "GREEN DRAGON"
Kennedy McClure did not inhabit Hanover Lodge, though the Princess
pressed her hospitality upon him. He knew his place, he said. He might
be Laird of Supsorrow and all that. His cattle were upon a thousand
hills, but for all that he was just a rough-spun Galloway farmer body
and he would not disgrace the company of no great ladies by his ignorances.

The
truth was that he had a horror of the whole genus "lackey," and he
could not even pass the soberly clad "gentlemen" of the Princess without
a quivering of the muscles and a clenching of the fists. He found
himself much more comfortable at the adjoining Green Dragon Inn, which
stands near the river just on the London side of the toll-bar.  The
Spaniards were more and more amazed and impressed with the beauty and fertility of these islands.
The lands were more lovely than the finest land in Castile; the rivers were large and wide,
the trees green and full of fruit, the grasses knee-deep and starred with flowers; the birds
sang sweetly all night; there were mastic trees and aloes and plantations of cotton.  There
was fishing in plenty; and if there were not any gold mines immediately at hand, they here
sure to be round the next headland or, at the farthest, in the next island. The people, too,
charmed and delighted the Admiral, who saw in them a future glorious army of souls converted
to the Christian religion.  They were taller and handsomer than the inhabitants of the other
islands, and the women much fairer; indeed, if they had not been so much exposed to the sun,
and if they could only be clothed in the decent garments of civilisation, the Admiral thought
that their skins would be as white as those of the women of Spain--which was only another argument
for bringing them within the fold of the Holy Catholic Church.  The men were powerful and apparently
harmless; they showed no truculent or suspicious spirit; they had no knowledge of arms; a thousand
of them would not face three Christians; and

     "so they are suitable to be governed and made to work and sow and do
     everything else that shall be necessary, and to build villages and
     be taught to wear clothing and observe our customs."

At present, you see, they are but poor happy heathens, living in a paradise of their own, where
the little birds sing all through the warm nights, and the rivers murmur through flowery meadows,
and no one has any knowledge of arms or desire of such knowledge, and every one goes naked
and unashamed.  High time, indeed, that they should be taught to wear clothing and observe
our customs.

The local chief came on a visit of state to the ship; and the Admiral paid him due honour,
telling him that he came as an envoy from the greatest sovereigns in the world.  But this charming
king, or cacique as they called him, would not believe this; he thought that Columbus was,
for reasons of modesty, speaking less than the truth--a new charge to bring against our Christopher!
He believed that the Spaniards came from heaven, and that the realms of the sovereigns of Castile
were in the heavens and not in this world.  He took some refreshment, as his councillors did
also, little dreaming, poor wretches, what in after years was to come to them through all this
palavering and exchanging of presents.  The immediate result of the interview, however, was
to make intercourse with the natives much freer and pleasanter even than it had been before;
and some of the sailors went fishing with the natives. It was then that they were shown some
cane arrows with hardened points, which the natives said belonged to the people of 'Caniba',
who, they alleged, came to the island to capture and eat the natives.  The Admiral did not
believe it; his sublime habit of rejecting everything that did not fit in with his theory of
the moment, and accepting everything that did, made him shake his head when this piece of news
was brought to him. He could not get the Great Khan out of his head, and his present theory
was that this island, being close to the mainland of Cathay, was visited by the armies of the
Great Khan, and that it was his men who had used the arrows and made war upon the natives.
It was no good for the natives to show him some of their mutilated bodies, and to tell him
that the cannibals ate them piecemeal; he had no use for such information.  His mind was like
a sieve of which the size of the meshes could be adjusted at will; everything that was not
germane to the idea of the moment fell through it, and only confirmative evidence remained;
and at the moment he was not believing any stories which did not prove that the Great Khan
was, so to speak, just round the corner.  If they talked about gold he would listen to them;
and so the cacique brought him a piece of gold the size of his hand and, breaking it into pieces,
gave it to him a bit at a time.  This the Admiral took to be sign of great intelligence.  They
told him there was gold at Tortuga, but he preferred to believe that it came from Babeque,
which may have been Jamaica and may have been nothing at all.

But his theory was that it existed on Espanola only in small pieces because that country was
so rich that the natives had no need for it; an economic theory which one grows dizzy in pondering.
At any rate "the Admiral believed that he was very near the fountainhead, and that Our Lord
was about to show him where the gold originates."

On Tuesday, December 18th, the ships were all dressed in honour of a religious anniversary,
and the cacique, hearing the firing of the lombards with which the festival was greeted, came
down to the shore to see what was the matter.  As Columbus was sitting at dinner on deck beneath
the poop the cacique arrived with all his people; and the account of his visit is preserved
in Columbus's own words.

     "As he entered the ship he found that I was eating at the table
     below the stern forecastle, and he came quickly to seat himself
     beside me, and would not allow me to go to meet him or get up from
     the table, but only that I should eat.  I thought that he would like
     to eat some of our viands and I then ordered that things should be
     brought him to eat.  And when he entered under the forecastle, he
     signed with his hand that all his people should remain without, and
     they did so with the greatest haste and respect in the world, and
     all seated themselves on the deck, except two men of mature age whom
     I took to be his counsellors and governors, and who came and seated
     themselves at his feet: and of the viands which I placed before him
     he took of each one as much as may be taken for a salutation, and
     then he sent the rest to his people and they all ate some of it, and
     he did the same with the drink, which he only touched to his mouth,
     and then gave it to the others in the same way, and it was all done
     in wonderful state and with very few words, and whatever he said,
     according to what I was able to understand, was very formal and
     prudent, and those two looked in his face and spoke for him and with
     him, and with great respect.

     "After eating, a page brought a belt which is like those of Castile
     in shape, but of a different make, which he took and gave me, and
     also two wrought pieces of gold, which were very thin, as I believe
     they obtain very little of it here, although I consider they are
     very near the place where it has its home, and that there is a great
     deal of it. You never knew in the least what she was going to say,
     and it would have grieved him exceedingly not to be abused. He would
     have been sure, either that the girl was sickening for a serious
     illness, or that he had mortally offended her.
     
     "How did you leave the Wise Uncle this morning?" he asked, with a nod
     of his head in the direction of the house by the Abbey Burnfoot. Both
     had begun to climb a little way up out of the path by the waterside.
They did so without any words.  I sent for some beads of mine, where as a sign I
     have a 'excelente' of gold upon which the images of your Highnesses
     are engraved, and showed it to him, and again told him the same as
     yesterday, that your Highnesses command and rule over all the best
     part of the world, and that there are no other such great Princes:
     and I showed him the royal banners and the others with the cross,
     which he held in great estimation: and he said to his counsellors
     that your Highnesses must be great Lords, since you had sent me here
     from so far without fear: and many other things happened which I did
     not understand, except that I very well saw he considered everything
     as very wonderful."

Later in the day Columbus got into talk with an old man who told him that there was a great
quantity of gold to be found on some island about a hundred leagues away; that there was one
island that was all gold; and that in the others there was such a quantity that they natives
gathered it and sifted it with sieves and made it into bars.  The old man pointed out vaguely
the direction in which this wonderful country lay; and if he had not been one of the principal
persons belonging to the King Columbus would have detained him and taken him with him; but
he decided that he had paid the cacique too much respect to make it right that he should kidnap
one of his retinue.  He determined, however, to go and look for the gold.  Before he left he
had a great cross erected in the middle of the Indian village; and as he made sail out of the
harbour that evening he could see the Indians kneeling round the cross and adoring it.  He
sailed eastward, anchoring for a day in the Bay of Acul, which he called Cabo de Caribata,
receiving something like an ovation from the natives, and making them presents and behaving
very graciously and kindly to them.

