  Peacemakers ye, the daisies, from the soil
  Upbreathing wordless messages of love,
  Soothing of earth-born brethren the toil
  And lifting e'en the lowliest above.

Ay, they did. The poet knew it; the children knew it; the slum knew it. It lost its grip where
the flowers went with their message. I saw it.

I saw, too, that I had put my hand to a task that was too great for me, yet which I might not
give over, once I had taken it up. Every day the slum showed me that more clearly. The hunger
for the beautiful that gnawed at its heart was a constant revelation. Those little ones at
home were wiser than I. At most I had made out its stomach. This was like cutting windows for
souls that were being shrunk and dwarfed in their mean setting. Shut them up once the sunlight
had poured in--never!  I could only drive ahead, then, until a way opened.  Somewhere beyond
it was sure to do that.

And it did. Among the boxes from somewhere out in Jersey came one with the letters I. H. N.
on.  I paid little attention to it then, but when more came so marked, I noticed that they
were not all from one place, and made inquiries as to what the letters meant. So I was led
to the King's Daughters' headquarters, where I learned that they stood for "In His Name." I
liked the sentiment; I took to it at once. And I liked the silver cross upon which it was inscribed.
I sometimes wish I had lived--no! I do not. Here was life at its source, not checked, directed,
utilised, but gushing forth uncontrollably through every fissure of the brown walls and reeking
streets--love and hatred, mirth and folly, impudence and greed, going naked and unashamed as
the lazzaroni on the quays. The variegated surface of it all was fascinating to Odo. It set free
his powers of purely physical enjoyment, keeping all deeper sensations
in abeyance.

These, however, presently found satisfaction in that other hidden beauty of which city and plain
were but the sumptuous drapery. It is hardly too much to say that to the trained eyes of the
day the visible Naples hardly existed, so absorbed were they in the perusal of her buried past.
The fever of excavation was on every one. No social or political problem could find a hearing while
the subject of the last coin or bas-relief from Pompeii or Herculanaeum remained undecided. Odo,
at first an amused spectator, gradually found himself engrossed in the fierce quarrels raging
over the date of an intaglio or the myth represented on an amphora. The intrinsic beauty of
the objects, and the light they shed on one of the most brilliant phases of human history, were
in fact sufficient to justify the prevailing ardour; and the reconstructive habit he had acquired
from Crescenti lent a living interest to the driest discussion between rival collectors.

Gradually other influences reasserted themselves. At the house of Sir William Hamilton, then
the centre of the most polished society in Naples, he met not only artists and archeologists,
but men of letters and of affairs. Among these, he was peculiarly drawn to the two distinguished
economists, the abate Galiani and the cavaliere Filangieri, in whose company he enjoyed for the
first time sound learning unhampered by pedantry. The lively Galiani proved that social tastes
and a broad wit are not incompatible with more serious interests; and Filangieri threw the charm
of a graceful personality over any topic he discussed. In the latter, indeed, courtly, young
and romantic, a thinker whose intellectual acuteness was steeped
in moral emotion, Odo beheld the type of the new chivalry, an ideal
leader of the campaign against social injustice.

Filangieri represented the extremest optimism of the day. His sense of existing abuses was only
equalled by his faith in their speedy amendment. Love was to cure all evils: the love of man for
man, the effusive all-embracing sympathy of the school of the Vicaire Savoyard, was to purge
the emotions by tenderness and pity. In Gamba, the victim of the conditions he denounced,
the sense of present hardship prevailed over the faith in future improvement; while Filangieri's
social superiority mitigated his view of the evils and magnified the efficacy of the proposed
remedies. Odo's days passed agreeably in such intercourse, or in the excitement of excursions
to the ruined cities; and as the court and the higher society of Naples offered little to engage
him, he gradually restricted himself to the small circle of chosen spirits gathered at the villa
Hamilton.

To these he fancied the abate de Crucis might prove an interesting addition; and the desire
to learn something of this problematic person induced him to quit the villa at the moment when the abate
took leave.
  I had, and I know what it is to do without tobacco, for the doctor
cut my supply off a long while ago.  Those two were old, very old, and they wanted their pipe,
and they got it. I suppose it was irregular, but I might as well say it here that I would do
the same thing again, without doubt. I feel it in my bones. So little have I profited. But,
good land! a pipe is not a deadly sin. For the rest, I was mighty glad to see things managed
with system.  It was a new experience to me. On the Tribune I had a kind of license to appeal
now and again for some poor family I had come across, and sometimes a good deal of money came
in. It was hateful to find that it did not always do the good it ought to.  I bring to mind
the aged bookkeeper and his wife whom I found in a Greene Street attic in a state of horrid
want. He had seen much better days, and it was altogether a very pitiful case. My appeal brought
in over $300, which, in my delight, I brought him in a lump. The next morning, when going home
at three o'clock, whom should I see in a vile Chatham Street dive, gloriously drunk, and in
the clutches of a gang of Sixth Ward cutthroats, but my protege, the bookkeeper, squandering
money right and left. I caught sight of him through the open door, and in hot indignation went
in and yanked him out, giving him a good talking to.  The gang followed, and began hostilities
at once.  But for the providential coming of two policemen, we should probably have both fared
ill. I had the old man locked up in the Oak Street Station. For a wonder, he had most of the
money yet, and thereafter I spent it for him.

On another occasion we were deliberately victimized--the reporters in Mulberry Street, I mean--by
a man with a pitiful story of hardship, which we took as truth and printed. When I got around
there the next morning to see about it, I found that some neighborhood roughs had established
a toll-gate in the alley, charging the pitying visitors who came in shoals a quarter for admission
to the show in the garret. The man was a fraud. That was right around the corner from a place
where, years before, I used to drop a nickel in a beggar woman's hand night after night as
I went past, because she had a baby cradled on her wheezy little hand-organ, until one night
the baby rolled into the gutter, and I saw that it was a rag baby, and that the woman was drunk.
It was on such evidence as this, both as to them and myself, that I early pinned my faith to
organized charity as just orderly charity, and I have found good reasons since to confirm me
in the choice. If any doubt had lingered in my mind, my experience in helping distribute the
relief fund to the tornado sufferers at Woodhaven a dozen years ago would have dispelled it.
It does seem as if the chance of getting something for nothing is, on the whole, the greatest
temptation one can hold out to frail human nature, whether in the slum, in Wall Street, or
out where the daisies grow.

Everything takes money. Our work takes a good deal. It happened more than once, when the bills
came in, that there was nothing to pay them with.  Now these were times to put to the test
my faith, as recorded above. My associates in the Board will bear me out that it was justified.
It is true that the strain was heavy once or twice. I recall one afternoon, as do they, when
we sat with bills amounting to $150 before us and not a cent in the bank, so the treasurer
reported. Even as she did, the mail-carrier brought two letters, both from the same town, as
it happened--Morristown, N.J. Each of them contained a check for $75, one from a happy mother
"in gratitude and joy," the other from "one stricken by a great sorrow" that had darkened her
life. Together they made the sum needed. We sat and looked at each other dumbly. To me it was
not strange: that was my mother's faith. But I do not think we, any of us, doubled after that;
and we had what we needed, as we needed it.

CHAPTER XII

I BECOME AN AUTHOR AND RESUME MY INTERRUPTED CAREER AS A LECTURER

For more than a year I had knocked at the doors of the various magazine editors with my pictures,
proposing to tell them how the other half lived, but no one wanted to know. One of the Harpers,
indeed, took to the idea, but the editor to whom he sent me treated me very cavalierly. Hearing
that I had taken the pictures myself, he proposed to buy them at regular photographer's rates
and "find a man who could write" to tell the story. We did not part with mutual expressions
of esteem. I gave up writing for a time then, and tried the church doors.  That which was bottled
up within me was, perhaps, getting a trifle too hot for pen and ink. In the church one might,
at all events, tell the truth unhindered.  So I thought; but there were cautious souls there,
too, who held the doors against Mulberry Street and the police reporter. It was fair, of course,
that they should know who I was, but I thought it sufficient introduction that I was a deacon
in my own church out on Long Island.  They did not, it seemed. My stock of patience, never
very large, was showing signs of giving out, and I retorted hotly that then, if they wanted
to know, I was a reporter, and perhaps Mulberry Street had as much sanctity in it as a church
that would not listen to its wrongs. They only shut the doors a little tighter at that. It
did not mend matters that about that time I tried a little truth-telling in my own fold and
came to grief. It did not prove to be any more popular on Long Island than in New York. I resigned
the diaconate and was thinking of hiring a hall--a theatre could be had on Sunday--wherein
to preach my lay sermon, when I came across Dr. Schauffler, the manager of the City Mission
Society, and Dr. Josiah Strong, the author of "Our Country." They happened to be together,
and saw at once the bearing of my pictures. Remembering my early experience with the magic
lantern, I had had slides made from my negatives, and on February 28, 1888, I told their story
in the Broadway Tabernacle. Thereafter things mended somewhat. Plymouth Church and Dr. Parkhurst's
opened their doors to me and the others fell slowly into line.

I had my say and felt better. I found a note from Dr. Schauffler among my papers the other
day that was written on the morning after that first speech.  He was pleased with it and with
the collection of $143.50 for the mission cause. I remember it made me smile a little grimly.
The fifty cents would have come handy for lunch that day. It just happened that I did not have
any. It happened quite often.  I was, as I said, ever a bad manager. I mention it here because
of two letters that came while I have been writing this, and which I may as well answer now.
One asks me to lift the mortgage from the writer's home. I get a good many of that kind.  The
writers seem to think I have much money and might want to help them. I should like nothing
better. To go around, if one were rich, and pay off mortgages on little homes, so that the
owners when they had got the interest together by pinching and scraping should find it all
gone and paid up without knowing how, seems to me must be the very finest fun in all the world.
But I shall never be able to do it, for I haven't any other money than what I earn with my
pen and by lecturing, and never had. So their appeals only make me poorer by a two-cent stamp
for an answer to tell them that, and make them no richer. The other letter asks why I and other
young men who have had to battle with the world did not go to the Young Men's Christian Association,
or to the missionaries, for help. I do not know about the others, but I did not want anybody
to help me. There were plenty that were worse off and needed help more. The only time I tried
was when Pater Breton, the good French priest in Buffalo, tried to get me across to France
to fight for his country, and happily did not succeed. As to battling with the world, that
is good for a young man, much better than to hang on to somebody for support A little starvation
once in a while even is not out of the way. We eat too much anyhow, and when you have fought
your way through a tight place, you are the better for it. I am afraid that is not always the
case when you have been shoved through.

And then again, as I have just told, when I did go to the ministers with a fair proposition,
they did not exactly jump at it. No, it was better the way it was.

The thing I had sought vainly so long came in the end by another road than I planned. One of
the editors of Scribner's Magazine saw my pictures and heard their story in his church, and
came to talk the matter over with me. As a result of that talk I wrote an article that appeared
in the Christmas Scribner's, 1889, under the title "How the Other Half Lives," and made an
instant impression. That was the beginning of better days.

Before I let the old depart I must set down an incident of my reporter's experience that crowds
in with a good hearty laugh, though it was not the slum that sent me to the Church of the Holy
Communion over on Sixth Avenue. And though the door was shut in my face, it was not by the
rector, or with malice prepense. A despatch from the Tenderloin police station had it that
the wife of the Rev. Dr. Henry Mottet was locked up there, out of her mind. We had no means
of knowing that Dr. Mottet was at that time a confirmed bachelor.  So I went over to condole
with him, and incidentally to ask what was the matter with his wife, any way. The servant who
came to the door did not know whether the doctor was in; she would go and see. But even as
she said it the wind blew the door shut behind her. It had a snap-lock.

"Oh!" she said, "I am shut out. If the doctor isn't in the house, I can't get in."

We rang, but no one came. There was only one way: to try the windows. The poor girl could not
be left in the street. So we went around the rectory and found one unlatched. Mammy thinks she
will be all run down, and is steeping up white-oak bark and cherry-tree
twigs.

Elinor will make up faces, I know; but mammy will make her take it. She didn't see Frederic
when he dropped in the red pepper.

I wouldn't have him know for anything that I skimmed it out.

Captain Welles has bought a chaise. There are now two in the place.

His is green-bottomed. It has a most agreeable leathery smell, and a gentle creak which is very
pleasant. The minister's is dark blue.

They are set high, and the tops tip forward, serving to keep out
both sun and rain. Poor Mrs. Scott was buried to-day.

* * * * *

June
7.--Elinor came yesterday, late in the afternoon. Frederic brought
her from the tavern.  Then he slowly telescoped his tall frame
into an armchair, and sank down, a look of comic despair settling upon his face.

"O Lord!" he sighed heavily. "A strange man climbs through my parlor window to tell me, a bachelor,
that my wife is locked up in the police station. What will happen next?"

And then we laughed together and made friends.  The woman was just an ordinary lunatic.

I was late home from the office one evening the week my Christmas article was printed. My wife
was waiting for me at the door, looking down the street. I saw that she had something on her
mind, but the children were all right, she said; nothing was amiss. Supper over, she drew a
chair to the fire and brought out a letter.

"I read it," she nodded. It was our way. The commonest business letter is to me a human document
when she has read it. Besides, she knows so much more than I. Her heart can find a way where
my head bucks blindly against stone walls.

The letter was from Jeanette Gilder, of the Critic, asking if I had thought of making my article
into a book. If so, she knew a publisher.  My chance had come. I was at last to have my say.

I should have thought I would have shouted and carried on. I didn't. We sat looking into the
fire together, she and I. Neither of us spoke. Then we went up to the children. They slept
sweetly in their cribs. I saw a tear in her eye as she bent over the baby's cradle, and caught
her to me, questioning.

"Shall we lose you now?" she whispered, and hid her head on my shoulder. I do not know what
jealous thought of authors being wedded to their work had come into her mind; or, rather, I
do. I felt it, and in my heart, while I held her close, I registered a vow which I have kept.
It was the last tear she shed for me. Our daughter pouts at her father now and then; says I
am "fierce." But She comes with her sewing to sit where I write, and when she comes the sun shines.

Necessarily, for a while, my new work held me very close. "How the Other Half Lives" was written
at night while the house slept, for I had my office work to attend to in the day. Then it was
my habit to light the lamps in all the rooms of the lower story and roam through them with
my pipe, for I do most of my writing on my feet. I began the book with the new year. In November
it was published, and on the day it came out I joined the staff of the Evening Sun. I merely
moved up one flight of stairs. Mulberry Street was not done with me yet, nor I with it.

I had had a falling out with the manager of the Associated Press Bureau,--the Tribune had retired
from the copartnership some years before,--and during one brief summer ran an opposition shop
of my own. I sold police news to all the papers, and they fell away from the Bureau with such
hearty unanimity that the manager came around and offered to farm out the department to me
entirely if I would join forces. But independence was ever sweet to me, and in this instance
it proved profitable even. I made at least three times as much money as before, but I did it
at such cost of energy and effort that I soon found it could not last, even with the phenomenal
streak of good luck I had struck. It seemed as if I had only to reach out to turn up news.
I hear people saying once in a while that there is no such thing as luck.  They are wrong.
There is; I know it. It runs in streaks, like accidents and fires. The thing is to get in the
way of it and keep there till it comes along, then hitch on, and away you go. It is the old
story of the early bird. I got up at five o'clock, three hours before any of my competitors,
and sometimes they came down to the office to find my news hawked about the street in extras
of their own papers.

One way or another, a fight there was always on hand. That seemed foreordained. If it was not
"the opposition" it was the police. When Mulberry Street took a rest the publisher's "reader"
began it, and the proof-reader. This last is an enemy of human kind anyhow. Not only that he
makes you say things you never dreamed of, but his being so cocksure that he knows better every
time, is a direct challenge to a fight. The "reader" is tarred with the same stick. He is the
one who passes on the manuscript, and he has an ingrown hatred of opinion. If a man has that,
he is his enemy before he ever sets eye on him. He passed on my manuscript with a blue pencil
that laid waste whole pages, once a whole chapter, with a stroke. It was like sacking a conquered
city. But he did not die in his sins. I joined battle at the first sight of that blue pencil.
The publishers said their reader was a very capable man. So he was, and a fine fellow to boot;
had forgotten more than I ever knew, except as to the other half, of which he did not know
anything. I suggested to the firm that if they did not think so, they had better let him write
a book to suit, or else print mine as I wrote it. It was fair, and they took my view of it.
So did he.  The blue pencil went out of commission.

How deadly tired I was in those days I do not think I myself knew until I went to Boston one
evening to help discuss sweating at the Institute of Technology. I had an hour to spare, and
went around into Beacon Street to call upon a friend. I walked mechanically up the stoop and
rang the bell. My friend was not in, said the servant who came to the door. Who should she
say called? I stood and looked at her like a fool: I had forgotten my name. I was not asleep;
I was rummaging in an agony of dread and excitement through every corner and crevice of my
brain for my own name, but I did not find it. As slowly as I could, to gain time, I reached
for my card-case and fumbled for a card, hoping to remember. But no ray came. Until I actually
read my name on my card it was as utterly gone as if I had never heard it. If the people of
Boston got anything out of my speech that day they did better than I. All the time I spoke
something kept saying over within me: "You are a nice fellow to make a speech at the Institute
of Technology; you don't even know your own name."

After that I was haunted by a feeling that I would lose myself altogether, and got into the
habit of leaving private directions in the office where I would probably be found, should question
arise. It arose at last in a Brooklyn church where I was making a speech with my magic-lantern
pictures.  While I spoke a feeling kept growing upon me that I ought to be down in the audience
looking at the pictures. It all seemed a long way off and in no way related to me. Before I
knew it, or any one had time to notice, I had gone down and taken a front seat. I sat there
for as much as five minutes perhaps, while the man with the lantern fidgeted and the audience
wondered, I suppose, what was coming next. Then it was the pictures that did not change which
fretted me; with a cold chill I knew I had been lost, and went back and finished the speech.
No one was any the wiser, apparently. But I was glad when, the following week, I wrote the
last page in my book. That night, my wife insists, I deliberately turned a somersault on the
parlor carpet while the big children cheered and the baby looked on, wide-eyed, from her high
chair.

I preserve among my cherished treasures two letters of that period from James Russell Lowell.
In one of them he gives me permission to use the verses with which I prefaced the book. They
were the text from which I preached my sermon. He writes that he is "glad they have so much
life left in them after forty years." But those verses will never die. They tell in a few lines
all I tried to tell on three hundred pages. The other letter was written when he had read the
book. I reproduce it here.

For myself I have never been able to satisfactorily explain the great run "How the Other Half
Lives" had. It is a curiously popular book even to-day.  Perhaps it was that I had had it in
me so long that it burst out at last with a rush that caught on. The title had a deal to do
with it. Mr. Howells asked me once where I got it. I did not get it. It came of itself. Like
Topsy, it growed. It had run in my mind ever since I thought of the things I tried to describe.
Then there was the piece of real good luck that Booth's "In Darkest England" was published
just then. People naturally asked, "how about New York?" That winter Ward McAllister wrote
his book about society as he had found it, and the circuit was made. Ministers preached about
the contrast." How the Other Half Lives "ran from edition to edition. There was speedily a
demand for more "copy," and I wrote "The Children of the Poor," following the same track. Critics
said there were more "bones" in it, but it was never popular like the "Other Half."

By "bones" I suppose they meant facts to tie to.  They were scarce enough at that stage of
the inquiry.  I have in my desk a table giving the ages at which children get their teeth that
bears witness to that. I had been struggling with the problem of child-labor in some East Side
factories, and was not making any headway. The children had certificates, one and all, declaring
them to be "fourteen," and therefore fit to be employed. It was perfectly evident that they
were not ten in scores of cases, but the employer shrugged his shoulders and pointed to the
certificate. The father, usually a tailor, would not listen at all, but went right on ironing.
There was no birth registry to fall back on; that end of it was neglected. There seemed to
be no way of proving the fact, yet the fact was there and must be proven. My own children were
teething at the time, and it gave me an idea. I got Dr. Tracy to write out that table for me,
showing at what age the dog-teeth should appear, when the molars, etc. Armed with that I went
into the factories and pried open the little workers' mouths.  The girls objected: their teeth
were quite generally bad; but I saw enough to enable me to speak positively.  Even allowing
for the backwardness of the slum, it was clear that a child that had not yet grown its dog-teeth
was not "fourteen," for they should have been cut at twelve at the latest. Three years later
the Reinhardt Committee reported to the Legislature that the net result of the Factory Law
was a mass of perjury and child-labor, and day began to dawn for the little ones, too.

Rough ways and rough work? Yes, but you must use the tools that come to hand, and be glad for
them, if you want to get things done. Bludgeons were needed just then, and, after all, you
can get a good deal of fun out of one when it is needed.  I know I did. By that time the whole
battle with the slum had evolved itself out of the effort to clean one pig-sty, and, as for
my own share in it, to settle for one dead dog. It was raging all along the line with demands
for tenement-house reform and the destruction of the old rookeries; for parks for the people
who were penned up in the slum; for playgrounds for their children; for decent teaching and
decent schools. There were too many dark spots in New York where we had neither. So dense was
the ignorance of the ruling powers of the needs and real condition of the public schools, which,
on parade days, they spoke of sententiously as the "corner-stone of our liberties," while the
people cheered the sentiment, that it was related how a Tammany Mayor had appointed to the
office of school trustee in the Third Ward a man who had been dead a whole year, and how, when
the world marvelled, it had been laughed off at the City Hall with the comment that what did
it matter: there were no schools in the ward; it was the wholesale grocery district. I do not
know how true it was, but there was no reason why it might not be. It was exactly on a par
with the rest of it. I do not mean to say that there were no good schools in New York. There
were some as good as anywhere; for there were high-souled teachers who redeemed even the slough
we were in from utter despair. But they were there in spite of it and they were far from being
the rule.  Let us hope for the day when that shall have been reversed as a statement of fact.
No one will hail it more gladly than I. There is an easy way of putting it to the test; we
did it once before.  Broach a measure of school reform and see what the question is that will
be asked by the teachers.  If it is, "How is it going to benefit the children?" hoist the flag;
the day of deliverance is at hand.  In the battle I refer to that question was not asked once.
The teachers stood shoulder to shoulder for their rights, let the children fare as they might.

However, that is an old grievance. We had it out over it once, and I have no mind to rip it
up again unless it is needed. My own father was a teacher; perhaps that is one reason why I
revere the calling so that I would keep its skirts clear of politics at any hazard. Another
is that I most heartily subscribe to the statement that the public school is the corner-stone
of our liberties, and to the sentiment that would keep the flag flying over it always. Only
I want as much respect for the flag: a clean school under an unsoiled flag! So we shall pull
through; not otherwise. The thing requires no argument.

My own effort in that fight was mainly for decent schoolhouses, for playgrounds, and for a
truant school to keep the boys out of jail. If I was not competent to argue over the curriculum
with a professor of pedagogy, I could tell, at least, if a schoolroom was so jammed that to
let me pass into the next room the children in the front seat had to rise and stand; or if
there was light enough for them to see their slates or the blackboard. Nor did it take the
wisdom of a Solomon to decide that a dark basement room, thirty by fifty feet, full of rats,
was not a proper place for a thousand children to call their only "playground." Play, in the
kindergarten scheme, is the "normal occupation of the child through which he first begins to
perceive moral relations." Nice kind of morals burrowed there for him! There was, in the whole
of Manhattan, but a single outdoor playground attached to a public school, and that was an
old burial-ground in First Street that had been wrested from the dead with immense toil. When
I had fed fat my grudge upon these things, I could still go where the public school children
came, and learn, by a little judicious pumping, how my friend, the professor, had stored their
minds. That is, if they did not come to me.  Many hundreds of them did, when under Roosevelt
we needed two thousand new policemen, and it was from some of them we learned that among the
thirteen States which formed the Union were "England, Ireland, Wales, Belfast, and Cork"; that
Abraham Lincoln was "murdered by Ballington Booth," and that the Fire Department was in charge
of the city government when the Mayor was away.  Don't I wish it were, and that they would
turn the hose on a while! What a lot of trouble it would save us in November.

As for a truant school, the lack of one was the worst outrage of all, for it compelled the
sending of boys, who had done no worse harm than to play hooky on a sunny spring day, to a
jail with iron bars in the windows. For the boy who did this wicked thing--let me be plain
about it and say that if he had not; if he had patiently preferred some of the schools I knew
to a day of freedom out in the sunshine, I should have thought him a miserable little lunkhead
quite beyond hope! As for those who locked him up, almost nothing I can think of would be bad
enough for them. The whole effort of society should be, and is getting to be more and more,
thank goodness and common sense, to keep the boy out of jail. To run to it with him the moment
the sap begins to boil up in him and he does any one of the thousand things we have all done
or wanted to do if we dared, why, it is sinful folly. I am not saying that there are not boys
who ought to be in jail, though to my mind it is the poorest use you can put them to; but to
put truants there, to learn all the tricks the jail has to teach, with them in the frame of
mind in which it receives them,--for boys are not fools, whatever those who are set over them
may be, and they know when they are ill-used,--I know of nothing so wickedly wasteful. That
was our way; is still in fact, to a large extent, though the principle has been disavowed as
both foul and foolish. But in those days the defenders of the system--Heaven save the mark!--fought
for it yet, and it was give and take right along, every day and all day.

Before this, in time to bear a strong hand in it all, there had come into the field a new force
that was destined to give both energy and direction to our scattered efforts for reform. Up
till then we had been a band of guerillas, the incentive proceeding usually from Dr. Felix
Adler, Mrs.  Josephine Shaw Lowell, or some one of their stamp; and the rest of us joining
in to push that cart up the hill, then taking time to breathe until another came along that
needed a lift. The social settlements, starting as neighborhood guilds to reassert the lost
brotherhood, became almost from the first the fulcrum, as it were, whence the lever for reform
was applied, because the whole idea of that reform was to better the lot of those whom the
prosperous up-town knew vaguely only as "the poor." If parks were wanted, if schools needed
bettering, there were at the College Settlement, the University Settlement, the Nurses' Settlement,
and at a score of other such places, young enthusiasts to collect the facts and to urge them,
with the prestige of their non-political organization to back them. The Hull House out in Chicago
set the pace, and it was kept up bravely at this end of the line. For one, I attached myself
as a kind of volunteer "auxiliary" to the College Settlement--that was what the girls there
called me--and to any one that would have me, and so in a few years' time slid easily into
the day when my ruder methods were quite out of date and ready to be shelved.

How it came about that, almost before I knew it, my tongue was enlisted in the fight as well
as my pen I do not know myself. It could not be because I had a "silver-tongue," for I read
in the local newspaper one day when I had been lecturing in the western part of the state that
"a voluble German with a voice like a squeaky cellar-door" had been in town. It seems that
I had fallen into another newspaper row, all unsuspecting, and was in the opposition editor's
camp. But, truly, I lay no claim to eloquence. So it must have been the facts, again.  There
is nothing like them. Whatever it was, it made me smile sometimes in the middle of a speech
to think of the prophecies when I was a schoolboy that "my tongue would be my undoing" for
here it was helping right wrongs instead. In fact, that was what it had tried to do in the
old days when the teachers were tyrannical. It entered the lists here when Will Craig, a clerk
in the Health Department, with whom I had struck up a friendship, helped me turn my photographs
into magic-lantern slides by paying the bills, and grew from that, until now my winters are
spent on the lecture platform altogether. I always liked the work. It tires less than the office
routine, and you feel the touch with your fellows more than when you sit and write your message.
Also, if you wish to learn about a thing, the best way is always to go and try to teach some
one else that thing. I never make a speech on a subject I am familiar with but that I come
away knowing more about it than I did at the start, though no one else may have said a word.

Then there is the chairman. You never can tell what sort of surprise is in store for you. In
a Massachusetts town last winter I was hailed on the stage by one of his tribe, a gaunt, funereal
sort of man, who wanted to know what he should say about me.

"Oh," said I, in a spirit of levity, "say anything you like. Say I am the most distinguished
citizen in the country. They generally do."

Whereupon my funereal friend marched upon the stage and calmly announced to the audience that
he did not know this man Riis, whom he was charged with introducing, never heard of him.

"He tells me," he went on with never a wink, "that he is the most distinguished citizen in
the country. You can judge for yourselves when you have heard him."

I thought at first it was some bad kind of joke; but no! He was not that kind of man. I do
not suppose he had smiled since he was born. Maybe he was an undertaker. Assuredly, he ought
to be.  But he had bowels after all. Instead of going off the stage and leaving me blue with
rage, he stayed to exhort the audience in a fifteen minutes' speech to vote right, or something
of that sort. The single remark, when at last he turned his back, that it was a relief to have
him "extinguished," made us men and brothers, that audience and me. I think of him with almost
as much pleasure as I do of that city editor chap out in Illinois who came blowing upon the
platform at the last minute and handed me a typewritten speech with the question if that would
do. I read it over. It began with the statement that it was the general impression that all
newspapermen were liars, and went on by easy stages to point out that there were exceptions,
myself for instance.  The rest was a lot of praise to which I had no claim. I said so, and
that I wished he would leave it out.

"Oh, well," he said, with a happy smile, "don't you see it gives you your cue. Then you can
turn around and say that anyway I am a liar."

With tongue or pen, the argument shaped itself finally into the fundamental one for the rescue
of the home imperiled by the slum. There all roads met. Good citizenship hung upon that issue.
Say what you will, a man cannot live like a pig and vote like a man. The dullest of us saw
it. The tenement had given to New York the name of "the homeless city." But with that gone
which made life worth living, what were liberty worth? With no home to cherish, how long before
love of country would be an empty sound? Life, liberty, pursuit of happiness? Wind! says the
slum, and the slum is right if we let it be. We cannot get rid of the tenements that shelter
two million souls in New York to-day, but we set about making them at least as nearly fit to
harbor human souls as might be.  That will take a long time yet. But a beginning was made.
With reform looming upon the heels of the Lexow disclosures came the Gilder Tenement-House
Commission in the autumn of 1894.

[ Picture of an entitled "Typical East Side Tenement Block" subtitled "Five hundred babies
in it, not one bathtub"]

Greater work was never done for New York than by that faithful body of men. The measure of
it is not to be found in what was actually accomplished, though the volume of that was great,
but in what it made possible. Upon the foundations they laid down we may build for all time
and be the better for it. Light and air acquired a legal claim, and where the sun shines into
the slum, the slum is doomed. The worst tenements were destroyed; parks were opened, schools
built, playgrounds made. The children's rights were won back for them. The slum denied them
even the chance to live, for it was shown that the worst rear tenements murdered the babies
at the rate of one in five. The Commission made it clear that the legislation that was needed
was "the kind that would root out every old ramshackle disease-breeding tenement in the city."
That was the way to begin it. As to the rest of them, it laid the foundation deeper yet, for
it made us see that life in them "conduces to the corruption of the young." That told it all.
It meant that a mortgage was put on the civic life of the morrow, which was not to be borne.
We were forewarned.

The corruption of the young! We move with rapid strides in our time. That which was a threat,
scoffed at by many, has become a present and dreadful peril in half a dozen brief years. We
took a short cut to make it that when we tried to drain the pool of police blackmail of which
the Lexow disclosures had shown us the hideous depths. We drained it into the tenements, and
for the police infamy got a real-estate blackmail that is worse.  The chairman of the Committee
of Fifteen tells us that of more than a hundred tenements, full of growing children, which
his committee has canvassed, not one had escaped the contamination that piles up the landlord's
profits. Twelve dollars for an honest flat, thirty for the other kind and no questions asked!
I find in my scrap-book this warning, sounded by me in the Christmas holidays, 1893, when the
country was ringing with Dr. Parkhurst's name:--

"I would not, whatever else might happen, by any hasty or ill-advised system of wholesale raids
crowd these women into the tenements and flats of our city. That is what will surely happen,
is happening now. It is a danger infinitely greater than any flowing from their presence where
they are, and as they are. Each centre of moral contagion by this scattering process becomes
ten or twenty, planted where they will do the most possible harm. Think of the children brought
in daily, hourly contact with this vice! Think of the thousands of young women looking vainly
for work this hard winter! Be there ever so little money for woman's honest work, there is
always enough to buy her virtue. Have tenement houses moral resources that can be trusted to
keep her safe from this temptation?

"This is a wicked villany that must not be permitted, come whatever else may. We hear of danger
to 'our young men,' from present conditions.  What sort of young men must they be who would
risk the sacrifice of their poorer sisters for their own 'safety'? And it is being risked wherever
houses of this kind are being shut up and the women turned into the streets, there to shift
for themselves. The jail does not keep them. Christian families will not receive them. They
cannot be killed. No door opens to them: yet they have to go somewhere. And they go where they
think they can hide from the police and still ply the trade that gives them the only living
society is willing they shall have, though it says it is not."

And they did go there. Dr. Parkhurst was not to blame. He was fighting Tammany that dealt the
cards and took all the tricks, and for that fight New York owes him a debt it hardly yet knows
of. Besides, though those raids hastened the process, it was already well underway. The police
extortion of itself would have finished it in time. A blackmailer in the long run always kills
the goose that lays his golden egg. His greed gets the better of his sense. The interview I
quoted was not a plea for legalizing wrong. That will get us no farther. It was rather a summons
to our people to cease skulking behind lying phrases and look the matter squarely in the face.
With a tenement-house law, passed this winter, which sends the woman to jail and fines the
landlord and his house $1000, we shall be in the way shortly of doing so.  Until we do that
justice first, I do not see how we can. Poverty's back is burdened enough without our loading
upon it the sins we are afraid to face. Meanwhile we shall be getting up courage to talk plainly
about it, which is half the battle. Think of the shock it would have given our grandmothers
to hear of a meeting of women in a public hall "to protest against protected vice." On a Sunday,
too.  Come to think of it, I do not know but that wholesome, plain speech on this subject is
nearer the whole than half the battle. I rather guess it is. 

An' gives each feller his dinner an' a hat.

"I was half afeered you wouldn't be open yet, Rowton--but I was determined to git ahead o' the Christmus
crowd, an' I started by starlight. I ca'culate to meet 'em all a-goin' back.

"Well, I vow, ef yo' sto'e don't look purty. Wish she could see it. She'd have some idee of New York.
But, of co'se, I couldn't fetch her to-day, an' me a-comin' specially to pick out her Christmus
gif'. She's jest like a child. Ef she s'picions befo' hand what she's a-goin' to git, why,
she don't want it.

"I notice when I set on these soap-boxes, my pockets is jest about even with yo' cash-drawer,
Rowton.

Well, that's what we're here for. Fetch out all yo' purties, now, an' lay 'em along on the
counter. You know her, an' she ain't to be fooled in quality.

Reckon I will walk around a little an' see what you've got. I 'ain't got a idee on earth what
to buy, from a broach to a barouche. Let's look over some o' yo' silver things, Rowton. Josh
Porter showed me a butter-dish you sold him with a silver cow on the led of it, an' I was a-wonderin'
ef, maybe, you didn't have another.

"That's it. That's a mighty fine idee, a statue like that is. It sort o' designates a thing.
D'rec'ly a person saw the cow, now, he'd s'picion the butter inside the dish. Of co'se, he'd know
they wouldn't hardly be hay in it--no, ez you say, 'nor a calf.' No doubt wife'll be a-wantin'
one o' these cow-topped ones quick ez she sees Josh's wife's. She'll see the p'int in a minute--of
the cow, I mean. But, of co'se, I wouldn't think o' gittin' her the same thing Josh's got for
Helen, noways. We're too near neighbors for that. Th' ain't no fun in borryin' duplicates over
a stile when company drops in sudden, without a minute's warnin'.

"No, you needn't call my attention to that tiltin' ice-pitcher. I seen it soon ez I approached
the case. Didn't you take notice to me a-liftin' my hat? That was what I was a-bowin' to, that
pitcher was. No, that's the thing wife hankers after, an' I know it, an' it's the one thing
I'll never buy her. Not thet I'd begrudge it to her--but to tell the truth it'd pleg me to have
to live with the thing. I wouldn't mind it on Sundays or when they was company in the house,
but I like to take off my coat, hot days, an' set around in my shirt-sleeves, an' I doubt ef I'd
have the cheek to do it in the face of sech a thing as that.

"Fact is, when I come into a room where one of 'em is, I sort o' look for it to tilt over of
its own accord an' bow to me an' ask me to 'be seated.'

"You needn't to laugh. Of co'se, they's a reason for it--but it's so. I'm jest that big of a
ninny. Ricollec' Jedge Robinson, he used to have one of 'em--jest about the size o' this one--two
goblets an' a bowl--an' when I'd go up to the house on a errand for
pa, time pa was distric' coroner, the jedge's mother-in-law, ol' Mis'
Meredy, she'd be settin' in the back room a-sewin,' an' when the black
gal would let me in the front door she'd sort o' whisper: 'Invite
him to walk into the parlor and be seated.' I'd overhear her say it,
an' I'd turn into the parlor, an' first thing I'd see'd be that ice-pitcher.

I don't think anybody can set down good, noways, when they're ast to 'be seated,' an' when,
in addition to that, I'd meet the swingin' ice-pitcher half way to the patent rocker, I didn't
have no mo' consciousness where I was a-settin' than nothin'. An' like ez not the rocker'd
squawk first strain I put on it. She wasn't no mo'n a sort o' swingin' ice-pitcher herself,
ol' Mis' Meredy wasn't--walkin' round the house weekdays dressed in black silk, with a lace
cap on her head, an' half insultin' his company thet he'd knowed all his life. I did threaten
once-t to tell her, 'No, thank you, ma'am, I don't keer to be seated--but I'll set down ef it's
agreeable,' but when the time would come I'd turn round an' there'd
be the ice-pitcher.

An' after that I couldn't be expected to do nothin' but back into the parlor over the Brussels
carpet an' chaw my hat-brim. But, of co'se, I was young then.

"Reckon you've heerd the tale they tell on Aleck Turnbull the day he went there in the old lady's
time. She had him ast into the cushioned sanctuary--an' Aleck hadn't seen much them days--an'
what did he do but gawk around an' plump hisself down into that gilt-backed rocker with a
tune-playin' seat in it, an', of co'se, quick ez his weight struck it, it started up a jig
tune, an' they say Aleck shot out o' that door like ez ef he'd been fired out of a cannon.
An' he never did go back to say what he come after.

I doubt ef he ever knew.

"How much did you say for the ice-pitcher, Rowton? Thirty dollars--an' you'll let me have it for--hush,
now, don't say that. I don't see how you could stand so close to it an' offer to split dollars.
Of co'se I ain't a-buyin' it, but ef I was I wouldn't want no reduction on it, I'd feel like
ez ef it would always know it an' have a sort of contemp' for me. They's suitableness in all things.
Besides, I never want no reduction on anything I buy for her, someways. You can charge me reg'lar
prices an' make it up on the Christmas gif' she buys for me--that is, ef she buys it from you.
Of co'se it'll be charged. That's a mighty purty coral broach, that grape-bunch one, but she's
so pink-complected, I don't know ez she'd become it. I like this fish-scale set, myself, but
she might be prejerdyced ag'in' the idee of it. You say she admired that hand-merror, an' this
pair o' side-combs--an' she 'lowed she'd git 'em fur my Christmus
gif' ef she dared?

But, of co'se, she was jokin' about that. Poor little thing, she ain't never got over the way
folks run her about that side-saddle she give me last Christmus, though I never did see anything
out o' the way in it. She knew thet the greatest pleasure o' my life was in makin' her happy,
and she was jest simple-hearted enough to do it--that's all--an' I can truly say thet I ain't
never had mo' pleasure out of a Christmus gif' in my life than I've had out o' that side-saddle.
She's been so consistent about it--never used it in her life without a-borryin' it of me, an' she
does it so cunnin'. Of co'se I don't never loand it to her without a kiss. They ain't a cunnin'er
play-actor on earth 'n she is, though she ain't never been to a theatre--an' wouldn't go, bein'
too well raised.

"You say this pitcher wasn't there when she was here--no, for ef it had 'a' been, I know she'd 'a'
took on over it. Th' ain't never been one for sale in Simpkinsville before. They've been several
of 'em brought here by families besides the one old Mis' Meredy presided over--though that
was one o' the first. But wife is forever a-pickin' out purty patterns of 'em in the catalogues.
Ef that one hadn't 'a' give me such a setback in my early youth I'd git her this, jest to please
her. Ef I was to buy this one, it an' the plush album would set each other off lovely. She's a-buyin'
it on instalments from the same man thet enlarged her photograph to a' ile-painted po'trait,
an' it's a dandy! She's got me a-settin' up on the front page, took with my first wife, which it
looks to me thet if she'd do that much to please me, why, I might buy almost anything to please
her, don't it? Of co'se I don't take no partic'lar pleasure in that photograph--but she seems
to think I might, an' no doubt she's put it there to show thet she ain't small-minded. You
ricollec' Mary Jane was plain-featured, but Kitty don't seem to mind
that ez much ez I do, now thet she's gone an' her good deeds ain't
in sight.

I never did see no use in throwin' a plain-featured woman's looks up to her post mortem.

"This is a mighty purty pitcher, in my judgment, but to tell the truth I've made so much fun
o' the few swingin' pitchers thet's been in this town that I'd be ashamed to buy it, even ef
I could git over my own obnoxion to it. But of co'se, ez you say, everybody'd know thet I
done it jest to please her--an' I don't know thet they's a more worthy object in a married man's
life than that.

"I s'pose I'll haf to git it for her. An' I want a bold, outspoke
dedication on it, Rowton.

I ain't a-goin' about it shamefaced. Here, gimme that pencil. Now, I want this inscription on
it, word for word. I've got to stop over at Paul's to git him to regulate my watch, an' I'll
tell him to hurry an' mark it for me, soon ez you send it over.

"Well, so long. Happy Christmus to you an' yo' folks.

"Say, Rowton, wrap up that little merror an' them side-combs an' send 'em along, too, please.
So long!"

Part II

Time: Same morning. Plate: Store in Washington.

Second Monologue, by Mrs. Trimble:

"Why, howdy, Mis' Blakes--howdy, Mis' Phemie--howdy, all.

Good-mornin', Mr. Lawson. I see yo' sto'e is fillin' up early. Great minds run in the same channel,
partic'larly on Christmus Eve.

"My old man started off this mornin' befo' day, an' soon ez he got out o' sight down the Simpkinsville
road, I struck out for Washin'ton, an' here I am.

He thinks I'm home seedin' raisins. He was out by starlight this mornin' with the big wagon, an', of
co'se, I know what that means.

He's gone for my Christmus gif', an' I'm put to it to know what tremenjus thing he's a-layin'
out to fetch me--thet takes a cotton-wagon to haul it. Of co'se I imagine everything, from a
guyaskutus down. I always did like to git things too big to go in my stockin'. What you say,
Mis' Blakes? Do I hang up my stockin'? Well, I reckon. I hadn't quit when I got married, an'
I think that's a poor time to stop, don't you? Partic'larly when you marry a man twice-t yo'
age, an' can't convince him thet you're grown, noways. Yas, indeedy, that stockin' goes up
to-night--not mine, neither, but one I borry from Aunt Jane Peters. I don't wonder y' all laugh.
Aunt Jane's foot is a yard long ef it's a' inch, but I'll find it stuffed to-morrer mornin',
even ef the guyaskutus has to be chained to the mantel.

An' it'll take me a good hour to empty it, for he always puts a lot o' devilment in it, an' I
give him a beatin' over the head every nonsensical thing I find in it. We have a heap o' fun
over it, though.

"He don't seem to know I'm grown, an' I know I don't know he's old.

"Listen to me runnin' on, an' you all nearly done yo' shoppin'. Which do you think would be
the nicest to give him, Mr. Lawson--this silver card-basket, or that Cupid vase, or--?

"Y' all needn't to wink. I seen you, Mis' Blakes. Ef I was to pick out a half dozen socks for
him like them you're a-buyin' for Mr. Blakes, how much fun do you suppose we'd have out of
it? Not much. I'd jest ez lief 'twasn't Christmus--an' so would he--though they do say his first
wife give him a bolt o' domestic once-t for Christmus, an' made it up into night-shirts an'
things for him du'in' the year. Think of it.

No, I'm a-goin' to git him somethin' thet's got some git-up to it, an'--an' it'll be either--that--Cupid
vase--or--lordy, Mr. Lawson, don't fetch out that swingin' ice-pitcher. I glimpsed it quick ez
I come in the door, an', says I, 'Get thee behind me, Satan,' an' turned my back on it immejiate.

"But
of co'se I ca'culated to git you to fetch it out jest for me to look at, after I'd selected
his present. Ain't it a beauty? Seems to me they couldn't be a more suitable present for a man--ef
he didn't hate 'em so. No, Mis' Blakes, it ain't only thet he don't never drink ice-water.
I wouldn't mind a little thing like that.

"You ricollec' ol' Mis' Meredy, she used to preside over one thet they had, an' somehow he taken
a distaste to her an' to ice-pitchers along with her, an' he don't
never lose a chance to express his disgust.

When them new folks was in town last year projec'in' about the railroad,
he says to me, 'I hope they won't stay, they'd never suit Simpkinsville
on earth.

They're the regular swingin' ice-pitcher sort. Git folks like that in town an' it wouldn't be
no time befo' they'd start a-chargin' pew rent in our churches.' We was both glad when they
give out thet they wasn't a-goin' to build the road. They say railroads is mighty corrupting
an' me, with my sick headaches, an' a' ingine whistle in town, no indeed! Besides, ef it was
to come I know I'd be the first one run over. It's bad enough to have bulls in our fields without
turnin' steam-ingines loose on us. Jest one look at them cow-ketchers is enough to frustrate a person
till he'd stand stock still an' wait to be run over--jest like poor crazy Mary done down here
to Cedar Springs.

"They say crazy Mary looked that headlight full in the face, jes' the same ez a bird looks at
a snake, till the thing caught her, an' when the long freight train had passed over her she didn't
have a single remain, not a one, though I always thought they might've gethered up enough to give
her a funeral. When I die I intend to have a funeral, even if I'm drownded at sea. They can
stand on the sho'e, an' I'll be jest ez likely to know it ez them thet lay in view lookin' so ca'm.
I've done give him my orders, though they ain't much danger o' me dyin' at sea, not ef we
stay in Simpkinsville.

"How much are them willer rockers, Mr. Lawson? I declare that one favors my old man ez it sets
there, even without him in it. Nine dollars? That's a good deal for a pants'-tearin' chair,
seems to me, which them willers are, the last one of 'em, an' I'm a mighty poor hand to darn.
Jest let me lay my stitches in colors, in the shape of a flower, an' I can darn ez well ez
the next one, but I do despise to fill up holes jest to be a-fillin'. Yes, ez you say, them
silver-mounted brier-wood pipes is mighty purty, but he smokes so much ez it is, I don't know
ez I want to encourage him. Besides, it seems a waste o' money to buy a Christmus gif' thet a
person has to lay aside when company comes in, an' a silver-mounted pipe ain't no politer to smoke
in the presence o' ladies than a corncob is. An' ez for when we're by ourselves--shucks.

"Ef you don't mind, Mr. Lawson, I'll stroll around through the sto'e an' see what you've got
while you wait on some o' them thet know their own minds. I know mine well enough. What I want
is that swingin' ice-pitcher, an' my judgment tells me thet they ain't a more suitable present in
yo' sto'e for a settled man thet has built hisself a residence an' furnished it complete the
way he has, but of co'se 'twouldn't never do. I always think how
I'd enjoy it when the minister called.

I wonder what Mr. Lawson thinks o' me back here a-talkin' to myself. I always like to talk
about the things I'm buyin'. That's a mighty fine saddle-blanket, indeed it is. He was talkin'
about a new saddle-blanket the other day. But that's a thing a person could pick up almost
any day, a saddle-blanket is. A' ice-pitcher now--

"Say, Mr. Lawson, lemme look at that tiltin'-pitcher again, please, sir. I jest want to see
ef the spout is gold-lined.

Yes, so it is--an' little holes down in the throat of it, too. It
cert'n'y is well made, it cert'n'y is.

I s'pose them holes is to strain out grasshoppers or anything thet might fall into it. That musician
thet choked to death at the barbecue down at Pump Springs last summer might 'a' been livin'
yet ef they'd had sech ez this to pass water in, instid o' that open pail. He's got a mighty
keerless way o' drinkin' out o' open dippers, too. No tellin' what he'll scoop up some day.
They'd be great safety for him in a pitcher like this--ef I could only make him see it. It would
seem a sort o' awkward thing to pack out to the well every single time, an' he won't drink
no water but what he draws fresh. An' I s'pose it would look sort o' silly to put it in here
jest to drink it out again.

"Sir? Oh yes, I saw them saddle-bags hang-in' up back there, an' they are fine, mighty fine,
ez you say, an' his are purty near wo'e out, but lordy, I don't want to buy a Christmus gif'
thet's hung up in the harness-room half the time. What's that you say? Won't you all never git
done a-runnin' me about that side-saddle? You can't pleg me about that. I got it for his pleasure,
ef it was for my use, an', come to think about it, I'd be jest reversin' the thing on the pitcher.
It would be for his use an' my pleasure. I wish I could see my way to buy it for him. Both
goblets go with it, you say--an' the slop bowl? It cert'n'y is handsome--it cert'n'y is. An'
it's expensive--nobody could accuse me o' stintin' 'im. Wonder why they didn't put some polar
bears on the goblets, too. They'd 'a' had to be purty small bears, but they could 'a' been cubs,
easy.

"I don't reely believe, Mr. Lawson, indeed I don't, thet I could find a mo' suitable present for
him ef I took a month, an' I don't keer what he's a-pickin' out for me this minute, it can't be
no handsomer 'n this. Th' ain't no use--I'll haf to have it--for 'im. Jest charge it, please,
an' now I want it marked.

I'll pay cash for the markin', out of my egg money. An' I want his full name. Have it stamped
on the iceberg right beside the bear. 'Ephraim N. Trimble.' No, you needn't to spell out the
middle name. I should say not. Ef you knew what it was you wouldn't ask me. Why, it's Nebuchadnezzar.
It'd use up the whole iceberg. Besides, I couldn't never think o' Nebuchadnezzar there an' not
a spear o' grass on the whole lan'scape. You needn't to laugh. I know it's silly, but I always
think o' sech ez that. No, jest write it, 'Ephraim N. Trimble, from his wife, Kitty.' Be sure
to put in the Kitty, so in after years it'll show which wife give it to him. Of co'se, them thet
knew us both would know which one. Mis' Mary Jane wouldn't never
have approved of it in the world. Why, she used to rip up her old
crocheted tidies an' things an' use 'em over in bastin' thread, so
they tell me. She little dremp' who she was a-savin' for, poor thing.
She was buyin' this pitcher then, but she didn't know it. But I keep
a-runnin' on. Go on with the inscription, Mr. Lawson. What have you
got? 'From his wife, Kitty'--what's the matter with 'affectionate
wife'? You say affectionate is a purty expensive word? But 'lovin''
'll do jest ez well, an' it comes cheaper, you say? An' plain 'wife'
comes cheapest of all? An' I don't know but what it's mo' suitable,
anyhow--at his age. Of co'se, you must put in the date, an' make the
'Kitty' nice an' fancy, please. Lordy, well, the deed's done--an'
I reckon he'll threaten to divo'ce me when he sees it--till he reads
the inscription. Better put in the 'lovin',' I reckon, an' put it
in capitals--they don't cost no more, do they? Well, goodbye, Mr.
Lawson, I reckon you'll be glad to see me go. I've outstayed every
last one thet was here when I come. Well, good-bye! Have it marked
immediate, please, an' I'll call back in an hour. Good-bye, again!"

Part
III

When old man Trimble stood before the fireplace at midnight that
night, stuffing little parcels into the deep, borrowed stocking, he
chuckled noiselessly, and glanced with affection towards the corner
of the room where his young wife lay sleeping. He was a fat old man,
and as he stood with shaking sides in his loose, home-made pajamas,
he would have done credit to a more conscious impersonation of old
Santa himself.

His task finally done, he glanced down at a tall bundle
that stood on the floor almost immediately in front of him, moved
back with his hands resting on his hips, and thoughtfully surveyed
it.

"Well, ef anybody had 'a' told it on me I never would 'a' believed
it," he said, under his breath. "The idee o' me, Ephe Trimble, settin'
up sech a thing ez that in his house--at my time o' life." Then, glancing
towards the sleeper, he added, with a chuckle, "an' ef they'd 'a'
prophesied it I wouldn't 'a' believed sech ez thet, neither--at my
time o' life--bless her little curly head."

He sat down on the floor
beside the bundle, clipped the twine, and cautiously pushed back the
wrappings. Then, rising, he carefully set each piece of the water-set
up above the stocking on the mantel. He did not stop to examine it.
He was anxious to get it in place without noise.

It made a fine show,
even in the dim, unsteady light of the single taper that burned in
its tumbler of oil close beside the bed. Indeed, when it arose in
all its splendor, he was very much impressed.

"A thing like that
ought to have a chandelier to set it off right," he thought--"yas,
and she'll have one, too--she'll have anything she wants--thet I can
give her."

Sleep came slowly to the old man that night, and even
long after his eyes were closed, the silver things seemed arrayed
in line upon his mental retina.  Old Mr. Walling tore his
hair; said the thing had never been done before, and it had not. But I got the order and got
the interview, though Byrnes, black with rage, commanded a policeman to stand on either side
of the prisoner while I talked to him.  He himself stood by, glaring at me. It was not a good
way to get an interview, and, in fact, the man had nothing to tell. But I had my way and I
made the most of it. After that Captain Byrnes and I got along. We got to think a lot of each
other after a while.

Perhaps he was a tyrant because he was set over crooks, and crooks are cowards in the presence
of authority. His famous "third degree" was chiefly what he no doubt considered a little wholesome
"slugging." He would beat a thief into telling him what he wanted to know. Thieves have no
rights a policeman thinks himself bound to respect.  But when he had to do with men with minds
he had other resources. He tortured his prisoner into confession in the Unger murder case by
locking him up out of reach of a human voice, or sight of a human face, in the basement of
Police Headquarters, and keeping him there four days, fed by invisible hands. On the fifth
he had him brought up through a tortuous way, where the tools he had used in murdering his
partner were displayed on the walls as if by accident. Led into the Inspector's presence by
the jailer, he was made to stand while Byrnes finished a letter. Then he turned his piercing
glance upon him with a gesture to sit.  The murderer sank trembling upon a lounge, the only
piece of furniture in the room, and sprang to his feet with a shriek the next instant: it was
the one upon which he had slaughtered his friend, all blood-bespattered as then. He sprawled
upon the floor, a gibbering, horror-stricken wretch, and confessed his sin.

As in this instance, so in the McGloin murder case, the moral certainty of guilt was absolute,
but the legal evidence was lacking. McGloin was a young ruffian who had murdered a saloon-keeper
at a midnight raid on his place. He was the fellow who the night before he was hanged invited
the Chief of Detectives to "come over to the wake; they'll have a devil of a time." For six
months Byrnes had tried everything to bring the crime home to him, but in vain. At last he
sent out and had McGloin and his two "pals" arrested, but so that none of them knew of the
plight of the others.  McGloin was taken to Mulberry Street, and orders were given to bring
the others in at a certain hour fifteen or twenty minutes apart. Byrnes put McGloin at the
window in his office while he questioned him. Nothing could be got out of him.  As he sat there
a door was banged below. Looking out he saw one of his friends led across the yard in charge
of policemen. Byrnes, watching him narrowly, saw his cheek blanch; but still his nerve held.
Fifteen minutes passed; another door banged. The murderer, looking out, saw his other pal led
in a prisoner. He looked at Byrnes. The Chief nodded:--

"Squealed, both."

It was a lie, and it cost the man his life. "The jig is up then," he said, and told the story
that brought him to the gallows.

I could not let Byrnes go without a word, for he filled a large space in my life. It is the
reporter, I suppose, who sticks out there. The boys called him a great faker, but they were
hardly just to him in that. I should rather call him a great actor, and without being that
no man can be a great detective.  He made life in a mean street picturesque while he was there,
and for that something is due him. He was the very opposite of Roosevelt--quite without moral
purpose or the comprehension of it, yet with a streak of kindness in him that sometimes put
preaching to shame. Mulberry Street swears by him to-day, even as it does, under its breath,
by Roosevelt. Decide from that for yourself whether his presence there was for the good or the bad.

In writing "How the Other Half Lives" I had been at great pains not to overstate my case. I
knew that it would be questioned, and was anxious that no flaws should be picked in it, for,
if there were, harm might easily come of it instead of good.  I saw now that in that I had
been wise. The Gilder Tenement-House Commission more than confirmed all that I had said about
the tenements and the schools. The Reinhardt Committee was even more emphatic on the topic
of child labor. I was asked to serve on the Seventy's sub-committee on Small Parks. In the
spring of 1896, the Council of Confederated Good Government Clubs appointed me its general
agent, and I held the position for a year, giving all my spare time to the planning and carrying
out of such work as it seemed to me ought to make a record for a reform administration.  We
wanted it to last. That was a great year. They wanted a positive programme, and my notions
of good government were nothing if not positive. They began and ended with the people's life.
We tore down unfit tenements, forced the opening of parks and playgrounds, the establishment
of a truant school and the remodelling of the whole school system, the demolition of the overcrowded
old Tombs and the erection on its site of a decent new prison. We overhauled the civil courts
and made them over new in the charter of the Greater New York. We lighted dark halls; closed
the "cruller" bakeries in tenement-house cellars that had caused the loss of no end of lives,
for the crullers were boiled in fat in the early morning hours while the tenants slept, and
when the fat was spilled in the fire their peril was awful.  We fought the cable-car managers
at home and the opponents of a truant school at Albany. We backed up Roosevelt in his fight
in the Police Board, and--well, I shall never get time to tell it all.  But it was a great
year. That it did not keep the Good Government clubs alive was no fault of my programme. It
was mine, I guess. I failed to inspire them with the faith that was in me. I had been going
it alone so long that I did not know how to use the new tool that had come to hand.  There
is nothing like an organization if you know how to use it. I did not. Perhaps, also, politics
had something to do with it. They were in for playing the game. I never understood it.

But if I did not make the most of it, I had a good time that year. There were first the two
small parks to be laid out over on the East Side, where the Gilder Commission had pointed to
the smothering crowds. I had myself made a member of the Citizens' Committee that was appointed
to locate them. It did not take us any nine years or six, or three. We did the business in
three weeks, and having chosen the right spots, we went to the Legislature with a bill authorizing
the city to seize the property at once, ahead of condemnation, and it was passed. We were afraid
that Tammany might come back, and the event proved that we were wise.  You bring up the people
slowly to a reform programme, particularly when it costs money. They will pay for corruption
with a growl, but seem to think that virtue ought always to be had for nothing. It makes the
politicians' game easy. They steal the money for improvements, and predict that reform will
raise the tax-rate. When the prophecy comes true, they take the people back in their sheltering
embrace with an "I told you so!" and the people nestle there repentant. There was a housing
conference at which that part of the work was parcelled out: the building of model tenements
to the capitalists who formed the City and Suburban Homes Company; the erection of model lodging-houses
to D. O. Mills, the banker philanthropist, who was anxious to help that way. I chose for the
Good Government clubs the demolition of the old tenements.  It was my chance. I hated them.
A law had been made the year before empowering the Health Board to seize and destroy tenement-house
property that was a threat to the city's health, but it had remained a dead letter. The authorities
hesitated to attack property rights, vested rights. Charles G. Wilson, the President of the
Board, was a splendid executive, but he was a holdover Tammany appointee, and needed backing.

Now that Theodore Roosevelt sat in the Health Board, fresh from his war on the police lodging-rooms
of which I told, they hesitated no longer.  I put before the Board a list of the sixteen worst
rear tenements in the city outside of the Bend, and while the landlords held their breath in
astonishment, they were seized, condemned, and their tenants driven out. The Mott Street Barracks
were among them. In 1888 the infant death-rate among the 350 Italians they harbored had been
325 per thousand--that is to say, one-third of all the babies died that year. That was the
kind of evidence upon which those rear tenements were arraigned.  Ninety-four of them, all
told, were seized that year, and in them there had been in four years 956 deaths--a rate of
62.9 when the general city death-rate was 24.63. I shall have once more, and for the last time,
to refer to "A Ten Years' War" for the full story of that campaign. As I said, it was great.

Conceive, if you can, the state of mind of a man to whom a dark, overcrowded tenement had ever
been as a personal affront, now suddenly finding himself commissioned with letters of marque
and reprisal, as it were, to seize and destroy the enemy wherever found, not one at a time,
but by blocks and battalions in the laying out of parks. I fed fat my ancient grudge and grew
good humor enough to last me for a dozen years in those two. They were the years when, in spite
of hard work, I began to grow stout, and honestly, I think it was tearing down tenements that
did it. Directly or indirectly, I had a hand in destroying seven whole blocks of them as I
count it up. I wish it had been seventy.

The landlords sued, but the courts sided with the Health Board. When at last we stopped to
take breath we had fairly broken the back of the slum and made precedents of our own that would
last a while. Mr. Roosevelt was personally sued twice, I think, but that was all the good it
did them. We were having our innings that time, and there were a lot of arrears to collect.
The city paid for the property that was taken, of course, and more than it ought to have paid,
to my way of thinking. The law gave the owner of a tenement that was altogether unfit just
the value of the brick and timbers that were in it. It was enough, for "unfit" meant murderous,
and why should a man have a better right to kill his neighbor with a house than with an axe
in the street?  But the lawyers who counseled compromise bought Gotham Court, one of the most
hopeless slums in the Fourth Ward, for nearly $20,000. It was not worth so many cents. The
Barracks with their awful baby death-rate were found to be mortgaged to a cemetery corporation.
The Board of Health gave them the price of opening one grave for their share, and tore down
the rear tenements. A year or two later I travelled to Europe on an ocean steamer with the
treasurer of that graveyard concern. We were ten days on the way, and I am afraid he did not
have altogether a good time of it. The ghost of the Barracks would keep rising out of the deep
before us, sitting there in our steamer chairs, from whichever quarter the wind blew. I suppose
he took it as a victory when the Court of Appeals decided upon a technicality that the Barracks
should not have been destroyed; but so did I, for they were down by that time. The city could
afford to pay.  We were paying for our own neglect, and it was a good lesson.

I have said more than once in these pages that I am not good at figuring, and I am not; a child
could do better. For that very reason I am going to claim full credit for every time I do a
sum right. It may not happen again. Twice during that spell, curiously enough, did I downright
distinguish myself in that line. I shall never be able to tell you how; I only know that I
did it. Once was when I went before the Board of Estimate and Apportionment to oppose an increase
in the appropriation for the Tombs which the Commissioner of Correction had asked for. His
plea was that there had been a large increase in the census of the prison, and he marched up
a column of figures to prove it. To the amazement of the Board, and really, if the truth be
told, of myself, I demonstrated clearly from his own figures that not only had there been no
increase, but that there could not be without criminally overcrowding the wretched old prison,
in which already every cell had two inmates, and some three. The exhibit was so striking that
the Commissioner and his bookkeeper retired in confusion. It was just the power of the facts
again. I wanted to have the horrid old pile torn down, and had been sitting up nights acquainting
myself with all that concerned it. Now it is gone, and a good riddance to it.

The other computation was vastly more involved.  It concerned the schools, about which no one
knew anything for certain. The annual reports of the Department of Education were models of
how to say a thing so that no one by any chance could understand what it was about. It was
possible to prove from them that, while there was notoriously a dearth of school accommodation,
while children knocked vainly for admission and the Superintendent clamored for more schools,
yet there were ten or twenty thousand seats to spare. But it was not possible to get the least
notion from them of what the real need was. I tried for many months, and then set about finding
out for myself how many children who ought to be in school were drifting about the streets.
The truant officers, professionally discreet, thought about 800. The Superintendent of Schools
guessed at 8000. The officers of the Association for the Improvement of the Condition of the
Poor, with an eye on the tenements, made it 150,000. I canvassed a couple of wards from the
truant officers' reports, and Dr. Tracy compared the showing with the statistics of population.
From the result I reasoned that there must be about 50,000. They scorned me at the City Hall
for it. It was all guess-work they said, and so it was. We had first to have a school census,
and we got one, so that we might know where we were at. But when we had the result of that
first census before us, behold! it showed that of 339,756 children of school age in the city,
251,235 were accounted for on the roster of public or private schools, 28,452 were employed,
and 50,069 on the street or at home. So that, if I am not smart at figuring, I may reasonably
claim to be a good guesser.

The showing that a lack of schools which threw an army of children upon the street went hand
in hand with overcrowded jails made us get up and demand that something be done. From the school
executive came the helpless suggestion that the thing might be mended by increasing the classes
in neighborhoods where there were not enough schools from sixty to seventy-five. Forty or forty-five
pupils is held to be the safe limit anywhere. But the time had passed for such pottering. New
York pulled itself together and spent millions in building new schools while "the system" was
overhauled; we dragged in a truant school by threatening the city authorities with the power
of the State unless they ceased to send truants to institutions that received child criminals.
But a man convinced against his will is of the same opinion still; we shall have to do that
all over again next. My pet scheme was to have trained oculists attached to the public schools,
partly as a means of overcoming stupidity--half of what passes for that in the children is
really the teacher's; the little ones are near-sighted; they cannot see the blackboard--partly
also that they might have an eye on the school buildings and help us get rid of some where
they had to burn gas all day.  That was upset by the doctors, who were afraid that "private
practice would be interfered with." We had not quite got to the millennium yet. It was so with
our bill to establish a farm school to win back young vagrants to a useful life. It was killed
at Albany with the challenge that we "had had enough of reform in New York." And so we had,
as the events showed. Tammany came back.

But not to stay. We had secured a hold during those three years which I think they little know
of.  They talk at the Wigwam of the "school vote," and mean the men friends and kin of the
teachers on whom the machine has a grip, or thinks it has; but there is another school vote
that is yet to be heard from, when the generation that has had its right to play restored to
it comes to the polls.  That was the great gain of that time. It was the thing I had in mind
back of and beyond all the rest. I was bound to kill the Bend, because it was bad. I wanted
the sunlight in there, but so that it might shine on the children at play. That is a child's
right, and it is not to be cheated of it. And when it is cheated of it, it is not the child
but the community that is robbed of that beside which all its wealth is but tinsel and trash.
For men, not money, make a country great, and joyless children do not make good men.

So when the Legislature, urged by the Tenement House Commission, made it law that no public
school should ever again be built in New York without an outdoor playground, it touched the
quick. Thereafter it was easy to rescue the small parks from the landscape gardener by laying
them under the same rule. It was well we did it, too, for he is a dangerous customer, hard
to get around.  Twice he has tried to steal one of the little parks we laid out, the one that
is called Seward Park, from the children, and he "points with pride" almost to the playground
in the other, which he laid out so badly that it was a failure from the start.  However, we
shall convert him yet; everything in its season.

The Board of Education puzzled over its end of it for a while. The law did not say how big
the playground should be, and there was no precedent.  No, there was not. I found the key to
that puzzle, at least one that fitted, when I was Secretary of the Small Parks Committee. It
was my last act as agent of the Good Government clubs to persuade Major Strong to appoint that
committee. It made short work of its task. We sent for the police to tell us where they had
trouble with the boys, and why. It was always the same story: they had no other place to play
in than the street, and there they broke windows. So began the trouble. It ended in the police-station
and the jail. The city was building new schools by the score. We got a list of the sites, and
as we expected, they were where the trouble was worst. Naturally so; that was where the children
were. There, then, was our field as a playground committee. Why not kill two birds with one
stone, and save money by making them one? By hitching the school and the boys' play together
we should speedily get rid of the truant. He was just there as a protest against the school
without play.

We asked the Board of Education to make their school playgrounds the neighborhood recreation
centres. So they would not need to worry over how big they should be, but just make them as
big as they could, whether on the roof or on the ground. They listened, but found difficulties
in "the property." Odd, isn't it, this disposition of the world to forever make of the means
the end, to glorify the establishment! It was the same story when I asked them to open the
schools at night and let in the boys to have their clubs there. The saloon was bidding for
them, and bidding high, but the School Board hesitated because a window might be broken or
a janitor want extra pay for cleaning up. Before a reluctant consent was given I had to make
a kind of promise that I would not appear before the Board again to argue for throwing the
doors wider still. But it isn't going to keep me from putting in the heaviest licks I can,
in the campaign that is coming, for turning the schools over to the people bodily, and making
of them the neighborhood centre in all things that make for good, including trades-union meetings
and political discussions. Only so shall we make of our schools real corner-stones of our liberties.
So, also, we shall through neighborhood pride restore some of the neighborhood feeling, the
home feeling that is now lacking in our cities to our grievous loss.  Half the tenement-house
population is always moving, and to the children the word "home" has no meaning. Anything that
will help change that will be a great gain. And that old Board is gone long since, anyhow.

The club prevailed in the end. At least one school let it in, and though the boys did break
a window-pane that winter with a ball, they paid for it like men, and that ghost was laid.
The school playground holds aloof yet from the neighborhood except in the long vacation. But
that last is something, and the rest is coming. It could not be coming by any better road than
the vacation schools, which are paving the way for common sense everywhere.  "Everything takes
ten years." said Abram S. Hewitt, when he took his seat as the chairman of the Small Parks
Committee. Ten years before, when he was Mayor, he had put through the law under which the
Mulberry Bend had been at last wiped out. We held our meetings at the City Hall, where I had
been spurned so often. All things come to those who wait--and fight for them. Yes, fight! I
say it advisedly. I have come to the time of life when a man does not lay about him with a
club unless he has to. But--eternal vigilance is the price of liberty! To be vigilant is to
sit up with a club. We, as a people, have provided in the republic a means of fighting for
our rights and getting them, and it is our business to do it.  We shall never get them in any
other way. Colonel Waring was a wise man as well as a great man.  His declaration that he cleaned
the streets of New York, all prophecies to the contrary notwithstanding, by "putting a man
instead of a voter behind every broom," deserves to be put on the monument we shall build by
and by to that courageous man, for it is the whole gospel of municipal righteousness in a nutshell.
But he never said anything better than when he advised his fellow-citizens to fight, not to
plead, for their rights. So we grow the kind of citizenship that sets the world, or anyhow
our day, ahead. We will all hail the day when we shall be able to lay down the club. But until
it comes I do not see that we have any choice but to keep a firm grip on it.

CHAPTER XIV

I TRY TO GO TO THE WAR FOR THE THIRD AND LAST TIME

That which I have described as "sitting up with a club" in a city like New York is bound to
win your fight if you sit up long enough, for it is to be remembered that the politicians who
oppose good government are not primarily concerned about keeping you out of your rights. They
want the things that make for their advantage; first of all the offices through which they
can maintain their grip. After that they will concede as many of the things you want as they
have to, and if you are not yourself out for the offices, more than otherwise, though never
more than you wring out of them. They really do not care if you do have clean streets, good
schools, parks, playgrounds, and all the things which make for good citizenship because they
give the best part of the man a chance, though they grudge them as a sad waste of money that
might be turned to use in "strengthening the organization," which is the sum of all their self-seeking,
being their means of ever getting more and more.  Hence it is that a mere handful of men and
women who rarely or never had other authority than their own unselfish purpose, have in all
times, even the worst, been able to put their stamp upon the community for good. I am thinking
of the Felix Adlers, the Dr. Rainsfords, the Josephine Shaw Lowells, the Robert Ross McBurneys,
the R. Fulton Cuttings, the Father Doyles, the Jacob H.  Schiffs, the Robert W. de Forests,
the Arthur von Briesens, the F. Norton Goddards, the Richard Watson Gilders, and their kind;
and thinking of them brings to mind an opportunity I had a year or two ago to tell a club of
workmen what I thought of them. It was at the Chicago Commons. I had looked in on a Sunday
evening upon a group of men engaged in what seemed to me a singularly unprofitable discussion
of human motives. They were of the school which professes to believe that everything proceeds
from the love of self, and they spoke learnedly of the ego and all that; but as I listened
the conviction grew, along with the feeling of exasperation that sort of nonsense always arouses
in me, that they were just vaporing, and I told them so. I pointed to these men and women I
have spoken of, some of them of great wealth--the thing against which they seemed to have a
special grudge--and told them how they had given their lives and their means in the cause of
humanity without asking other reward than that of seeing the world grow better, and the hard
lot of some of their fellow-men eased; wherein they had succeeded because they thought less
of themselves than of their neighbors, and were in the field, anyway, to be of such use as
they could. I told them how distressed I was that upon their own admission they should have
been engaged in this discussion four years without getting any farther, and I closed with a
remorseful feeling of having said more than I intended and perhaps having made them feel bad.
But not they. They had listened to me throughout with undisturbed serenity. When I had done,
the chairman said courteously that they were greatly indebted to me for my frank opinion. Every
man was entitled to his own. And he could quite sympathize with me in my inability to catch
their point of view.

"Because here," he added, "I have been reading for ten years or more the things Mr. Riis writes
in his newspaper and in the magazines, and by which he makes a living, and for the life of
me I never was able to understand how any one could be found to pay for such stuff."

So there you have my measure as a reformer.  The meeting nodded gravely. I was apparently the
only one there who took it as a joke.

I spoke of the women's share in the progress we made. A good big one it was. We should have
been floundering yet in the educational mud-puddle we were in, had it not been for the women
of New York who went to Albany and literally held up the Legislature, compelling it to pass
our reform bill.  And not once but a dozen times, during Mayor Strong's administration, when
they had wearied of me at the City Hall--I was not always persona grata there with the reform
administration--did I find it the part of wisdom to send committees of women instead to plead
with the Mayor over his five o'clock tea. They could worm a playground or a small park out
of him when I should have met with a curt refusal and a virtual invitation to be gone. In his
political doldrums the Mayor did not have a kindly eye to reformers; but he was not always
able to make them out in petticoats.

The women prevailed at Albany by the power of fact. They knew, and the legislators did not.
They received them up there with an indulgent smile, but it became speedily apparent that they
came bristling with information about the schools to which the empty old Tammany boast that
New York "had the best schools in the world" was not an effective answer. In fact they came
nearer being the worst. I had myself had an experience of that kind, when I pointed out in
print that an East Side school was so overrun with rats that it was difficult to hear oneself
think for their squeaking in the dark "playground," when the children were upstairs in their
classes. The Board of Estimate and Apportionment, which comprises the important officials of
the city Government with the Mayor as presiding officer, took umbrage at the statement, and
said in plain words that I lied and that there were no rats. That was a piece of unthinking
ignorance, for an old schoolhouse without rats in it would be a rare thing anywhere; but it
was impertinence, too, of a kind of which I had had so much from the City Hall that I decided
the time had come for a demonstration. I got me a rat trap, and prepared to catch one and have
it sent in to the Board, duly authenticated by affidavit as hailing from Allen Street; but
before I could carry out my purpose the bottom fell out of the Tammany conspiracy of ignorance
and fraud and left us the way clear for three years, So I saved my rat for another time.

This "fact," which was naturally my own weapon, the contribution I was able to make from my
own profession and training, was in reality a tremendously effective club before which nothing
could or can stand in the long run. If I can leave that conviction as a legacy to my brother
reporters, I shall feel that I have really performed a service. I believe they do not half
understand it, or they would waste no printer's ink idly. The school war was an illustration
of it, all through. I was at Police Headquarters, where I saw the East Side, that had been
orderly, becoming thievish and immoral. Going to the schools, I found them overcrowded, ill
ventilated, dark, without playgrounds, repellent. Following up the boys, who escaped from them
in disgust--if indeed they were not barred out; the street swarmed with children for whom there
was not room--I saw them herded at the prison to which Protestant truants were sent, with burglars,
vagrants, thieves, and "bad boys" of every kind. They classified them according to size: four
feet, four feet seven, and over four feet seven! No other way was attempted. At the Catholic
prison they did not even do that. They kept them on a "footing of social equality" by mixing
them all up together; and when in amazement I asked if that was doing right by the truant who
might be reasonably supposed to be in special danger from such contact, the answer I got was
"would it be fair to the burglar to set him apart with the stamp on him?" I went back to the
office and took from the Rogues' Gallery a handful of photographs of boy thieves and murderers
and printed them in the Century Magazine with a statement of the facts, under the heading,
"The Making of Thieves in New York." I quote the concluding sentence of that article because
it seemed to me then, and it seems to me now, that there was no getting away from its awful
arraignment:--

"While we are asking at this end of the line if it would be quite fair to the burglar to shut
him off from social intercourse with his betters, the State Reformatory, where the final product
of our schools of crime is garnered, supplies the answer year after year, unheeded. Of the
thousands who land there, barely one per cent kept good company before coming. All the rest
were the victims of evil association, of corrupt environment. They were not thieves by heredity;
they were made.  And the manufacture goes on every day. The street and the jail are the factories."

Upon the lay mind the argument took hold; that of the official educator resisted it stubbornly
for a season. Two years later, when one of the School Commissioners spoke indulgently of the
burglars and highway robbers in the two prisons as probably guilty merely of "the theft of
a top, or a marble, or maybe a banana," in extenuation of the continued policy of his department
in sending truants there in flat defiance of the State law that forbade the mingling of thieves
and truants, the police office had once more to be invoked with its testimony.  I had been
keeping records of the child crimes that came up in the course of my work that year. They began
before the kindergarten age with burglary and till-tapping. "Highwaymen" at six sounds rather
formidable, but there was no other name for it. Two lads of that age had held up a third and
robbed him in the street; at seven and eight there were seven housebreakers and two common
thieves; at ten I had a burglar, one boy and four girl thieves, two charged with assault and
one with forgery; at eleven four burglars, two thieves with a record, two charged with assault,
a highway robber, an habitual liar, and a suicide; at twelve five burglars, three thieves,
two "drunks," three incendiaries, three arrested for assault, and two suicides; at thirteen
five burglars, one with a record, five thieves, five charged with assault, one "drunk," one
forger; at fourteen four burglars, seven thieves, one drunk enough to fight a policeman, six
highway robbers, and ten charged with assault. And so on. The street had borne its perfect
crop, and they were behind the bars every one, locked in with the boys who had done nothing
worse than play hooky.

It was a knock-out blow. Classification by measurement had ceased at the first broadside; the
last gave us the truant school which the law demanded.  To make the most of it, we shall apparently
have to have a new deal. I tried to persuade the Children's Aid Society to turn its old machinery
to this new work. Perhaps the George Junior Republic would do better still. When there is room
for every boy on the school bench, and room to toss a ball when he is off it, there will not
be much left of that problem to wrestle with; but little or much, the peril of the prison is
too great to be endured for a moment.

It must have been about that time that I received a letter from an old friend who was in high
glee over a statement in some magazine that I had evolved a "scientific theory" as to why boys
go to the bad in cities. It was plain that he was as much surprised as he was pleased, and
so was I when I heard what it was all about. That which they had pitched upon as science and
theory was the baldest recital of the facts as seen from Mulberry Street. Beyond putting two
and two together, there was very little reasoning about it. That such conditions as were all
about us should result in making "toughs" of the boys was not strange. Rather, it would have
been strange had anything else come of it.  With the home corrupted by the tenement; the school
doors closed against them where the swarms were densest, and the children thrown upon the street,
there to take their chance; with honest play interdicted, every natural right of the child
turned into a means of oppression, a game of ball become a crime for which children were thrust
into jail, indeed, shot down like dangerous criminals when running away from the policeman
who pursued them;[Footnote: Such a case occurred on Thanksgiving Day, 1897. A great public
clamor arose and the policeman was sent to Sing Sing.] with dead-letter laws on every hand
breeding blackmail and bringing the police and authority into disrepute; with the lawlessness
of the street added to want of rule at home, where the immigrant father looked on helpless,
himself dependent in the strange surroundings upon the boy and no longer his master--it seemed
as if we had set out to deliberately make the trouble under which we groaned. And we were not
alone in it. The shoe fits every large city more or less snugly. I know, for I have had a good
deal to do with fitting it on the last two or three years; and often, when looking my audience
over in lecturing about Tony and his hardships, I am thinking about Mulberry Street and the
old days when problems, civic or otherwise, were farthest from my mind in digging out the facts
that lay ready to the hand of the police reporter.

In him as a reporter there may be no special virtue; but there is that in his work, in the
haste and the directness of it, which compels him always to take the short cut and keeps it
clear of crankery of every kind. The "isms" have no place in a newspaper office, certainly
not in Mulberry Street. I confess I was rather glad of it. I had no stomach for abstract discussions
of social wrongs; I wanted to right those of them that I could reach. I wanted to tear down
the Mulberry Bend and let in the light so that we might the more readily make them out; the
others could do the rest then. I used to say that to a very destructive crank who would have
nothing less, upon any account, than the whole loaf. My "remedies" were an abomination to him.
The landlords should be boiled in oil to a man; hanging was too good for them. Now he is a
Tammany officeholder in a position where propping up landlord greed is his daily practice and
privilege, and he thrives upon it. But I ought not to blame him. It is precisely because of
his kind that Tammany is defenceless against real reform. It never can make it out. That every
man has his price is the language of Fourteenth Street. They have no dictionary there to enable
them to understand any other; and as a short cut out of it they deny that there is any other.

It helped me vastly that my associations in the office were most congenial. I have not often
been in accord with the editorial page of my own paper, the Sun. It seemed as if it were impossible
for anybody to get farther apart in their views of most things on the earth and off it than
were my paper and I.  It hated and persecuted Beecher and Cleveland; they were my heroes. It
converted me to Grant by its opposition to him. The sign "Keep off the grass!" arouses in its
editorial breast no desire to lock up the man who planted it; it does in mine.  Ten years and
more I have striven in its columns to make the tenement out a chief device of the devil, and
it must be that I have brought some over to my belief; but I have not converted the Sun. So
that on the principle which I laid down before that I must be always fighting with my friends,
I ought to have had a mighty good time of it there. And so in fact I did. They let me have
in pretty nearly everything my own way, though it led us so far apart.  As time passed and
the duties that came to me took more and more of my time from my office work, I found that
end of it insensibly lightened to allow me to pursue the things I believed in, though they
did not. No doubt the old friendship that existed between my immediate chief on the Evening
Sun, William McCloy, and myself, bore a hand in this.  Yet it could not have gone on without
the assent and virtual sympathy of the Danas, father and son; for we came now and then to a
point where opposite views clashed and proved irreconcilable. Then I found these men, whom
some deemed cynical, most ready to see the facts as they were, and to see justice done.

I like to think of my last meeting with Charles A.  Dana, the "Old Chief" as he was always
called in the office. In all the years I was on the Sun I do not think I had spoken with him
a half dozen times.  When he wanted anything of me personally, his orders were very brief and
to the point. It was generally something--a report to be digested or the story of some social
experiment--which showed me that in his heart he was faithful to his early love; he had been
in his youth, as everybody knows, an enthusiastic reformer, a member of the Brook Farm Community.
But if he thought I saw, he let no sign escape him. He hated shams; perhaps I was on trial
all the time. If so, I believe that he meant to tell me in that last hand-shake that he had
not found me wanting. It was on the stairs in the Sun office that we met. I was going up; he
was coming down--going home to die. He knew it.  In me there was no suspicion of the truth
when I came upon him at the turn of the stairs, stumbling along in a way very unlike the usual
springy step of the Old Chief. I hardly knew him when he passed, but as he turned and held
out his hand I saw that it was Mr. Dana, looking somehow older than I had ever seen him, and
changed. I asked her very seriously if she knew anything of Dorice.

Miss Giggleswick thought I was referring to some new authoress.

"Yes--yes,"
she said thoughtfully, "I must have read some of them, but I can't
remember which ones--I'm so silly about names."

"Ha!" he laughed, "you come on! We are ready for you. Come right along!" And with another hearty
hand-shake he was gone. He never saw the Sun office again.

It was the only time he had ever held out his hand to me, after that first meeting of ours
when I was a lonely lad, nearly thirty years before. That time there was a dollar in it and
I spurned it.  This time I like to believe his heart was in it.  And I took it gladly and gratefully.

The police helped--sometimes. More frequently we were at odds, and few enough in the rank and
file understood that I was fighting for them in fighting the department. A friend came into
my office, laughing, one day, and told me that he had just overheard the doorman at Police
Headquarters say, as he saw me pass:--

"Ugh! the hypocrite! See him take off his hat and then lay us out cold in his paper when he
gets the chance."

He referred to my old-country habit of raising the hat in salutation instead of merely nodding
or touching the brim. No doubt he expressed a feeling that was quite general at the time. But
after Mulberry Street had taken notice of Roosevelt's friendship for me there was a change,
and then it went to the other extreme. It never quite got over the fact that he did not "ring
me in" on President McKinley and the Government, or at least make me his private secretary
and deputy boss of the Empire State while he was Governor. Last season, when between 13 and 14 years
old, he caught three salmon. His record is probably unique for inshore fisher boys."--Lancaster
Guardian.

Anyhow the rate at which he grows up is. Contrast of imposing personality of the Minister and sonorousness
of his voice with commonplace character of utterance tickled fancy of House, then as now almost
childishly eager to be amused. The great man looked round with stern glance that cowed the tittering
audience. "Sugar," he repeated amid awed silence, and triumphantly continued his remarks.
It wasn't sugar that occupied attention of House on resuming sittings
after Whitsun recess. It was Milk. Naturally Bill dealing with subject
was in hands of the INFANT SAMUEL. He eyed me very coldly,
and said, "Bad, very bad." At that I expressed my astonishment, saying that I was a reporter
at Police Headquarters and had understood differently.

"What paper?" he grunted insolently. I told him. He bestowed a look of mingled pity and contempt
upon me.

"Nix! mine friend," he said, spreading his feet farther apart and tossing the peel at the Italian,
who grinned with delight at such condescension. I regarded him expectantly. He was a very aggravating
chap.

"Did you say you were at Police Headquarters--for the Sun?" he observed at length.

"Yes!" He shook his head.

"Nixie! not guilty!" he said tauntingly.

"Why, what do you mean?"

"Haven't you heard of Mr. Riis, Jacob Riis?"

I said I had.

"The Governor's friend?"

"Yes; what of it?"

"Well, ain't he at Headquarters for the Sun?"

I said that was so.

"Well?"

I took out my card and handed it to him. "I am that man," I said.

For a fraction of a second the policeman's jaw dropped; but he was a thoroughbred. His heels
came together before, as it seemed, he could have read my name; he straightened up. The half-peeled
orange fell from his hand and rolled into the gutter, covertly speeded by a dextrous little
kick. The unhappy Italian, believing it a mishap, made haste to select the biggest and juiciest
fruit on his stand, and held it out with a propitiatory bow, but he spurned him haughtily away.

"These dagoes," he said, elaborately placing my card in the sweat-band of his hat, "ain't got
no manners.  It's a hard place for a good man down here.  It's time I was a roundsman. You
can do it.  You've got de 'pull.'"

When Roosevelt had gone to Washington to help fit out the navy for the war with Spain, I spent
a part of the winter there with him, and Mulberry Street took it for granted that I had at
last been "placed" as I should have been long before. There was great amazement when I came
back to take my old place. The truth was that I had gone partly to observe what went on at
the capital for my paper, and partly to speed on the war, in which I was a hearty believer
from the first. It was to me a means, first and last, of ending the murder in Cuba.  One of
the very earliest things I had to do with as a reporter was the Virginius massacre, and ever
since it had been bloodshed right along. It was time to stop it, and the only way seemed to
wrest the grip of Spain from the throat of the island. And what a nature to eyes subdued to the sober
tints of the north! Its spectacular quality--that studied sequence of effects ranging from the translucent
outline of Capri and the fantastically blue mountains of the coast, to Vesuvius lifting its torch
above the plain--this prodigal response to fancy's claims suggested the boundless invention of
some great scenic artist, some Olympian Veronese with sea and sky for a palette. And then the
city itself, huddled between bay and mountains, and seething and
bubbling like a Titan's cauldron! I made friends that
winter with Dr. Leonard Wood, whom we all came to know and admire afterwards as General and
Governor Wood; and a fine fellow he was. He was Roosevelt's friend and physician, and we spent
many strenuous hours together, being in that mood.

For the third time in my life, and the last, I wanted to go to the war, when they went, and
oh!  so badly. Not to fight,--I had had all I needed of that at home,--but to tell the truth
about what was going on in Cuba. The Outlook offered me that post, and the Sun agreed heartily;
but once more the door was barred against me. Two of my children had scarlet fever, my oldest
son had gone to Washington trying to enlist with the Rough Riders, and the one next in line
was engineering to get into the navy on his own hook. My wife raised no objection to my going,
if it was duty; but her tears fell silently--and I stayed. It was "three times and out." I
shall never go to the war now unless in defence of my own home, which may God forbid.  Within
a year I knew that, had I gone then, I should most likely not have returned. I had received
notice that to my dreams of campaigning in that way there was an end. Thankful that I had been
spared, I yet took leave of them with a sigh; most illogically, for I hate the sight of human
suffering and of brutal passions aroused. But deep down in my heart there is the horror of
my Viking forefathers of dying in bed, unable to strike back, as it were. I know it is wicked
and foolish, but all my life I have so wished to get on a horse with a sword, and slam in just
once, like another Sheridan. I, who cannot sit on a horse! Even the one Roosevelt got me at
Montauk that was warranted "not to bite or scratch" ran away with me. So it is foolishness,
plain to see. Yet, so I might have found out which way I would really have run when the call
came. I do hope the right way, but I never have felt quite sure.

The casualties of war are not all on the battlefield. So seldom, too, as daddy has a chance to
talk with an out-of-town minister! He is not at all good-looking. His hair is yellowish and
stands up stiff on his forehead, and his eyes are no color. I don't see how he can be agreeable
to any young girl. But being a minister goes a good ways.

I knew mammy would ask him to stay to tea. As soon as anybody comes, no matter if it is only in
the middle of the afternoon, she always says, "Now take your things right off. Come, Bethiah,
clap on the tea-kettle, and we'll have tea airly." They say she was always just so about liking
to have company.

* * * * *

October 18.--Mr. Scott has begun to
come here evenings. He owns a house and farm and wood-lot. They must have aged suddenly over there, for they were not that
way when I was a boy. The real fact was that somehow they could not get it into their heads
that a European bully could be whipped in one round by "the States." They insisted on printing
ridiculous despatches about Spanish victories. I think there was something about codfish, too,
something commercial about corks and codfish--Iceland keeping Spain on a fish diet in Lent,
in return for which she corked the Danish beer--I have forgotten the particulars.  The bottom
fact was a distrust of the United States that was based upon a curiously stubborn ignorance,
entirely without excuse in a people of high intelligence like the Danes. I tried hard as a
correspondent to draw a reasonable, human picture of American affairs, but it seemed to make
no impression.  They would jump at the Munchausen stories that are always afloat, as if America
were some sort of menagerie and not a Christian country.  I think nothing ever aggravated me
as did an instance of that kind the year Ben Butler ran for the Presidency.  I had been trying
in my letters to present the political situation and issues fairly, and was beginning to feel
that they must understand, when I received a copy of my paper from Copenhagen and read there
a "life" of General Butler, which condensed, ran something like this:--

