There is one thing which cannot but make one indignant here in Paris, and which, I think, is
keenly felt by some of the best among the French; and that is, the indifference of many Americans,
while here, to their own national principles of liberty. They seem to come to Paris merely
to be hangers on and applauders in the train of that tyrant who has overthrown the hopes of
France. To all that cruelty and injustice by which thousands of hearts are now bleeding, they
appear entirely insensible. They speak with heartless levity of the revolutions of France,
as of a pantomime got up for their diversion. Their time and thoughts seem to be divided between
defences of American slavery and efforts to attach themselves to the skirts of French tyranny.
They are the parasites of parasites--delighted if they can but get to an imperial ball, and
beside themselves if they can secure an introduction to the man who figured as a roue, in the
streets of New York. Noble-minded men of all parties here, who have sacrificed all for principle,
listen with suppressed indignation, while young America, fresh from the theatres and gambling
saloons, declares, between the whiffs of his cigar, that the French are not capable of free
institutions, and that the government of Louis Napoleon is the best thing France could have.
Thus from the plague- spot at her heart has America become the propagandist of despotism in
Europe. Nothing weighs so fearfully against the cause of the people of Europe as this kind
of American influence. Through almost every city of Europe are men whose great glory it appears
to be to proclaim that they worship the beast, and wear his name in their foreheads. I have
seen sometimes, in the forests, a vigorous young sapling which had sprung up from the roots
of an old, decaying tree. So, unless the course of things alters much in America, a purer civil
liberty will spring up from her roots in Europe, while her national tree is blasted with despotism.
It is most affecting, in moving through French circles, to see what sadness, what anguish of
heart, lies under that surface which seems to a stranger so gay. Each revolution has cut its
way through thousands of families, ruining fortunes, severing domestic ties, inflicting wounds
that bleed, and will bleed for years. I once alluded rather gayly to the numerous upsets of
the French government, in conversation with a lady, and she laughed at first, but in a moment
her eyes filled with tears, and she said, "Ah, you have no idea what these things are among
us." In conversation nothing was more common than the remark, "I shall do so and so, provided
things hold out; but then there is no telling what will come next."

On the minds of some there lie deep dejection and discouragement. Some, surrounded by their
growing families, though they abhor the tyranny of the government, acquiesce wearily, and even
dread change lest something worse should arise.

We know not in America how many atrocities and cruelties that attended the coup d'etat have
been buried in the grave which intombed the liberty of the press. I have talked with eye witnesses
of those scenes, men who have been in the prisons, and heard the work of butchery going on
in the prison yards in the night. While we have been here, a gentleman to whom I had been introduced
was arrested, taken from bed by the police, and carried off, without knowing of what he was
accused. His friends were denied access to him, and on making application to the authorities,
the invariable reply was, "Be very quiet about it. If you make a commotion his doom is sealed."
When his wife was begging permission for a short interview, the jailer, wearied with her importunities,
at last exclaimed unguardedly, "Madam, there are two hundred here in the same position; what
would you have me do?" [Footnote: That man has remained in prison to this day.]

At that very time an American traveller, calling on us, expatiated at length on the peaceful
state of things in Paris--on the evident tranquillity and satisfaction universally manifest.

JOURNAL--(Continued.)

Saturday, August 27. Left Paris with H., the rest of our party having been detained. Reached
Boulogne in safety, and in high spirits made our way on board the steamer, deposited our traps
below, came on deck, and prepared for the ordeal. A high north-wester had been blowing all
day, and as we ran along behind the breakwater, I could see over it the white and green waves
fiendishly running, and showing their malign eyes sparkling with hungry expectation. "Come
out, come out!" they seemed to say; "come out, you little black imp of a steamer; don't be
hiding behind there like a coward. We dare you to come out here and give us a chance at you--we
will eat you up, as so many bears would eat a lamb."

And sure enough, the moment her bows passed beyond the pier, the sea struck her, and tossed
her like an eggshell, and the deck, from stem to stern, was drenched in a moment, and running
with floods as if she had been under water. For a few moments H. and I both enjoyed the motion.
We stood amidships, she in her shawl, I in a great tarpauling which I had borrowed of Jack,
and every pitch sent the spray over us. We exulted that we were not going to be sick. Suddenly,
however, so suddenly that it was quite mysterious, conscience smote me. A profound, a deep-seated
remorse developed itself just exactly in the deepest centre of the pit of my stomach.

"H.," said I, with a decided, grave air, "I'm going to be seasick."

"So am I," said she, as if struck by the same convictions that had been impressed on me. We
turned, and made our way along the leeward quarter, to a seat by the bulwarks. I stood holding
on by the railrope, and every now and then addressing a few incoherent and rather guttural,
not to say pectoral, remarks to the green and gloomy sea, as I leaned over the rail. After
every paroxysm of communicativeness, (for in seasickness the organ of secretiveness gives way,)
I regained my perpendicular, and faced the foe, with a determination that I would stand it
through--that the grinning, howling brine should get no more secrets out of me. And, in fact,
it did not.

Meanwhile, what horrors--what complicated horrors--did not that crowded deck present! Did the
priestly miscreants of the middle ages ever represent among the torments of purgatory the deck
of a channel steamer? If not, then they forgot the "lower deep," that Satan doubtless thought
about, according to Milton. 

For those thoughts make my love for you simply desperate, David; I cry out to myself that I
never have loved you enough, never told you enough!" And then she added pleadingly, "But oh,
you know that I love you, do you not, dear? Tell me."

"Yes, I know it," said the other gently, taking her in his arms and kissing her.

"Come back soon," Helen went on, "and I will tell you once more how much I do; and then we can be
happy again, and I won't be afraid any more.

Please let me be happy, won't you, David?"

"Yes, love, I will," said the man with a smile. "I do not think that I was wise ever to trouble
you."

Helen was silent for a while, then as a sudden thought occurred to
her she added: "David, I meant to tell you something--do you know
if those horrible thoughts keep haunting me, it is just this that
they will make me do; you said that God was very good, and so I was
thinking that I would show him how very much I love you, how I could
really never get along without you, and how I care for nothing else
in the world.

It seems to me to be such a little thing, that we should only just want to love; and truly, that
is all I do want,--I would not mind anything else in the world,--I would go away from this
little house and live in any poor place, and do all the work, and never care about anything
else at all, if I just might have you. That is really true, David, and I wish that you would
know it, and that God would know it, and not expect me to think of such dreadful things as you
talk of."

As David gazed into her deep, earnest eyes he pressed her to him with a sudden burst of emotion.
"You have me now, dearest," he whispered, "and oh, I shall trust the God who gave me this precious
heart!"--He kissed her once more in fervent love, and kissed her again and again until the clouds
had left her face. She leaned back and gazed at him, and was radiant
with delight again. "Oh--oh--oh!" she cried. "David, it only makes
me more full of wonder at the real truth! For it is the truth, David,
it is the truth--that you are all mine! It is so wonderful, and it
makes me so happy,--I seem to lose myself more in the thought every
day!"

"You can never lose yourself too much, little sweetheart,"
David whispered; "let us trust to love, and let it grow all that it
will. I stood my ground; and in an hour we came running, bounding, and
rolling towards the narrow mouth of the Folkstone pier heads.

LETTER XLIX

LONDON.

You ought to have seen our rooms at night, the last evening we spent in Paris. When the whole
gleanings of a continental tour were brought forth for packing, and compared with the dimensions
of original trunks--ah, what an hour was that! Who should reconcile these incongruous elements--bronzes,
bonnets, ribbons and flowers, plaster casts, books, muslins and laces--elements as irreconcilable
as fate and freedom; who should harmonize them? And I so tired!

"Ah," said Jladame B., "it is all quite easy; you must have a packer."

"A packer?"

"Yes. He will come, look at your things, provide whatever may be necessary, and pack them all."

So said, so done. The man came, saw, conquered; he brought a trunk, twine, tacks, wrapping
paper, and I stood by in admiration while he folded dresses, arranged bonnets, caressingly
enveloped flowers in silk paper, fastened refractory bronzes, and muffled my plaster animals
with reference to the critical points of ears and noses,--in short, reduced the whole heterogeneous
assortment to place and proportion, shut, locked, corded, labelled, handed me the keys, and
it was done. The charge for all this was quite moderate. How individual is every cathedral!
York is not like Westminster, nor like Strasbourg, nor Cologne, any more than Shakspeare is
like Milton, or Milton like Homer. In London I attended morning service in Westminster, and
explored its labyrinths of historic memories. The reading of the Scriptures in the English
tongue, and the sound of the chant, affected me deeply, in contrast with the pictorial and
dramatic effects of Romanism in continental churches.

As a simple matter of taste, Protestantism has made these buildings more impressive by reducing
them to a stricter unity. The multitude of shrines, candlesticks, pictures, statues, and votive
offerings, which make the continental churches resemble museums, are constantly at variance
with the majestic grandeur of the general impression. The lions and the unicorns are forthwith
extra-enchanted, so as to guard the fountain--an excellent arrangement, but subject to some
awkwardnesses in the sequel.

For the lions take turns to seek their meat in the ordinary way, and though they can hurt nobody
who does not meddle with the fountain, and have no wish to be man-eaters,
complications naturally supervene.

And sometimes, besides fighting,[147] and love-making, and love casuistry, and fairy-tales, and
oracles, and the finer comedy above mentioned, "Messire d'Urfé" I lingered long here, and often turned
to gaze again; and after going out, went back, once more, to fill my soul with a last, long
look, in which I bade adieu to all the historic memories of the old world.

These glorious arches, this sublime mystery of human power and skill, is only a shadow of some
eternal substance, which, in the ages to come, God will yet reveal to us.

It rained with inflexible pertinacity during all the time we were at York; and the next day
it rained still, when we took the cars for Castle Howard station.

In riding through the park from the station, we admired an avenue composed of groups of magnificent
beeches, sixteen or eighteen in a group, disposed at intervals on either hand.

The castle, a building in the Italian style, rose majestically on a slight eminence in the
centre of a green lawn. We alighted in the crisis of one of the most driving gusts of wind
and rain, so that we really seemed to be fleeing for shelter. But within all was bright and warm.

Several of the family were there, among the rest Lady Dover and Mr. and Mrs. E. Howard. They
urged us to remain over night; but as we had written to Leeds that we should be there in the
evening train, we were obliged to decline. We were shown over the castle, which is rich in
works of art. There was a gallery of antiques, and a collection of paintings from old masters.
In one room I saw tapestry exactly like that which so much interested us in Windsor, representing
scenes from the Book of Esther. It seemed to be of a much more ancient date. I was also interested
in a portrait of an ancestor of the family, the identical "Belted Will" who figures in Scott's Lay.

  "Belted Will Howard shall come with speed,
   And William of Deloraine, good at need."

In one of the long corridors we were traversing, we heard the voice of merriment, and found
a gay party of young people and children amusing themselves at games. I thought what a grand
hide-and-go-seek place the castle must be--whole companies might lose themselves among the
rooms. The central hall of the building goes up to the roof, and is surmounted by a dome. The
architecture is in the Italian style, which I think much more suited to the purposes of ordinary
life than for strictly religious uses. I like to say that it is time made beautiful, and so a shadow
picture of the soul; it is this, because it can picture different degrees of speed and of power,
because it can breathe and throb, can sweep and soar, can yearn and pray,--because, in short, everything
that happens in the heart can happen in music, so that we may lose ourselves in it and actually
live its life, or so that a great genius can not merely tell us about himself, but can make
all the best hours of his soul actually a part of our own. There is an air of grave majesty
about the wide sweep of their outlines--a quality suggestive of ideas of strength and endurance
which is appropriate to their nationality.

In Lord Carlisle's own room we saw pictures of Sumner, Prescott, and others of his American
friends. This custom of showing houses, which prevails over Europe, is, I think, a thing which
must conduce greatly to national improvement. A plea for the beautiful is constantly put in
by them--a model held up before the community, whose influence cannot be too highly estimated.
Before one of the choicest paintings stood the easel of some neighboring artist, who was making
a copy. He was quite unknown to the family, but comes and goes at his pleasure, the picture
being as freely at his service as if it were an outside landscape.

After finishing our survey, I went with Lady Carlisle into her own boudoir. There I saw a cabinet
full-length picture of her mother, the Duchess of Devonshire. She is represented with light
hair, and seemed to have been one whose beauty was less that of regular classic model, than
the fascination of a brilliant and buoyant spirit inspiring a graceful form. He wants to have
the fountain shut up, I suppose (for my notes and memory do not cover this point exactly), that
no rival may have the chance denied to himself. He would even destroy it, but that--the Druid
tells and shows him--is quite impossible. I particularly appreciated some lines in closing, addressed to her
children, expressing the eagerness with which she turned from all that nature and art could
offer, in prospect of meeting them once more.

Lord Carlisle is still in Turkey, and will, probably, spend the winter in Greece. His mother
had just received a letter from him, and he thinks that war is inevitable.

In one of the rooms that we traversed I saw an immense vase of bog oak and gold, which was
presented to Lord Carlisle by those who favored his election on the occasion of his defeat
on the corn-law question. The sentiment expressed by the givers was, that a defeat in a noble
undertaking was worthy of more honor than a victory in an ignoble one. 

The scene with Cryseide and Arimant and Clorine and the nurse and the ointment in Part III. Book
VII., though it contains little or nothing to effaroucher la pudeur, is like one of the broader
but not broadest tales of the Fabliaux and their descendants. The wind was unkindly and discourteous enough, and seemed bent on baffling
the hospitable intentions of our friends. If the beauties of an English landscape were set
off by our clear sky and sun, then patriotism, I fancy, would run into extravagance. I could
see that even one gracious sunset smile might produce in these lawns and groves an effect of
enchantment.

I was pleased with what is called the "kitchen garden," which I expected to find a mere collection
of vegetables, but found to be a genuine old-fashioned garden, which, like Eden, brought forth
all that was pleasant to the eye and good for food.

There were wide walks bordered with flowers, enclosing portions devoted to fruit and vegetables,
and, best of all this windy day, the whole enclosed by a high, solid stone wall, which bade
defiance to the storm, and made this the most agreeable portion of our walk. The father of
our host was one of the most energetic parliamentary advocates of the repeal of the corn laws.
Mr. B. spoke warmly of Lord Carlisle, and gave me the whole interesting history of the campaign
which the vase at Castle Howard commemorated, and read me the speech of Lord C. on that occasion. 

She had wrapped him up in a heavy overcoat, and was kneeling beside his chair with her arms
about him.

"Tell me, dear," she asked him, for the third or fourth time, "are you sure this will be enough
to keep you warm?--for the nights are so very cold, you know; I do not like you to come back alone
anyway."

"I don't think you would be much of a protection against
danger," laughed David.

"But it will be dark when you get back, dear."

"It
will only be about dusk," was the reply; "I don't mind that." By this means the
nobility, when they enter the House of Lords, are better adapted to legislate wisely for the
interests, not of a class, but of the whole people.

The next day the house was filled with company, and the Leeds offering was presented, the account
of which you will see in the papers. Every thing was arranged with the greatest consideration.
I saw many interesting people, and was delighted with the strong, religious interest in the
cause of liberty, pervading all hearts. Truly it may be said, that Wilberforce and Clarkson
lighted a candle which will never go out in England.

Monday we spent in a delightful visit to Fountains Abbey; less rich in carvings than Melrose,
but wider in extent, and of a peculiar architectural beauty. We lunched in what was the side
gallery of the refectory, where some drowsy old brother used to read the lives of saints to
the monks eating below. We walked over the graves of abbots, and through the scriptorium, which
reminded me of the exquisite scene in the Golden Legend, of the old monk in the scriptorium
busily illuminating a manuscript.

In the course of the afternoon a telegraph came from the mayor of Liverpool, to inquire if
our party would accept a public breakfast at the town hall before sailing, as a demonstration
of sympathy with the cause of freedom. But why, in the midst of the generally gracious macédoine
of serious and comic loves, and jokes, and adventures, should we have thrust in the entirely
unnecessary, however historical, crime whereby Valentinian the Third lost his worthless life
and his decaying Empire?

Sad letters from home met us there; yet not sad, since they only told us of friends admitted
before us to that mystery of glory for which we are longing--of which all that we have seen
in art or nature are but dim suggestions and images.

The mayor of Liverpool and the Rev. Dr. Raffles breakfasted with us, and after breakfast Dr.
R. commended us in prayer to God. Could we feel in this parting that we were leaving those
whom we had known for so brief a space? Never have I so truly felt the unity of the Christian
church, that oneness of the great family in heaven and on earth, as in the experience of this
journey. A large party accompanied us to the wharf, and went with us on board the tender. The
shores were lined with sympathizing friends, who waved their adieus to us as we parted.

THE END.