SAMANTHA ON THE

                      WOMAN QUESTION

                            BY

                      MARIETTA HOLLEY

                   "Josiah Allen's Wife"

                        Author of

       "Samantha at Saratoga," "My Opinions" and
                 "Betsey Bobbet's," etc.

CONTENTS

   I. "SHE WANTED HER RIGHTS"

  II. "THEY CAN'T BLAME HER"

 III. "POLLY'S EYES GROWED TENDER"

  IV. "STRIVIN' WITH THE EMISSARY"

   V. "HE WUZ DRETFUL POLITE"

  VI. "CONCERNING MOTH-MILLERS AND MINNY FISH"

 VII. "NO HAMPERIN' HITCHIN' STRAPS"

VIII. "OLD MOM NATER LISTENIN'"

  IX. THE WOMEN'S PARADE

   X. "THE CREATION SEARCHIN' SOCIETY"

ILLUSTRATIONS

"AND I WONDER IF THERE'S A WOMAN IN THE LAND THAT CAN BLAME SEREPTA FOR WANTIN' HER RIGHTS"
(p. 29). Frontispiece

"I WANTED TO VISIT THE CAPITOL OF OUR COUNTRY.... SO WE LAID OUT TO GO"

"HE'D ENTERED POLITICAL LIFE WHERE THE BIBLE WUZN'T POPULAR; HE'D NEVER READ FURTHER THAN GULLIVER'S
EPISTLE TO THE LILIPUTIANS"

"SEZ JOSIAH, 'DOES THAT THING KNOW ENOUGH TO VOTE?'"

I

"SHE WANTED HER RIGHTS"

Lorinda Cagwin invited Josiah and me to a reunion of the Allen family at her home nigh Washington,
D.C., the birthplace of the first Allen we knowed anything about, and Josiah said:

"Bein' one of the best lookin' and influential Allens on earth now, it would be expected on
him to attend to it."

And I fell in with the idee, partly to be done as I would be done by if it wuz the relation
on my side, and partly because by goin' I could hit two birds with one stun, as the poet sez.
Indeed, I could hit four on 'em.

My own cousin, Diantha Trimble, lived in a city nigh Lorinda's and I had promised to visit
her if I wuz ever nigh her, and help bear her burdens for a spell, of which burden more anon
and bom-by.

Diantha wuz one bird, the Reunion another, and the third bird I had in my mind's eye wuz the
big outdoor meeting of the suffragists that wuz to be held in the city where Diantha lived,
only a little ways from Lorinda's.

And the fourth bird and the biggest one I wuz aimin' to hit from this tower of ourn wuz Washington,
D.C. I wanted to visit the Capitol of our country, the center of our great civilization that
stands like the sun in the solar system, sendin' out beams of power and wisdom and law and
order, and justice and injustice, and money and oratory, and talk and talk, and wind and everything,
to the uttermost points of our vast possessions, and from them clear to the ends of the earth.
I wanted to see it, I wanted to like a dog. So we laid out to go.

Lorinda lived on the old Allen place, and I always sot store by her, and her girl, Polly, wuz,
as Thomas J. said, a peach. She had spent one of her college vacations with us, and a sweeter,
prettier, brighter girl I don't want to see. Her name is Pauline, but everybody calls her Polly.

The Cagwins are rich, and Polly had every advantage money could give, and old Mom Nater gin
her a lot of advantages money couldn't buy, beauty and intellect, a big generous heart and
charm. And you know the Cagwins couldn't bought that at no price. Charm in a girl is like the
perfume in a rose, and can't be bought or sold. And you can't handle or describe either on
'em exactly. But what a influence they have; how they lay holt of your heart and fancy.

Royal Gray, the young man who wuz payin' attention to her, stopped once for a day or two in
Jonesville with Polly and her Ma on their way to the Cagwins' camp in the Adirondacks. And
we all liked him so well that we agreed in givin' him this extraordinary praise, we said he
wuz worthy of Polly, we knowed of course that wuz the highest enconium possible for us to give.

Good lookin', smart as a whip, and deep, you could see that by lookin' into his eyes, half
laughin' and half serious eyes and kinder sad lookin' too under the fun, as eyes must be in
this world of ourn if they look back fur, or ahead much of any. A queer world this is, and
kinder sad and mysterious, behind all the good and glory on't.

He wuz jest out of Harvard school and as full of life and sperits as a colt let loose in a
clover field. He went out in the hay field, he and Polly, and rode home on top of a load of
hay jest as nateral and easy and bare-headed as if he wuz workin' for wages, and he the only
son of a millionaire--we all took to him.

Well, when the news got out that I wuz goin' to visit Washington, D.C., all the neighbors wanted
to send errents by me. Betsy Bobbet Slimpsey wanted a dozen Patent Office books for scrap books
for her poetry.

Uncle Nate Gowdey wanted me to go to the Agricultural Buro and git him a paper of lettuce seed.
And Solomon Sypher wanted me to git him a new kind of string beans and some cowcumber seeds.

Uncle Jarvis Bentley, who wuz goin' to paint his house, wanted me to ask the President what
kind of paint he used on the White House. He thought it ort to be a extra kind to stand the
sharp glare that wuz beatin' down on it constant, and to ask him if he didn't think the paint
would last longer and the glare be mollified some if they used pure white and clear ile in
it, and left off whitewash and karseen.

Ardelia Rumsey, who is goin' to be married, wanted me, if I see any new kinds of bedquilt patterns
at the White House or the Senator's housen, to git patterns for 'em. She said she wuz sick
of sun flowers and blazin' stars. She thought mebby they'd have sunthin' new, spread eagle
style. She said her feller wuz goin' to be connected with the Govermunt and she thought it
would be appropriate.

And I asked her how. And she said he wuz goin' to git a patent on a new kind of jack knife.
It took the old lady three years, and when it wuz done it wuz a sight to behold, though I wouldn't
want to sleep under so many animals. But folks went from fur and near to see it, and I enjoyed
lookin' at it that day.

Zebulin Coon wanted me to carry a new hen coop of hisen to git patented. And I thought to myself
I wonder if they will ask me to carry a cow.

And sure enough Elnathan Purdy wanted me to dicker for a calf from Mount Vernon, swop one of
his yearlin's for it. But thinkses I as I carried her things into my bedroom, "She'll want
to send some errent by me"; and I wondered what it would be.

And so it didn't surprise me when she asked me if I would lobby a little for her in Washington.
I spozed it wuz some new kind of tattin' or fancy work. I told her I shouldn't have much time
but would try to git her some if I could.

And she said she wanted me to lobby myself. And then I thought mebby it wuz a new kind of dance
and told her, "I wuz too old to lobby, I hadn't lobbied a step since I wuz married."

And then she explained she wanted me to canvas some of the Senators.

And I hung back and asked her in a cautious tone, "How many she wanted canvassed, and how much
canvas it would take?"

I had a good many things to buy for my tower, and though I wanted to obleege Serepta, I didn't
feel like runnin' into any great expense for canvas.

She wanted the Whiskey Ring destroyed and her rights, and she wanted 'em both inside of two weeks.

I told her I didn't believe she could git 'em done inside that length of time, but I would
tell the President about it, and I thought more'n likely as not he would want to do right by
her. "And," sez I, "if he sets out to, he can haul them babies of yourn out of that Ring pretty
sudden."

And then to git her mind offen her sufferin's, I asked how her sister Azuba wuz gittin' along?
I hadn't heard from her for years. She married Phileman Clapsaddle, and Serepty spoke out as
bitter as a bitter walnut, and sez she:

"She's in the poor-house."

"Why, Serepta Pester!" sez I, "what do you mean?"

"I mean what I say, my sister, Azuba Clapsaddle, is in the poor-house."

"Why, where is their property gone?" sez I. "They wuz well off. Azuba had five thousand dollars
of her own when she married him."

"Why-ee!" sez I agin. "And where are the children?" That pretty girl I see to your house once?"

"That girl is in the lunatick asylum."

"Serepta Pester," sez I, "be you tellin' the truth?"

"Yes, I be, the livin' truth. She went to New York to buy millinery goods for her mother's store.

"She is moulderin' in jail," sez she.

"In jail? Cassandra in jail!"

"Yes, in jail." And she wouldn't tear up a good sidewalk to please him or anybody else, so
she wuz put to jail for refusin' to comply with the law."

Thinkses I, I don't believe the law would have been so hard on her if she hadn't been so humbly.
The Pesters are a humbly lot. But I didn't think it out loud, and didn't ophold the law for
feelin' so. I sez in pityin' tones, for I wuz truly sorry for Cassandra Keeler:

"How did it end?"

I don't believe Cassanda wuz mouldy, but that is Serepta's way of talkin', very flowery. But
I felt that the weather wuz safe, and cotton stockin's, and hens, and factory cloth, and I
kep' her down on them for more'n two hours.

But good land! I can't blame her for bein' embittered agin men and the laws they've made, for
it seems as if I never see a human creeter so afflicted as Serepta Pester has been all her
life. And some think it wuz the hardness between 'em and some think it wuz the gripin' of the
colick when he made his will, anyway he willed Serepta away, boy or girl whichever it wuz,
to his brother up on the Canada line.

So when Serepta wuz born (and born a girl ontirely onbeknown to her) she wuz took right away
from her mother and gin to this brother. Her mother couldn't help herself, he had the law on
his side. But it killed her. She drooped away and died before the baby wuz a year old. She
wuz a affectionate, tenderhearted woman and her husband wuz overbearin' and stern always. But
the will wuz made and the law stood. Then it leggo.

And finally she married Lank Burpee, and did considerable well it wuz spozed. Why, it seemed
as if everything under the sun and moon, that could happen to a woman, had happened to Serepta,
painful things and gauldin'.

Jest before Lank parted with her, she fell on a broken sidewalk: some think he tripped her
up, but it never wuz proved. And it wuz spozed that that very hip money wuz what made the match.
For before she wuz fairly out of splints he got a divorce from her and married agin. And by
the help of Serepta's hip money and the Whiskey Ring he got her two little children away from her.

II

"THEY CAN'T BLAME HER"

For as she sez to me once, when we wuz talkin' it over, how everything had happened to her.
Why, one of her aunts on her father's side, Huldah Pester, married for her first husband, Eliphelet
Perkins. He wuz a minister, rode on a circuit, and he took Huldah on it too, and she rode round
with him on it a good deal of the time. But she never loved to, she wuz a woman that loved
to be still, and kinder settled down at home.

But she loved Eliphelet so well that she would do anything to please him, so she rode round
with him on that circuit till she wuz perfectly fagged out.

He wuz a dretful good man to her, but he wuz kinder poor and they had hard times to git along.
But what property they had wuzn't taxed, so that helped some, and Huldah would make one dollar
go a good ways.

You see Eliphelet's salary stopped when his breath did. No; the law is quite thoughtful of
wimmen by spells. It sez it protects wimmen. And I spoze that in some mysterious way, too deep
for wimmen to understand, it wuz protectin' her now.

Well, she suffered along and finally married agin. I wondered why she did.

He moved Huldah thirteen times in two years, and at last he took her into a cart, a sort of
covered wagon, and traveled right through the western states with her. He wanted to see the
country and loved to live in the wagon, it wuz his make. And, of course, the law give him control
of her body, and she had to go where he moved it, or else part with him. And I spoze the law
thought it wuz guardin' and nourishin' her when it wuz joltin' her over them prairies and mountains
and abysses. But it jest kep' her shook up the hull of the time.

It wuz the regular Pester luck.

And then another of her aunts, Drusilly Pester, married a industrious, hard-workin' man, one
that never drinked, wuz sound on the doctrines, and give good measure to his customers, he
wuz a groceryman.

But he had read some scareful talk from high quarters about Race Suicide. Some men do git real
wrought up about it and want everybody to have all the children they can, jest as fast as they
can, though wimmen don't all feel so.

Aunt Hetty Sidman said, "If men had to born 'em and nuss 'em themselves, she didn't spoze they
would be so enthusiastick about it after they had had a few, 'specially if they done their
own housework themselves," and Aunt Hetty said that some of the men who wuz exhortin' wimmen
to have big families, had better spend some of their strength and wind in tryin' to make this
world a safer place for children to be born into.

She said they'd be better off in Nonentity than here in this world with saloons on every corner,
and war-dogs howlin' at 'em.

I don't know exactly what she meant by Nonentity, but guess she meant the world we all stay
in, before we are born into this one.

Aunt Hetty has lost five boys, two by battle and three by licensed saloons, that makes her
talk real bitter, but to resoom. I told Josiah that men needn't worry about Race Suicide, for
you might as well try to stop a hen from makin' a nest, as to stop wimmen from wantin' a baby
to love and hold on her heart. But sez I, "Folks ort to be moderate and mejum in babies as
well as in everything else."

But Drusilly's husband wanted twelve boys he said, to be law-abidin' citizens as their Pa wuz,
and a protection to the Govermunt, and to be ready to man the new warships, if a war broke
out. But her babies wuz real pretty and cunning, and she wuz so weak-minded she couldn't enjoy
the thought that if our male statesmen got to scrappin' with some other nation's male law-makers
and made another war, of havin' her grown-up babies face the cannons. I spoze it wuz when she
wuz so awful tired she felt so. And when there wuz so many of 'em and she enjoyin' real poor
health, I spoze she sometimes thought more of her own achin' back than she did of the good
of the Govermunt--and she would git kinder discouraged sometimes and be cross to him. And knowin'
his own motives wuz so high and loyal, he felt that he ort to whip her, so he did. There wuz
jest ten months difference between that and the one next older. And they said she often spoke
out in her last sickness, and said, "Thank fortune, I've always kep' the law!" And they said
the same thought wuz a great comfort to him in his last moments. He died about a year after
she did, leavin' his second wife with twins and a good property.

Then there wuz Abagail Pester.

Of course the law give her clothes to him, and knowin' that it wuz the law in the state where
they lived, she wouldn't have complained only when they had company. But it wuz mortifyin',
nobody could dispute it, to have company come and have nothin' to put on. When a man hides
his wife's stockin's and petticoats it is governin' without the consent of the governed.

And Serepta looked as bad agin as she would otherwise on account of her teeth. It wuz after
Lank had begun to git after this other woman, and wuz indifferent to his wife's looks that
Serepta had a new set of teeth on her upper jaw. And they had a law-suit.

Serepta went home about 5 P.M., I promisin' sacred to do her errents for her.

And I gin a deep, happy sithe after I shot the door behind her, and I sez to Josiah I do hope
that's the very last errent we will have to carry to Washington, D.C., for the Jonesvillians.

"Yes," says he, "an' I guess I will get a fresh pail of water and hang on the tea kettle for you."

"And," I says, "it's pretty early for supper, but I'll start it, for I do feel kinder gone
to the stomach. Sympathy is real exhaustin'. Sometimes I think it tires me more'n hard work.
And Heaven knows I sympathized with Serepta. I felt for her full as much as if she was one
of the relations on his side."

But if you'll believe it, I had hardly got the words out of my mouth and Josiah had jest laid
holt of the water pail, when in comes Philander Dagget, the President of the Jonesville Creation
Searchin' Society and, of course, he had a job for us to do on our tower. This Society was
started by the leadin' men of Jonesville, for the purpose of searchin' out and criticizin'
the affairs of the world, an' so far as possible advisin' and correctin' the meanderin's an'
wrong-doin's of the universe.

This Society, which we call the C.S.S. for short, has been ruther quiet for years. But sence
woman's suffrage has got to be such a prominent question, they bein' so bitterly opposed to
it, have reorganized and meet every once in a while, to sneer at the suffragettes and poke
fun at 'em and show in every way they can their hitter antipathy to the cause.

Philander told me if I see anything new and strikin' in the way of Society badges and regalia,
to let him know about it, for he said the C.S.S. was goin' to take a decided stand and show
their colors. They wuz goin' to help protect his women endangered sect, an' he wanted sunthin'
showy and suggestive.

I thought of a number of badges and mottoes that I felt would be suitable for this Society,
but dassent tell 'em to him, for his idees and mine on this subject are as fur apart as the
two poles. He talked awful bitter to me once about it, and I sez to him:

"Philander, the world is full of good men, and there are also bad men in the world, and, sez
I, did you ever in your born days see a bad man that wuzn't opposed to Woman's Suffrage? All
the men who trade in, and profit by, the weakness and sin of men and women, they every one
of 'em, to a man, fight agin it. And would they do this if they didn't think that their vile
trades would suffer if women had the right to vote? It is the great-hearted, generous, noble
man who wants women to become a real citizen with himself--which she is not now--she is only
a citizen just enough to be taxed equally with man, or more exhorbitantly, and be punished
and executed by the law she has no hand in makin'."

Philander sed, "I have always found it don't pay to talk with women on matters they don't understand."

An' he got up and started for the door, an' Josiah sed, "No, it don't pay, not a cent; I've
always said so."

But I told Philander I'd let him know if I see anything appropriate to the C.S.S. Holdin' back
with a almost Herculaneum effort the mottoes and badges that run through my mind as bein' appropriate
to their society; knowin' it would make him so mad if I told him of 'em--he never would neighbor
with us again. And in three days' time we sot sail. We got to the depo about an hour too early,
but I wuz glad we wuz on time, for it would have worked Josiah up dretfully ef we hadn't been,
for he had spent most of the latter part of the night in gittin' up and walkin' out to the
clock seein' if it wuz train time. Jest before we started, who should come runnin' down to
the depo but Sam Nugent wantin' to send a errent by me to Washington. He wunk me out to one
side of the waitin' room, and ast "if I'd try to git him a license to steal horses."

It kinder runs in the blood of the Nugents to love to steal, and he owned up it did, but he
said he wanted the profit of it. He wuz goin' West, and he thought he could do a good bizness,
and lay up somethin'. If he had a license he shouldn't be afraid of bein' shet up or shot.

But I refused the job with scorn; and jest as I wuz refusin', the cars snorted, and I wuz glad
they did. They seemed to express in that wild snort something of the indignation I felt.

The idee!

III

"POLLY'S EYES CROWED TENDER"

Lorinda wuz dretful glad to see us and so wuz her husband and Polly. But the Reunion had to
be put off on account of a spell her husband wuz havin'. Lorinda said she could not face such
a big company as she'd invited while Hiram wuz havin' a spell, and I agreed with her.

Sez I, "Never, never, would I have invited company whilst Josiah wuz sufferin' with one of
his cricks."

Men hain't patient under pain, and outsiders hain't no bizness to hear things they say and
tell on 'em. So Polly had to write to the relations puttin' off the Reunion for one week. But
Lorinda kep' on cookin' fruit cake and such that would keep, she had plenty of help, but loved
to do her company cookin' herself. And seein' the Reunion wuz postponed and Lorinda had time
on her hands, I proposed she should go with me to the big out-door meetin' of the Suffragists,
which wuz held in a nigh-by city.

"Good land!" sez she, "nothin' would tempt me to patronize anything so brazen and onwomanly
as a out-door meetin' of wimmen, and so onhealthy and immodest." I see she looked reproachfully
at Polly as she said it. Polly wuz arrangin' some posies in a vase, and looked as sweet as
the posies did, but considerable firm too, and I see from Lorinda's looks that Polly wuz one
who had to leave father and mother for principle's sake.

But I sez, "You're cookin' this minute, Lorinda, for a out-door meetin'" (she wuz makin' angel
cake). "And why is this meetin' any more onwomanly or immodest than the camp-meetin' where
you wuz converted, and baptized the next Sunday in the creek?"

"Oh, them wuz religious meetin's," sez she.

"Well," sez I, "mebby these wimmen think their meetin' is religious. You know the Bible sez,
'Faith and works should go together,' and some of the leaders of this movement have showed
by their works as religious a sperit and wielded aginst injustice to young workin' wimmen as
powerful a weepon as that axe of the 'Postles the Bible tells about. And you said you went
every day to the Hudson-Fulton doin's and hearn every out-door lecture; you writ me that there
wuz probable a million wimmen attendin' them out-door meetin's, and that wuz curosity and pleasure
huntin' that took them, and this is a meetin' of justice and right."

"Oh, shaw!" sez Lorinda agin, with her eye on Polly. "Wimmen have all the rights they want
or need." Lorinda's husband bein' rich and lettin' her have her way she is real foot loose,
and don't feel the need of any more rights for herself, but I told her then and there some
of the wrongs and sufferin's of Serepta Pester, and bein' good-hearted (but obstinate and bigoted)
she gin in that the errents wuz hefty, and that Serepta wuz to be pitied, but she insisted
that wimmen's votin' wouldn't help matters.

But Euphrasia Pottle, a poor relation from Troy, spoke up. "We mustn't be cowards, boys! We've
got to keep our nerve! I'm doing my part--it took nerve to get in here! In Mrs. Zamboni's clothes,
and with two pillows stuffed in front of me!"

He thumped the pillows, and there was a burst of laughter. Many in the crowd knew Mrs. Zamboni--it
was what comedians call a "local gag." The laughter spread, and became
a gale of merriment.

Men began to cheer: "Hurrah for Joe! You're the girl! Will you marry me, Joe?" And so, of course,
it was easy for Hal to get a response when he shouted, "Hurrah for the North Valley union!"

Again
he raised his hands for silence, and went on again. "Listen, men. They'll turn me out, and
you're not going to resist them.

You're going to work and keep your jobs, and get ready for the big strike. And you'll tell the
other men what I say.

I can't talk to them all, but you tell them about the union. Remember, there are people outside
planning and fighting for you. We're going to stand by the union, all of us, till we've brought
these coal-camps back into America!" There was a cheer that shook the walls of the room. Yes,
that was what they wanted--to live in America!

A crowd of men had gathered in the doorway, attracted by the uproar; Hal noticed confusion and
pushing, and saw the head and burly shoulders of his enemy, Pete Hanun, come into sight.

"Here come the gunmen, boys!" he cried; and there was a roar of anger
from the crowd.

Men turned, clenching their fists, glaring at the guard. But Hal rushed on, quickly:

"Boys, hear what I say! Keep your heads! I can't stay in North Valley, and you know it! But
I've done the thing I came to do, I've brought you the message from the union. And you'll tell
the other men--tell them to stand by the union!"

Hal went on, repeating his message over and over. Looking from one to another of these toil-worn
faces, he remembered the pledge he had made them, and he made it
anew: "I'm going to stand by you!

I'm going on with the fight, boys!"

There came more disturbance at the door, and suddenly Jeff Cotton appeared, with a couple of additional
guards, shoving their way into the room, breathless and red in the face from running.

"Ah, there's the marshal!" cried Hal. "You needn't push, Cotton, there's not going to be any
trouble. We are union men here, we know how to control ourselves.
Now, boys, we're not giving up, we're not beaten, we're only waiting
for the men in the other camps! We have a union, and we mean to keep
it! Three cheers for the union!"

The cheers rang out with a will:
cheers for the union, cheers for Joe Smith, cheers for the widow and
her weeds!

"You belong to the union! You stand by it, no matter what
happens! If they fire you, you take it on to the next place! You teach
it to the new men, you never let it die in your hearts! In union there
is strength, in union there is hope! Never forget it, men--Union!"

The
voice of the camp-marshal rang out. "If you're coming, young woman,
come now!"

Hal dropped a shy curtsey. "Oh, Mr. Cotton!

Lorinda admitted that the state of the children in the homes of the poor and ignorant wuz pitiful.
"But," sez she, "the Bible sez 'ye shall always have the poor with you,' and I spoze we always
shall, with all their sufferin's and wants. But," sez she, "in well-to-do homes the children
are safe and well off, and don't need any help from woman legislation."

"Why, Lorinda," sez I, "did you ever think on't how such mothers may watch over and be the
end of the law to their children with the father's full consent during infancy when they're
wrastlin' with teethin', whoopin'-cough, mumps, etc., can be queen of the nursery, dispensor
of pure air, sunshine, sanitary, and safe surroundin's in every way, and then in a few years
see 'em go from her into dark, overcrowded, unsanitary, carelessly guarded places, to spend
the precious hours when they are the most receptive to influence and pass man-made pitfalls
on their way to and fro, must stand helpless until in too many cases the innocent healthy child
that went from her care returns to her half-blind, a physical and moral wreck. The mother who
went down to death's door for 'em, and had most to do in mouldin' their destiny during infancy
should have at least equal rights with the father in controllin' their surroundin's during
their entire youth, and to do this she must have equal legal power or her best efforts are
wasted. That this is just and right is as plain to me as the nose on my face and folks will
see it bom-bye and wonder they didn't before.

"And wimmen who suffer most by the lack on't, will be most interested in openin' schools to
teach the fine art of domestic service, teachin' young girls how to keep healthy comfortable
homes and fit themselves to be capable wives and mothers. I don't say or expect that wimmen's
votin' will make black white, or wash all the stains from the legislative body at once, but
I say that jest the effort to git wimmen's suffrage has opened hundreds of bolted doors and
full suffrage will open hundreds more. And I'm goin' to that woman's suffrage meetin' if I
walk afoot."

But here Josiah spoke up, I thought he wuz asleep, he wuz layin' on the lounge with a paper
over his face. But truly the word, "Woman's Suffrage," rousts him up as quick as a mouse duz
a drowsy cat, so, sez he, "I can't let you go, Samantha, into any such dangerous and onwomanly
affair."

"Let?" sez I in a dry voice; "that's a queer word from one old pardner to another."

"I'm responsible for your safety, Samantha, and if anybody goes to that dangerous and onseemly
meetin' I will. Mebby Polly would like to go with me." As stated, Polly is as pretty as a pink
posy, and no matter how old a man is, nor how interestin' and noble his pardner is, he needs
girl blinders, yes, he needs 'em from the cradle to the grave. But few, indeed, are the female
pardners who can git him to wear 'em.

He added, "You know I represent you legally, Samantha; what I do is jest the same as though
you did it."

Sez I, "Mebby that is law, but whether it is gospel is another question. But if you represent
me, Josiah, you will have to carry out my plans; I writ to Diantha Smith Trimble that if I
went to the city I'd take care of Aunt Susan a night or two, and rest her a spell; you know
Diantha is a widder and too poor to hire a nurse. But seein' you represent me you can set up
with her Ma a night or two; she's bed-rid and you'll have to lift her round some, and give
her her medicine and take care of Diantha's twins, and let her git a good sleep."

"Well, as it were--Samantha--you know--men hain't expected to represent wimmen in everything,
it is mostly votin' and tendin' big meetin's and such."

"Oh, I see," sez I; "men represent wimmen when they want to, and when they don't wimmen have
got to represent themselves."

"Well, yes, Samantha, sunthin' like that."

He didn't say anything more about representin' me, and Polly said she wuz goin' to ride in
the parade with some other college girls. Lorinda's linement looked dark and forbiddin' as
Polly stated in her gentle, but firm way this ultimatum. Lorinda hated the idee of Polly's
jinin' in what she called onwomanly and immodest doin's, but I looked beamin'ly at her and
gloried in her principles.

After she went out Lorinda said to me in a complainin' way, "I should think that a girl that
had every comfort and luxury would be contented and thankful, and be willin' to stay to home
and act like a lady."

Sez I, "Nothin' could keep Polly from actin' like a lady, and mebby it is because she is so
well off herself that makes her sorry for other young girls that have nothin' but poverty and
privation."

"Oh, nonsense!" sez Lorinda. But I knowed jest how it wuz. Polly bein' surrounded by all the
good things money could give, and bein' so tender-hearted her heart ached for other young girls,
who had to spend the springtime of their lives in the hard work of earnin' bread for themselves
and dear ones, and she longed to help 'em to livin' wages, so they could exist without the
wages of sin, and too many on 'em had to choose between them black wages and starvation. She
wanted to help 'em to better surroundin's and she knowed the best weepon she could put into
their hands to fight the wolves of Want and Temptation, wuz the ballot. Polly hain't a mite
like her Ma, she favors the Smiths more, her grand-ma on her pa's side wuz a Smith and a woman
of brains and principle.

Durin' my conversation with Lorinda, I inquired about Royal Gray, for as stated, he wuz a great
favorite of ourn, and I found out (and I could see it gaulded her) that when Polly united with
the Suffragists he shied off some, and went to payin' attention to another girl. Whether it
wuz to make Polly jealous and bring her round to his way of thinkin', I didn't know, but mistrusted,
for I could have took my oath that he loved Polly deeply and truly. To be sure he hadn't confided
in me, but there is a language of the eyes, when the soul speaks through 'em, and as I'd seen
him look at Polly my own soul had hearn and understood that silent language and translated
it, that Polly wuz the light of his eyes, and the one woman in the world for him. And I couldn't
think his heart had changed so sudden. But knowin' as I did the elastic nature of manly affection,
I felt dubersome.

This other girl, Maud Vincent, always said to her men friends, it wuz onwomanly to try to vote.
She wuz one of the girls who always gloried in bein' a runnin' vine when there wuz any masculine
trees round to lean on and twine about. One who always jined in with all the idees they promulgated,
from neckties to the tariff, who declared cigar smoke wuz so agreeable and welcome; it did
really make her deathly sick, but she would choke herself cheerfully and willin'ly if by so
chokin' she could gain manly favor and admiration.

She said she didn't believe in helpin' poor girls, they wuz well enough off as it wuz, she
wuz sure they didn't feel hunger and cold as rich girls did, their skin wuz thicker and their
stomachs different and stronger, and constant labor didn't harm them, and working girls didn't
need recreation as rich girls did, and woman's suffrage wouldn't help them any; in her opinion
it would harm them, and anyway the poor wuz on-grateful.

She had the usual arguments on the tip of her tongue, for old Miss Vincent, the aunt she lived
with, wuz a ardent She Aunty and very prominent in the public meetin's the She Auntys have
to try to compel the Suffragists not to have public meetin's. They talk a good deal in public
how onwomanly and immodest it is for wimmen to talk in public. And she wuz one of the foremost
ones in tryin' to git up a school to teach wimmen civics, to prove that they mustn't ever have
anything to do with civics.

Yes, old Miss Vincent wuz a real active, ardent She Aunty, and Maud Genevieve takes after her.
Royal Gray, his handsome attractive personality, and his millions, had long been the goal of
Maud's ambition. And how ardently did she hail the coolness growing between him and Polly,
the little rift in the lute, and how zealously did she labor to make it larger.

Polly and Royal had had many an argument on the subject, that is, he would begin by makin'
fun of the Suffragists and their militant doin's, which if he'd thought on't wuz sunthin' like
what his old revolutionary forbears went through for the same reasons, bein' taxed without
representation, and bein' burdened and punished by the law they had no voice in making, only
the Suffragettes are not nearly so severe with their opposers, they haven't drawed any blood
yet. Why, them old Patriots we revere so, would consider their efforts for freedom exceedingly
gentle and tame compared to their own bloody battles.

And Royal would make light of the efforts of college girls to help workin' girls, and the encouragement
and aid they'd gin 'em when they wuz strikin' for less death-dealin' hours of labor, and livin'
wages, and so forth. I don't see how such a really noble young man as Royal ever come to argy
that way, but spoze it wuz the dead hand of some rough onreasonable old ancestor reachin' up
out of the shadows of the past and pushin' him on in the wrong direction.

So when he begun to ridicule what Polly's heart wuz sot on, when she felt that he wuz fightin'
agin right and justice, before they knowed it both pairs of bright eyes would git to flashin'
out angry sparks, and hash words would be said on both sides. That old long-buried Tory ancestor
of hisen eggin' him on, so I spoze, and Polly's generous sperit rebellin' aginst the injustice
and selfishness, and mebby some warlike ancestor of hern pushin' her on to say hash things.
'Tennyrate he had grown less attentive to her, and wuz bestowin' his time and attentions elsewhere.

And when she told him she wuz goin' to ride in the automobile parade of the suffragists, but
really ridin' she felt towards truth and justice to half the citizens of the U.S., he wuz mad
as a wet hen, a male wet hen, and wuz bound she shouldn't go.

Some men, and mebby it is love that makes 'em feel so (they say it is), and mebby it is selfishness
(though they won't own up to it), but they want the women they love to belong to them alone,
want to rule absolutely over their hearts, their souls, their bodies, and all their thoughts
and aims, desires, and fancies. They don't really say they want 'em to wear veils, and be shet
in behind lattice-windowed harems, but I believe they would enjoy it.

They want to be foot loose and heart loose themselves, but always after Ulysses is tired of
world wandering, he wants to come back and open the barred doors of home with his own private
latch-key, and find Penelope knitting stockings for him with her veil on, waitin' for him.

That sperit is I spoze inherited from the days when our ancestor, the Cave man, would knock
down the woman he fancied, with a club, and carry her off into his cave and keep her there
shet up. But little by little men are forgettin' their ancestral traits, and men and wimmen
are gradually comin' out of their dark caverns into the sunshine (for women too have inherited
queer traits and disagreeable ones, but that is another story).

Well, as I said, Royal wuz mad and told Polly that he guessed that the day of the Parade he
would take Maud Vincent out in the country in his motor, to gather May-flowers. Polly told
him she hoped they would have a good time, and then, after he had gone, drivin' his car lickety-split,
harem skarum, owin' to his madness I spoze, Polly went upstairs and cried, for I hearn her,
her room wuz next to ourn.

And I deeply respected her for her principles, for he had asked her first to go May-flowering
with him the day of the Suffrage meeting. But she refused, havin' in her mind, I spoze, the
girls that couldn't hunt flowers, but had to handle weeds and thistles with bare hands (metaforically)
and wanted to help them and all workin' wimmen to happier and more prosperous lives.

IV

"STRIVIN' WITH THE EMISSARY"

But I am hitchin' the horse behind the wagon and to resoom backwards. The Reunion wuz put off
a week and the Suffrage Meetin' wuz two days away, so I told Lorinda I didn't believe I would
have a better time to carry Serepta Pester's errents to Washington, D.C. Josiah said he guessed
he would stay and help wait on Hiram Cagwin, and I approved on't, for Lorinda wuz gittin' wore out.

And then Josiah made so light of them errents I felt that he would be a drawback instead of
a help, for how could I keep a calm and noble frame of mind befittin' them lofty errents, and
how could I carry 'em stiddy with a pardner by my side pokin' fun at 'em, and at me for carryin'
'em, jarrin' my sperit with his scorfin' and onbelievin' talk?

And as I sot off alone in the trolley I thought of how they must have felt in old times a-carryin'
the Urim and Thumim. And though I hadn't no idee what them wuz, yet I always felt that the
carriers of 'em must have felt solemn and high-strung. Yes, my feelin's wuz such as I felt
of the heft and importance of them errents not alone to Serepta Pester, but to the hull race
of wimmen that it kep' my mental head rained up so high that I couldn't half see and enjoy
the sight of the most beautiful city in the world, and still I spoze its grandeur and glory
sort o' filtered down through my conscientiousness, as cloth grows white under the sun's rays
onbeknown to it.

Anon I left the trolley and walked some ways afoot. It wuz a lovely day, the sun shone down
in golden splendor upon the splendor beneath it. Broad, beautiful clean streets, little fresh
green parks, everywhere you could turn about, and big ones full of flowers and fountains, and
trees and statutes.

And anon or oftener I passed noble big stun buildings, where everything is made for the nation's
good and profit. Money and fish and wisdom and all sorts of patented things and garden seeds
and tariffs and resolutions and treaties and laws of every shape and size, good ones and queer
ones and reputations and rates and rebates, etc., etc. But it would devour too much time to
even name over all that is made and onmade there, even if I knowed by name the innumerable
things that are flowin' constant out of that great reservoir of the Nation, with its vast crowd
of law-makers settin' on the lid, regulatin' its flow and spreadin' it abroad over the country,
thick and thin.

But on I went past the Capitol, the handsomest buildin' on the Globe, standin' in its own Eden
of beauty. By the Public Library as long as from our house to Grout Hozleton's, and I guess
longer, and every foot on't more beautifler ornamented than tongue can tell. But I didn't dally
tryin' to pace off the size on't, though it wuz enormous, for the thought of what I wuz carryin'
bore me on almost regardless of my matchless surroundin's and the twinges of rumatiz.

And anon I arrived at the White House, where my hopes and the hopes of my sect and Serepta
Pester wuz sot. I will pass over my efforts to git into the Presence, merely sayin' that they
were arjous and extreme, and I wouldn't probably have got in at all had not the Presence appeared
with a hat on jest goin' out for a walk, and see me as I wuz strivin' with the emissary for
entrance. I spoze my noble mean, made more noble fur by the magnitude of what I wuz carryin',
impressed him, for suffice it to say inside of five minutes the Presence wuz back in his augience
room, and I wuz layin' out them errents of Serepta's in front of him.

He wuz very hefty, a good-lookin' smilin' man, a politer demeanored gentlemanly appearner man
I don't want to see. I pitied him, I see it wuz a hard stent for him to do it in the time she
had sot, and he so fleshy too. But knowin' how much wuz at the stake, and how the fate of Serepta
and wimmen wuz tremblin' in the balances, I spread them errents out before him. And bein' truthful
and above board, I told him that Serepta wuz middlin' disagreeable and very humbly, but she
needed her rights jest as much as though she wuz a wax-doll.

When I got down agin onto my feet I see he had a still more worried and anxious look on his
good-natured face, and he sez: "The laws of the United States are such that I can't do them
errands, I can't interfere."

"Then," sez I, "why don't you make the United States do right?"

He said sunthin' about the might of the majority, and the powerful corporations and rings,
and that sot me off agin.

Sez I, "Intemperance is bad for Serepta and bad for the Nation."

He murmured sunthin' about the revenue the liquor trade brought the Govermunt. "It is queer,
queer as a dog." Sez I, "The intellectual and moral power of the United States are rolled up
and thrust into that Whiskey Ring and bein' drove by the whiskey dealers jest where they want
to drive 'em." Sez I, "It controls New York village and nobody denies it, and the piety and
philanthropy and culture and philosophy of that village has to be drawed along by that Ring."
Tell me," sez I firmly, "tell me!"

He did not try to frame a reply, he could not find a frame.

Oh, how solemn he looked, and how sorry I felt for him, for I knowed worse wuz to come, I knowed
the sharpest arrow Serepta Pester had sent wuz yet to pierce his sperit. But I sort o' blunted
the edge on't what I could conscientiously. Sez I, "I think myself Serepta is a little onreasonable,
I myself am willin' to wait three or four weeks. But she's suffered dretful from intemperance
from the Rings and from the want of rights, and her sufferin's have made her more voylent in
her demands and impatienter," and then I fairly groaned as I did the rest of the errent, and
let the sharpest arrow fly from the bo.

"Serepta told me to tell you if you didn't do these errents you should not be President next year."

He trembled like a popple leaf, and I felt that Serepta wuz threatenin' him too hard. Sez he,
"I do not wish to be President again, I shall refuse to be nominated. At the same time I do
wish to be President and shall work hard for the nomination if you can understand the paradox."

"Yes," sez I, "I understand them paradoxes. I've lived with 'em as you may say, all through
my married life."

A clock struck in the next room and I knowed time wuz passin' swift.

Sez the President, "I would be glad to do Serepta's errents, I think she is justified in askin'
for her rights, and to have the Ring destroyed, but I am not the one to do them."

Sez I, "Who is the man or men?"

He looked all round the room and up and down as if in hopes he could see someone layin' round
on the floor, or danglin' from the ceilin', that would take the responsibility offen him, and
in the very nick of time the door opened after a quick rap, and the President jumped up with
a relieved look on his linement, and sez:

"Here is the very man to do the errents." And he hastened to introduce me to the Senator who
entered. And then he bid me a hasty adoo, but cordial and polite, and withdrew himself.

V

"HE WUZ DRETFUL POLITE"

I felt glad to have this Senator do Serepta's errents, but I didn't like his looks. My land!
talk about Serepta Pester bein' disagreeable, he wuz as disagreeable as she any day. He wuz
kinder tall and looked out of his eyes and wore a vest. He wuz some bald-headed, and wore a
large smile all the while, it looked like a boughten one that didn't fit him, but I won't say
it wuz. I presoom he'll be known by this description. But his baldness didn't look to me like
Josiah Allen's baldness, and he didn't have the noble linement of the President, no indeed.
I told over all her sufferin's and wrongs from the Rings and from not havin' her rights, and
all her sister's Azuba Clapsaddle's, and her Aunt Cassandra Keeler's, and Hulda and Drusilly's
and Abagail Flanderses injustices and sufferin's. I did her errents as honorable as I'd love
to have one done for me, I told him all the petickulars, and as I finished I said firmly:

"Now can you do Serepta Pesterses errents and will you?" Ah, women are lovely creatures, lovely
beings, every one of 'em." And he sithed, "You are very beautiful," and he sithed agin, a sort
of a deceitful lovesick sithe. Have you a leanin' toward Natural history, madam? Have you ever
studied into the habits and traits of our American Wad?"

Sez I, "Do you mean waddin' eight cents a sheet?" But this is goin' too fur--too fur. But,"
sez I firmly, "I shall do Serepta's errents, and do 'em to the best of my ability, and you
can't draw off my attention from her wrongs and sufferin's by talkin' about wads."

"I would love to obleege Serepta," sez he, "because she belongs to such a lovely sect.

Sez I firmly, "They hain't no such thing; they are disagreeable creeters a good deal of the
time. They hain't no better than men, but they ort to have their rights all the same.

"Who is Josiah?" sez he. "Fly around, ye angels, in your native hants; mingle not with rings
and vile laws, flee away, flee above them!" I sez reasonably:

"Serepta would have been glad to flew above 'em, but the Ring and the vile laws lay holt of
her onbeknown to her and dragged her down. And there she is all bruised and broken-hearted
by 'em. Who ever hearn of a angel foldin' up her wings and goin' to a poor-house or jail through
the fault of somebody else?

"Serepta sez you call wimmen angels, and you don't give 'em the rights of the lowest beasts
that crawl on the earth. She wants to help make the laws that have such a overpowerin' influence
over her. She believes they can't be much worse than they are now, and may be a little better."

"Ah! my dear woman. They want to do right, but don't exactly see the way to do it. In the old
slavery times some of the masters wuz more to be pitied than the slaves. Life is a curious
conundrum anyway, and hard to guess. But we can try to git the right answer to it as fur as
we can. Serepta feels that one of the answers to the conundrum is in gittin' her rights. Why,
sweetened water must turn to vinegar, it is its nater.

VI

"CONCERNING MOTH-MILLERS AND MINNY FISH"

He evaded a direct answer by sayin', "As you alluded to the little indirect ways of women,
dearest madam, you will pardon me for saying that it is my belief that the soft gentle brains
of females are unfitted for the deep hard problems men have to grapple with. They are too doll-like,
too angelically and sweetly frivolous."

"No doubt," sez I, "some wimmen are frivolous and some men foolish, for as Mrs. Poyser said,
'God made women to match the men,' but these few hadn't ort to disfranchise the hull race of
men and wimmen. And as to soft brains, Maria Mitchell discovered planets hid from masculine
eyes from the beginnin' of time, and do you think that wimmen can't see the black spots on
the body politic, that darkens the life of her and her children?

"Madame Curie discovered the light that looks through solid wood and iron, and you think wimmen
can't see through unjust laws and practices, the rampant evils of to-day, and see what is on
the other side, see a remedy for 'em. Florence Nightingale could mother and help cure an army,
and why hain't men willin' to let wimmen help cure a sick legislation, kinder mother it, and
encourage it to do better? She might much better be doin' that, than playin' bridge-whist,
or rastlin' with hobble skirts, and it wouldn't devour any more time."

He sot demute for a few minutes and then he sez, "While on the subject of women's achievements,
dearest madam, allow me to ask you, if they have reached the importance you claim for them,
why is it that so few women are made immortal by bein' represented in the Hall of Fame? And
why are the four or five females represented there put away by themselves in a remote unadorned
corner with no roof to protect them from the rough winds and storms that beat upon them?"

Sez I, "That's a good illustration of what I've been sayin'. It wuz owin' to a woman's gift
that America has a Hall of Fame, and it would seem that common courtesy would give wimmen an
equally desirable place amongst the Immortals. Do you spoze that if women formed half the committee
of selection--which they should since it wuz a woman's gift that made such a place possible--do
you spoze that if she had an equal voice with men, the names of noble wimmen would be tucked
away in a remote unroofed corner?

"Edgar Allan Poe's genius wuz worthy a place among the Immortals, no doubt; his poems and stories
excite wonder and admiration. But do they move the soul like Mrs. Stowe's immortal story that
thrilled the world and helped free a race?--yes, two races--for the curse of slavery held the
white race in bondage, too. Yet she and her three or four woman companions face the stormy
winds in an out-of-the-way corner, while Poe occupies his honorable sightly place among his
fifty or more male companions.

"Wimmen have always been admonished to not strive for right and justice but to lean on men's
generosity and chivalry. Here wuz a place where that chivalry would have shone, but it didn't
seem to materialize, and if wimmen had leaned on it, it would have proved a weak staff, indeed.

"Such things as this are constantly occurring and show plain that wimmen needs the ballot to
protect her from all sorts of wrongs and indignities. Men take wimmen's money, as they did
here, and use it to uplift themselves, and lower her, like taxin' her heavily and often unjustly
and usin' this money to help forward unjust laws which she abominates. And so it goes on, and
will, until women are men's equals legally and politically."

"Ahem--you present things in a new light. I never looked at this matter with your eyes."

"No, you looked at 'em through a man's eyes; such things are so customary that men do 'em without
thinkin', from habit and custom, like hushin' up children's talk, when they interrupt grown-ups."

Agin he sot demute for a short space, and then said, "I feel that natural human instinct is
aginst the change. In savage races that knew nothin' of civilization, male force and strength
always ruled." I never believed in the female workin' ones killin' off the male drones to save
winterin' 'em; they might give 'em some light chores to do round the hive to pay for their
board. I love justice and that would be my way."

Agin he sithed. "Modern history don't seem to favor the scheme--" But his axent wuz as weak
as a cat and his boughten smile seemed crackin' and wearin' out; he knowed better.

Sez I, "We won't argy long on that p'int, for I might overwhelm you if I approved of overwhelmin',
but, will merely ask you to cast one eye on England. Was the rain of Victoria the Good less
peaceful and prosperous than that of the male rulers who preceded her? And you can then throw
your other eye over to Holland: is their sweet queen less worthy and beloved to-day than other
European monarchs? And is her throne more shaky and tottlin' than theirn?"

He didn't try to dispute me and bowed his head on his breast in a almost meachin' way. He knowed
he wuz beat on every side, and almost to the end of his chain of rusty, broken old arguments.

He sithed powerful and sot round oneasy in his chair.

Sez he faintly, "The Old Testament may teach that women have some strength and power. But in
the New Testament in every great undertaken' and plan men have been chosen by God to carry
them through."

"Why-ee!" sez I, "how you talk! Have you ever read the Bible?"

Sez I, "That hain't Bible, there hain't no Gulliver in it, and you mean Galatians."

Well, he said, that might be it, it wuz some man he knew, and he had always heard and believed
that man wuz the only worker that God had chosen.

"Why," sez I, "the one great theme of the New Testament--the salvation of the world through
the birth of Christ--no man had anything to do with.

"He will help her carry on the work of helpin' a sinful world.

"You spoke of Herod," sez he dreamily, "the name sounds familiar to me. Was not Mr. Herod once
in the United States Senate?"

"Not that one," sez I. "He died some time ago, but I guess he has relatives there now, judgin'
from laws made there. You ask who Herod wuz, and as it all seems a new story to you, I will
tell you. Sellin' for money the right to destroy the child the mother carries on her heart.
Surroundin' him with temptations so murderous, yet so enticin' to youthful spirits, that the
mother feels that as the laws are now, the grave is the only place of safety that God Himself
can find for her boy. But because Herod wuz so mean it hain't no sign that all men are mean.
Joseph wuz as likely as he could be."

"Joseph?" sez he pensively. "Do you allude to our venerable speaker, Joe Cannon?"

"No," sez I. "I'm talkin' Bible--I'm talkin' about Joseph; jest plain Joseph."

Sez I candidly, "I knew you hadn't read it the minute you mentioned the book of Liliputians.
But as I wuz sayin', Joseph wuz a likely man.

"Yes, the star of hope is risin' in the sky brighter and brighter, and wise men are even now
comin' to the mother of the new Redeemer, led by the star."

He sot demute. Silence rained for some time; and finally I spoke out solemnly through the rain:

"Will you do Serepta's errents? Will you give her her rights? And will you break the Whiskey
Ring?" As the laws of the United States wuz, he could not make any move toward doin' either
of the errents.

He jumped up on his feet and his second-hand smile fell off. He kinder shook as if he wuz skairt
most to death and tremblin' with horrow.

"Yes, that is what I said. Hain't they never been changed?"

He dropped that skairful look and put on a firm judicial one. He see that he could not skair
me to death; an' sez he, "Oh, yes, they've been changed in cases of necessity."

Sez I, "For instance durin' the Oncivil war it wuz changed to make Northern men cheap bloodhounds
and hunters."

"Yes," he said, "it seemed to be a case of necessity and economy."

"I know it," sez I; "men wuz cheaper than any other breed of bloodhounds the slave-holders
could employ to hunt men and wimmen with, and more faithful."

"Yes," he said, "it wuz a case of clear economy."

And sez I: "The laws have been changed to benefit liquor dealers."

"Well, yes," he said, "it had been changed to enable whiskey dealers to utilize the surplus
liquor they import."

Sez he, gittin' kinder animated, for he wuz on a congenial and familar theme, "Nobody, the
best calculators in drunkards, can exactly calculate how much whiskey will be drunk in a year;
and so, ruther than have the whiskey dealers suffer loss, the law had to be changed.

Sez I, "As it has been changed, it can be agin.

And he continued dreamily, as if losin' sight of me and talkin' to himself: "The wealthy Corporations
and Trusts, we have to condemn them loudly to please the common people, and help 'em secretly
to please ourselves, or our richest perkisits are lost. The Canal Ring, the Indian Agency,
the Land Grabbers, the political bosses. In fact, we are surrounded by a host of bandits that
we have to appease and profit by; oh, how these matters wear into the gray matter of our brains!"

"Gray matter!" sez I, with my nose uplifted to its extremest height, "I should call it black
matter!"

"Well, the name is immaterial, but these labors, though pocket filling, are brain wearing.
And of late I and the rest of our loyal henchmen have been worn out in our labors in tariff
revision. You know how we claim to help the common people by the revision; you've probable
read about it in the papers."

"Yes," sez I coldly, "I've hearn talk."

"Yes," sez he, "but if we do succeed, after the most strenious efforts in getting the duty
off champagne, green turtle, olives, etc., and put on to sugar, tea, cotton cloth and such
like, with all this brain fag and brain labor--"

"And tongue labor!" sez I in a icy axent.

"Yes, after all this ceaseless toil the common people will not show any gratitude; we statesmen
labor oft with aching hearts." And he leaned his forward on his hand and sithed.

But my looks wuz like ice-suckles on the north side of a barn. And I stopped his complaints
and his sithes by askin' in a voice that demanded a reply:

"Can you and will you do Serepta's errents? Errents full of truth and justice and eternal right?"

He said he knew they wuz jest runnin' over with them qualities, but happy as it would make
him to do 'em, he had to refuse owin' to the fur more important matters he had named, and the
many, many other laws and preambles that he hadn't time to name over to me. "Mebby you have
heard," sez he, "that we are now engaged in making most important laws concerning moth-millers,
and minny fish, and hog cholera.

"Well," sez I, "I guess I may as well be a-goin'." And I bid him a cool goodbye and started
for the door. But jest as my hand wuz on the nub he jumped up and opened the door, wearin'
that boughten second-hand smile agin on his linement, and sez he:

"Dear madam, perhaps Senator B. will do the errents for you."

Sez I, "Where is Senator B.?" And he said I would find him at his Post of Duty at the Capitol.

"Well," I said, "I will hunt up the Post," and did. A grand enough place for a Emperor or a
Zar is the Capitol of our great nation where I found him, a good natured lookin' boy in buttons
showin' me the Post.

VII

"NO HAMPERIN' HITCHIN' STRAPS"

Well, Senator B. wanted to do the errents but said it wuz not his place, and sent me to Senator
C., and he almost cried, he wanted to do 'em so bad, but stern duty tied him to his Post, he
said, and he sent me to Senator D., and he did cry onto his handkerchief, he wanted to do the
errents so bad, and said it would be such a good thing to have 'em done. He bust right into
tears as he said he had to refuse to do 'em. Whether they wuz wet tears or dry ones I couldn't
tell, his handkerchief wuz so big, but I hearn his sithes, and they wuz deep and powerful ones.

But as I sez to him, "Wet tears, nor dry ones, nor windy sithes didn't help do the errents."
So I went on his sobbin' advice to Senator E., and he wuz huffy and didn't want to do 'em and
said so. And said his wife had thirteen children, and wimmen instead of votin' ort to go and
do likewise.

And I told him it wouldn't look well in onmarried wimmen and widders, and if they should foller
her example folks would talk.

And he said, "They ort to marry."

And I said, "As the fashion is now, wimmen had to wait for some man to ask 'em, and if they
didn't come up to the mark and ask 'em, who wuz to blame?"

He wouldn't answer, and looked sulky, but honest, and wouldn't tell me who to go to to git
the errents done.

But jest outside his door I met the Senator I had left sobbin' over the errents. He looked
real hilarious, but drawed his face down when he ketched my eye, and sithed several times,
and sent me to Senator F. and he sent me to Senator G.

And suffice it to say I wuz sent round, and talked to, and cried at, and sulked to, and smiled
at and scowled at, and encouraged and discouraged, 'till my head swum and my knees wobbled
under me. And with all my efforts and outlay of oratory and shue leather not one of Serepta
Pester's errents could I git done, and no hopes held out of their ever bein' done. And about
the middle of the afternoon I gin up, there wuz no use in tryin' any longer and I turned my
weary tracks towards the outside door. But as bad as I felt, I couldn't help my sperit bein'
lifted up some by the grandeur about me. Thinkses I, I wonder them little laws don't git to
strollin' round and git lost in them magnificent corridors. But I consoled myself, thinkin'
it wouldn't be no great loss if they did. Won't you take something? Let me treat you to something;
what will you take, mom?" That always comes handy."

"But," sez he, "I mean beer or wine or liquor of some kind."

I riz right up in my shues and dignity, and glared at him.

Sez he, "There is a saloon right here handy in the buildin'."

Sez I in awful axents, "It is very appropriate to have it here handy!" Sez I, "Liquor duz more
towards makin' the laws of the United States from Caucus to Convention than anything else duz,
and it is highly proper to have it here so they can soak the laws in it right off before they
lay 'em onto the table or under 'em, or pass 'em onto the people. It is highly appropriate," sez I.

"Yes," sez he. "It is very handy for the Senators and Congressmen, and let me get you a glass."

"No, you won't!" sez I firmly. "The nation suffers enough from that room now without havin'
Josiah Allen's wife let in."

"No!" sez I firmly, "when I want to foller Cleopatra's fashion and commit suicide, I will hire
a rattlesnake and take my pizen as she did, on the outside."

Well, I got back to Hiram Cagwin's tired as a dog, and Serepta's errents ondone. But my conscience
opholded me and told me I had done my very best, and man or woman can do no more.

Well, the next day but one wuz the big outdoor suffrage meetin'. And we sot off in good season,
Hiram feelin' well enough to be left with the hired help. Polly started before we did with
some of her college mates, lookin' pretty as a pink with a red rose pinned over a achin' heart,
so I spoze, for she loved the young man who wuz out with another girl May-flowering. Burnin'
zeal and lofty principle can't take the place in a woman's heart of love and domestic happiness,
and men needn't be afraid it will. There is no more danger on't than there is of a settin'
hen wantin' to leave her nest to be a commercial traveler. Nature has made laws for wimmen
and hens that no ballot, male or female, can upset.

Josiah and Lorinda and I went in the trolley in good season, so's to git a sightly place, Lorinda
protestin' all the time aginst the indelicacy and impropriety of wimmen's appearin' in outdoor
meetin's, forgittin', I spose, the dense procession of wimmen that fills the avenues every
day, follerin' Fashion and Display. As nigh as I could make out the impropriety consisted in
wimmen's follerin' after Justice and Right.

Josiah's face looked dubersome. I guess he wuz worryin' over his offer to represent me, and
thinkin' of Aunt Susan and the twins.

But as it turned out I met Diantha while Josiah wuz in a shop buyin' some peppermint lozengers,
and she said her niece had come from the West, and they got along all right. So that lifted
my burden. But I thought best not to tell Josiah, as he wuz so bound to represent me. I thought
it wouldn't do any hurt to let him think it over about the job a man took on himself when he
sot out to represent a woman. They wouldn't like it in lots of ways, as willin' as they seem
to be in print.

Wimmen go through lots of things calm and patient that would make a man flinch and shy off
like a balky horse, and visey versey. I wouldn't want to represent Josiah lots of times, breakin'
colts, ploughin' greensward, cuttin' cord-wood etc., etc. Men and wimmen want equal legal rights
to represent themselves and their own sex which are different, and always must be, and both
sexes don't want to be hampered and sot down on by the other one. That is gauldin' to human
nater, male or female.

We got a good place nigh the speakers' stand, and we hadn't stood there long before the parade
hove in sight, the yeller banners streamin' out like sunshine on a rainy day, police outriders,
music, etc.

More than a hundred automobiles led the parade and five times as many wimmen walkin' afoot.
A big grand-stand with the lady speakers and their friends on it, all dressed pretty as pinks.
For the old idee that suffragists don't care for attractive dress and domestic life wuz exploded
long ago, and many other old superstitions went up in the blaze.

Those of us who have gray hair can remember when if a man spoke favorably of women's rights
the sarcastic question was asked him: "How old is Susan B. Anthony?"

And this fine wit and cuttin' ridicule would silence argument and quench the spirit of the
upholder.

But the world moves. Susan's memory is beloved and revered, and the contemptious ridicule of
the onthinkin' and ignorant only nourished the laurels the world lays on her tomb.

At that time accordin' to popular opinion a suffragist wuz a slatternly woman with uncombed
locks, dangling shoe strings, and bloomers, stridin' through an unswept house onmindful of
dirty children or hungry husband, but the world moves onward and public opinion with it. Suffragists
are the best mothers, the best housekeepers, the best dressers of any wimmen in the land. Search
the records and you'll find it so, and why?

Because they know sunthin', it takes common sense to make a gooseberry pie as it ort to be.
And the more a woman knows and the more justice she demands, the better for her husband. The
same sperit that rebels at tyranny and injustice rebels at dirt, disorder, discomfort, and
all unpleasant conditions.

I looked ahead with my mind's eye and see them pretty college girls settled down in pleasant
homes of their own, where sanitary laws prevailed, where the babies wuzn't fed pickles and
cabbage, and kep' in air-tight enclosures. Where the husbands did not have to go outside their
own homes to find cheer and comfort, and intelligent conversation, and where Love and Common
Sense walked hand in hand toward Happiness and Contentment, Justice, with her blinders offen
her eyes, goin' ahead on 'em. I never liked the idee of Justice wearin' them bandages over
her eyes. She ort to have both eyes open; if anybody ever needed good eyesight she duz, to
choose the straight and narrer road, lookin' backward to see the mistakes she has made in the
past, so's to shun 'em in the future, and lookin' all round her in the present to see where
she can help matters, and lookin' fur off in the future to the bright dawn of a Tomorrow. To
the shinin' mount of Equal Rights and full Liberty. Where she sees men and wimmen standin'
side by side with no halters or hamperin' hitchin' straps on either on 'em. He more gentle
and considerate, and she less cowardly and emotional.

Good land! what could Justice do blind in one eye and wimmen on the blind side? But good sensible
wimmen are reachin' up and pullin' the bandages offen her eyes. She's in a fair way to git
her eyesight. But I'm eppisodin', and to resoom forward.

VIII

"OLD MOM NATER LISTENIN'"

There wuz some pleasant talkin' and jokin' between bystanders and suffragettes, and then some
good natured but keen and sensible speeches. And one pretty speaker told about the doin's at
Albany and Washington. How women's respectful pleas for justice are treated there. How the
law-makers, born and nussed by wimmen and dependent on 'em for comfort and happiness, use the
wimmen's tax money to help make laws makin' her of no legal importance only as helpless figgers
to hang taxation and punishment on.

Old Mom Nater had been listenin' clost, her sky-blue eyes shinin' with joy to see her own sect
present such a noble appearance in the parade. But when these insults and indignities wuz brung
up to her mind agin and she realized afresh how wimmen couldn't git no more rights accorded
to her than a dog or a hen, and worse. For a hen or a dog wouldn't be taxed to raise money
for turkle soup and shampain to nourish the law-makers whilst they made the laws agin 'em--Mom
Nater's eyes clouded over with indignation and resentment, and she boo-hooed right out a-cryin'.
Helpless tears, of no more account than other females have shed, and will, as they set on their
hard benches with idiots, lunaticks, and criminals.

Of course she wiped up her tears pretty soon, not willin' to lose any of the wimmen's bright
speeches. But when her tear-drops fell fast, Josiah sez to me, "You'll see them wimmen run
like hikers now, wimmen always thought more of shiffon and fol-de-rols than they did of principle."

But I sez, "Wait and see," (we wuz under a awnin' and protected).

But the young and pretty speaker who wore a light silk dress and exquisite bunnet, kep' right
on talkin' jest as calmly as if she didn't know her pretty dress wuz bein' spilte and her bunnet
gittin' wet as sop, and I sez to Josiah:

"When wimmen are so in earnest, and want anything so much they can stand soakin' in their best
dresses, and let their Sunday bunnets be spilte on their heads, not noticin' 'em seemin'ly,
but keep right on pleadin' for right and justice, they are in a fair way of gittin' what they
are after."

He looked kinder meachin' but didn't dispute me.

The speeches wuz beautiful and convincin', and pretty soon old Mom Nater stopped cryin' to
hear 'em, and she and I both listened full of joy and happiness to see with what eloquence
and justice our sect wuz pleadin' our cause. Their arguments wuz so reasonable and convincin'
that I said to myself, I don't see how anybody can help bein' converted to this righteous cause,
the liftin' up of wimmen from her uncomfortable crouchin' poster with criminals and idiots,
up to the place she should occupy by the side of other good citizens of the United States,
with all the legal and moral rights that go with that noble title.

And right whilst I wuz thinkin' this, sunthin' wuz happenin' that proved I wuz right in my
eppisodin', and somebody awful sot agin it wuz bein' converted then and there (but of this
more anon and bom-bye). We stayed till we heard the last word of the last speech, I happy and
proud in sperit, Lorinda partly converted, she couldn't help it, though she wouldn't own up
to it at that juncter. And Josiah lookin' real deprested, the thought of representin' me wuz
worryin' him I knew, for I hearn him say (soty vosy), "Represent wimmen or not, I hain't goin'
to set up all night with no old woman, and lift her round, nor dry nuss no twins."

And thinkin' his sperit wuz pierced to a sufficient depth by his apprehension, so reason could
be planted and take root, and he wouldn't be so anxious in the future to represent a woman,
I told him what Diantha said and we all went home in good sperits. The sun shone clear, the
rain had washed the face of the Earth till it shone, and everything looked gay and joyous.

When we got to Lorinda's we see a auto standin' in front of the door full of flowery branches
in front and the pink posies lookin' no more bright and rosy than the faces of the two young
folks settin' there. It wuz Polly and Royal.

It seemed that when he and Maud got back from the country (and they didn't stay long, Royal
wuz so restless and oneasy) Maud insisted on his takin' her to the suffrage meetin' jest to
make fun on't, so I spoze. She thought she had rubbed out Polly's image and made a impression
herself on Royal's heart that only needed stompin' in a little deeper, and she thought ridicule
would be the stomper she needed.

But when they got to the meetin' and he see Polly settin' like a lily amongst flowers, and
read in her lovely face the earnest desire to lift the burden from the heavy laden, comfort
the sorrowful, right the wrong, and do what she could in her day and generation--

I spoze his eyes could only see her sweet face. But he couldn't help his ears from hearin'
the reasonable, eloquent words of earnest and womanly wimmen, so full of good sense and truth
and justice that no reasonable person could dispute 'em, and when he contrasted all this with
the sneerin' face, the sarcastic egotistic prattle of Maud, the veil dropped from his eyes,
and he see with the New Vision. 

Hal lowered his voice, confidentially. "It's a romance, Edward--it may interest you as an illustration
of the manners of these foreign races. She met a man on the street, a fine, fine man, she says--and
he gave her a lot of money. So she went and bought herself some new clothes, and she wants to give these
widow's weeds to the new man. That's the custom in her country, it seems--her sign that she
accepts him as a suitor."

Seeing the look of wonderment growing on his brother's face, Hal had to stop for a moment to
keep his own face straight. "If that man wasn't serious in his intention,
Edward, he'll have trouble, for I know Mrs. Zamboni's emotional nature.
She'll follow him about everywhere--"

"Hal, that creature is insane!" 'Tennyrate the same rain that washed some of the color off Maud's cheeks, seemed
to wash away the blindin' mist of prejudice and antagonism from Royal's mental vision, leavin'
his sperit ready for the great white light of truth and justice to strike in. And that very
day and hour he come round to Polly's way of thinkin', and bein' smart as a whip and so rich,
I suppose he will be a great accusation to the cause.

Well, the next day but one the Allens met in a pleasant grove on the river shore and we had
a good growin' time. Royal bein' as you may say one of the family, took us all to the grove
in his big tourin' car, and the fourth trip he took Polly alone, and wuzn't it queer that,
though the load wuz fur lighter, it took him three times as long as the other three trips together?
Why, they never got there till dinner wuz on the table, and then they didn't seem to care a
mite about the extra good food.

But I made allowances, for as I looked into their glowin' faces I knowed they wuz partakin'
of fruit from the full branches of first love, true love. Rich fruit that gives the divinest
satisfaction of any this old earth affords. Food that never changes through the centuries,
though fashion often changes, and riotous plenty or food famine may exalt or depress the sperit
of the householder. Nothin' but time has any power over this divine fruitage. He gradually,
as the light of the honeymoon wanes, whets his old scythe and mows down some of the luxuriant
branches, either cuttin' a full swath, or one at a time, and the blessed consumers have to
come down to the ordinary food of mortals. But this wuz still fur away from them.

And I knowed too that the ordinary food of ordinary mortals partook of under the full harvest
moon of domestic comfort and contentment wuz not to be despised, though fur different. And
the light fur different from the glow and the glamour that wropped them two together and all
the rest of the world away from 'em.

But I'm eppisodin' too much, and to resoom forward.

As I said, we had a happy growin' time at the Reunion, Josiah bein' in fine feather to see
the relation on his side presentin' such a noble appearance. And like a good wife I sympathized
with him in his pride and happiness, though I told him they didn't present any better appearance
than the same number of Smiths would. And their cookin', though excellent, wuz no better than
the Smiths could cook if they sot out to.

He bein' so good natered didn't dispute me outright, but said he thought the Allens made better
nut-cakes than the Smiths.

But they don't, no such thing. In fact I think the Smith nut-cakes are lighter and have a more
artistic twist to 'em and don't devour so much fat a-fryin'.

But I'd hate to set Josiah down to any better vittles. I d'no as I would dast let him loose
at the table at a Smith reunion, for he eat fur too much as it wuz. I had to give him five
pepsin lozengers and some pepper tea. And then I looked out all night for night mairs to ride
on his chist. But he come through it alive though with considerable pain.

We stayed two or three days longer with Lorinda, and then she and Hiram went part way with
us as we visited our way home. We've got relations livin' all along the river that we owed
visits to. And we went to see a number of 'em and enjoyed our four selves first rate. These
things all took place more than a year ago and another man sets in the high chair, before which
I laid Serepta's errents, a man not so hefty mebby weighed by common steelyards, but one of
noble weight judged by mental and moral scales.

I d'no whether I'd had any better luck if I'd presented Serepta's errents to him. Sometimes
when I look in the kind eyes of his picter, and read his noble and eloquent words that I believe
come from his very soul, I think mebby I'd been more lucky if he'd sot in the chair that day.
But then I d'no, there are so many influences and hendrances planted like thorns in the cushion
of that chair that a man, no matter how earnest he strives to do jest right, can't help bein'
pricked by 'em and held back. And I know he could never done them errents in the time she sot,
but I'm in hopes he'll throw his powerful influence jest as fur as he can on the side of right,
and justice to all the citizens of the U.S., wimmen as well as men.

'Tennyrate, he has showed more heroism now than many soldiers who risk life on the battle field.
For the worst foe to fight and conquer is Ridicule; and he and others in high places have attackted
Fashion so entrenched in the solid armour of Habit that most public men wouldn't have dasted
to take arms agin it.

And the long waves of Time must swash up agin the shores of Eternity, before the good it has
done can be estimated. How fur the influence has extended. How many weak wills been strengthened.
How many broken hearts healed. How many young lives inspired to nobler and saner living.

But to resoom forward, I can't nor won't carry them errents of Serepta's there again. It is
too wearin' for one of my age and my rheumatiz. What a tedious time I did put in there. It
wuz a day long to be remembered by me.

IX

THE WOMEN'S PARADE

Josiah come home from Jonesville one day, all wrought up. He'd took off a big crate of eggs
and got returns from several crates he'd sent to New York, an' he sez to me:

"That consarned Middleman is cheatin' me the worst kind. I know the yaller Plymouth Rock eggs
ort to bring mor'n the white Leghorns; they're bigger and it stands to reason they're worth
more, and he don't give nigh so much. I believe he eats 'em himself and that's why he wants
to git 'em cheaper."

"No Middleman," sez I, "could eat fifty dozen a week."

"He could if he eat enough at one time. 'Tennyrate, I'm goin' to New York to see about it."

"When are you goin'?" sez I.

"I'm goin' to-morrow mornin'. I'm goin' in onexpected and I lay out to catch him devourin'
them big eggs himself."

"Oh, shaw!" sez I. "The idee!"

"Well, I say the Trusts and Middlemen are dishonest as the old Harry. Don't you remember what
one on 'em writ to Uncle Sime Bentley and what he writ back? He'd sent a great load of potatoes
to him and he didn't get hardly anything for 'em, only their big bill for sellin' 'em. They
charged him for freightage, carage, storage, porterage, weightage, and to make their bill longer,
they put in ratage and satage.

"Uncle Sime writ back 'You infarnel thief, you, put in "stealage" and keep the whole on't.'"

But I sez, "They're not all dishonest. There are good men among 'em as well as bad."

"Well, I lay out to see to it myself, and if they ever charge me for 'ratage' and 'satage'
I'm goin' to see what they are, and how they look."

"Well," sez I, "if you're bound to go, I'll get up and get a good breakfast and go with you."
It was the day of the Woman's Suffrage Parade and I wanted to see it. I wanted to like a dog,
and had ever since I hearn of it. Though some of the Jonesvillians felt different. The Creation
Searchin' Society wuz dretful exercised about it. The President's stepma is a strong She Aunty
and has always ruled Philander with an iron hand. I've always noticed that women who didn't
want any rights always took the right to have their own way. But 'tennyrate Philander come
up a very strong He Aunty. And he felt that the Creation Searchers ort to go to New York that
day to assist the Aunties in sneerin' at the marchers, writin' up the parade, and helpin' count
'em. Philander wuz always good at figures, specially at subtraction, and he and his Step Ma
thought he ort to be there to help.

I told Josiah I guessed the She Aunties didn't need no help at that.

But Philander called a meetin' of the Creation Searchers to make arrangements to go. And I
spoze the speech he made at the meetin' wuz a powerful effort. And the members most all on
'em believin' as he did--they said it wuz a dretful interestin' meetin'. Sunthin' like a love
feast, only more wrought up and excitin'.

The editor of the Auger printed the whole thing in his paper, and said it give a staggerin'
blow agin Woman's Suffrage, and he didn't know but it wuz a death blow--he hoped it wuz.

"A Woman's Parade," sez Philander, "is the most abominable sight ever seen on our planetary
system. Onprotected woman dressed up in fine clothes standin' up on her feet, and paradin'
herself before strange men. Oh! how bold! Oh! how onwomanly! No wonder," says he, "the She
Aunties are shocked at the sight, and say they marched to attract the attention of men. Why
can't women stay to home and set down and knit? And then men would love 'em. But if they keep
on with these bold, forward actions, men won't love 'em, and they will find out so. And it
has always been, and is now, man's greatest desire and chiefest aim he has aimed at, to protect
women, to throw the shinin' mantilly of his constant devotion about her delikit form and shield
her and guard her like the very apples in his eyes.

"Woman is too sweet and tender a flower to have any such hardship put upon her, and it almost
crazes a man, and makes him temporarily out of his head, to see women do anything to hazard
that inheriant delicacy of hern, that always appealed so to the male man.

"Let us go forth, clad in our principles (and ordinary clothing, of course), and show just
where we stand on the woman question, and do all we can to assist the gentle feminine She Aunties.
Lovely, retirin' females whose pictures we so often see gracin' the sensational newspapers.
Their white womanly neck and shoulders, glitterin' with jewels, no brighter than their eyes.
They don't appear there for sex appeal, or to win admiration. No indeed! No doubt they shrink
from the publicity. And also shrink from making speeches in the Senate chambers or the halls
of Justice, but will do so, angelic martyrs that they are, to hold their erring Suffrage sisters
back from their brazen efforts at publicity and public speakin'."

They said his speech wuz cheered wildly, give out for publication, and entered into the moments
of the Society.

But after all, it happened real curious the day of the Parade every leadin' Creation Searcher
had some impediment in his way, and couldn't go, and of course, the Society didn't want to
go without its leaders.

Mis' Philander Daggett, the president's wife, wuz paperin' her settin' room and parlor overhead.
She wuz expectin' company and couldn't put it off. And bein' jest married, and thinkin' the
world of her, Philander said he dassent leave home for fear she'd fall offen the barrel and
break her neck. She had a board laid acrost two barrels to stand up on. And every day Philander
would leave his outside work and come into the house, and set round and watch her--he thought
so much of her. I suppose he wanted to catch her if she fell. But I didn't think she would
fall. She is young and tuff, and she papered it real good, though it wuz dretful hard on her
arm sockets and back.

And the Secretary's wife wuz puttin' in a piece of onions. She thought she would make considerable
by it, and she will, if onions keep up. But it is turrible hard on a woman's back to weed 'em.
But she is ambitious; she raised a flock of fifty-six turkeys last year besides doin' her house
work, and makin' seventy-five yards of rag carpet. And she thought onions wouldn't be so wearin'
on her as turkeys, for onions, she said, will stay where they are put, but turkeys are born
wanderers and hikers. And they led her through sun and rain, swamp and swale, uphill and downhill,
a-chasin' 'em up, but she made well by 'em. Well, in puttin' in her onion seed, she overworked
herself and got a crick in her back, so she couldn't stir hand nor foot for two days. And bein'
only just them two, her husband had to stay home to see to things.

And the Treasurer's wife is canvassin' for the life of William J. Bryan. And wantin' to make
all she could, she took a longer tramp than common, and didn't hear of the Parade or meetin'
of the C.S.S. at all. She writ home a day or two before the meetin', that she wuz goin' as
long as her legs held out, and they needn't write to her, for she didn't know where she would be.

Well, of course, the Creation Searchers didn't want to go without their officers. They said
they couldn't make no show if they did. So they give up goin'. But I spoze they made fun of
the Woman's Parade amongst theirselves, and mourned over their indelikit onwomanly actions,
and worried about it bein' too hard for 'em, and sneered at 'em considerable.

Well, Josiah always loves to have me with him, an' though he'd made light of the Parade, he
didn't object to my goin'. And suffice it to say that we arrove at that Middleman's safe and
sound, though why we didn't git lost in that grand immense depo and wander 'round there all
day like babes in the woods, is more'n I can tell.

The Middleman wuzn't dishonest: he convinced Josiah on it. He had shipped the colored eggs
somewhere, and of course he couldn't pay as much, and he never had hearn of Ratage or Satage.
He wuz a real pleasant Middleman, and hearing me say how much I wanted to see the Woman's Parade,
he invited us to go upstairs and set by a winder, where there was a good view on't. We'd eat
our lunch on the train and we accepted his invitation, and sot down by a winder then and there,
though it wuz a hour or so before the time sot for the Parade. And I should have taken solid
comfort watchin' the endless procession of men and women and vehicles of all sorts and descriptions,
but Josiah made so many slightin' remarks on the dress of the females passin' below on the
sidewalk, that it made me feel bad. And to tell the truth, though I didn't think best to own
up to it to him, I did blush for my sect to see the way some on 'em rigged themselves out.

"See that thing!" Josiah sez, as a woman passed by with her hat drawed down over one eye, and
a long quill standin' out straight behind more'n a foot, an' her dress puckered in so 'round
the bottom, she couldn't have took a long step if a mad dog wuz chasin' her--to say nothin'
of bein' perched up on such high heels, that she fairly tottled when she walked.

Sez Josiah: "Does that thing know enough to vote?"

"No," sez I, reasonably, "she don't. But most probable if she had bigger things to think about
she'd loosen the puckerin' strings 'round her ankles, push her hat back out of her eyes, an'
get down on her feet again."

"Why, Samantha," says he, "if you had on one of them skirts tied 'round your ankles, if I wuz
a-dyin' on the upper shelf in the buttery, you couldn't step up on a chair to get to me to
save your life, an' I'd have to die there alone."

"Why should you be dyin' on the buttery shelf, Josiah?" sez I.

"Oh, that wuz jest a figger of speech, Samantha."

"But folks ort to be mejum in figgers of speech, Josiah, and not go too fur."

"Do you think, Samantha, that anybody can go too fur in describin' them fool skirts, and them
slit skirts, and the immodesty and indecensy of some of them dresses?"

"I don't know as they can," sez I, sadly.

"Jest look at that thing," sez he again.

And as I looked, the hot blush of shame mantillied my cheeks, for I felt that my sect was disgraced
by the sight. "Listen to me! The bosses won't let me talk long, and I've something important
to say. The union leaders say we can't win a strike now."

Consternation came into the faces before him. There were cries of dismay. He went on:

"We are only one camp, and the bosses would turn us out, they'd get in scabs and run the mines
without us.

What we must have is a strike of all the camps at once. One big union and one big strike! If we
walked out now, it would please the bosses; but we'll fool them--we'll keep our jobs, and keep
our union too! You are members of the union, you'll go on working
for the union! Hooray for the North Valley union!"

For a moment there
was no response. It was hard for men to cheer over such a prospect! And he sez to me, real uppish, "Do you think them things know enough to vote?"

But jest then a young man went by dressed fashionably, but if he hadn't had the arm of a companion,
he couldn't have walked a step; his face wuz red and swollen, and dissipated, and what expression
wuz left in his face wuz a fool expression, and both had cigarettes in their mouths, and I
sez, "Does that thing know enough to vote?" And jest behind them come a lot of furrin laborers,
rough and rowdy-lookin', with no more expression in their faces than a mule or any other animal.
"Do they know enough to vote?" sez I. "As for the fitness for votin' it is pretty even on both
sides. Good intelligent men ortn't to lose the right of suffrage for the vice and ignorance
of some of their sect, and that argument is jest as strong for the other sect."

But before Josiah could reply, we hearn the sound of gay music, and the Parade began to march
on before us. First a beautiful stately figure seated fearlessly on a dancin' horse, that tossted
his head as if proud of the burden he wuz carryin'. She managed the prancin' steed with one
hand, and with the other held aloft the flag of our country. Jest as women ort to, and have
to. They have got to manage wayward pardners, children and domestics who, no matter how good
they are, will take their bits in their mouths, and go sideways some of the time, but can be
managed by a sensible, affectionate hand, and with her other hand at the same time she can
carry her principles aloft, wavin' in every domestic breeze, frigid or torrid, plain to be
seen by everybody.

Then come the wives and relations of Senators and Congressmen, showin' that bein' right on
the spot they knowed what wimmen needed. Then the wimmen voters from free Suffrage states,
showin' by their noble looks that votin' hadn't hurt 'em any. They carried the most gorgeous
banner in the whole Parade. Then the Wimmen's Political Union, showin' plain in their faces
that understandin' the laws that govern her ain't goin' to keep woman from looking beautiful
and attractive.

On and on they come, gray-headed women and curly-headed children from every station in life:
the millionairess by the working woman, and the fashionable society woman by the business one.
Two women on horseback, and one blowin' a bugle, led the way for the carriage of Madam Antoinette
Blackwell. I wonder if she ever dreamed when she wuz tryin' to climb the hill of knowledge
through the thorny path of sex persecution, that she would ever have a bugle blowed in front
of her, to honor her for her efforts, and form a part of such a glorious Parade of the sect
she give her youth and strength to free.

How they swept on, borne by the waves of music, heralded by wavin' banners of purple and white
and gold, bearin' upliftin' and noble mottoes. Physicians, lawyers, nurses, authors, journalists,
artists, social workers, dressmakers, milliners, women from furrin countries dressed in their
quaint costumes, laundresses, clerks, shop girls, college girls, all bearin' the pennants and
banners of their different colleges: Vassar, Wellesley, Smith, etc., etc. High-school pupils,
Woman's Suffrage League, Woman's Social League, and all along the brilliant line each division
dressed in beautiful costumes and carryin' their own gorgeous banners. And anon or oftener
all along the long, long procession bands of music pealin' out high and sweet, as if the Spirit
of Music, who is always depictered as a woman, was glad and proud to do honor to her own sect.
And all through the Parade you could see every little while men on foot and on horseback, not
a great many, but jest enough to show that the really noble men wuz on their side. For, as
I've said more formally, that is one of the most convincin' arguments for Woman's Suffrage.
In fact, it don't need any other. That bad men fight against Women's Suffrage with all their might.

Down by the big marble library, the grand-stand wuz filled with men seated to see their wives
march by on their road to Victory. I hearn and believe, they wuz a noble-lookin' set of men.
They had seen their wives in the past chasin' Fashion and Amusement, and why shouldn't they
enjoy seein' them follow Principle and Justice? Well, I might talk all day and not begin to
tell of the beauty and splendor of the Woman's Parade. And the most impressive sight to me
wuz to see how the leaven of individual right and justice had entered into all these different
classes of society, and how their enthusiasm and earnestness must affect every beholder.

And in my mind I drawed pictures of the different modes of our American women and our English
sisters, each workin' for the same cause, but in what a different manner. Of course, our English
sisters may have more reason for their militant doin's; more unjust laws regarding marriage--divorce,
and care of children, and I can't blame them married females for wantin' to control their own
money, specially if they earnt it by scrubbin' floors and washin'. I can't blame 'em for not
wantin' their husbands to take that money from them and their children, specially if they're
loafers and drunkards. And, of course, there are no men so noble and generous as our American
men. But jest lookin' at the matter from the outside and comparin' the two, I wuz proud indeed
of our Suffragists.

While our English sisters feel it their duty to rip and tear, burn and pillage, to draw attention
to their cause, and reach the gole (which I believe they have sot back for years) through the
smoke and fire of carnage, our American Suffragettes employ the gentle, convincin' arts of
beauty and reason. Some as the quiet golden sunshine draws out the flowers and fruit from the
cold bosom of the earth. Mindin' their own business, antagonizin' and troublin' no one, they
march along and show to every beholder jest how earnest they be. They quietly and efficiently
answer that argument of the She Auntys, that women don't want to vote, by a parade two hours
in length, of twenty thousand. They answer the argument that the ballot would render women
careless in dress and reckless, by organizin' and carryin' on a parade so beautiful, so harmonious
in color and design that it drew out enthusiastic praise from even the enemies of Suffrage.
They quietly and without argument answered the old story that women was onbusiness-like and
never on time, by startin' the Parade the very minute it was announced, which you can't always
say of men's parades.

It wuz a burnin' hot day, and many who'd always argued that women hadn't strength enough to
lift a paper ballot, had prophesied that woman wuz too delicately organized, too "fraguile,"
as Betsy Bobbet would say, to endure the strain of the long march in the torrid atmosphere.

But I told Josiah that women had walked daily over the burning plow shares of duty and domestic
tribulation, till their feet had got calloused, and could stand more'n you'd think for.

And he said he didn't know as females had any more burnin' plow shares to tread on than men had.

And I sez, "I didn't say they had, Josiah. I never wanted women to get more praise or justice
than men. I simply want 'em to get as much--just an even amount; for," sez I, solemnly, "'male
and female created He them.'"

Josiah is a deacon, and when I quote Scripture, he has to listen respectful, and I went on:
"I guess it wuz a surprise even to the marchers that of all the ambulances that kept alongside
the Parade to pick up faint and swoonin' females, the only one occupied wuz by a man."

Josiah denied it, but I sez, "I see his boots stickin' out of the ambulance myself." Josiah
couldn't dispute that, for he knows I am truthful. But he sez, sunthin' in the sperit of two
little children I hearn disputin'. Sez one: "It wuzn't so; you've told a lie."

"Well," sez the other, "You broke a piece of china and laid it to me."

Sez Josiah, "You may have seen a pair of men's boots a-stickin' out of the ambulance, but I'll
bet they didn't have heels on 'em a inch broad, and five or six inches high."

"No, Josiah," sez I, "you're right. Men think too much of their comfort and health to hist
themselves up on such little high tottlin' things, and you didn't see many on 'em in the Parade."

But he went on drivin' the arrow of higher criticism still deeper into my onwillin' breast.
"I'll bet you didn't see his legs tied together at the ankles, or his trouses slit up the sides
to show gauze stockin's and anklets and diamond buckles. And you didn't see my sect who honored
the Parade by marchin' in it, have a goose quill half a yard long, standin' up straight in
the air from a coal-scuttle hat, or out sideways, a hejus sight, and threatenin' the eyes of
friend and foe."

"And you didn't see many on 'em in the Parade," sez I agin. "Women, as they march along to
Victory, have got to drop some of these senseless things. In fact, they are droppin' em. You
don't see waists now the size of a hour glass. It is gettin' fashionable to breathe now, and
women on their way to their gole will drop by the way their high heels; it will git fashionable
to walk comfortable, and as they've got to take some pretty long steps to reach the ballot
in 1916, it stands to reason they've got to have a skirt wide enough at the bottom to step
up on the gole of Victory. It is a high step, Josiah, but women are goin' to take it. They've
always tended to cleanin' their own house, and makin' it comfortable and hygenic for its members,
big and little. And when they turn their minds onto the best way to clean the National house
both sects have to live in to make it clean and comfortable and safe for the weak and helpless
as well as for the strong--it stands to reason they won't have time or inclination to stand
up on stilts with tied-in ankles, quilled out like savages."

"Well," said Josiah, with a dark, forebodin' look on his linement, "we shall see."

"Yes," sez I, with a real radiant look into the future. "We shall see, Josiah."

But he didn't have no idea of the beautiful prophetic vision I beheld with the eyes of my sperit.
Good men and good women, each fillin' their different spears in life, but banded together for
the overthrow of evil, the uplift of the race.

X

"THE CREATION SEARCHIN' SOCIETY"

It was only a few days after we got home from New York that Josiah come into the house dretful
excited. He'd had a invitation to attend a meetin' of the Creation Searchin' Society.

"Why," sez I, "did they invite you? You are not a member?"

"No," sez he, "but they want me to help 'em be indignant. It is a indignation meetin'."

"Indignant about what?" I sez.

"Fur be it from me, Samantha, to muddle up your head and hurt your feelin's by tellin' you
what it's fur." And he went out quick and shet the door. But I got a splendid dinner and afterwards
he told me of his own accord.

I am not a member, of course, for the president, Philander Daggett, said it would lower the
prestige of the society in the eyes of the world to have even one female member. This meetin'
wuz called last week for the purpose of bein' indignant over the militant doin's of the English
Suffragettes. Josiah and several others in Jonesville wuz invited to be present at this meetin'
as sort of honorary members, as they wuz competent to be jest as indignant as any other male
men over the tribulations of their sect.

Josiah said so much about the meetin', and his Honorary Indignation, that he got me curious,
and wantin' to go myself, to see how it wuz carried on. But I didn't have no hopes on't till
Philander Daggett's new young wife come to visit me and I told her how much I wanted to go,
and she bein' real good-natered said she would make Philander let me in.

He objected, of course, but she is pretty and young, and his nater bein' kinder softened and
sweetened by the honey of the honeymoon, she got round him. And he said that if we would set
up in a corner of the gallery behind the melodeon, and keep our veils on, he would let her
and me in. But we must keep it secret as the grave, for he would lose all the influence he
had with the other members and be turned out of the Presidential chair if it wuz knowed that
he had lifted wimmen up to such a hite, and gin 'em such a opportunity to feel as if they wuz
equal to men.

Well, we went early and Josiah left me to Philander's and went on to do some errents. He thought
I wuz to spend the evenin' with her in becomin' seclusion, a-knittin' on his blue and white
socks, as a woman should. But after visitin' a spell, jest after it got duskish, we went out
the back door and went cross lots, and got there ensconced in the dark corner without anybody
seein' us and before the meetin' begun.

Philander opened the meetin' by readin' the moments of the last meetin', which wuz one of sympathy
with the police of Washington for their noble efforts to break up the Woman's Parade, and after
their almost Herculaneum labor to teach wimmen her proper place, and all the help they got
from the hoodlum and slum elements, they had failed in a measure, and the wimmen, though stunned,
insulted, spit on, struck, broken boneded, maimed, and tore to pieces, had succeeded in their
disgustin' onwomanly undertakin'.

But it wuz motioned and carried that a vote of thanks be sent 'em and recorded in the moments
that the Creation Searchers had no blame but only sympathy and admiration for the hard worked
Policemen for they had done all they could to protect wimmen's delicacy and retirin' modesty,
and put her in her place, and no man in Washington or Jonesville could do more. He read these
moments, in a real tender sympathizin' voice, and I spoze the members sympathized with him,
or I judged so from their linements as I went forward, still as a mouse, and peeked down on 'em.

He then stopped a minute and took a drink of water; I spoze his sympathetic emotions had het
him up, and kinder dried his mouth, some. And then he went on to state that this meetin' wuz
called to show to the world, abroad and nigh by, the burnin' indignation this body felt, as
a society, at the turrible sufferin's and insults bein' heaped onto their male brethren in
England by the indecent and disgraceful doin's of the militant Suffragettes, and to devise,
if possible, some way to help their male brethren acrost the sea. "For," sez he, "pizen will
spread. How do we know how soon them very wimmen who had to be spit on and struck and tore
to pieces in Washington to try to make 'em keep their place, the sacred and tender place they
have always held enthroned as angels in a man's heart--"

Here he stopped and took out his bandanna handkerchief, and wiped his eyes, and kinder choked.
But I knew it wuz all a orator's art, and it didn't affect me, though I see a number of the
members wipe their eyes, for this talk appealed to the inheriant chivalry of men, and their
desire to protect wimmen, we have always hearn so much about.

"How do we know," he continued, "how soon they may turn aginst their best friends, them who
actuated by the loftiest and tenderest emotions, and determination to protect the weaker sect
at any cost, took their valuable time to try to keep wimmen down where they ort to be, angels
of the home, who knows but they may turn and throw stuns at the Capitol an' badger an' torment
our noble lawmakers, a-tryin' to make 'em listen to their silly petitions for justice?"

In conclusion, he entreated 'em to remember that the eye of the world wuz on 'em, expectin'
'em to be loyal to the badgered and woman endangered sect abroad, and try to suggest some way
to stop them woman's disgraceful doin's.

Cyrenus Presly always loves to talk, and he always looks on the dark side of things, and he
riz up and said "he didn't believe nothin' could be done, for by all he'd read about 'em, the
men had tried everything possible to keep wimmen down where they ort to be, they had turned
deaf ears to their complaints, wouldn't hear one word they said, they had tried drivin' and
draggin' and insults of all kinds, and breakin' their bones, and imprisonment, and stuffin'
'em with rubber tubes, thrust through their nose down into their throats. And he couldn't think
of a thing more that could be done by men, and keep the position men always had held as wimmen's
gardeens and protectors, and he said he thought men might jest as well keep still and let 'em
go on and bring the world to ruin, for that was what they wuz bound to do, and they couldn't
be stopped unless they wuz killed off."

Phileman Huffstater is a old bachelder, and hates wimmen. He had been on a drunk and looked
dretful, tobacco juice runnin' down his face, his red hair all towsled up, and his clothes
stiff with dirt. He wuzn't invited, but had come of his own accord. He had to hang onto the
seat in front of him as he riz up and said:

"He believed that wuz the best and only way out on't, for men to rise up and kill off the weaker
sect, for their wuzn't never no trouble of any name or nater, but what wimmen wuz to the bottom
on't, and the world would be better off without 'em." But Philander scorfed at him and reminded
him that such hullsale doin's would put an end to the world's bein' populated at all.

But Phileman said in a hicuppin', maudlin way that "the world had better stop, if there had
got to be such doin's, wimmen risin' up on every side, and pretendin' to be equal with men."

Here his knee jints kinder gin out under him, and he slid down onto the seat and went to sleep.

I guess the members wuz kinder shamed of Phileman, for Lime Peedick jumped up quick as scat
and said, "It seemed the Englishmen had tried most everything else, and he wondered how it
would work if them militant wimmen could be ketched and a dose of sunthin' bitter and sickenin'
poured down 'em. No doubt Cartwright would turn off many men--those who had made themselves conspicuous
during the strike, those who continued to talk union out loud. But such men would have to be
replaced, and the union knew through what agencies the company got
its hands.

But here Josiah jumped up quick and said, "he objected," he said, "that would endanger the
right wimmen always had, and ort to have of cookin' good vittles for men and doin' their housework,
and bearin' and bringin' up their children, and makin' and mendin' and waitin' on 'em. He said
nothin' short of a Gatlin gun could keep Samantha from speakin' her mind about such things,
and he wuzn't willin' to have her made sick to the stomach, and incapacitated from cookin'
by any such proceedin's."

The members argued quite awhile on this pint, but finally come round to Josiah's idees, and
the meetin' for a few minutes seemed to come to a standstill, till old Cornelius Snyder got
up slowly and feebly. He has spazzums and can't hardly wobble. His wife has to support him,
wash and dress him, and take care on him like a baby. But he has the use of his tongue, and
he got some man to bring him there, and he leaned heavy on his cane, and kinder stiddied himself
on it and offered this suggestion:

"How would it do to tie females up when they got to thinkin' they wuz equal to men, halter
'em, rope 'em, and let 'em see if they wuz?"

But this idee wuz objected to for the same reason Josiah had advanced, as Philander well said,
"wimmen had got to go foot loose in order to do the housework and cookin'."

Uncle Sime Bentley, who wuz awful indignant, said, "I motion that men shall take away all the
rights that wimmen have now, turn 'em out of the meetin' house, and grange."

But before he'd hardly got the words out of his mouth, seven of the members riz up and as many
as five spoke out to once with different exclamations:

"That won't do! we can't do that! Who'll do all the work! Who'll git up grange banquets and
rummage sales, and paper and paint and put down carpets in the meetin' house, and git up socials
and entertainments to help pay the minister's salary, and carry on the Sunday School? and tend
to its picnics and suppers, and take care of the children? We can't do this, much as we'd love to."

One horsey, sporty member, also under the influence of liquor, riz up, and made a feeble motion,
"Spozin' we give wimmen liberty enough to work, leave 'em hand and foot loose, and sort o'
muzzle 'em so they can't talk."

This seemed to be very favorably received, 'specially by the married members, and the secretary
wuz jest about to record it in the moments as a scheme worth tryin', when old Doctor Nugent
got up, and sez in a firm, decided way:

"Wimmen cannot be kept from talking without endangerin' her life; as a medical expert I object
to this motion."

"How would you put the objection?" sez the secretary.

"On the ground of cruelty to animals," sez the doctor.

A fat Englishman who had took the widder Shelmadine's farm on shares, says, "I 'old with Brother
Josiah Hallen's hargument. As the father of nine young children and thirty cows to milk with
my wife's 'elp, I 'old she musn't be kep' from work, but h'I propose if we can't do anything
else that a card of sympathy be sent to hold Hengland from the Creation Searchin' Society of
America, tellin' 'em 'ow our 'earts bleeds for the men's sufferin' and 'ardships in 'avin'
to leave their hoccupations to beat and 'aul round and drive females to jails, and feed 'em
with rubber hose through their noses to keep 'em from starvin' to death for what they call
their principles."

This motion wuz carried unanimously.

But here an old man, who had jest dropped in and who wuz kinder deef and slow-witted, asked,
"What it is about anyway? what do the wimmen ask for when they are pounded and jailed and starved?"

Hank Yerden, whose wife is a Suffragist, and who is mistrusted to have a leanin' that way himself,
answered him, "Oh, they wanted the lawmakers to read their petitions asking for the rights
of ordinary citizens. "Your fool jokes bore me!" But nevertheless, Hal could see uncertainty in his brother's
face. Edward recognised those widow's weeds. And how could he be sure about the "national customs"
of that grotesque creature who had pinched him in the ribs on the street?
 And as long as they brought children into the world they wanted the right to protect
'em. And when the lawmakers wouldn't hear a word they said, and beat 'em and drove 'em round
and jailed 'em, they got mad as hens, and are actin' like furiation and wild cats. But claim
that civil rights wuz never give to any class without warfare."

"Heavens! what doin's!" sez old Zephaniah Beezum, "what is the world comin' to!" "Angle worms
will be risin' up next and demandin' to not be trod on." Sez he, "I have studied the subject
on every side, and I claim the best way to deal with them militant females is to banish 'em
to some barren wilderness, some foreign desert where they can meditate on their crimes, and
not bother men."

This idee wuz received favorably by most of the members, but others differed and showed the
weak p'ints in it, and it wuz gin up.

Well, at ten P.M., the Creation Searchers gin up after arguin' pro and con, con and pro, that
they could not see any way out of the matter, they could not tell what to do with the wimmen
without danger and trouble to the male sect.

They looked dretful dejected and onhappy as they come to this conclusion, my pardner looked
as if he wuz most ready to bust out cryin'. And as I looked on his beloved linement I forgot
everything else and onbeknown to me I leaned over the railin' and sez:

"Here is sunthin' that no one has seemed to think on at home or abroad. How would it work to
stop the trouble by givin' the wimmen the rights they ask for, the rights of any other citizen?"

I don't spoze there will ever be such another commotion and upheaval in Jonesville till Michael
blows his last trump as follered my speech. Knowin' wimmen wuz kep' from the meetin', some
on 'em thought it wuz a voice from another spear. Them wuz the skairt and horrow struck ones,
and them that thought it wuz a earthly woman's voice wuz so mad that they wuz by the side of
themselves and carried on fearful. But when they searched the gallery for wimmen or ghosts,
nothin' wuz found, for Philander's wife and I had scooted acrost lots and wuz to home a-knittin'
before the men got there.

And I d'no as anybody but Philander to this day knows what, or who it wuz.

And I d'no as my idee will be follered, but I believe it is the best way out on't for men and
wimmen both, and would stop the mad doin's of the English Suffragettes, which I don't approve
of, no indeed! much as I sympathize with the justice of their cause.

