SEVEN WIVES AND SEVEN PRISONS

Or Experiences In The Life Of A Matrimonial Maniac. A True Story. Written By Himself.

By L.A. Abbott

New York:

Published For The Author. 1870.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1. THE FIRST AND WORST WIFE My Early History. The First Marriage. Leaving Home to Prospect.
Sending for My Wife. Her Mysterious Journey. Where I Found Her. Ten Dollars for Nothing. A
Fascinating Hotel Clerk. My Wife's Confession. From Bad to Worse. Final Separation. Trial for
Forgery. A Private Marriage. Summary Separation.

CHAPTER II. MISERIES FROM MY SECOND MARRIAGE. Love-Making in Massachusetts. Arrest for Bigamy.
Trial at Northampton. A Stunning Sentence. Sent to State Prison. Learning the Brush Business.
Sharpening Picks. Prison Fare. In the Hospital. Kind Treatment. Successful Horse-Shoeing. The
Warden my Friend. Efforts for my Release. A Full Pardon.

CHAPTER III. THE SCHEIMER SENSATION. The Scheimer Family. In Love With Sarah. Attempt to Elope.
How it was Prevented. Second Attempt. A Midnight Expedition. The Alarm. A Frightful Beating.
Escape, Flogging the Devil out of Sarah. Return to New Jersey. "Boston Yankee." Plans to Secure
Sarah.

CHAPTER IV. SUCCESS WITH SARAH. Mary Smith as a Confederate. The Plot. Waiting in the Woods.
The Spy Outwitted. Sarah Secured. The Pursuers Baffled. Night on the Road. Efforts to Get Married.
"The Old Offender." Married at Last. A Constable after Sarah. He Gives it Up. An Ale Orgie.
Return to "Boston Yankee's." A Home in Goshen.

CHAPTER V. HOW THE SCHEIMERS MADE ME SUFFER. Return to Scheimer's. Peace, and then Pandemonium.
Frightful Family Row. Running for Refuge. The Gang Again. Arrest at Midnight. Struggle with
my Captors. In Jail Once More. Put in Irons. A Horrible Prison. He is interrupted in his tale,
for the sad hand of destruction has fallen upon the MS., and his arguments have come to us unfinished.
"It is better," he says, "not to give wine to the sick at all, because
you may injure them by the application.

In the same way I do not know whether it would not be better to refuse that gift of reason, that
sharpness and quickness of thought, to men in general, than to bestow it upon them so often
to their own destruction."[298] It is thus that is discussed the nature of the gods in this work of
Cicero, which is indeed a discussion on the different schools of philosophy, each in the position
which it had reached in his time.

The De Natura Deorum is followed by two books, De Divinatione, and by the fragment of one, De Fato. Divination
is the science of predicting events. By "Fatum" Cicero means destiny, or that which has been
fixed beforehand.

The three books together may be taken as religious discourses, and his purport seems to have
been to show that it might be the duty of the State to foster observances, and even to punish
their non-observance--for the benefit of the whole--even though they might not be in themselves true.
He is here together with his brother, or with those whom, like his brother, he may suppose to
have emancipated themselves from superstition--and tells him or them that though they do not
believe they should feign belief.

If the augurs declare by the flight of birds that such a thing should be done, let it be done,
although he who has to act in the matter has no belief in the birds. If they declare that a matter
has been fixed by fate, let it be as though it were fixed, whether
fixed or no. He repudiates the belief as unreasonable or childish,
but recommends that men should live as though they believed. In Jail Eleven Months.
A Tedious Trial. Found Guilty. Appeal to Supreme Court. Trying to Break Out of Jail. A Governor's
Promise. Second Trial. Sentenced to Three Years' Imprisonment.

CHAPTER X. PRISON LIFE IN VERMONT. Entering Prison. The Scythe Snath Business. Blistered Hands.
I Learn Nothing. Threaten to Kill the Shop Keeper. Locksmithing. Open Rebellion. Six Weeks
in the Dungeon. Escape of a Prisoner. In the Dungeon Again. The Mad Man Hall. He Attempts to
Murder the Deputy. I Save Morey's Life. Howling in the Black Hole. Taking Off Hall's Irons.
A Ghastly Spectacle. A Prison Funeral. I am Let Alone. The Full Term of my Imprisonment.

CHAPTER XI. ON THE TRAMP. The Day of my Deliverance. Out of Clothes. Sharing with a Beggar.
A Good Friend. Tramping Through the Snow. Weary Walks. Trusting to Luck. Comfort at Concord.
At Meredith Bridge. The Blaisdells. Last of the "Blossom" Business. Making Money at Portsmouth.
Revisiting Windsor. An Astonished Warden. Making Friends of Enemies. Inspecting the Prison.
Going to Port Jervis.

CHAPTER XII. ATTEMPT TO KIDNAP SARAH SCHEIMER'S BOY. Starting to See Sarah. The Long Separation.
What I Learned About Her. Her Drunken Husband. Change of Plan. A Suddenly-Formed Scheme. I
Find Sarah's Son. The First Interview. Resolve to Kidnap the Boy. Remonstrance of my Son Henry.
The Attempt. A Desperate Struggle. The Rescue. Arrest of Henry. My Flight into Pennsylvania.
Sending Assistance to my Son. Return to Port Jervis. Bailing Henry. His Return to Belvidere.
He is Bound Over to be Tried for Kidnapping. My folly.

CHAPTER XIII. ANOTHER WIDOW. Waiting for the Verdict. My Son Sent to State Prison. What Sarah
Would Have Done. Interview with my First Wife. Help for Henry. The Biddeford Widow. Her Effort
to Marry Me. Our Visit to Boston. A Warning. A Generous Gift. Henry Pardoned. Close of the
Scheimer Account. Visit to Ontario County. My Rich Cousins. What Might Have Been. My Birthplace
Revisited.

CHAPTER XIV. MY SON TRIES TO MURDER ME. Settling Down in Maine. Henry's Health. Tour Through
the South. Secession Times. December in New Orleans. Up the Mississippi. Leaving Henry in Massachusetts.
Back in Maine Again. Return to Boston, Profitable Horse-Trading. Plenty of Money. My First
Wife's Children. How they Have Been Brought Up. A Barefaced Robbery. Attempt to Blackmail Me.
My Son Tries to Rob and Kill Me. My Rescue Last of the Young Man.

CHAPTER XV. A TRUE WIFE AND HOME AT LAST. Where Were All my Wives? Sense of Security. An Imprudent
Acquaintance. Moving from Maine. My Property in Rensselaer County. How I Lived. Selling a Recipe.
About Buying a Carpet. Nineteen Lawsuits. Sudden Departure for the West. A Vagabond Life for
Two Years. Life in California. Return to the East. Divorce from any First Wife. A Genuine Marriage.
My Farm. Home at Last.

SOME one has said that if any man would faithfully write his autobiography, giving truly his
own history and experiences, the ills and joys, the haps and mishaps that had fallen to his
lot, he could not fail to make an interesting story; and Disraeli makes Sidonia say that there
is romance in every life. How much romance, as well as sad reality, there is in the life of
a man who, among other experiences, has married seven wives, and has been seven times in prison--solely
on account of the seven wives, may be learned from the pages that follow.

I was born in the town of Chatham, Columbia County, New York, in September, 1813. My father
was a New Englander, who married three times, and I was the eldest son of his third wife, a
woman of Dutch descent, or, as she would have boosted if she had been rich, one of the old
Knickerbockers of New York. My parents were simply honest, hard--working, worthy people, who
earned a good livelihood, brought up their children to work, behaved themselves, and were respected
by their neighbors. They had a homestead and a small farm of thirty acres, and on the place
was a blacksmith shop in which my father worked daily, shoeing horses and cattle for farmers
and others who came to the shop from miles around.

There were three young boys of us at home, and we had a chance to go to school in the winter,
while during the summer we worked on the little farm and did the "chores" about the house and
barn. But by the time I was twelve years old I began to blow and strike in the blacksmith shop,
and when I was sixteen years old I could shoe horses well, and considered myself master of
the trade. At the age of eighteen, I went into business with my father, and as I was now entitled
to a share of the profits, I married the daughter of a well-to-do neighboring farmer, and we
began our new life in part of my father's house, setting up for ourselves, and doing our own
house-keeping.

I ought to have known then that marrying thus early in life, and especially marrying the woman
I did, was about the most foolish thing I could do. I found it out afterwards, and was frequently
and painfully reminded of it through many long years. But all seemed bright enough at the start.
My wife was a good-looking woman of just my own age; her family was most respectable; two of
her brothers subsequently became ministers of the gospel; and all the children had been carefully
brought up. I was thought to have made a good match; but a few years developed that had wedded
a most unworthy woman.

Seventeen months after our marriage, our oldest child, Henry, was born. Meanwhile we had gone
to Sidney, Delaware County, where my father opened a shop. I still continued in business with
him, and during our stay at Sidney, my daughter, Elizabeth, was born. From Sidney, my father
wanted to go to Bainbridge, Chenango, County, N.Y., and I went with him, leaving my wife and
the children at Sidney, while we prospected. As usual my father started a blacksmith-shop;
but I bought a hundred acres of timber land, went to lumbering, and made money. We had a house
about four miles from the village, I living with my father, and as soon as found out that we
were doing well in business, I sent to Sidney for my wife and children. They were to come by
stage, and were due, after passing through Bainbridge, at our house at four o'clock in the
morning. We were up early to meet the stage; but when it arrived, the driver told us that my
wife had stopped at the public house in Bainbridge.

Wondering what this could mean, I at once set out with my brother and walked over to the village.
It was daylight when we arrived, and knocked loudly at the public house door. After considerable
delay, the clerk came to the door and let us in. He also asked as to "take something," which
we did. The clerk knew us well, and I inquired if my wife was in the house; he said she was,
told us what room she was in, and we went up stairs and found her in bed with her children.
Waking her, I asked her why she did not come home, in the stage? She replied that the clerk
down stairs told her that the stage did not go beyond the house, and that she expected to walk
over, as soon as it was daylight, or that possibly we might come for her.

I declare, I was so young and unsophisticated that I suspected nothing, and blamed only the
stupidity, as I supposed, of the clerk in telling her that the stage did not go beyond Bainbridge.
My wife got up and dressed herself and the children, and then as it was broad daylight, after
endeavoring, ineffectually, to get a conveyance, we started for home on foot, she leading the
little boy, and I carrying the youngest child. We were not far on our way when she suddenly
stopped, stooped down, and exclaimed:

"O! see what I have found in the road."

And she showed me a ten dollar bill. I was quite surprised, and verdantly enough, advised looking
around for more money, which my wife, brother and I industriously did for some minutes. It
was full four weeks before I found out where that ten dollar bill came from. Meanwhile, my
wife was received and was living in her new home, being treated with great kindness by all
of us. It was evident, however, that she had something on her mind which troubled her, and
one morning, about a month after her arrival, I found her in tears. I asked her what was the
matter? She said that she had been deceiving me; that she did not pick up the ten dollar bill
in the road; but that it was given to her by the clerk in the public house in Bainbridge; only,
however, for this: he had grossly insulted her; she had resented it, and he had given her the
money, partly as a reparation, and partly to prevent her from speaking of the insult to me
or to others.

But by this time my hitherto blinded eyes were opened, and I charged her with being false to
me. She protested she had not been; but finally confessed that she had been too intimate with
the clerk at the hotel. I began a suit at law against the clerk; but finally, on account of
my wife's family and for the sake of my children, I stopped proceedings, the clerk paying the
costs of the suit as far as it had gone, and giving me what I should probably have got from
him in the way of damages. My wife too, was apparently so penitent, and I was so much infatuated
with her, that I forgave her, and even consented to continue to live with her. But I removed
to Greenville, Greene County, N. Y., where I went into the black-smithing business, and was
very successful. We lived here long enough to add two children to our little family; but as
time went on, the woman became bad again, and displayed the worst depravity. I could no longer
live with her, and we finally mutually agreed upon a life-long separation--she insisting upon
keeping the children, and going to Rochester where she subsequently developed the full extent
of her character.

This, as nearly as I remember, was in the year 1838, and with this came a new trouble upon
me. Just before the separation, I received from my brother's wife a note for one hundred dollars,
and sold it. It proved to be a forgery. I was temporarily in Troy, N. Y., when the discovery
was made, and as I made no secret of my whereabouts at any time, I was followed to Troy, was
there arrested, and after lying in jail at Albany one night, was taken next morning to Coxsackie,
Greene County, and front thence to Catskill. After one day in jail there, I was brought before
a justice and examined on the charge of uttering a forged note. There was a most exciting trial
of four days duration. I had two good lawyers who did their best to show that I did not know
the note to be forged when I sold it, but the justice seemed determined to bind me over for
trial, and he did so, putting me under five hundred dollars' bonds. My half-sister at Sidney
was sent for, came to Catskill, and became bail for me. I was released, and my lawyers advised
me to leave, which I did at once, and went to Pittsfield, and from there to Worthington, Mass.,
where I had another half-sister, who was married to Mr. Josiah Bartlett, and was well off.

Here I settled down, for all that I knew to the contrary, for life. For some years past, I
had devoted my leisure hours from the forge to the honest endeavor to make up for the deficiencies
in my youthful education, and had acquired, among other things, a good knowledge of medicine.
I did not however, believe in any of the "schools" particularly those schools that make use
of mineral medicines in their practice. I favored purely vegetable remedies, and had been very
successful in administering them. So I began life anew, in Worthington, as a Doctor, and aided
by my half-sister and her friends, I soon secured a remunerative practice.

I was beginning to be truly happy. I supposed that the final separation, mutually agreed upon
between my wife and myself, was as effectual as all the courts in the country could make it,
and I looked upon myself as a free man. Accordingly, after I had been in Worthington some months
I began to pay attentions to the daughter of a flourishing farmer. She was a fine girl; she
received my addresses favorably, and we were finally privately married. This was the beginning
of my life-long troubles. In a few weeks her father found out that I had been previously married,
and was not, so far as he knew, either a divorced man or a widower. And so it happened, that
one day when I was at his house, and with his daughter, he suddenly came home with a posse
of people and a warrant for my arrest. I was taken before a justice, and while we were waiting
for proceedings to begin, or, possibly for the justice to arrive, I took the excited father
aside and said:

"You know I have a fine horse and buggy at the door. Get in with me, and ride down home. I
will see your daughter and make everything right with her, and if you will let me run away,
I'll give her her the horse and buggy."

The offer was too tempting to be refused. The father had the warrant in his pocket, and he
accepted my proposal. We rode to his house, and he went into the back-room by direction of
his daughter while she and I talked in the hall. I explained matters as well as I could; I
promised to see her again, and that very soon. My horse and buggy were at the door. Hastily
bidding my new and young wife "good-bye," I sprang into the buggy and drove rapidly away. The
father rushed to the door and raised a great hue and cry, and what was more, raised the neighbors;
I had not driven five miles before all Worthington was after me. But I had the start, the best
horse, and I led in the race. I drove to Hancock, N.Y., where my pursuers lost the trail; thence
to Bennington, Vt., next to Brattleboro, Vt., and from there to Templeton, Mass. What befel
me at Templeton, shall be related in the next chapter.

At Templeton I speedily made known my profession, and soon had a very good medical practice
which one or two "remarkable cures" materially increased. I was doing well and making money.
I boarded in a respectable farmer's family, and after living there about six months there came
another most unhappy occurrence. From the day, almost, when I began to board with this farmer
there sprung up a strong attachment between myself and his youngest daughter which soon ripened
into mutual love. She rode about with me when I went to see my patients, who were getting to
be numerous, and we were much in each other's company.

On one occasion she accompanied me to Worcester where I had some patients. We went to a public
house where she and her family were well known, and when she was asked by the landlord how
she happened to come there with the doctor, her prompt answer was:

"Why, we are married; did'nt you know it?"

She refused even to go to the table without my attendance, and when I was out visiting some
patients, she waited for her meals till I came back. We stayed there but two days and returned
together to Templeton.

A month afterward her brother was in Worcester, and stopped at this house. The landlord, after
some conversation about general matters, said:

"So your sister is married to the Doctor?"

"I know nothing about it," was the reply.

This led to a full and altogether too free disclosure to the astonished brother about the particulars
of our visit to the same house a month before, and his sister's representations that we were
married. The brother immediately started for home, and repeated the story, as it was told to
him, to his father and the family. Without seeing his daughter, the father at once procured
a warrant, and had me arrested and brought before a justice on charge of seduction. The trial
was brief; the daughter herself swore positively, that though she had been imprudent and indiscreet
in going to Worcester with me, no improper communication had ever, there or elsewhere, taken
place between us.

Of course, there was nothing to do but to let me go and I was discharged. But out of this affair
came the worst that had yet fallen to my lot in life. The story got into the papers, with particulars
and names of the parties, and in this way the people at Worthington, who had chased me as far
as Hancock and had there lost all trace of me, found out where I was. If I had been aware of
it, they might have looked elsewhere for me; but while I was felicitating myself upon my escape
from the latest difficulty, down came an officer from Worthington with a warrant for my arrest.
This officer, the sheriff, was connected with the family into which I had married in Worthington,
and with him came two or three more relatives, all bound, as they boasted, to "put me through."
They were excessively irate against me and very much angered, especially that their race after
me to Hancock had been fruitless. I had fallen into the worst possible hands.

They took me to Northampton and brought me before a Justice, on a charge of bigamy: The sheriff
who arrested me, and the relatives who accompanied him were willing to swear my life away,
if they could, and the justice was ready enough to bind me over to take my trial in court,
which was not to be in session for full six months to come. Those long, weary six months I
passed in the county jail. Then came my trial. I had good counsel. There was not a particle
of proof that I was guilty of bigamy; no attempt was made on the part of the prosecution to
produce my first wife, from whom I had separated, or, indeed, to show that there was such a
woman in existence. But, evidence or no evidence, with all Worthington against me, conviction
was inevitable. The jury found me guilty. The judge promptly sentenced me to three years' imprisonment
in the State Prison, at Charlestown, with hard labor, the first day to be passed in solitary
confinement.

This severe sentence fairly stunned me. I was taken back to jail, and the following day I was
conveyed to Charlestown with heavy irons on my ankles and handcuffed. No murderer would have
been more heavily ironed. We started early in the morning, and by noon I was duly delivered
to the warden at Charlestown prison. I was taken into the office, measured, asked my name,
age, and other particulars, and then if I had a trade. To this I at once answered, "no." I
wanted my twenty-four hours' solitary confinement in which to reflect upon the kind of "hard
labor," prescribed in my sentence, I was willing to follow for the next three years; and I
also wanted information about the branches of labor pursued in that prison. The next words
of the warden assured me that he was a kind and compassionate man.

"Go," he said to an officer, "and instantly take off those irons when you take him inside the
prison."

I was taken in and the irons were taken off. I was then undressed, my clothes were removed
to another room, and I was redressed in the prison uniform. This was a grotesque uniform indeed.
The suit was red and blue, half and half, like a harlequin's, and to crown all came a hat or
cap, like a fool's cap, a foot and a half high and running up to a peak. Miserable as I was,
I could scarcely help smiling at the utterly absurd appearance I knew I then presented. I even
ventured to remark upon it; but was suddenly and sternly checked with the command:

"Silence! There's no talking allowed here."

Then began my twenty-four hours' solitary confinement, and twenty-four wretched hours they
were. I had only bread and water to eat and drink, and I need not say that my unhappy thoughts
would not permit me to sleep. At noon next day I was taken from my cell, and brought again
before the warden, Mr. Robinson, who kindly said:

"You have no trade, you say; what do you want to go to work at?"

"Anything light; I am not used to hard labor," I replied.

So the warden directed that I should be put at work in the brush shop, where all kinds of brushes
were made. Mr. Eddy was the officer in charge of this shop, and Mr. Knowles, the contractor
for the labor employed in the brush business, was present. Both of these gentlemen took pains
to instruct me in the work I was to begin upon, and were very kind in their manner towards
me. I went to work in a bungling way and with a sad and heavy heart. At 12 o'clock we were
marched from the shop to our cells, each man taking from a trap in the wall, as he went by,
his pan containing his dinner, which consisted, that day, of boiled beef and potatoes. It was
probably the worst dinner I had ever eaten, but I had yet to learn what prison fare was. From
one o'clock to six I was in the shop again; then came Supper--mush and molasses that evening
which was varied, as I learned afterwards, on different days by rye bread, or Indian bread
and rye coffee. These things were also served for breakfast, and the dinners were varied on
different days in the week. The fare was very coarse, always, but abundant and wholesome. After
supper prisoners were expected to go to bed, as they were called out at six o'clock in the morning.

I stayed in the brush shop three or four months, but I made very little progress in learning
the trade. I was willing enough to learn and did my best. From the day I entered the prison
I made up my mind to behave as well as I could; to be docile and obedient, and to comply with
every rule and order. Consequently I had no trouble, and the officers all treated me kindly.
Warden Robinson was a model man for his position. He believed that prisoners could be reformed
more easily by mild than by harsh measures--at least they would be more contented with their
lot and would be subordinate. Every now and then he would ask prisoners if they were well treated
by the officers; how they were getting on; if they had enough to eat, and so on. The officers
seemed imbued with the warden's spirit; the chaplain of the prison, who conducted the Sunday,
services and also held a Sunday school, was one of the finest men in the world, and took a
personal interest in every prisoner. Altogether, it was a model institution. But in spite of
good treatment I was intensely miserable; my mind was morbid; I was nearly, if not quite, insane;
and one day during the dinner hour, I opened a vein in each arm in hopes that I should bleed
to death. Bleed I did, till I fainted away, and as I did not come out when the other prisoners
did, the officer came to my cell and discovered my condition. He at once sent for the Doctor
who came and stopped the hemorrhage, and then sent me to the hospital where I remained two weeks.

After I came out of the hospitals the Warden talked to me about my situation and feelings.
He advised me to go into the blacksmith shop, of course not dreaming that I knew anything of
the work; but he said I would have more liberty there; that the men moved about freely and
could talk to each other; that the work mainly was sharpening picks and tools, and that I could
at least blow and strike. So I went into the blacksmith shop, and remained their six weeks.
But, debilitated as I was, the work was too hard for me, and so the warden put me in the yard
to do what I could. I also swept the halls and assisted in the cook-room. One day when the
warden spoke to me, I told him that I knew something about taking care of the sick, and after
some conversation, he transferred me to the hospital as a nurse.

Here, if there is such a things as contentment in prison, I was comparatively happy. I nursed
the sick and administered medicines under direction of the doctor. I had too, with all easy
position, more liberty than any other prisoner. I could go anywhere about the halls and yard,
and in a few weeks I was frequently sent on an errand into the town. Everyone seemed to have
the fullest confidence in me. The Warden talked to me whenever he saw me, and always had some
kind word for me. One day I ventured to speak to him about his horse, of which he was very
proud, and indeed the horse was a very fine one.

Mr. Warden, said I "that's a noble horse of yours; but he interferes badly, and that is only
because he is badly shod. If you will trust me, I can shoe him so as to prevent all that."

"Can you?" exclaimed the Warden in great surprise; "Well, if you can, I'll give you a good
piece of bread and butter, or, anything else you want."

"I don't want your bread and butter," said I "but I will shoe your horse as he has never been
shod before."

"Well take the horse to the shop and see what you can do."

Of course, I knew that by "bread and butter" the warden meant that if I could shoe his favorite
horse so as to prevent him from interfering, he would gladly favor me as far as he could; and
I knew, too, that I could make as good a shoe as any horse need wear. I gladly led the horse
to the shop where I had so signally failed in pick and tool sharpening, and was received with
jeers by my old comrades who wanted to know what I was going to do to that horse.

"O, simply shoe him," I said.

This greatly increased the mirth of my former shopmates; but their amusement speedily changed
to amazement as they saw me make my nails, turn the shoes and neatly put them on. In due time
the horse was shod, and I led him to the Warden for inspection; and before him and an officer
who stood by him, I led the horse up and down to show that he did not interfere. The Warden's
delight was unbounded; he never saw such a set of shoes; he declared that they fitted as if
they had grown to the horse's hoofs. I need not say that from that day till the day I left
the prison, I had everything I wanted from the Warden's own table; I fared as well as he did,
and had favors innumerable.

About once a month I shod that horse, little thinking that he was to carry me over my three
years' imprisonment in just half that time. Yet so it was. It must have distressed him sorely
at this time as he reflected how much eulogy he had wasted. To be sneered at by the boy when
he came back to Rome to assume the Consulship, and to be told, with a laugh, that he had been
a little late in his welcome!

And to hear that the boy had decreed his death in conjunction with
Antony and Lepidus!

This was all that Rome could do for him at the end--for him who had so loved her, suffered so
much for her, and been so valiant on her behalf! Are you not a little late to welcome me as
one of my friends? the boy had said when Cicero had bowed and smiled to him. Then the next tidings
that reached him contained news that he was condemned! Was this the youth of whom he had declared,
since the year began, that "he knew well all the boy's sentiments; that nothing was dearer to
the lad than the Republic, nothing more reverent than the dignity of the Senate?" Was it for
this that he had bade the Senate "fear nothing" as to young Octavian, "but always still look for
better and greater things?" Was it for this that he had pledged his faith for him with such
confident words--"I promise for him, I become his surety, I engage myself, conscript fathers,
that Caius Cæsar will always be such a citizen as he has shown himself to-day?"[238] And thus
the young man had redeemed his tutor's pledges on his behalf! "A little late to welcome me,
eh?" his pupil had said to him, and had agreed that he should be murdered. But, as I have said,
the story of that speech rests on doubtful authority.

Had not Cicero too rejoiced at the uncle's murder?

And having done so, was he not bound to endure the enmity he had provoked? He had not indeed killed
Cæsar, or been aware that he was to be killed; but still it must be said of him that, having
expressed his satisfaction at what had been done, he had identified himself with those who had
killed him, and must share their fate. The slaying of a tyrant was almost by law enjoined upon
Romans--was at any rate regarded as a virtue rather than a crime. There of course arises the
question, who is to decide whether a man be a tyrant? and the idea being radically wrong, becomes
enveloped in difficulty out of which there is no escape. But there remains as a fact the existence
of the feeling which was at the time held to have justified Brutus--and
also Cicero.

A man has to inquire of his own heart with what amount of criminality he can accuse the Cicero of
the day, or the young Augustus. Can any one say that Cicero was base to have rejoiced that Cæsar
had been killed? Can any one not regard with horror the young Consul, as he sat there in the
privacy of the island, with Antony on one side and Lepidus on the other, and then in the first
days of his youth, with the down just coming on his cheeks, sending forth his edict for slaughtering
the old friend of the Republic?

[Sidenote: B.C. 43, ætat. 64.]

It is supposed that Cicero left Rome in company with his brother Quintus, and that at first they
went to Tusculum. There was no bar to their escaping from Italy had they so chosen, and probably
such was their intention as soon as tidings reached them of the proscription. It is pleasant
to think that they should again have become friends before they died. In truth, Marcus the elder
was responsible for his brother's fate. Quintus had foreseen the sun rising in the political horizon,
and had made his adorations accordingly. He, with others of his class, had shown himself ready
to bow down before Cæsar.

With his brother's assent he had become Cæsar's lieutenant in Gaul, such employment being
in conformity with the practice of the Republic. When Cæsar had returned, and the question as to
power arose at once between Cæsar and Pompey, Quintus, who had then been with his brother in
Cilicia, was restrained by the influence of Marcus; but after Pharsalia the influence of Marcus
was on the wane. We remember how young Quintus had broken away and had joined Cæsar's party.
He had sunk so low that he had become "Antony's right hand." In that direction lay money,
luxury, and all those good things which the government of the day had to offer. Cicero was so
much in Cæsar's eyes, that Cæsar despised the elder and the younger Quintus for deserting their
great relative, and would hardly have them. The influence of the brother and the uncle sat
heavily on them.

The shame of being Cæsarean while he was Pompeian, the shame of siding with Antony while he sided
with the Republic, had been too great for them. While he was speaking his Philippics they could
not but be enthusiastic on the same side. And now, when he was proscribed, they were both proscribed
with him. As the story goes, Quintus returned from Tusculum to Rome to seek provision for their
journey to Macedonia, there met his son, and they both died gallantly. Antony's hirelings came
upon the two together, or nearly together, and, finding the son first, put him to the torture,
so to learn from him the place of his father's concealment; then the father, hearing his son's
screams, rushed out to his aid, and the two perished together. But this story also comes to
us from Greek sources, and must be taken for what it is worth.

Marcus, alone in his litter, travelled through the country to his sea-side villa at Astura.
Then he went on to Formiæ, sick with doubt, not knowing whether to
stay and die, or encounter the winter sea in such boat as was provided
for him.

Should he seek the uncomfortable refuge of Brutus's army? We can remember his bitter exclamations
as to the miseries of camp life. He did go on board; but was brought back by the winds, and his
servants could not persuade him to make another attempt. Plutarch tells us that he was minded
to go to Rome, to force his way into young Cæsar's house and there to stab himself, but that
he was deterred from this melodramatic death by the fear of torture.

The story only shows how great had been the attention given to every
detail of his last moments, and what the people in Rome had learned
to say of them.

The same remark applies to Plutarch's tale as to the presuming crows who pecked at the cordage of
his sails when his boat was turned to go back to the land, and afterward with their beaks
strove to drag the bedclothes from off him when he lay waiting his fate the night before the
murderers came to him.

He was being carried down from his villa at Formiæ to the sea-side when Antony's emissaries came
upon him in his litter. There seem to have been two of them--both soldiers and officers in
the pay of Antony--Popilius Lænas and Herennius. They overtook him in the wood, through which
paths ran from the villa down to the sea-shore. On arriving at the house they had not found
Cicero, but were put upon his track by a freedman who had belonged to Quintus, named Philologus.
He could hardly have done a kinder act than to show the men the way
how they might quickly release Cicero from his agony.

They went down to the end of the wood, and there met the slaves bearing the litter. The men
were willing to fight for their master; but Cicero, bidding them put down the chair, stretched
out his neck and received his death-blow. Antony had given special orders to his servants. They were
to bring Cicero's head and his hands--the hands which had written the Philippics, and the tongue
which had spoken them--and his order was obeyed to the letter. Cicero was nearly sixty-four when
he died, his birthday being on the 3d of January following. It would be hardly worth our while
to delay ourselves for a moment with the horrors of Antony's conduct, and those of his wife Fulvia--Fulvia
the widow of Clodius and the wife of Antony--were it not that we may see what were the manners
to which a great Roman lady had descended in those days in which the Republic was brought to an
end. On the rostra was stuck up the head and the hands as a spectacle to the people, while
Fulvia specially avenged herself by piercing the tongue with her bodkin. That is the story
of Cicero's death as it has been generally told.

We are told also that Rome heard the news and saw the sight with ill-suppressed
lamentation.

We can easily believe that it should have been so. I have endeavored, as I have gone on with
my work, to compare him to an Englishman of the present day; but there is no comparing English
eloquence to his, or the ravished ears of a Roman audience to the pleasure taken in listening
to our great orators. The world has become too impatient for oratory, and then our Northern senses
cannot appreciate the melody of sounds as did the finer organs of the Roman people. We require
truth, and justice, and common-sense from those who address us, and get much more out of our
public speeches than did the old Italians. We have taught ourselves to speak so that we may
be believed--or have come near to it. A Roman audience did not much care, I fancy, whether the words
spoken were true. But it was indispensable that they should be sweet--and sweet they always
were. Sweet words were spoken to them, with their cadences all measured, with their rhythm all
perfect; but no words had ever been so sweet as those of Cicero. I even, with my obtuse ears,
can find myself sometimes lifted by them into a world of melody, little as I know of their pronunciation
and their tone.

And with the upper classes--those who read--his literature had become almost as divine as his speech.
He had come to be the one man who could express himself in perfect language. As in the next
age the Eclogues of Virgil and the Odes of Horace became dear to all the educated classes because
of the charm of their expression, so in their time, I fancy, had become the language of Cicero.
It is not surprising that men should have wept when they saw that ghastly face staring at them
from the rostra, and the protruding tongue and the outstretched hands. The marvel is that, seeing
it, they should still have borne with Antony.

That which Cicero has produced in literature is, as a rule, admitted to be excellent; but his character
as a man has been held to be tarnished by three faults--dishonesty, cowardice, and insincerity.
As to the first, I have denied it altogether, and my denial is now submitted to the reader for
his judgment.

It seems to have been brought against him not in order to make him appear guilty, but because it
has appeared to be impossible that, when others were so deeply in fault, he should have been
innocent. That he should have asked for nothing, that he should have taken no illicit rewards, that
he should not have submitted to be feed, but that he should have kept his hands clean while
all around him were grasping at everything--taking money, selling their aid for stipulated payments,
grinding miserable creditors--has been too much for men to believe. I will not take my readers
back over the cases brought against him, but will ask them to ask themselves whether there
is one supported by evidence fit to go before a jury.

The accusations have been made by men clean-handed themselves; but to them it has appeared unreasonable
to believe that a Roman oligarch of those days should be an honest gentleman.

As to his cowardice, I feel more doubt as to my power of carrying my readers with me, though
no doubt as to Cicero's courage. Cowardice in a man is abominable. But what is cowardice? and
what courage? It is a matter in which so many errors are made! Tinsel is so apt to shine like
gold and dazzle the sight! "All wounded in front," is quoted by this author from Sallust. "Not
a man taken alive! Catiline himself gasping out his life ringed around with corpses of his friends."
That is given as a picture of a brave man dying for his cause, who should excite our admiration
even though his cause were bad. In the previous lines we have an intended portrait of Cicero, who,
"thinking, no doubt, that he had done a good day's work for his patrons, declined to run himself
into more danger." Here is one story told of courage, and another of fear. Let us pause for a
moment and regard the facts. Catiline, when hunted to the last gasp, faced his enemy and died
fighting like a man--or a bull. Who is there cannot do so much as that? For a shilling or eighteen-pence
a day we can get an army of brave men who will face an enemy--and die, if death should come.
It is not a great thing, nor a rare, for a man in battle not to run away. With regard to Cicero
the allegation is that he would not be allowed to be bribed to accuse Cæsar, and thus incur
danger.

The accusation which is thus brought against him is borrowed from Sallust, and is no doubt false;
but I take it in the spirit in which it is made. Cicero feared to accuse Cæsar, lest he should
find himself enveloped, through Cæsar's means, in fresh danger. Grant that he did so. Was he
wrong at such a moment to save his life for the Republic--and for himself? His object was to
banish Catiline, and not to catch in his net every existing conspirator. He could stop the conspiracy
by securing a few, and might drive many into arms by endeavoring to encircle all. Was this cowardice?
During all those days he had to live with his life in his hands, passing about among conspirators
who he knew were sworn to kill him, and in the midst of his danger
he could walk and talk and think like a man.

It was the same when he went down into the court to plead for Milo, with the gladiators of Clodius
and the soldiery of Pompey equally adverse to him. It was the same when he uttered Philippic
after Philippic in the presence of Antony's friends. True courage, to my thinking, consists
not in facing an unavoidable danger. Any man worthy of the name can do that. The felon that will
be hung to-morrow shall walk up to the scaffold and seem ready to surrender the life he cannot
save. But he who, with the blood running hot through his veins, with a full desire of life
at his heart, with high aspirations as to the future, with everything
around him to make him happy--love and friendship and pleasant work--when
he can willingly imperil all because duty requires it, he is brave.

Of such a nature was Cicero's courage.

As to the third charge--that of insincerity--I would ask of my readers to bethink themselves how
few men are sincere now?

How near have we approached to the beauty of truth, with all Christ's teaching to guide us? Not
by any means close, though we are nearer to it than the Romans were in Cicero's days. At any
rate we have learned to love it dearly, though we may not practise it entirely. He also had learned
to love it, but not yet to practise it quite so well as we do. When it shall be said of men
truly that they are thoroughly sincere, then the millennium will have come. We flatter, and
love to be flattered. Cicero flattered men, and loved it better. We are fond of praise, and all but
ask for it. Cicero was fond of it, and did ask for it. But when truth was demanded from him,
truth was there.

Was Cicero sincere to his party, was he sincere to his friends, was
he sincere to his family, was he sincere to his dependents?

Did he offer to help and not help? Did he ever desert his ship, when he had engaged himself to serve?
I think not. He would ask one man to praise him to another--and that is not sincere. He would apply
for eulogy to the historian of his day--and that is not sincere. He would speak ill or well of
a man before the judge, according as he was his client or his adversary--and that perhaps is not
sincere.

But I know few in history on whose positive sincerity in a cause his adherents could rest with
greater security. Look at his whole life with Pompey--as to which we see his little insincerities
of the moment because we have his letters to Atticus; but he was true to his political idea
of a Pompey long after that Pompey had faded from his dreams. For twenty years we have every
thought of his heart; and because the feelings of one moment vary from those of another, we
call him insincere. What if we had Pompey's thoughts and Cæsar's, would they be less so? Could
Cæsar have told us all his feelings?

Cicero was insincere: I cannot say otherwise. But he was so much more sincere than other Romans
as to make me feel that, when writing his life, I have been dealing
with the character of one who might have been a modern gentleman.

CHAPTER XI.

CICERO'S RHETORIC.

It is well known that Cicero's works are divided into four main parts. There are the Rhetoric,
the Orations, the Epistles, and the Philosophy. There is a fifth part, indeed--the Poetry; but of that
there is not much, and of the little we have but little is esteemed.

There are not many, I fear, who think that Cicero has deserved well of his country by his poetry.
His prose works have been divided as I have stated them. Of these, two portions have been
dealt with already--as far as I am able to deal with them. Of the Orations and Epistles I
have spoken as I have gone on with my task, because the matter there treated has been available
for the purposes of biography: the other two, the Rhetoric and the Philosophy, have been distinct
from the author's life.[239] They might have been good or bad, and his life would have been still
the same; therefore it is necessary to divide them from his life, and to speak of them separately.
They are the work of his silent chamber, as the others were the enthusiastic
outpourings of his daily spirit, or the elaborated arguments of his
public career.

Who has left behind him so widely spread a breadth of literature? Who has made so many efforts,
and has so well succeeded in them all? I do not know that it has ever been given to any one
man to run up and down the strings of knowledge, and touch them all
as though each had been his peculiar study, as Cicero has done.

His rhetoric has been always made to come first, because, upon the whole, it was first written.
It may be as well here to give a list of his main works, with their dates--premising, however,
that we by no means in that way get over the difficulty as to time,
even in cases as to which we are sure of our facts.

A treatise may have been commenced and then put by, or may have been
written some time previously to publication.

Or it may be, as were those which are called the Academica, that it was remodelled, and altered
in its shape and form. The Academica were written at the instance of Atticus. We now have the altered
edition of a fragment of the first book, and the original of the second book. In this manner there
have come discrepancies which nearly break the heart of him who would fain make his list clear.
But here, on the whole, is presented to the reader with fair accuracy a list of the works of
Cicero, independent of that continual but ever-changing current of his thought which came welling
out from him daily in his speeches and his letters. Again, however, we must remember that
here are omitted all those which are either wholly lost or have come to us only in fragments too
abruptly broken for the purposes of continuous study. Of these I will not even attempt to
give the names, though when we remember some of the subjects--the
De Gloria, the De Re Militari--he could not go into the army for a
month or two without writing a book about it--the De Auguriis, the
De Philosophia, the De Suis Temporibus, the De Suis Consiliis, the
De Jure Civili, and the De Universo, we may well ask ourselves what
were the subjects on which he did not write.

In addition to these, much that has come to us has been extracted, as it were unwillingly,
from palimpsests, and is, from that and from other causes, fragmentary. We have indeed only
fragments of the essays De Republica. De Legibus, De Natura Deorum, De Divinatione, and De
Fato, in addition to the Academica.

The list of the works of which it is my purpose to give some shortest possible account in the
following chapters is as follows:

NATURE OF THE WORK. TITLES OF Those as to Rhetoric are marked [a] THE DATE THE WORKS. " " Philosophy
" [b] OF The Moral Essays " [c] PUBLICATION.

Rheticorum { Four books, giving lessons in Rhetoric; } ad C. { supposed to have been written, not
by Cicero, } B.C. Herennium. { but by one Cornificius.[a][240] } 87, 86. } Ætat. De { Four books,
giving lessons in Rhetoric, } 20, 21. Inventione. { supposed to have been translated from the
} { Greek. Two out of four have come to us.[a] }

{ Three dialogues, in three books--supposed to } { have been held under a plane-tree, in the }
De Oratore. { garden at Tusculum belonging to Crassus, } B.C. 55. { forty years before--in which
are laid down } Ætat. 52. { instructions for the making of an orator.[a] }

{ Six political discussions--supposed to have } De { been held seventy-five years before the
date } B.C. 53. Republica. { at which they were written--on the best mode } Ætat. 54. { of
governance. We have but a fragment of them. } { [c] }

{ Three out of six books as to the best laws for } { governing the
Republic. They are carried on } De Legibus. { between Atticus, Quintus,
and Marcus. They } B.C. 52. { are supposed to have been written B.C.
52 } Ætat. 55. { (ætat. 55), but were not published till after } {
his death.[c] }

De Optimo { A preface to the translation of the speeches
} Genere { of Æschines and of Demosthenes for and against } B.C. 52.
Oratorum. { Ctesiphon--in the matter of the Golden Crown. } Ætat.
55. { [a] }

De { Instructions by questions and answers, } Partitione
{ supposed to have been previously given to his } B.C. 46. Oratoria.
{ son in Greek, on the art of speaking in public.} Ætat. 61. { [a]
}

{ Treatises, in which he deals with the various } { phases of Philosophy
taught by the Academy. It } The { has been altered, and we have only
a part of } B.C. 45. Academica. { the first book of the altered portion
and the } Ætat. 62. They must have thought we had turned off
into some other road. I waited a while longer to let our friend's get a little nearer home
and further away from us, and then took the road again toward Water Gap.

We reached Water Gap at midnight, had some supper and fed the horse. We rested awhile, and
then drove leisurely on nine miles further, where we waited till daylight and crossed the river.
We were in no great hurry now; we were comparatively safe from pursuit. We soon came to a public
house, where we stopped and put out the horse, intending to take breakfast. While I was inquiring
of the landlord if there was a justice of the peace in the neighborhood, the landlord's wife
had elicited from Sarah the fact of our elopement, who she was, who her folks were, and so
on. The well-meaning landlady advised Sarah to go back home and get her parents consent before
she married. Sarah suggested that the very impossibility of getting such consent was the reason
for her running away; nor did it appear how she was to go back home alone even if she desired
to. We saw that we could get no help there, so I countermanded my order for breakfast, offering
at the same time to pay for it as if we had eaten it, ordered out my horse and drove on. After
riding some ten miles we arrived at another public house on the road, and as the landlord come
out to the door I immediately asked him where I could find a justice of the peace? He laughed,
for he at once comprehended the whole situation, and said:

"Well, well! I am an old offender myself; I ran away with my wife; there is a justice of the
peace two miles from here, and if you'll come in I'll have him here within an hour."

We had reached the right place at last, for while the landlady was getting breakfast for us,
and doing her best to make us comfortable and happy, the Old Offender himself took his horse
and carriage and went for the justice. By the time we had finished our breakfast he was back
with him, and Sarah and I were married in "less than no time," the Old Offender and his wife
singing the certificate as witnesses. I never paid a fee more gladly. We were married now,
and all the Scheimers in Pennsylvania were welcome to come and see us if they pleased.

No Scheimers came that day; but the day following came a deputation from that family, some
half dozen delegates, and with them a constable from Easton, with a warrant to arrest Sarah
for something--I never knew what--but at any rate he was to take her home if necessary by force.
The Old Offender declined to let these people into his house; Sarah told me to keep out of
the way and she would see what was wanted. Whereupon she boldly went to the door and greeted
those of her acquaintances who were in the party. The constable knew her, and told her he had
come to take her home. "But what if I refuse to go?" "Well then, I have a warrant to take you;
but if you are married, I have no power over you." Well married I am, said Sarah, and she produced
the certificate, and the Old Offender and his wife came out and declared that they witnessed
the ceremony.

What was to be done? evidently nothing; only the constable ordered a whole barrel of ale to
treat his posse and any one about tire town who chose to drink, and the barrel was rolled out
on the grass, tapped, and for a half hour there was a great jollification, which was not exactly
in honor of our wedding, but which afforded the greatest gratification to the constable, his
retainers, and those who happened to gather to see what was going on. This ended, and the bill
paid, the Easton delegation got into their wagons and turned their horses heads towards home.

We passed three delightful days under the Old Offender's roof, and then thanking our host for
his kindness to us, and paying our bill, we started on our return journey for Oxford. We arrived
safely, and staid with Boston Yankee a fortnight. We were close by the Scheimer homestead,
which was but a few miles away across the river; but we feared neither father nor brothers,
nor even the woman who was so unwilling to let Sarah go with me. The constable, and the rest
had carried home the news of our marriage, and the old folks made the best of it. Indeed, after
they heard we had returned to Oxford, Sarah's mother sent a man over to tell her that if she
would come home any day she could pack her clothes and other things, and take them away with
her. The day after we received this invitation, Boston Yankee offered to take Sarah over home,
and promised to bring her safely back. So she went, was treated tolerably well, at any rate,
she secured her clothes and brought them home with her.

It was now time to bid farewell to our staunch friend, Boston Yankee. I had inducements to
go to Goshen, Orange County, N. Y., where I had many acquaintances, and to Goshen we went.
We found a good boarding place, and I began to practice medicine, After we had been there a
while, Sarah wrote home to let her family know where she was, and that she was well and happy.
Her father wrote in reply that we both might come there at any time, and that if she would
come home he would do as well by her as he would by any of his children. This letter made Sarah
uneasy. In spite of all the ill usage she had received from her parents and family, she was
nevertheless homesick, and longed to get back again. I could see that this feeling grew upon
her daily. We were pleasantly situated where we were; I had a good and growing practice, and
we had made many friends; but this did not satisfy her; she had some property in her own right,
but her father was trustee of it, and he had hitherto kept it away from her from spite at her
love affair with me. But now she was to be taken into favor again, and she represented to me
that we could go back and get her money, and that I could establish myself there as well as
anywhere; we could live well and happily among her friends and old associations. These things
were dinged in my ears day after day, till I was sick of the very sound. I could see that she
was bound, or, as the Dutch doctor would have said, "bewitched" to go back, and at last, after
five happy months in Goshen, in an evil hour I consented to go home with her.

We went back to the Scheimer homestead and were favorably received. There was no special enthusiasm
over our return, no marked demonstrations of delight; but they seemed glad to see us, and all
the unpleasant things of the past, if not forgotten, were tacitly ignored on all sides. We
passed a pleasant evening together in what seemed a re-united family circle--one of the brothers
only was absent--and next morning we met cordially around the breakfast table. I really began
to think it was possible that all the old difficulties might be healed, and that the pleasant
picture Sarah painted, at Goshen, about settling down happily in Pennsylvania, could be fully
realized.

After breakfast I took a conveyance to go three or four miles to see a man who owed me some
money for medical services in his family, and was away from Scheimer's three or four hours.
During this brief absence I could not help thinking with genuine satisfaction of the happiness
Sarah was experiencing in the gratification of her longing to return home again. Surely, I
thought, she must be happy now. No more homesickness, and a full and complete reconciliation
with her family; all the anger, abuse, and blows forgotten or forgiven; she restored to her
place in the family; and even her objectionable husband received with open arms.

But what an enormous difference there is between fancy and fact. During this brief absence
of mine, had come home the brother who had always seemed to concentrate the hatred of the whole
family towards me for the wrong they assumed I had done to the youngest daughter who loved
me. On my return I found the peaceful home I left in the morning a perfect pandemonium. Sarah
was fairly frantic. The whole family were abusing her. The returned brother especially, was
calling her all the vile names he could lay his tongue to. I learned afterwards that he had
been doing it ever since he came into the house that day and found her at home and heard that
I was with her. They had picked, wrenched rather, out of her the secret I had confided to her
that I had another wife from whom I was "separated," but not divorced. My sudden presence on
this scene was not exactly oil on troubled waters; it was gunpowder to fire. As soon as Sarah
saw me at the door she cried out:

"O! husband, let us go away from here."

Her mother turned and shouted at me that I had better fly at once or they would kill me. Meanwhile,
that mob, which the Scheimer boys seemed always to have at hand, was gathering in the dooryard.
I managed to get near enough to Sarah to tell her that I would send a man for her next day,
and then if she was willing to come with me she must get away from her family if possible.
I then made a rush through the crowd, and reached the road. I think the gang had an indistinct
knowledge of the situation, or they would have mobbed me, and perhaps killed me. They knew
something was "to pay" at Scheimer's, but did not know exactly what. Once on the road it was
my intention to have gone over to Belvidere, and then on to Oxford, where I should have found
a sure refuge with my friend Boston Yankee.

Would that I had done so; but I was a fool; I thought I could be of service to Sarah by remaining
near her; might see her next day; I might even be able to get her out of the house, and then
we could once more elope together and go back again to Goshen where we had been so happy. So
I went to a public house three miles above Scheimer's, and remained there quietly during the
rest of the day, revolving plans for the deliverance of Sarah. I thought only of her. It is
strange that I did not once realize what a perilous position I was in myself--that, firmly
as I believed myself to be wedded to Sarah, I was in fact amenable to the law, and liable to
arrest and punishment. All this never occurred to me. I saw one or two of the gang who were
at Scheimer's about the hotel, but they did not offer to molest me, and I paid no particular
attention to them. I did not know then that they were spies and were watching my movements.
At nine o'clock I went to bed. At midnight, or thereabouts, I was roughly awakened and told
to get up. Without waiting for me, to comply, five men who had entered my room pulled me out
of bed, and almost before I could huddle on my clothes I was handcuffed. Then one of them,
who said he was a constable from Easton, showed a warrant for my arrest. What the arrest was
for I was not informed. I was taken down stairs, put into a wagon, the men followed, and the
horses started in the direction of Easton. By Scheimer's on the way, and I could see a light
in Sarah's window. I remembered how in, all the Bedlam in the house that morning she still
cried out: "I will go with him." I remembered how, only a few months before, she had been brutally
flogged in that very chamber, to "get the devil out of her." I remembered, too, the many happy,
happy hours we had passed together. And here was I, handcuffed and dragged in a wagon, I knew
not whither.

This for thoughts--in the way of action, was all the while trying to get my handcuffs off,
and at last I succeeded in getting one hand free. Waiting my opportunity till we came to a
piece of woods, I suddenly jumped up and sprang from the wagon. It was a very dark night, and
in running into the woods I struck against a tree with such force as to knock me down and nearly
stun me. Two of the men were on me in an instant. After a brief struggle I managed to get away
and ran again. I should have escaped, only a high rail fence brought me to a sudden stop, and
I was too exhausted to climb over it. My pursuers who were hard at my heels the whole while
now laid hold of me. In the subsequent struggle I got out my pocket knife, and stabbed one
of them, cutting his arm badly. Then they overpowered me. They dragged me to the roadside,
brought a rope out of the wagon, bound my arms and legs, and so at last carried me to Easton.

It was nearly daylight when I was thrust into jail. There were no cells, only large rooms for
a dozen or more men, and I was put, into one of these with several prisoners who were awaiting
trial, or who had been tried and were there till they could be sent to prison. It was a day
or two before I found out what I was there for. Then a Dutch Deputy Sheriff, who was also keeper
of the jail, came and told me that I was held for bigamy, adding the consoling intelligence
that it would be a very hard job for me, and that I would get five or six years in State prison
sure. I was well acquainted in Easton, and I sent for lawyer Litgreave for assistance and advice.
I sent also to my half-sister in Delaware County, N. Y., and in a day or two she came and saw
me, and gave Mr. Litgreave one hundred dollars retaining fee. My lawyer went to see the Scheimers
and when he returned he told me that he hoped to save me from State prison--at all events he
would exercise the influence he had over the family to that end; but I must expect to remain
in jail a long time. Precisely what this meant I did not know then; but I found out afterwards.

Soon after this visit from the lawyer, the Deputy Sheriff came in and said that he was ordered
"by the Judge" to iron me, and it was done. They were heavy leg-irons weighing full twelve
pounds, and I may say here that I wore them during the whole term of my imprisonment in this
jail, or rather they wore me--wearing their way in time almost into the bone. I had been here
a week now, and was well acquainted with the character of the place. It was indescribably filthy;
no pretence was made of cleansing it. The prisoners were half fed, and, at that, the food was
oftentimes so vile that starving men rejected it. The deputy who kept the jail was cruel and
malignant, and took delight in torturing his prisoners. He would come in sometimes under pretence
of looking at my irons to see if they were safe, and would twist and turn them about so that
I suffered intolerable pain, and blood flowed from my wounds made by these cruel irons. Such
abuse as he could give with his tongue he dispensed freely. Of course he was a coward, and
he never dared to come into one of the prisoner's rooms unless he was armed. This is a faithful
photograph of the interior of the jail at Easton, Penn., as it was a few years ago; there may
have been some improvement since that time; for the sake of humanity, I hope there has been.

After I had been in this jail about six weeks, and had become well acquainted with my room-mates,
I communicated to them one day, the result of my observation:

"There," said I, showing them a certain place in the wall, "is a loose stone that with a little
labor can be lifted out, and it will leave a hole large enough for us to get out of and go
where we like."

Examination elicited a unanimous verdict in favor of making the attempt. With no tools but
a case knife we dug out the mortar on all sides of the stone doing the work by turns and covering
the stone by hanging up an old blanket--which excited no suspicion, as it was at the head of
one of the iron bedsteads--whenever the Deputy or any of his men were likely to visit us. In
twelve days we completed the work, and could lift out the stone. The hole was large enough
to let a man through, and there was nothing for us to do but to crawl out one after the other
and drop down a few feet into the yard. This yard was surrounded by a board fence that could
be easily surmounted. I intended to take the lead, after taking off my irons (which I had learned
to do, and indeed, did every day, putting them on only when I was liable to be "inspected")
and after leaving these irons at the Deputy's door, I intended to put myself on the Jersey
side of the river as speedily as possible.

Liberty was within reach of every man in that room, and the night was set for the escape. But
one of the crowd turned traitor, and, under pretence, of speaking to the Deputy about some
matter, managed to be called out of the room and disclosed the whole. The man was waiting transportation
to prison to serve out a sentence of ten years, and, with the chance of escape before him,
it seemed singular that he should reveal a plan which promised to give him liberty; but probably
he feared a failure; or that he might be recaptured and his prison sentence increased; while
on the other hand by disclosing the plot he could curry favor enough to get his term reduced,
and perhaps he might gain a pardon. Any how, he betrayed us. The Deputy came in and found the
stone in the condition described, and forthwith we were all removed to the dungeon, or dark
room, and kept there on bread and water for twelve days. We heard afterwards that our betrayer
did get five years less than his original sentence for subjecting his comrades in misery to
twelve days of almost indescribable suffering. We were not only in a totally dark and frightfully
filthy hole, but we were half starved, and the Deputy daily took delight in taunting us with
our sufferings.

At the end of the twelve days we were taken back to the old room where we found the stone securely
fastened in with irons. Moreover, we were now under stricter observation, and at stated hours
every day, an inspector came in and examined the walls. This soon wore off, however, and when
the inspection was finally abandoned, about two months from the time of our first attempt,
we managed to find another place in the old wall where we could dig out and we went to work.
We were a fortnight at it, and had nearly completed our labor when we were discovered.

This time we spent fourteen days in the dungeon for our pains.

And now comes an extraordinary disclosure with regard to my imprisonment. A few days after
my removal from the dungeon to the old quarters again, the Deputy, in one of his rare periods
of what, with him, passed for good humor, informed me that Sarah had been confined, and had
given birth to a fine boy; that she was crying for my release; that Lawyer Sitgreave was interceding
for me; but that the old man Scheimer was still obstinate and would not let me out. Passing
over my feelings with regard to the birth of my son, here was a revelation indeed! It will
be remembered that I had only been told that I was under indictment for bigamy. I had never
been brought before a justice for a preliminary examination; never bound over for trial; and
now it transpired that old Scheimer, a Pennsylvania Dutch farmer, had the power to put me in
jail, put me in irons, and subject me to long months, perhaps years of imprisonment. I had
something to occupy my thoughts now, and for the remaining period of my jail life.

Next came a new dodge of the Scheimers, the object of which was to show that Sarah's marriage
to me was no marriage at all, thus leaving her free to marry any other man her family might
force upon her. When I had been in jail seven months, one day the Deputy came in and said that
he was going to take off my irons. I told him I wouldn't trouble him to do that, for though
I had worn them when he and his subordinates were around till the irons had nearly killed me,
yet at other times I had been in a habit of taking them off at pleasure; and to prove it, I
sat down and in a few minutes handed him the irons. The man was amazed; but saying nothing
about the irons, he approached me on another subject. He said he thought if I would sign an
acknowledgment that I was a married man when I married Sarah Scheimer, and would leave the
State forever, I could get out of jail; would I do it? I told him I would give no answer till
I had seen my counsel.

Well, the next day Lawyer Sitgreave came to me and told me I had better do it, and I consented.
Shortly afterwards, I was taken to court, for the first time in this whole affair, and was
informed by the judge that if I would sign a bond not to go near the Scheimer house or family
he would discharge me. I signed such a bond, and the judge then told me I was discharged; but
that I ought to have gone to State prison for ten years for destroying the peace and happiness
of the Scheimer family. Truly the Scheimer family were a power, indeed, in that part of the
country!

My lawyer gave me five dollars and I went to Harmony and staid that night. The next day I went
to an old friend of mine, a Methodist minister, and persuaded him to go over and see what Sarah
Scheimer's feelings were towards me, and if she was willing to come to me with our child. He
went over there, but the old Scheimers suspected his errand, and watched him closely to see
that he held no communication with Sarah. He did, however, have an opportunity to speak to
her, and she sent me word that if she could ever get her money and get away from her parents,
she would certainly join me in any part of the world. I was warned, at the same time, not to
come near the house, for fear that her father or some of her brothers would kill me.

The next day I left Harmony and walked to Port Jarvis, on the Erie Railroad, N. Y., arriving
late at night, and entirely footsore, sick, and disheartened. I went to the hotel, and the
next morning I found myself seriously sick. Asking advice, I was directed to the house of a
widow, who promised to nurse and take care of me. I was ill for two weeks, and meantime, my
half-sister in Delaware County, to whom I made known my condition, sent me money for my expenses,
and when I had sufficiently recovered to travel, I went to this sister's house in Sidney, and
there I remained several days, till I was quite well and strong again.

Casting about for something to do, a friend told me that he knew of an opportunity for a good
man at Newbury to take care of a young man, eighteen years of age, who was insane. I went there
and saw his father, and he put him under my charge. I had the care of him four months, and
during the last two months of the time I traveled about with him, and returned him, finally,
to his friends in a materially improved condition. The friends of another insane man in Montgomery,
near Newbury, hearing of my success with this young man, sent for me to come and see them.
I went there and found a man who had been insane seven years, but who was quiet and well-behaved,
only he was "out of his head." I engaged to do what I could for him. The father of my Newbury
patient had paid me well, and with my medical practice and the sale of medicines in traveling
about, I had accumulated several hundred dollars, and when I went to Montgomery I had a good
horse and buggy which cost me five hundred dollars. So, when my new patient had been under
my care and control two months, I proposed that he should travel about with me in my buggy,
and visit various parts of the State in the immediate vicinity. His friends thought well of
the suggestion, and we traveled in this way about four months, stopping a few days here and
there, when I practiced where I could, and sold medicines, making some money. At the end of
this time I went back to Montgomery with my patient, as I think, fully restored, and his father,
besides, paying the actual expenses of our journey, gave me six hundred dollars. 

It would be useless in me here to attempt to give any notion of the laws as to speech which Cicero
lays down. For myself I do not take them as laws, feeling that the interval of time has been
too great to permit laws to remain as such. No orator could, I feel sure, form himself on Cicero's
ideas. But the sweetness of the language is so great as to convince us that he, at any rate,
knew how to use language as no one has done since: "But there is a building up of words, and a
turning of them round, and a nice rendering. There is the opposing and the loosening. There
is the avoiding, the holding back, the sudden exclamation, and the dropping of the voice; and
the taking an argument from the case at large and bringing it to bear on a single point; and
the proof and the propositions together. And there is the leave given; and then a doubting, and
an expression of surprise. There is the counting up, the setting right; the utter destruction,
the continuation, the breaking off, the pretence, the answer made
to one's self, the change of names, the disjoining and rejoining of
things--the relation, the retreat, and the curtailing."[256] Who can
translate all these things when Quintilian himself has been fain to
acknowledge that he has attempted and has failed to handle them in
fitting language?

And then at last there comes that most lovely end to these most charming discourses: "His autem de rebus
sol me ille admonuit, ut brevior essem, qui ipse jam præcipitans, me quoque hac præcipitem
pæne evolvere coegit."[257] These words are so charming in their rhythm that I will not rob them
of their beauty by a translation. The setting sun requires me also to go to rest: that is their
simple meaning. At the end of the book he introduces a compliment to Hortensius, who during his life had
been his great rival, and who was still living when the De Oratore was written.

[Sidenote: B.C. 52, ætat. 55.]

The next on the list is the De Optimo Genere Oratorum--a preliminary treatise written as a preface
to a translation made by himself on the speeches of Æschines and Demosthenes against Ctesiphon
in the matter of the Golden Crown. We have not the translations; but we have his reasons for
translating them--namely, that he might enable readers only of Latin to judge how far Æschines
and Demosthenes had deserved, either of them, the title of "Optimus orator." For they had spoken
against each other with the most bitter abuse, and each spokesman was struggling for the suppression
of the other. Each was speaking with the knowledge that, if vanquished, he would have to pay
heavily in his person and his pocket. He gives the palm to neither; but he tells his readers
that the Attic mode of speaking is gone--of which, indeed, the glory is known, but the nature
unknown. But he explains that he has not translated the two pieces verbatim, as an interpreter,
but in the spirit, as an orator, using the same figures, the same forms, the same strength
of ideas.

We have to acknowledge that we do not see how in this way he can have done aught toward answering
the question De Optimo Genere Oratorum; but he may perhaps have done something to prove that he
himself, in his oratory, had preserved the best known Grecian forms.

The De Partitione Oratoria Dialogus follows, of which we have already spoken, written when
he was an old man, and was in the sixty-first year of his life. It was the year in which he
had divorced Terentia, and had been made thoroughly wretched in private and in public affairs.
But he was not on that account disabled from preparing for his son
these instructions, in the form of questions and answers, on the art
of speaking.

We next come to the Brutus; or, De Claris Oratoribus, a dialogue supposed
to have been held between Brutus, Atticus, and Cicero himself.

It is a continuation of the three books De Oratore.

He there describes what is essential to the character of the optimus
orator.

He here looks after the special man, going back over the results
of past ages, and bringing before the reader's eyes all Greek and
Roman orators, till he comes down to Cicero.

I cannot but say that the feeling is left with the reader that the orator optimus has been reached
at last in Cicero's mind.

We must remark, in the first place, that he has chosen for his friend,
to whom to address his piece, one whom he has only known late in life.

It was when he went to Cilicia as governor, when he was fifty-six years old, that he was thrown
by Atticus into close relations with Brutus. Now he has, next to Atticus, become his most chosen
friend.

His three next treatises, the Orator, the Tusculan Disquisitions, and the De Natura Deorum,
have all been graced, or intended to be graced, by the name of Brutus. And yet, from what we know,
we can hardly imagine two men less likely to be brought together by their political ambition.
The one compromising, putting up with the bad rather than with a worse, knowing that things
were evil, and contented to accept those that were the least so; the other strict, uncompromising,
and one who had learned lessons which had taught him that there was no choice among things
that were bad! And Brutus, too, had told Cicero that his lessons in oratory were not to his
taste.

There was a something about Cicero which enabled him to endure such rebukes while there was
aught worthy of praise in the man who rebuked him; and it was to this something that his devotion
was paid. We know that Brutus was rapacious after money with all the greed of a Roman nobleman,
and we know also that Cicero was not. Cicero could keep his hands clean with thousands around
him, and with thousands going into the pockets of other men. He could see the vice of Brutus, but
he did not hate it.

He must have borne, too, with something from Atticus of the same kind. The truth seems to me that
to Cicero there was no horror as to greediness, except to greed in
himself.

He could hate it for himself and yet tolerate it in others, as a man may card-playing, or
rackets, or the turf.

But he must have known that Brutus had made himself the owner of all good gifts in learning,
and took him to his heart in consequence.

In no other way can I explain to myself the feeling of subservience to Brutus which Cicero
so generally expresses: it exists in none other of his relations of life. Political subservience
there is to Pompey; but he can laugh at Pompey, and did not dedicate to him his treatises De Republica,
or De Legibus. To Appius Claudius he was very courteous.

He thought badly of Appius, but hardly worse than he ought to have done of Brutus. Of Cælius he was
fond, of Curio, of Trebatius.

To Pætus he was attached, to Sulpicius and Marcellus.

But to none of them did he ever show that deference which he did to Brutus. I could have understood
this feeling as evinced in the political letters at the end of his life, and have explained
it to myself by saying that the "ipsissima verba" have not probably
come to us.

But I cannot say that the name of Brutus does not stand there, written in imperishable letters
on the title-pages of his most chosen pieces. If this be so, Brutus has owed more to his learning
than the respect of Cicero.

All ages since have felt it, and Shakespeare has told us that "Brutus is an honorable man."

There
is a dispute as to the period of the authorship of this treatise.

Cicero in it tells us of Cato and of Marcellus, and therefore we must suppose that it was written
when they were alive. Indeed, he so compares Cæsar and Marcellus as he could not have done
had they not both been alive.

But Cato and Marcellus died B.C. 46, and how then could the treatise have been written in B.C. 45?
It should, however, be remembered that a written paper may be altered and rewritten, and that
the date of authorship and that of publication cannot be exactly the same. But the time is
of but little matter to those who can take delight in the discourse. He begins by telling us
how he had grieved when, on his return from Cilicia, he had heard
that Hortensius was dead.

Hortensius had brought him into the College of Augurs, and had there stood to him in the place
of a parent. And he had lamented Hortensius also on behalf of Rome. Hortensius had gone. Then he
goes on to say that, as he was thinking of these things while walking in his portico, Brutus had
come to him and Pomponius Atticus.

He says how pleasantly they greeted each other; and then gradually they go on, till Atticus
asks him to renew the story he had before been telling. "In truth, Pomponius," he says, "I remember
it right well, for then it was that I heard Deiotarus, that truest and best of kings, defended
by our Brutus here," Deiotarus was that Eastern king whose defence by Cicero himself I have mentioned
when speaking of his pleadings before Cæsar. Then he rushes off into his subject, and discusses
at length his favorite idea. It must still be remembered that neither here are to be traced
any positive line of lessons in oratory. There is no beginning, no middle, and no end to this
treatise. Cicero runs on, charming us rather by his language than
by his lessons.

He says of Eloquence that "she is the companion of peace, and the associate of ease."[258]
He tells us of Cato, that he had read a hundred and fifty of his speeches, and had "found them
all replete with bright words and with great matter; * * * and yet no one in his days read Cato's
speeches!"[259] This, of course, was Cato the elder. Then we hear how Demosthenes said that in oratory
action was everything: it was the first thing, the second, and the third. "For there is nothing
like it to penetrate into the minds of the audience--to teach them, to turn them, and to form
them, till the orator shall be made to appear exactly that which he wishes to be thought.[260]
* * * The man who listens to one who is an orator believes what he hears; he thinks everything to
be true, he approves of all."[261] No doubt! In his power of describing the orator and his work
Cicero is perfect; but he does not describe the man doing that which he is bound to do by
his duty.

He tells us that nothing is worse than half a dozen advocates--which certainly is true.[262]
Further on he comes to Cæsar, and praises him very highly.

But here Brutus is made to speak, and tells us how he has read the Commentaries, and found
them to be "bare in their beauty, perfect in symmetry, but unadorned, and deprived of all outside
garniture."[263] They are all that he has told us, nor could they have been described in truer
words. Then he names Hortensius, and speaks of him in language which is graceful and graphic;
but he reserves his greatest strength for himself, and at last, declaring
that he will say nothing in his own praise, bursts out into a string
of eulogy, which he is able to conceal beneath dubious phrases, so
as to show that he himself has acquired such a mastery over his art
as to have made himself, in truth, the best orator of them all.[264]

Perhaps
the chief charm of this essay is to be found in the lightness of the
touch.

It is never heavy, never severe, rarely melancholic. If read without reference to other works,
it would leave on the reader's mind the impression that though now and again there had come upon him
the memory of a friend who had gone, and some remembrance of changes in the State to which,
as an old man, he could not give his assent; nevertheless, it was written by a happy man, by one
who was contented among his books, and was pleased to be reminded that things had gone well with
him. He writes throughout as one who had no great sorrow at his heart. No one would have thought
that in this very year he was perplexed in his private affairs, even to the putting away of
his wife; that Cæsar had made good his ground, and, having been Dictator last year, had for
the third time become Consul; that he knew himself to be living, as a favor, by Cæsar's pleasure.
Cicero seems to have written his Brutus as one might write who was well at ease. Let a man
have taught himself aught, and have acquired the love of letters, it is easy for him then, we
might say, to carry on his work. What is it to him that politicians are cutting each other's
throats around him? He has not gone into that arena and fought and bled there, nor need he do
so.

Though things may have gone contrary to his views, he has no cause for anger, none for personal
disappointment, none for personal shame; but with Cicero, on every morning as he rose he must have
remembered Pompey and have thought of Cæsar. And though Cæsar was courteous to him, the courtesy
of a ruler is hard to be borne by him who himself has ruled.

Cæsar was Consul; and Cicero, who remembered how majestically he had walked when a few years
since he was Consul by the real votes of the people, how he had been applauded for doing his
duty to the people, how he had been punished for stretching the laws on the people's behalf,
how he had refused everything for the people, must have had bitter feelings in his heart when
he sat down to write this conversation with Brutus and with Atticus. Yet it has all the cheerfulness
which might have been expected from a happy mind.

But we must remark that at its close--in its very final words--he does allude with sad melancholy
to the state of affairs, and that then it breaks off abruptly.

Even in the middle of a sentence it is brought to a close, and the reader is left to imagine
that something has been lost, or that more might have been added.

The last of these works is the Orator. We have passed in review the De Oratore, and the Brutus;
or, De Claris Oratoribus. We have now to consider that which is commonly believed to be the most
finished piece of the three. Such seems to have become the general idea of those scholars who
have spoken and written on the subject. He himself says that there are in all five books. There
are the three De Oratore; the fourth is called the Brutus, and the
fifth the Orator.[265] In some MSS. this work has a second title,
De Optimo Genere Dicendi--as though the five books should run on in
a sequence, the first three being on oratory in general, the fourth
as to famous orators, while the last concluding work is on the best
mode of oratory.

Readers who may wish to carry these in their minds must exclude for the moment from their
memory the few pages which he wrote as a preface to the translations from Æschines and Demosthenes.
The purport is to show how that hitherto unknown hero of romance may be produced--the perfect
orator.

Here as elsewhere we shall find the greatest interest lies in a certain
discursive treatment of his subject, which enables him to run hither
and thither, while he always pleases us, whatever attitude he may
assume, whatever he may say, and in whatever guise he may speak to us.

But here, in the last book, there does seem to be some kind of method in his discourse. He
distinguishes three styles of eloquence--the simple, the moderate, and the sublime, and explains
that the orator has three duties to perform. He must learn what on any subject he has to say;
he must place his arguments in order, and he must know how to express them. He explains what
action should achieve for the orator, and teaches that eloquence depends wholly on elocution.
He tells us that the philosophers, the historians, and the poets have never risen to his ideas
of eloquence; but that he alone does so who can, amid the heat and
work of the Forum, turn men's minds as he wishes.

Then he teaches us how each of the three styles should be treated--the simple, the moderate,
and the sublime--and shows us how to vary them. He informs us what laws we should preserve
in each, what ornaments, what form, and what metaphors. He then considers the words we should
use, and makes us understand how necessary it is to attend to the minutest variety of sound.
In this matter we have to acknowledge that he, as a Roman, had to deal with instruments for listening
infinitely finer than are our British ears; and I am not sure that we can follow him with rapture
into all the mysteries of the Poeon, the Dochmius, and the Dichoreus. What he says of rhythm
we are willing to take to be true, and we wonder at the elaborate study given to it; but I
doubt whether we here do not read of it as a thing beyond us, by descending into which we should
be removing ourselves farther from the more wholesome pursuits of our lives.

There are, again, delightful morsels here. He tells us, for instance, that he who has created a
beautiful thing must have beauty in his soul,[266]--a charming idea,
as to which we do not stop to inquire whether it be true or not.

He gives us a most excellent caution against storing up good sayings, and using them from the storehouse
of our memory: "Let him avoid these studied things, not made of the moment, but brought from
the closet."[267] Then he rises into a grand description of the perfect orator: "But that third
man is he, rich, abundant, dignified, and instructed, in whom there is a divine strength. This
is he whose fulness and culture of speech the nations have admired, and whose eloquence has been
allowed to prevail over the people.[268] * * * Then will the orator make himself felt more abundantly.
Then will he rule their minds and turn their hearts.

Then will he do with them as he would wish."[269]

But in the teeth of all this it did not please Brutus himself. "When I wrote to him," he said to Atticus,
"in obedience to his wishes, 'De Optimo Genere Dicendi,' he sent
word, both to you and me, that that which pleased me did not satisfy
him."[270] "Let every man kiss his own wife," says Cicero in his letter
in the next words to those we have quoted; and we cannot but love
the man for being able to joke when he is telling of the rebuff he
has received.

It must have been an additional pang to him, that he for whom he had written his book should
receive it with stern rebuke.

At last we come to the Topica; the last instructions which Cicero gives on the subject of oratory.
The Romans seem to have esteemed much the lessons which are here conveyed, but for us it has but
little attraction. He himself declares it to have been a translation
from Aristotle, but declares also that the translation has been made
from memory.

He has been at sea, he says, in the first chapter, and has there performed his task, and has sent
it as soon as it has been done. There is something in this which is unintelligible to us. He
has translated a treatise of Aristotle from memory--that is, without having the original before
him--and has done this at sea, on his intended journey to Greece![271] I do not believe that
Cicero has been false in so writing. The work has been done for his young friend Trebatius, who
had often asked it, and was much too clever when he had received it not to recognize its worth.
But Cicero has, in accordance with his memory, reduced to his own form Aristotle's idea as
to "invention" in logic. Aristotle's work is, I am informed, in eight books: here is a bagatelle
in twenty-five pages. There is an audacity in the performance--especially in the doing it on board
ship; but we must remember that he had spent his life in achieving a knowledge of these things,
and was able to write down with all the rapidity of a practised professor the doctrines on
the matter which he wished to teach Trebatius.

This later essay is a recapitulation of the different sources to which an orator, whether as
lawyer, advocate, philosopher, or statesman, may look for his arguments.
 At last I was brought
to a cell door and the cap was taken off. There were, properly no "cells" in this prison--at
least I never saw any; but good sized rooms for two prisoners, not only to live in but to work
in. I found myself in a room with a man who was weaving carpets, and I was at once instructed
in the art of winding yarn on bobbins for him--in fact, I was to be his "bobbin-boy."

I pursued this monotonous occupation for two months, when I told the keeper I did not like
that business, and wanted to try something that had a little more variety in it. Whereupon
he put me at the cane chair bottoming business, which gave me another room and another chum,
and I remained at this work while I was in the prison. In three weeks I could bottom one chair,
while my mate was bottoming nine or ten as his day's work; but I told the keeper I did not
mean to work hard, or work at all, if I could help it. He was a very nice fellow and he only
laughed and let me do as I pleased. Indeed, I could not complain of my treatment in any respect;
I had a good clean room, good bed, and the fare was wholesome and abundant. But then, there
was that terrible, terrible sentence of ten long years of this kind of life, if I should live
through it.

After I had been in prison nearly seven months, one day a merchant tailor whom I well knew
in Newark, and who made my clothes, including my wedding suit when I married the Widow Roberts,
came to see me. The legislature was in session and he was a member of the Senate. He knew all
the circumstances of my case, and was present at my trial. After the first salutation, he laughingly
said:

"Well, Doctor, those are not quite as nice clothes as I used to furnish you with."

"No," I replied, "but perhaps they are more durable."

After some other chaff and chat, he made me tell him all about my first marriage and subsequent
separation, and after talking awhile he went away, promising to see me soon. I looked upon
this only as a friendly visit, for which I was grateful; and attached no great importance to
it. But he came again in a few days, and after some general conversation, he told me that there
was a movement on foot in my favor, which might bring the best of news to me; that he had not
only talked with his friends in the legislature, and enlisted their sympathy and assistance,
but he had laid the whole circumstances, from beginning to end, before Governor Price; that
the Governor would visit the prison shortly, and then I must do my best in pleading my own cause.

In a day or two the Governor came, and I had an opportunity to relate my story. I told him
all about my first unfortunate marriage, and the separation. He said that he knew the facts,
and also that he had lately received a letter from my oldest son on the subject, and had read
it with great interest. I then appealed to the Governor for his clemency; my sentence was an
outrageously severe one, and seemed almost prompted by private malice; I implored him to pardon
me; I went down on my knees before him, and asked his mercy. He told me to be encouraged; that
he would be in the prison again in a few days, and he would see me. He then went away.

I at once drew up a petition which my friend in the Senate circulated in the legislature for
signatures, and afterwards sent it to Newark, securing some of the best names in that city.
It was then returned to me, and two weeks afterwards when the Governor came again to the prison
I presented it to him, and he put it in his pocket.

In two days' time, Governor Price sent my pardon into the prison. The Warden came and told
me of it, and said he would let me out in an hour. Then came a keeper who once more put the
cap over my face and led me around the interior--I was willingly led now--till he brought me
to a room where he gave me my own clothes which I put on, and with a kind parting word, and
five dollars from the Warden, I was soon in the street, once more a free man. My sentence of
ten years had been fulfilled by an imprisonment of exactly seven months.

I went and called on Governor Price to thank him for his great goodness towards me. He received
me kindly, talked to me for some time, and gave me some good advice and a little money. With
this and the five dollars I received from the Warden of the prison I started for New York.

CHAPTER VII.

It would seem as if, by this time, I had had enough of miscellaneous marrying and the imprisonment
that almost invariably followed. I had told Governor Price, when I first implored him for pardon,
that if he would release me I would begin a new life, and endeavor to be in all respects a
better man. I honestly meant to make every effort to be so, and on my stay to New York I made
numberless vows for my own future good behavior. I bound myself over, as it were, to keep the
pace--my own peace and quiet especially--and became my own surety. That I could not have had
a poorer bondsman, subsequent events proved to my sorrow. But I started fairly, and meant to
let liquor alone; to attend strictly to my medical business, which I always managed to make
profitable, and above all, to have nothing to do with women in the love-making or matrimonial way.

With those good resolutions I arrived in New York and went to my old hotel in Courtland Street,
where I was well known and was well received. My trunk, which I had left there sixteen months
before, was safe, and I had a good suit of clothes on my back--the clothes I took off when
I went to prison in Trenton--and which were returned to me when I came away. I went to a friend
who loaned me some money, and I remained two or three days in town to try my new-found freedom,
going about the city, visiting places of amusement, enjoying myself very much, and keeping,
so far, the good resolutions I had formed.

From New York I went to Troy, and at the hotel where I stopped I became acquainted with a woman
who told me that her husband was in the Insane Asylum at Brattleboro, Vt. She was going to
see him, and if he was fit to be removed, she proposed to take him home, with her. I told her
of the success I had had in taking care of two men at Newbury and Montgomery; and how I had
traveled about the country with them, and with the most beneficial results to my patients.
She was much interested, inquired into the particulars, and finally thought the plan would
be a favorable one for her husband. She asked me to go with her to see him, and said that if
he was in condition to travel he should go about with me if he would; at any rate, if he came
out of the Asylum she would put him under my care. We went together to Brattleboro, and the
very day we arrived her husband was taken in an apoplectic fit from which he did not recover.
She carried home his corpse, and I lost my expected patient.

But I must have something to do for my daily support, and so I went to work and very soon sold
some medicines and recipes, and secured a few patients. I also visited the adjoining villages,
and in a few weeks I had a very good practice. I might have lived here quietly and made money.
Nobody knew anything of my former history, my marriages or my misfortunes, and I was doing
well, with a daily increasing business. And so I went on for nearly three months, gaining new
acquaintances, and extending my practice every day.

Then came the old tempter in a new form, and my matrimonial monomania, which I hoped was cured
forever, broke out afresh. One day, at the public house where I lived, I saw a fine girl from
New Hampshire, with whom I became acquainted--so easily, so far as she was concerned--that
I ought to have been warned to have nothing to do with her; but, as usual, in such cases, my
common sense left me, and I was infatuated enough to fancy that I was in love.

Mary Gordon was the daughter of a farmer living near Keene, N. H., and was a handsome girl
about twenty years of age. She was going, she told me, to visit some friends in Bennington,
and would be there about a month, during which time, if I was in that vicinity, she hoped I
would come and see her. We parted very lovingly, and when she had been in Bennington a few
days she wrote to me, setting a time for me to visit her; but in business in Brattleboro was
too good to leave, and I so wrote to her. Whereupon, in another week, she came back to Brattleboro
and proposed to finish the remainder of her visit there, thus blinding her friends at home
who would think she was all the while at Bennington.

Our brief acquaintance when she was at the house before, attracted no particular attention,
and when she came now I told the landlord that she was my cousin, and he gave her a room and
I paid her bills. The cousin business was a full cover to our intimacy; she sat next to me
at the table, rode about with me to see my patients, and when I went to places near by to sell
medicine, and we were almost constantly together. Of course, we were engaged to be married,
and that very soon.

In a fortnight after her arrival I went home with her to her father's farm near Keene, and
she told her mother that we were "engaged." The old folks thought they would like to know me
a little better, but she said we were old friends, she knew me thoroughly, and meant to marry
me. There was no further objection on the part of her parents, and in the few days following
she and her mother were busily engaged in preparing her clothes and outfit.

I then announced my intention of returning to Brattleboro to settle up my business in that
place, and she declared she would go with me; I was sure to be lonesome; she might help me
about my bills, and so on. Strange as it may seem, her parents made no objection to her going,
though I was to be absent a fortnight, and was not to be married till I came back. So we went
together, and I and my "cousin" put up at the hotel we had lately left. For two weeks I was
busy in making my final visits to my patients acquaintances, she generally going with me every day.

At the end of that time we went back to Keene, and in three weeks we were married in her father's
house, the old folks making a great wedding for us, which was attended by all the neighbors
and friends of the family. We stayed at home two weeks, and meanwhile arranged our plans for
the future. We proposed to go out to Ohio, where she had some relatives, and settle down. She
had seven hundred dollars in bank in Keene which she drew, and we started on our journey. We
went to Troy, where we stayed a few days, and during that time we both concluded that we would
not go West, but return to Keene and live in the town instead of on the farm, so that I could
open an office and practice there.

So we went back to her home again, but before I completed my plans for settling down in Keene,
Mary and I had several quarrels which were worse than mere ordinary matrimonial squabbles.
Two or three young men in Keene, with whom I had become acquainted, twitted me with marrying
Mary, and told me enough about her to convince me that her former life had not been altogether
what it should have been. I had been too blinded by her beauty when I first saw her in Brattleboro,
to notice how extremely easily she was won. Her parents, too, were wonderfully willing, if
not eager, to marry her to me. All these things came to me now, and we had some very lively
conversations on the subject, in which the old folks joined, siding with their daughter of
course. By and by the girl went to Keene and made a complaint that she was afraid of her life,
and I was brought before a magistrate and put under bonds of four hundred dollars to keep the
peace. I gave a man fifty dollars to go bail for me, and then, instead of going out to the
farm with Mary, I went to the hotel in Keene.

The well-known character of the girl, my marriage to her, the brief honeymoon, the quarrels
and the cause of the same, were all too tempting material not to be served up in a paragraph,
and as I expected and feared, out came the whole story in the Keene paper.

This was copied in other journals, and presently came letters to the family and to other persons
in the place, giving some account of my former adventures and marriages. Of this however I
knew nothing, till one day, while I was at the hotel, I was suddenly arrested for bigamy. But
I was used to this kind of arrest by this time, and I went before the magistrate with my mind
made up that I must suffer again for my matrimonial monomania.

It was just after dinner when I was arrested, and the examination, which was a long one, continued
till evening. Every one in the magistrate's office was tired out with it, I especially, and
so I took a favorable opportunity to leave the premises. I bolted for the door, ran down stairs
into the street, and was well out of town before the astonished magistrate, stunned constable,
and amazed spectators realized that I had gone.

Whether they than set out in pursuit of me I never knew, I only know they did not catch me.
I ran till I came to the house of a farmer whom I had been attending for some ailment, and
hurriedly narrating the situation, I offered him one hundred dollars if he would secrete me
till the hue and cry was over and I could safely get away. I think he would have done it from
good will, but the hundred dollar bill I offered him made the matter sure. He put my money
into his pocket, and he put me into a dark closet, not more than five feet square, and locked
me in.

I stayed in that man's house, never going out of doors, for more than three weeks, and did
my best to board out my hundred dollars. The day after my flight the whole neighborhood was
searched, that is, the woods, roads, and adjacent villages. They never thought of looking in
a house, particularly in a house so near the town; and, as I heard from my protector, they
telegraphed and advertised far and near for me.

I anticipated all this, and for this very reason I remained quietly where I was, in an unsuspected
house, and with my dark closet to retire to whenever any one came in; and gossiping neighbors
coming in almost every hour, kept me in that hole nearly half the time. I heard my own story
told in that house at least fifty times, and in fifty different ways.

At last, when I thought it was safe, one night my host harnessed up his horses and carried
me some miles on my way to Concord. He drove as far as he dared, for he wanted to get back
home by daylight, so that his expedition might excite no suspicion. Twenty miles away from
Keene he set me down in the road, and, bidding him "good-bye," I began my march toward Concord.
When I arrived there, almost the first man I saw in the street was a doctor from Keene. I did
not think he saw me, but he did, as I soon found out, for while I was waiting at the depot
to take the cars to the north, I was arrested.

The Keene doctor owed me a grudge for interfering, as he deemed it; with his regular practice,
and the moment he saw me he put an officer on my trail. I thought it was safe here to take
the cars, for I was footsore and weary, nor did I get away from Keene as fast and as far as
I wanted to. I should have succeeded but for that doctor.

When the officer brought me before a justice, the doctor was a willing witness to declare that
I was a fugitive from justice, and he stated the circumstances of my escape. So I was sent
back to Keene under charge of the very officer who arrested me at the depot.

I would not give this officer's name if I could remember it, but he was a fine fellow, and
was exceedingly impressible. For instance, on our arrival at Keene, he allowed me to go to
the hotel and pack my trunk to be forwarded to Meredith Bridge by express. He then handed me
over to the authorities, and I was immediately taken before the magistrate from whom I had
previously escaped, the Concord officer accompanying the Keene officer who had charge of me.

The examination was short; I was bound over in the sum of one thousand dollars to take my trial
for bigamy. On my way to jail I persuaded the Concord officer--with a hundred dollar bill which
I slipped into his hand--to induce the other officer to go with me to the hotel under pretense
of looking after my things, and getting what would be necessary for my comfort in jail. My
Concord friend kept the other officer down stairs--in the bar-room, I presume--while I went
to my room. I put a single shirt in my pocket; the distance from my window to the ground was
not more than twelve or fifteen feet, and I let myself down from the window sill and then dropped.

I was out of the yard, into the street, and out of town in less than no time. It was already
evening, and everything favored my escape. I had no idea of spending months in jail at Keene,
and months more, perhaps years, in the New Hampshire State Prison. All my past bitter experiences
of wretched prison life urged me to flight.

And fly I did. No stopping at the friendly farmer's, my former refuge, this time; that would
be too great a risk. No showing of myself in any town or village where the telegraph might
have conveyed a description of my person. I traveled night and day on foot, and more at night
than during the day, taking by-roads, lying by in the woods, sleeping in barns, and getting
my meals in out-of-the-way farm houses.

I had plenty of money; but this kind of travelling is inexpensive, and, paying twenty-five
cents for one or two meals a day, as I dared to get them, and sleeping in barns or under haystacks
for nothing, my purse did not materially diminish. I was a good walker, and in the course of
a week from the night when I left Keene, I found myself in Biddeford, Maine.

There was some sense of security in being in another State, and here I ventured to take the
cars for Portland, where I staid two days, sending in the meantime for my trunk from Meredith
Bridge, and getting it by express. Of course it went to a fictitious address at Meredith, and
it came to me under the same name which I had registered in my hotel at Portland.

I did not mean to stay there long. My departure was hastened by the advice of a man who knew
me, and told he also knew my New Hampshire scrape, and that I had better leave Portland as
soon as possible. Half an hour after this good advice I was on my way by cars to Canada. In
Canada I stayed in different small towns near the border, and "kept moving," till I thought
the New Hampshire matter had blown over a little, or at least till they had given me up as
a "gone case," and I then reappeared in Troy.

From Troy I went, first to Newburyport, Mass., where I had some business, and where I remained
a week, and then returned to Troy again. Next I went to Bennington, Vt., to sell medicines
and practice, and I found enough to occupy me there for full two months. From Bennington to
Rutland, selling medicines on the way, and at Rutland I intended to stay for some time. My
oldest son was there well established in the medical business, and I thought that both of us
together might extend a wide practice and make a great deal of money.

No doubt we might have done so, if I had minded my medical business only, and had let matrimonial
matters alone. I had just got rid of a worthless woman in New Hampshire with a very narrow
escape from State prison. But, as my readers know by this time, all experience, even the bitterest,
was utterly thrown away upon me; I seemed to get out of one scrape only to walk, with my eyes
open, straight into another.

At the hotel where I went to board, there was temporarily staying a woman, about thirty-two
years old, Margaret Bradly, by name, who kept a large millinery establishment in town. I became
acquainted with her, and she told me that she owned a house in the place, in which she and
her mother lived; but her mother had gone away on a visit, and as she did not like to live
alone she had come to the hotel to stay for a few days till her mother returned. Margaret was
a fascinating woman; she knew it, and it was my miserable fate to become intimate, altogether
too intimate with this designing milliner.

I went to her store every day, sometimes two or three times a day, and she always had in her
backroom, wine or something stronger to treat me with, and in the evening I saw her at the
hotel. When her mother came back, and Margaret opened her house again, I was a constant visitor.
I was once more caught; I was in love.

Matters went on in this way for several weeks, when one evening I told her that I was going
next day to Troy on business, and she said she wanted to go there to buy some goods, and that
she would gladly take the opportunity to go with me, if I would let her. Of course, I was only
too happy; and the next day I and my son, and she and one of the young women in her employ,
who was to assist her in selecting goods, started for Troy. When I called for her, just as
we were leaving the house, the old lady, her mother, called out:

"Margaret, don't you get married before you come back."

"I guess I will," was Margaret's answer, and we went, a very jovial party of four, to Troy
and put up at the Girard House, where we had dinner together, and drank a good deal of wine.
After dinner my son and myself went to attend to our business, she and her young woman going
to make their purchases, and arranging to meet us at a restaurant at half past four o'clock,
when we would lunch preparatory to returning to Rutland.

We met at the appointed place and hour, and had a very lively lunch indeed, an orgie in fact,
with not only enough to eat, but altogether too much to drink. I honestly think the two women
could have laid me and my son under the table, and would have done it, if we had not looked
out for ourselves; as it was, we all drank a great deal and were very merry. We were in a room
by ourselves, and when we had been there nearly an hour, it occurred to Margaret that it would
be a good idea to humor the old lady's dry joke about the danger of our getting married during
this visit to Troy.

"Henry," said she to my son; "Go out and ask the woman who keeps the saloon where you can get
a blank marriage certificate, and then get one and bring it here, and we'll have some fun."

We were all just drunk enough to see that there was a joke in it, and we urged the boy to go.
He went to the woman, who directed him to a stationer's opposite, and presently he came in
with a blank marriage certificate. We called for pen and ink and he sat down and filled out
the blank form putting in my name and Margaret Bradley's, signing it with some odd name I have
forgotten as that of the clergyman performing the ceremony. He then signed his own name as
a witness to the marriage, and the young woman who was with us also witnessed it with her signature.
We had a great deal of fun over it, then more wine, and then it was time for us to hurry to
the depot to take the six o'clock train for Rutland.

Reaching home at about eleven o'clock at night, we found the old lady up, and waiting for Margaret.
We went in and Margaret's first words were:

"Well, mother! I'm married; I told you, you know, I thought I should be; and here's my certificate."

The mother expressed no surprise--she knew her daughter better than I did, then--but quietly
congratulated her, while I said not a single word. My son went to see his companion home, and,
as I had not achieved this latest greatness, but had it thrust upon me, I and my new found
"wife" went to our room. The next day I removed from the hotel to Margaret's house and remained
there during my residence in Rutland, she introducing me to her friends as her husband, and
seeming to consider it an established fact.

Three weeks after this mock marriage, however, I told Margaret that I was going to travel about
the State a while to sell my medicines, and that I might be absent for some time. She made
no objections, and as I was going with my own team she asked me to take some mantillas and
a few other goods which were a little out of fashion, and see if I could not sell them for
her. To be sure I would, and we parted on the best of terms.

Behold rue now, not only a medical man and a marrying man, but also a man milliner. When I
could not dispose of my medicines, I tried mantillas, and in the course of my tour I sold the
whole of Margaret's wares, faithfully remitting to her the money for the same. I think she
would have put her whole stock of goods on me to work off in the same way; but I never gave
her the opportunity to do so.

My journeying brought me at last to Montpelier where I proposed to stay awhile and see if I
could establish a practice. I had disposed of my millinery goods and had nothing to attend
to but my medicines--alas that my professional acquirements as a marrying man should again
have been called in requisition. But it was to be. It was my fate to fall into the hands of
another milliner.

"Insatiate monster! would not one suffice?"

It seems not. There was a milliner at Rutland whose family and, friends all believed to be
my wife, though she knew she was not; and here in Montpelier, was ready waiting, like a spider
for a fly, another milliner who was about to enmesh me in the matrimonial net. I had not been
in the place a week before I became acquainted with Eliza Gurnsey. I could hardly help it,
for she lived in the hotel where I stopped, and although she was full thirty-five years old,
she was altogether the most attractive woman in the house. She was agreeable, good-looking,
intelligent, and what the vernacular calls "smart." At all events, she was much too smart for
me, as I soon found out.

She had a considerable millinery establishment which she and her younger sister carried on,
employing several women, and she was reputed to be well off. Strange as it may seem in the
light of after events, she actually belonged to the church and was a regular attendant at the
services. But no woman in town was more talked about, and precisely what sort of a woman she
was may be estimated from the fact that I had known her but little more than a week, when she
proposed that she, her sister and I should go to Saratoga together, and have a good time for
a day or two.

I was fairly fascinated with the woman and I consented. The younger sister was taken with us,
I thought at first as a cover, I knew afterwards as a confederate, and Eliza paid all the bills,
which were by no means small ones, of the entire trip. We stopped in Saratoga at a hotel, which
is now in very different hands, but which was then kept by proprietors who, in addition to
a most excellent table and accommodations, afforded their guests the opportunity, if they desired
it, of attending prayers every night and morning in one of the parlors. This may have been
the inducement which made Eliza insist upon going to this house, but I doubt it.

For our stay at Saratoga, three or four days, was one wild revel. We rode about, got drunk,
went to the Lake, came back to the hotel, and the second day we were there, Eliza sent her
sister for a Presbyterian minister, whose address she had somehow secured, and this minister
came to the hotel and married us. I presume I consented, I don't know, for I was too much under
the effect of liquor to know much of anything. I have an indistinct recollection of some sort
of a ceremony, and afterwards Eliza showed me a certificate--no Troy affair, but a genuine
document signed by a minister residing in Saratoga, and witnessed by her sister and some one
in the hotel who had been called in. But the whole was like a dream to me; it was the plot
of an infamous woman to endeavor to make herself respectable by means of a marriage, no matter
to whom or how that marriage was effected.

Meanwhile, the Montpelier papers had the whole story, one of them publishing a glowing account
of my elopement with Miss Gurnsey, and the facts of our marriage at Saratoga was duly chronicled.
This paper fell into the hands of Miss Bradley, at Rutland, and as she claimed to be my wife,
and had parted with me only a little while before, when I went out to peddle medicines and
millinery, her feelings can be imagined. She read the story and then aroused all Rutland. I
had not been back from Saratoga half an hour before I was arrested in the public house in Montpelier
and taken before a magistrate, on complaint of Miss Bradley, of Rutland, that I was guilty
of bigamy.

The examination was a long one, and as the facts which were then shown appeared afterwards
in my trial they need not be noted now. I had two first-rate lawyers, but for all that, and
with the plainest showing that Margaret Bradley had no claim whatever to be considered my wife,
I was bound over in the sum of three thousand dollars to appear for trial, and was sent to
jail. There was a tremendous excitement about the matter, and the whole town seemed interested.

To jail I went, Eliza going with me, and insisting upon staying; but the jailer would not let
her, nor was she permitted to visit me during my entire stay there, at least she got in to
see me but once. I made every effort to get bail, but was unsuccessful. Eight long weary months
elapsed before my trial came on, and all this while I was in jail. My trial lasted a week.
The Bradley woman knew she was no more married to me than she was to the man in the moon; but
she swore stoutly that we were actually wedded according to the certificate. On the other hand,
my son swore to all the facts about the Troy spree, and his buying and filling out the certificate,
which showed for itself that, excepting the signature of the young woman who also witnessed
it, it was entirely in Henry's handwriting. I should have got along well enough so far as the
Bradley woman was concerned; but the prosecution had been put in possession of all the facts
relative to my first and worst marriage, and the whole matter came up in this case. The District
Attorney had sent everywhere, as far even as Illinois, for witness with regard to that marriage.
It seemed as if all Vermont was against me. I have heard that with the cost of witnesses and
other expenses, my trial cost the state more than five thousand dollars. My three lawyers could
not save me. After a week's trial the case went to the jury, and in four hours they returned
a verdict of "guilty."

My counsel instantly appealed the case to the Supreme Court, and, meanwhile I went back to
jail where I remained three months more. A few days after I returned to jail a friend of mine
managed to furnish me with files and saws, and I went industriously to work at the gratings
of my window to saw my way out. I could work only at night, when the keepers were away, and
I covered the traces of my cuttings by filling in with tallow. In two months I had everything
in readiness for my escape. An hour's more sawing at the bars would set me free. But just at
that time the Governor of the State, Fletcher, made a visit to the jail. I told him all about
my case. He assured me, after hearing all the circumstances, that if I should be convicted
and sentenced, he would surely pardon me in the course of six or eight weeks. Trusting in this
promise, I made no further effort to escape though I could have done so easily any night; but
rather than run the risk of recapture, and a heavier sentence if I should be convicted, I awaited
the chances of the court, and looked beyond for the clemency of the Governor.

Well, finally my case came up in the Supreme Court. It only occupied a day, and the result
was that I was sentenced for three years in the State prison. I was remanded to jail, and five
days from that time I was taken from Montpelier to Windsor.

We arrived at Windsor and I was safely inside of the prison at three o'clock in the afternoon.
Warden Harlow met me with a joke, to the effect that, had it not been for my handcuffs he should
have taken the officer who brought me, to be the prisoner, I was so much the better dressed
of the two. He then talked very seriously to me for a long time. He was sorry, and surprised,
he said, to see a man of my appearance brought to such a place for such a crime; he could not
understand how a person of my evident intelligence should get into such a scrape.

I told him that he understood it as well as I did, at all events; that I could not conceive
why I should get into these difficulties, one after the other; but that I believed I was a
crazy man on this one subject--matrimonial monomania; that when I had gone through with one
of these scrapes, and had suffered the severe punishment that was almost certain to follow,
the whole was like a dream to me--a nightmare and nothing more. With regard to what was before
me in this prison I should try and behave myself, and make the best of the situation; but I
notified the Warden that I did not mean to do one bit of work if I could help it.

He took me inside, where my fine clothes were taken away, and I. was dressed in the usual particolored
prison uniform. I was told the rules, and was warned that if I did not observe them it would
go hard with me. Then followed twenty-four hours solitary confinement, and the next afternoon
I was taken from my cell to a shop in which scythe snaths were made.

It had transpired during my trial at Montpelier, that when I was a young man, I was a blacksmith
by trade. This information had been transmitted to prison and I was at once put to work making
heel rings. It was some years since I had worked at a forge and handled a hammer. Consequently,
in three or four days, my hands were terribly blistered, and as the Warden happened to come
into the shop, I showed them to him, and quietly told him that I would do that work no longer.
He told me that I must do it; he would make me do it. I answered that he might kill me, or
punish me in any way he pleased, but he could not make me do that kind of labor, and I threw
down my hammer and refused to work a moment longer.

The Warden left me and sent Deputy Warden Morey to try me. He approached me in a kindly way,
and I showed my blistered hands to him. He thought that was the way to "toughen" me. I thought
not, and said so, and, moreover, told him I would never make another heel ring in that prison,
and I never did.

He sent me to my cell and I stayed there a week, till my hands were well. Then the Deputy came
to me and asked me if I was willing to learn to hew out scythe snaths in the rough for the
shavers, who finished them? I said I would try. I went into the shop and was shown how the
work was to be done. Every man was expected to hew out fifty snaths in a day. In three or four
days the shop-keeper came and overlooked me while I was working in my bungling way, and said
if I couldn't do better than that I must clear out of his shop and do something else. My reply
was that I did not understand the business, and had no desire or intention to learn it. He
sent for the Deputy Warden, who came and expressed the opinion that I could not do anything.
I said I was willing to do anything I could understand.

"Do you understand anything?" asked the Deputy.

"Well, some things, marrying for instance," was my answer.

"I want no joking or blackguardism about this matter," said the Deputy; "them simple fact is,
you've got to work; if you don't we'll make you."

So I kept on at hewing, making no improvement, and in a day or two more the shopkeeper undertook
to show me how the work should be done. I protested I never could learn it.

"You don't try; and I have a good mind to punish you."

The moment the shop-keeper said it I dropped the snath, raised my axe, and told him that if
he came one step nearer to me I would make mincemeat of him. He thought it was advisable to
stay where he was; but one of the prison-keepers was in the shop, and as he came toward me
I warned him that he had better keep away.

All the men in the shop were ready to break out in insubordination; when I threatened the shop
keeper and the guard, they cheered; the Deputy Warden was soon on the ground; he stood in the
doorway a moment, and then, in a kind tone called me to him. I had no immediate quarrel with
him, and so I dropped my axe and went to him. He told me that there was no use of "making a
muss" there, it incited the other prisoners to insubordination, and was sure to bring severe
punishment upon myself. "Go and get your cap and coat," said he "and come with me."

"But if you are going to put me into that black hole of yours," I exclaimed, "I won't go; you'll
have to draw me there or kill me on the way."

He promised he would not put me in the dungeon, he was only going to put me in my cell, he
said, and to my cell I went, willingly enough, and stayed there a week, during which time I
suppose everyone of my shopmates thought I was in the dungeon, undergoing severe punishment
for my rebellions conduct.

I had learned now the worst lesson which a prisoner can learn--that is, that my keepers were
afraid of me. To a limited extent, it is true, I was now my own master and keeper. In a few
days Deputy Morey came to me and asked me if I was "willing" to come out and work. I was sick
of solitary confinement, and longed to see the faces of men, even prisoners: so I told him
if I could get any work I could do I was willing to try it, and would do as well as I knew
how. He asked me if I knew anything of locksmithing? I told him I had some taste for it, and
if he would show me his job I would let him see what I could do.

The fact is, I was a very fair amateur locksmith, and had quite a fondness for fixing, picking,
and fussing generally over locks. Accordingly, when he gave me a lock to work upon to make
it "play easier," as he described it, I did the job so satisfactorily that I had nearly every
lock in the prison to take off and operate upon, if it was nothing more than to clean and oil
one. This business occupied my entire time and attention for nearly three months. Then I repaired
iron bedsteads, did other iron work, and I was the general tinker of the prison.

It came into my head, however, one day, that I might as well do nothing. The prison fare was
indescribably bad, almost as bad as the jail fare at Easton. We lived upon the poorest possible
salt beef for dinner, varied now and then with plucks and such stuff from the slaughter houses,
with nothing but bread and rye coffee for breakfast and supper, and mush and molasses perhaps
twice a week.

I was daily abused, too, by the Warden, his Deputy, and his keepers. They looked upon me as
an ugly, insubordinate, refractory, rebellious rascal, who was ready to kill any of them, and,
worst of all, who would not work. I determined to confirm their minds in the latter supposition,
and so one day I threw down my tools and refused to do another thing.

They dragged me to the dungeon and thrust me in. It was a wretched dark hole, with a little
dirty straw in one corner to lie upon. My entire food and drink was bread and water. The man
who brought it never spoke to me. His face was the only one I saw during the livelong day.
Day and night were alike to me; I lost the run of time; but at long intervals, once in eight
or ten days, I suppose, the Deputy came to this hole and asked me if I would come out and work.

"No, no!" I always answered, "never!" Then I paced the stone floor in the dark, or lay on my
straw. I lay there till my hips were worn raw. No human being can conceive the agony, the suffering
endured in this dungeon. At last I was nearly blind, and was scarcely able to stand up. I presume
that the attendant who brought my daily dole of bread and my cup of water, reported my condition.
One day the door opened and I was ordered out. They were obliged to bring me out; I was so
reduced that I was but the shadow of myself. They meant to cure my obstinacy or to kill me,
and had not quite succeeded in doing either.

There was no use in asking me if I would go to work then; I was just alive. A few days in my
own cell, in the daylight, and with something beside bread and water to eat, partially restored
me. I was then taken into the shop where the snaths were finished by scraping and varnishing,
the lightest part of the work, but I would not learn, would not do, would not try to do anything
at all. They gave me up. The whole struggle nearly killed me, but I beat them. I was turned
into the halls and told to do what I could, which, I knew well enough, meant what I would.

After that I worked about the halls and yard, sometimes sweeping, and again carrying something,
or doing errands for the keepers from one part of the prison to another. I was what theatrical
managers call a general utility man, and, not at all strangely, for it is human nature, now
that I could do what I pleased, I pleased to do a great deal, and was tolerably useful, and
far more agreeable than I had been in the past.

There was a young fellow, twenty-two years of age, in one of the cells, serving out a sentence
of six years. When I was sweeping around I used to stop and talk to him every day. One day
he was missing. He had been supposed to be sick or asleep for several hours, for apparently
lie lay in bed, and was lying very still. But that was only an ingeniously constructed dummy.
The young man himself had made a hole under his bed into an adjoining vacant cell, the door
of which stood open. He had crawled through his hole, come out of the vacant cell door, and
gone up to the prison garret, where he found some old pieces of rope. These he tied together,
and getting out at the cupola upon the roof, he managed to let himself down on the outside
of the building and got away. He was never recaptured. The Warden said that some one must have
told him about the adjoining vacant cell, with its always open door, else how would the young
man have known it?

I was accused of imparting this valuable information, and I suffered four weeks' confinement
in that horrible dungeon on the mere suspicion. This made ten weeks in all of my prison-life
in a hole in which I suffered so that I hoped I should die there.

One of the prisoners was a desperate man, named Hall. He was a convicted murderer, and was
sentenced for life. He too, worked about in the prison and the yards, dragging or carrying
a heavy ball and chain. When bundles of snaths were to be carried from one shop to the other
in the various processes of finishing, Hall had to do it, and to carry his ball and chain as
well, so that he was loaded like a pack-horse. The lessons which are given to us are supposed to come from the virtue
of the titular grandson of the greater Scipio who out-manoeuvred Hannibal.

He continues to tell story after story out of the Roman chronicles,
and at last assures us that that form of government is the best in
which the monarchical element is tempered by the authority of the
leading citizens, and kept alive by the voices of the people.

Is it only because I am an Englishman that he seems to me to describe that form of government
which was to come in England?

The second book also begins with the praises of Cato. Scipio then commences with Romulus, and
tells the history of Rome's kings. Tarquin is banished, and the Consulate established. He tells
us, by no means with approbation, how the Tribunate was established, and then, alas! there comes
a break in the MS.

In the third we have, as a beginning, a fragment handed down to us by Augustine, in which Cicero complains
of the injustice of Nature in having sent man into the world, as might a step-mother, naked,
weak, infirm, with soul anxious, timid, and without force, but still
having within it something of divine fire not wholly destroyed.

Then, after a while, through many "lacunæ," Scipio, Lælius, and one Philus fall into a discourse
as to justice. There is a remarkable passage, from which we learn that the Romans practised protection
with a rigor exceeding that of modern nations. They would not even permit their transalpine allies
to plant their olives and vineyards, lest their produce should make their way across Italy--whereby
they raised the prices against themselves terribly of oil and wine.[307] "There is a kind of
slavery which is unjust," says one, "when those men have to serve others who might 'properly
belong to themselves.' But when they only are made to be slaves who--" We may perceive that
the speaker went on to say that they who were born slaves might properly
be kept in that position.

But it is evidently intended to be understood that there exists a class who are slaves by right.
Carneades, the later master of the new Academy, has now joined them, and teaches a doctrine which
would not make him popular in this country. "If you should know," he says, "that an adder lay
hid just where one were about to sit down whose death would be a
benefit to you, you would do wrong unless you were to tell him of it.

But you would do it with impunity, as no one could prove that you knew it." From this may
be seen the nature of the discourses on justice.

The next two books are but broken fragments, treating of morals and manners. In the sixth we
come to that dream of Scipio which has become so famous in the world
of literature that I do not know whether I can do better than translate
it, and add it on as an appendix to the end of my volume.

It is in itself so beautiful in parts that I think that all readers will thank me. (See appendix
to this chapter). At the same time it has to be admitted that it is in parts fantastic, and might
almost be called childish, were it not that we remember, when reading it, at what distance
of time it was written, and with what difficulty Cicero strove to master subjects which science
has made familiar to us.

The music of the spheres must have been heard in his imagination before he could have told
us of it, as he has done in language which seems to be poetic now as it was then--and because
poetic, therefore not absurd. The length of the year's period is an extravagance. You may call
your space of time by what name you will; it is long or short in proportion to man's life. He
tells us that we may not hope that our fame shall be heard of on the other side of the Ganges,
or that our voices shall come down through many years. I myself read this dream of Scipio
in a volume found in Australia, and read it two thousand years after
it was written.

He could judge of this world's future only by the past. But when he tells us of the soul's
immortality, and of the heaven to be won by a life of virtue, of the duty upon us to remain here
where God has placed us, and of the insufficiency of fame to fill the cravings of the human
heart, then we have to own that we have come very near to that divine teaching which he was not
permitted to hear.

Two years afterward, about the time that Milo was killing Clodius, he wrote his treatise in three
books, De Legibus. It is, we are told, a copy from Plato. As is the Topica a copy from Aristotle,
written on board ship from memory, so may this be called a copy. The idea was given to him,
and many of the thoughts which he has worked up in his own manner. It is a dialogue between
him and Atticus and his brother Quintus, and treats rather of the
nature and origin of law, and how law should be made to prevail, than
of laws as they had been as yet constructed for the governance of man.

All that is said in the first book may be found scattered through his philosophic treatises. There
are some pretty morsels, as when Atticus tells us that he will for the nonce allow Cicero's
arguments to pass, because the music of the birds and the waters will prevent his fellow-Epicureans
from hearing and being led away by mistaken doctrine.[308] Now and again he enunciates a great
doctrine, as when he declares that "there is nothing better than that men should understand that
they are born to be just, and that justice is not a matter of opinion, but is inherent in nature."[309]
He constantly opposes the idea of pleasure, recurring to the doctrine of his Greek philosophy.
It was not by them, however, that he had learned to feel that a man's final duty here on earth
is his duty to other men.

In the second book he inculcates the observance of religious ceremonies in direct opposition to
that which he afterward tells us in his treatise De Divinatione. But in this, De Legibus, we may
presume that he intends to give instructions for the guidance of
the public, whereas in the other he is communicating to a few chosen
friends those esoteric doctrines which it would be dangerous to give
to the world at large.

There is a charming passage, in which we are told not to devote the rich things of the earth to
the gods. Gold and silver will create impure desire. Ivory, taken from the body of an animal,
is a gift not simple enough for a god. Metals, such as iron, are for war rather than for worship.
An image, if it is to be used, let it be made of one bit of wood, or one block of stone. If
cloth is given, let it not be more than a woman can make in a month. Let there be no bright
colors. White is best for the gods; and so on.[310] Here we have the wisdom of Plato, or of those
from whom Plato had borrowed it, teaching us a lesson against which subsequent ages have rebelled.
It is not only that a god cannot want our gold and silver, but that a man does want them. That
rule as to the woman's morsel of cloth was given in some old assembly, lest her husband or her
brother should lose the advantage of her labor.

It was seen what superstition would do in collecting the wealth of
the world round the shrines of the gods.

How many a man has since learned to regret the lost labor of his household; and yet what god has
been the better? There may be a question of æsthetics, indeed, with which Cicero does not meddle.

In
the third book he descends to practical and at the same time political questions. There had been
no matter contested so vehemently among Romans as that of the establishment and maintenance of
the Tribunate. Cicero defends its utility, giving, with considerable wit, the task of attacking
it to his brother Quintus. Quintus, indeed, is very violent in his onslaught. What can be more
"pestiferous," or more prone to sedition?

Then Cicero puts him down. "O Quintus," he says, "you see clearly the vices of the Tribunate!
but can there be anything more unjust than, in discussing a matter, to remember all its evils
and to forget all its merits? You might say the same of the Consuls; for the very possession
of power is an evil in itself. But without that evil you cannot have the good which the institution
contains. The power of the Tribunes is too great, you say. Who denies it? But the violence of the
people, always cruel and immodest, is less so under their own leader than if no leader had been given
them. The leader will measure his danger; but the people itself know no such measurement."[311]
He afterward takes up the question of the ballot, and is against it on principle. "Let the people
vote as they will," he says, "but let their votes be known to their betters."[312] It is,
alas, useless now to discuss the matter here in England!

We have been so impetuous in our wish to avoid the evil of bribery--which
was quickly going--that we have rushed into that of dissimulation,
which can only be made to go by revolutionary changes.

When men vote by tens of thousands the ballot will be safe, but no
man will then care for the ballot.

It is, however, strange to see how familiar men were under the Roman Empire with matters which
are perplexing us to-day.

We now come to the three purely moral essays, the last written of his works, except the Philippics
and certain of his letters, and the Topica. Indeed, when you reach the last year or two of his life,
it becomes difficult to assign their exact places to each. He mentions one as written, and
then another; but at last this latter appears before the former. They were all composed in
the same year, the year before his death--the most active year of his life, as far as his
written works are concerned--and I shall here treat De Senectute first, then De Amicitia, and
the De Officiis last, believing them to have been published in that
order.

The De Senectute is an essay written in defence of old age, generally called Cato Major. It is
supposed to have been spoken by the old Censor, 149 B.C., and to have been listened to by Scipio
and Lælius. This was the same Scipio who had the dream--who, in truth, was not a Scipio at all,
but a son of Paulus Æmilius, whom we remember in history as the younger Africanus. Cato rushes
at once into his subject, and proves to us his point by insisting on all those commonplace
arguments which were probably as well known before his time as they have been since. All men
wish for old age, but none rejoice when it has come.

The answer is that no man really wishes for old age, but simply wishes for a long life, of which
old age is the necessary ending. It creeps on us so quickly! But in truth it does not creep
quicker on youth than does youth on infancy; but the years seem to
fly fast because not marked by distinct changes.

It is the part of a wise man to see that each portion of his five-act poem shall be well performed.
Cato goes on with his lesson, and tells us perhaps all that could be said on behalf of old
age at that period of the world's history.

It was written by an old man to an old man; for it is addressed to Atticus, who was now sixty-seven,
and of course deals much in commonplaces. But it is full of noble thoughts, and is pleasant,
and told in the easiest language; and it leaves upon the reader a sweet savor of the dignity of
age. Let the old man feel that it is not for him to attempt the pranks of youth, and he will
already have saved himself from much of the evil which Time can do to him. I am ready for
you, and you cannot hurt me. "Let not the old man assume the strength of the young, as a young
man does not that of the bull or the elephant. * * * But still there is something to be regretted
by an orator, for to talk well requires not only intellect but all
the powers of the body.

The melodious voice, however, remains, which--and you see my years--I have not yet lost. The
voice of an old man should always be tranquil and contained."[313] He tells a story of Massinissa,
who was then supposed to be ninety. He was stiff in his joints, and therefore when he went a
journey had himself put upon a horse, and never left it, or started
on foot and never mounted.[314] "We must resist old age, my Lælius.

We must compensate our shortness by our diligence, my Scipio. As we fight against disease, so
let us contend with old age.[315] * * * Why age should be avaricious I could never tell. Can
there be anything more absurd than to demand so great a preparation for so small a journey?"[316]
He tells them that he knew their fathers, and that "he believes they
are still alive--that, though they have gone from this earth, they
are still leading that life which can only be considered worthy of
the name."[317]

The De Amicitia is called Lælius.

It is put into the mouth of Lælius, and is supposed to be a discourse on friendship held by
him in the presence of his two sons-in-law, Caius Fannius and Mucius Scævola, a few days after
the death of Scipio his friend. Not Damon and Pythias were more renowned for their friendship
than Scipio and Lælius. He discusses what is friendship, and why it is contracted; among whom
friendship should exist; what should be its laws and duties; and, lastly, by what means it should
be preserved.

Cicero begins by telling the story of his own youth; how he had been placed under the charge of
Scævola the augur, and how, having changed his toga, he never left the old man's side till he died;
and he recalls how once, sitting with him in a circle with friends, Scævola fell into that
mode of conversation which was usual with him, and told him how once
Lælius had discoursed to them on friendship.

It is from first to last fresh and green and cooling, as is the freshness of the early summer
grass to men who live in cities. The reader feels, as he goes on with it, that he who had such
thoughts and aspirations could never have been altogether unhappy. Coming at the end of his life,
in the telling the stories of which we have had to depend so much
on his letters to Atticus, it reminds me of the love that existed
between them.

He has sometimes been querulous with his Atticus.

He has complained of bad advice, of deficient care, of halting friendship--in reading which
accusations we have, all of us, declared him to be wrong.

But Atticus understood him. He knew that the privileges and the burden must go together, and
told himself how much more than sufficient were the privileges to compensate the burden. When
we make our histories on the bases of such loving letters, we should surely open them with careful
hands, and deal with them in sympathy with their spirit. In writing this treatise De Amicitia
especially for the eyes of Atticus, how constantly the heart must
have gone back to all that had passed between them--how confident
he must have been of the truth of his friend!

He who, after nearly half a century of friendship, could thus write to his friend on friendship
cannot have been an unhappy man.

"Should a new friendship spring up," he tells us, "let it not be repressed. You shall still gather fruit
from young trees; but do not let it take the place of the old. Age and custom will have given
the old fruit a flavor of its own. Who is there that would ride a new horse in preference
to one tried--one who knows your hand?"[318]

I regard the De Officiis as one of the most perfect treatises on morals which the world possesses,
whether for the truth of the lessons given, for their universality, or for the beauty and lightness
of the language.


When I called on Warden Harlow, and courteously asked to be shown about the prison, he got
up and was ready to comply with my request, when he looked me full in the face and started
back in amazement:

"Well, I declare! Is this you?"

"Yes, Warden Harlow; but I want you to understand that while I am here I do not intend to do
a bit of work, and you can't make me. You may as well give it up first as last; I won't work
anyhow."

The Warden laughed heartily, and sent for Deputy Morey who came in to "see a gentleman," and
was much astonished to find the prisoner, who, two years before, had saved his life from the
hands and knife of the madman Hall. I spent a very pleasant hour with my old enemies, and I
took occasion to give them a hint or two with regard to the proper treatment of prisoners.
I then made the rounds of the prison, and went into the dungeon where I had passed so many
wretched hours for weeks at a time. The warden and his deputy congratulated me upon my improved
appearance and prospects, and hoped that my whole future career would be equally prosperous.

Nor did I forget to call up my friend in need and friend indeed in the toll-house at the bridge.
I stayed three or four days in Windsor, finding it really a charming place, and I was almost
sorry to leave it. But my only purpose in going there, that is to revisit the prison, was accomplished,
and I started for New York, and went from there to Port Jervis, where I met my eldest son.

After I had been in Port Jervis three or four days I matured a plan that had long been forcing
in my mind, and that was, to try and see Sarah Scheimer once more, or at least to find out
something about her and about our son. The boy, if he was living, must be about ten years of
age. I had never seen him; nor, since the night when I was taken out of bed and carried to
the Easton jail had I ever seen Sarah, or even heard from her, except by the message the Methodist
minister brought to me from her the day after I was released from jail. In the long interval
I had married the Newark widow, and had served a brief term in the New Jersey State prison
for doing it; I had married Mary Gordon, in New Hampshire, and had run away, not only from
her, but from constables and the prison in that state; the mock marriage with the Rutland woman
at Troy, and the altogether too real marriage with the Montpelier milliner had followed; I
had spent three wretched years in the Vermont prison at Windsor; and numerous other exciting
adventures had checkered my career. What had happened to Sarah and her son during all this
while? There was not a week in the whole time since our sudden separation when I had not thought
of Sarah; and now I was near her old home, with means at my command, leisure on my hands, and
I was determined to know something about her and the child.

So long a time had elapsed and I was so changed in my personal appearance that I had little
fear of being recognized by any one in Pennsylvania or the adjoining part of New Jersey, who
would molest me. The old matters must have been pretty much forgotten by all but the very few
who were immediately interested in them. It was safe to make the venture at all events, and,
I resolved to make the venture to see and learn what I could.

I had the idea in my mind that if Sarah was alive and well, and free, I should be able to induce
her to fulfil her promise to come to me, and that we might go somewhere and settle down and
live happily together. At any rate, I would try to see her and our child.

I did not communicate a word of all this to my son Henry. I told him I was going to New Jersey
to visit some friends, to look for business, and I would like to have him accompany me. He
consented; I hired a horse and carriage, and one bright morning we started. I had no friends
to visit, no business to do, except to see Sarah--the dearest and best--loved of all my wives.

When we reached Water Gap I found an old acquaintance in the landlord of the hotel, and I told
him where I was going, and what I hoped to do. He knew the Scheimers, knew all that had happened
eleven years before, and he told me that Sarah had married again, seven years ago, and was
the mother of two more children. She lived on a farm, half a mile from Oxford, and her husband
who had married her for her money, and had been urged upon her by her parents, was a shiftless,
worthless, drunken fellow. The boy--my boy--was alive and well, and was with his mother.

This intelligence changed, or rather made definite my plan. Sarah was nothing to me now. The
boy was everything. I must see him, and if he was what he was represented to be, a bright little
fellow, I determined that he should no longer remain in the hands and under the control of
his drunken step-father, but I would carry him away with me if I could. It was nearly noon
when we arrived at Oxford, and going to my old quarters, I found that "Boston Yankee," had
long since left the place. There was a new landlord, and I saw no familiar faces about the
house; all was new and strange to me. I made inquiries, and soon found out that Sarah's boy
went to a school in town not far from the hotel, and I went there to "prospect," leaving Henry
at the public house.

It was noon now, and fifty or more boys were trooping out of school. I carefully scanned the
throng. The old proverb has it that it is a wise child who knows its own father; but it is
not so difficult for a father to know his own children. The moment I put my eyes on Sarah's
son, I knew him; he was the very image of me; I could have picked him out of a thousand. I
beckoned to the boy and he came to me. He was barefoot; and his very toes betrayed him, for
they "overrode" just as mine did; but his face was enough and would have been evidence of his
identity as my son in any court in Christendom.

"Do you know me, my little man?" said I.

"No, sir, I do not."

"Do you know what was your mother's name before she was married?"

"Yes Sir, it was Sarah Scheimer."

"Do you know that the man with whom you live is not your rather?"

"Oh, yes, Sir, I know that; mother always told me so; but she never told me who my father was."

"My son," said I taking him in my arms, "I am your father; wait about here a few minutes till
I can go and get my horse and carriage, and I will take you to ride."

I ran over to the hotel; ordered my horse to be brought to the door at once, got into the wagon
with Henry and told him that Sarah Scheimer's boy was just across the way, and that I was going
to carry him off with us. Henry implored me not to do it, and said it was dangerous. I never
stopped to think of danger when my will impelled me. I did not know that at that moment, men
who had noticed my excited manner, and who knew I was "up to something," were watching me from
the hotel piazza. I drove over where the boy was waiting, called him to me, and Henry held
the reins while I put out my hands to pull the boy into the carriage. Two of the men who were
watching me came at once, one of them taking the horse by the head, and the other coming to
me and demanding:

"What are you going to do with that boy?"

"Take him with me; he is my son."

"No you don't," said the man, and he laid hold of the boy and attempted to pull him out of
the wagon. I also seized the lad who began to scream. In the struggle for possession, I caught
up the whip and struck the man with the handle, felling him to the ground. All the while the
other man was shouting for assistance. The crowd gathered. The boy was roughly torn from me,
in spite of my efforts to retain him. Henry was thoroughly alarmed; and while the mob were
trying to pull us also out of the carriage he whipped the horse till he sprang through the
crowd and was well off in a moment.

"Get out of town as fast as you can drive," said I to Henry.

We were not half an hour in reaching Belvidere. There I stopped to breathe the horse a few
minutes, and Henry insisted that he was starving, and must have something to eat; he would
go into the hotel he said, and get some dinner. I told him it was madness to do it; but he
would not move an inch further on the road till he had some dinner. He went into the dining
room, and I paced up and down the piazza, nervous, anxious, fearing pursuit, dreading capture,
well knowing what would happen when those Jerseymen should get hold of me and find out who
I was. At that moment I saw the pursuers coming rapidly up the road. I called to my son:

"Henry, Henry! for God's sake come out here, quick!"

But he thought I was only trying to frighten him so as to hurry him away from his dinner, and
get him on the road, and he paid no attention to my summons. I knew that I was the man who
was wanted, and, without waiting for Henry, I jumped into my wagon and drove off. I just escaped,
that's all. The moment I left, my pursuers were at the door. I looked back and saw them drag
my son out of the house, and take him away with them. I turned my horse's head towards the
Belvidere Bridge. All the country about there was as familiar to me as the county I was born
in. I knew every road, and I had no fear of being caught. Once across the bridge and in Pennsylvania,
and I was comparatively safe, unless I myself should be kidnapped as I was at midnight, only
a little way from this very spot, eleven years before. Here was an opportunity now to rest
and reflect. Confound those Scheimers and all their blood! Was I never to see the end of the
scrapes that family would get me into, or which I was to get myself into, on account of the
Scheimers?

Surely they could not harm Henry. They might have taken him merely in the hope of drawing me
back to try to clear him, or rescue him, and then they would get hold of the man they wanted.
My son had done nothing. He did not even know of the contemplated abduction till five minutes
before it was attempted, and then he protested against it. He only held the horse when I pulled
the lad into the wagon.

Nothing showed so completely the consciousness of his own entire innocence in the matter, as
the coolness with which he sat down to his dinner in Belvidere, and insisted upon remaining
when I warned him of our danger. These facts shown, any magistrate before whom he might be
taken, must let him go at once. I thought, perhaps, if I waited a few hours where I was, he
would be sure to rejoin me, and we could then return to Port Jervis without Sarah's son to
be sure; but, otherwise, no worse off than we were when we set out on this ill-starred expedition
in the morning.

All this seemed so plain to me that I sent over to Belvidere for a lawyer, who soon came across
the bridge to see me, and to him I narrated the whole circumstances of the case from, beginning
to end. I asked him if I had not a right to carry off the boy whom I knew to be my own? His
reply was that he would not stop to discuss that question; all he knew was that there was a
great hue and cry after me for kidnapping the boy; that my son was seized and held for aiding
and abetting in the attempted abduction; and he advised me, as a friend, to leave that part
of the country as soon as possible. I gave him fifty dollars to look after Henry's case. He
thought, considering how little, and that little involuntarily, my son had to do with the matter,
he might be got off; he would do all he could for him anyhow. He then returned to Belvidere,
and I took the road north.

When I arrived at Port Jervis I detailed to my landlord the whole occurrences of the day--what
I had tried to do, and how miserably I had failed, and asked him what was to be done next.
He said "nothing;" we could only wait and see what happened.

The day following I received a letter from the Belvidere lawyer informing me that Henry had
been examined, had been bound over in the sum of three hundred dollars to take his trial on
a charge of kidnapping, and he was then in the county jail. I at once showed this letter to
the landlord, and he offered to go down with another man to Belvidere and see about the bail.
I gave him three hundred dollars, which he took with him and put into the bands of a resident
there who became bail, and in a day or two Henry came back with them to Port Jervis.

My son was frantic; he had been roughly treated; and to think, he said, that he should be thrust
into the common jail and kept there two days with all sorts of scoundrels, when he had done
actually nothing! He would go back there, stand his trial, and prove his innocence, if he died
for it. He reproached me for attempting to carry off the boy against his advice and warning;
he knew we should into trouble; but he would show them that he had nothing to do with it; that's
what he would do.

Now this was precisely what I did not wish to have him do. A trial of this case, even if Henry
should come off scott free, would be certain to revive the whole of the old Scheimer story,
which had nearly died away, and which I had no desire to have brought before the public again
in any way whatever. The bail bond I was willing, eager even to forfeit, if that would end
the matter. But Henry was sure they couldn't touch him, and he meant to have the three hundred
dollars returned to me.

Seeing how sensitive the boy was on the subject, and how bent he was on proving his innocence,
I thought it best to draw him away from the immediate locality, and so, in the course of a
week, I persuaded him to go to New York with me, and we afterward went to Maine for a few weeks
to sell my medicines. This Maine trip was a most lucrative one, which was very fortunate, for
the money I made there, to the amount of several hundred dollars, was shortly needed for purposes
which I did not anticipate when I put the money by.

We returned to New York, and I supposed that Henry had given up all idea of attempting to "prove
his innocence;" indeed we had no conversation about the kidnapping affair for several weeks.
But he slipped away from me. One day I came back to the hotel, and, inquiring for him, was
told at the office he had left word for me that he had gone to Belvidere. A letter from him
a day or two afterward confirmed this, to me, unhappy intelligence. The time was near at hand
for his trial, and he had gone and given himself up to the authorities. He wrote to me again
that he had sent word about his situation to his mother--my first and worst wife--and she and
his sister were already with him.

Of course it was impossible for me to go there, if there were no other reasons, I was too immediately
interested in this affair to be present, and I had no idea of undergoing a trial and a certain
conviction for myself. But I sent down a New York lawyer with one hundred dollars, directing
him to employ council there, and to advise and assist as much as he could. Meanwhile, I remained
in New York, anxious, it is true, yet almost certain that it would be impossible, under the
circumstances, to convict Henry of the kidnapping for which he was indicted. He had not even
assisted in the affair, and was sure his counsel would be able to so convince the court and jury.

And reviewing the whole matter, now in my cooler moments, this scheme of trying to carry away
Sarah's son, seemed to be as foolish, useless, and mad, as any one of my marrying adventures.
Till I picked him out from among his schoolmates, I had never seen the child at all. When I
started from Port Jervis to go down, as I supposed, into Pennsylvania, I had no more idea of
kidnapping the boy than I had of robbing a sheep-fold. It was only when the landlord at Water
Gap told me that Sarah had remarried, and was wedded to a worthless, drunken husband, that
I conceived the plan of removing the boy from such associations. I was going to bring him up
in a respectable manner. Alas! I did not succeed even in bringing him away.

I waited with nervous impatience for the close of the trial in New Jersey, when I hoped to
welcome my son Henry to New York. It was so plain a case, as it seemed to me, and must appear,
I thought, to everybody, that I hardly doubted his instant acquittal. But very shortly the
New York lawyer whom I had sent to Belvidere, came back and brought terrible news. Henry had
been tried, and notwithstanding the fairest showing in his favor, he was convicted and sentenced
to eighteen months imprisonment at Trenton.

As it appeared, it was I really, and not Henry, who was on trial. The circumstances of the
desperate struggle, and my knocking down one of the men with the butt of my whip, were conspicuous
in the case. Even the little boy was put on the stand, and was made to testify against his
older half-brother. Henry himself was astounded at the result of the trial, and was firmly
convinced that instead of "proving his innocence" to Jersey jurymen, he had better have let
his innocence go by default. We never even got back again the three hundred dollars which had
been put into the hands of the man who went bail for Henry when he was bound over for trial.
For us, it was bad business from beginning to end.

Henry wrote a letter to me, that just before his trial, before he had delivered himself up,
and while he was still under bail, he had gone to see Sarah Scheimer on the little farm which
was bought with her money, and was worked, so far as it was worked at all, by her drunken husband.
The family were even poorer than the landlord at Water Gap had reported. Sarah herself was
miserable and unhappy. She told Henry, when he informed her who he was, that if I had wanted
to see her or her son, I should have been welcome. She would have been very glad to have had
me take the boy and clothe him decently; but she could not part with him, and would not have
let me take him away; still, I could see him at any time, and as often as I liked, and the
boy should grow up to know and to look upon me as his father.

And this, really, was all I desired, all I wanted; and it was all easily within my grasp, ready
in fact to be put into my hands, and I had gone ahead in my usual mad, blundering way, acting,
not only without advice, but against such advice as came from Henry at the last moment, and
had alienated the mother from me, lost the boy, and had sent Henry, who was wholly innocent,
to state prison for eighteen months.

The poor fellow was take to Trenton and was put into the prison where I had spent seven months.
He was almost crazy when he got there. His mother and sister went with him, and took lodgings
in the place so as to be near him, to render him any assistance that might be in their power.

I had been idle now for some weeks in New York, and I went back to Maine, to Biddeford, where
I lad a good practice. I picked up a good deal of money, and in two months I returned to New
York to make a brief visit, and to see if something could not be done for the release of Henry
from prison. At my solicitation a friend of mine wrote to Trenton to Henry's mother to come
on to New York, and meet me at the Metropolitan Hotel on a specified day, to transact some
business. She came, and we met for the first time in several years. We met now simply on business,
and there was no expression of sentiment or feeling on either side. We cared nothing for each
other. I commended her for her devotion to Henry, and then told her I believed, if the proper
efforts were made, he could be pardoned out of prison. I told her what lawyer and other persons
to see, and how to proceed in the matter. I gave her the most minute instructions, and then
handed her five hundred dollars with which to fee her lawyer, and to pay her and her daughter's
living expenses in Trenton. She was grateful for the money, and was only too glad to go to
work for Henry; she would have done it long ago if she had only known what to do. We then parted,
and I have never seen the woman, since that day.

This business transacted, I at once returned to my practice at Biddeford. Among my patients
was a wealthy widow, "fat, fair, and forty," and I had not attended her long before a warm
affection sprung up between us, and in time, when the widow recovered, we began to think we
were in love with each other. I confess that I agreed to marry her; but it was to be at some
distant day--a very distant day as I intended--for, strange as it may seem, and as it did seem
to me, I had at last learned the lesson that I had better let matrimony alone. I had married
too many wives, widows, milliners, and what not, already, and had suffered too severely for
so doing. I meant that my Vermont imprisonment, the worst of all, should be the last.

So I only "courted" the widow, calling upon her almost every day, and I was received and presented
to her acquaintances as her affianced husband. Her family and immediate friends were violently
opposed to the match, thereby showing their good sense. I was also informed that they knew
something of my previous history, and I was warned that I had better not undertake to marry
the widow. Bless their innocent hearts! I had no idea of doing it. I was daily amazed at my
own common sense. My memory was active now; all my matrimonial mishaps of the past, with all
the consequences, were ever present to my mind, and never more present than when was in the
company of the fascinating widow. As for her, the more her relatives opposed the match, the
more she was bent upon marrying me. Her family, she, said, were afraid they were going to lose
her property, but she would never give them a cent of it, anyhow, and she would marry when
and whom she pleased.

Not "when," exactly; because, as she protested she would marry me, I had something to say about
it; I had been run away with by a milliner in Vermont, and I had no idea of beings forcibly
wedded by a widow in Maine. I pleaded that my business was not sufficiently established; I
was liable to be called away from time to time; I had affairs to arrange in New York and elsewhere
before I could settle down; and so the happy day was put off to an indefinite future time.

By-and-by I had business in Boston, and the widow declared that she would go with me; she wanted
to visit her friend's there and do some shopping; and without making particular mention of
her intention to her relatives, she went with me, and we were in Boston together more than
two weeks. At the end of that time she returned to Biddeford and notified her friends treat
she was married to the doctor, though she had no certificate, not even a Troy one, to show for it.

I deemed it advisable not to go back with her, but went to Worcester for a while. This Hicetas,
the Syracusan, seems to have been nearer the mark than the others, according to the existing lights,
which had not shone out as yet in Cicero's days. "But what was the meaning of it all? Who knows
anything about it? How is a man to live by listening to such trash as this?" It is thus that
Cicero means to be understood. I will agree that Cicero does not often speak out so clearly as he does
here, turning the whole thing into ridicule. He does generally find it well to say something
in praise of these philosophers. He does not quite declare the fact that nothing is to be made
of them; or, rather, there is existing in it all an under feeling that, were he to do so, he
would destroy his character and rob himself of his amusement. But we remember always his character
of a philosopher, as attributed to Cato, in his speech during his Consulship for Murena. I have told the
story when giving an account of the speech.

"He who cuts the throat of an old cock when there is no need, has sinned as deeply as the parricide
when breaking his father's neck,"[281] says Cicero, laughing at the Stoics. There he speaks out
the feelings of his heart--there, and often elsewhere in his orations. Here, in his Academica,
he is eloquent on the same side. We cannot but rejoice at the plainness of his words; but it
has to be acknowledged that we do not often find him so loudly betraying himself when dealing with
the old discussions of the Greek philosophers.

Very quickly after his Academica, in B.C. 45, came the five books,
De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum, written as though with the object of
settling the whole controversy, and declaring whether the truth lay
with the Epicureans, the Stoics, or the Academics.

What, at last, is the good thing, and what the evil thing, and how shall we gain the one and
avoid the other? If he will tell us this, he will have proved himself to be a philosopher to some
purpose. But he does nothing of the kind. At the end of the fifth book we find Atticus, who
was an Epicurean, declaring to Quintus Cicero that he held his own opinion just as firmly as
ever, although he had been delighted to hear how well the Academician Piso had talked in Latin. He
had hitherto considered that these were things which would not sound
well unless in the Greek language.

It is again in the form of a dialogue, and, like all his writings at this time, is addressed
to Brutus. It is in five books. The first two are supposed to have been held at Cumæ, between
Cicero, Torquatus, and Triarius. Here, after a prelude in favor of philosophy and Latin together,
Torquatus is allowed to make the best excuse he can for Epicurus. The prelude contains much
good sense; for, whether he be right or not in what he says, it is good for every man to hold
his own language in respect. "I have always thought and said that the Latin language is not
poor as it is supposed to be, but even richer than the Greek."[282] "Let us learn," says Torquatus,
who has happened to call upon him at Cumæ with Triarius, a grave and learned youth, as we are
told, "since we have found you at your house, why it is that you do not approve of Epicurus--he
who, alive, seems to have freed the minds of men from error, and to have taught them everything
which could tend to make them happy."[283] Then Torquatus goes to
work and delivers a most amusing discourse on the wisdom of Democritus
and his great disciple.

The words fly about with delightful power, so as to leave upon our minds an idea that Torquatus
is persuading his audience; for it is Cicero's peculiar gift, in whosesoever mouth he puts his
words, to make him argue as though he were the victor. We feel sure that, had he in his hand
held a theory contrary to that of Torquatus, had he in truth cared about it, he could not have
made Torquatus speak so well. But the speaker comes to an end, and assures his hearers that his
only object had been to hear--as he had never heard before--what Cicero's own opinion might
be on the matter.

The second book is a continuation of the same meeting. The word is taken up by Cicero, and he refutes
Torquatus. It seems to us, however, that poor Epicurus is but badly treated--as has been generally
the case in the prose works which have come down to us.

We have, indeed, the poem of Lucretius, and it is admitted that it contains fine passages. But
I was always told when young that the writing of it had led him to commit suicide--a deed on
his part which seems to have been painted in black colors, though Cato and Brutus, the Stoics,
did the same thing very gloriously. The Epicureans are held to be sensualists, because they have
used the word "pleasure" instead of "happiness," and Cicero is hard upon them. He tells a story
of the dying moments of Epicurus, quoting a letter written on his death-bed. "While I am writing,"
he says, "I am living my last hour, and the happiest. I have so bad a pain in my stomach that nothing
can be worse.

But I am compensated for it all by the joy I feel as I think of my philosophical discourses."[284]
Cicero then goes on to declare that, though the saying is very noble, it is unnecessary; he
should not, in truth, have required compensation. But whenever an opinion is enunciated, the
reader feels it to be unnecessary. He does not want opinion. He is satisfied with the language
in which Cicero writes about the opinions of others, and with the
amusing manner in which he deals with things of themselves heavy and
severe.

In the third book he, some time afterward, discusses the Stoic doctrine with Cato at the Tusculan
villa of Lucullus, near to his own. He had walked over, and finding Cato there by chance, had
immediately gone to work to demolish Cato's philosophical doctrines. He tells us what a glutton
Cato was over his books, taking them even into the Senate with him. Cicero asks for certain
volumes of Aristotle, and Cato answers him that he would fain put into his hand those of Zeno's
school.

We can see how easily Cato falls into the trap. He takes up his parable, and preaches his sermon,
but he does it with a marvellous enthusiasm, so that we cannot understand that the man who wrote
it intended to demolish it all in the next few pages. I will translate his last words of Cato's
appeal to the world at large: "I have been carried farther than my intention. But in truth
the admirable order of the system, and the incredible symmetry of it, has led him on. By the
gods, do you not wonder at it? In nature there is nothing so close packed, nor in art so well
fitted. The latter always agrees with the former--that which follows with that which has gone
before. Not a stone in it all can be moved from its place. If you touch but one letter it falls
to the ground. How severe, how magnificent, how dignified stands out the person of the wise
man, who, when his reason shall have taught him that virtue is the only good, of a necessity
must be happy!

He shall be more justly called king than Tarquin, who could rule neither himself nor others;
more rightly Dictator than Sulla, the owner of the three vices, luxury, avarice, and cruelty;
more rightly rich than Crassus, who, had he not in truth been poor, would never have crossed
the Euphrates in quest of war. All things are justly his who knows how to use them justly.
You may call him beautiful whose soul is more lovely than his body. He is free who is slave to no
desire. He is unconquered for whose mind you can forge no chains; you need not wait with him for
the last day to pronounce him happy. If this be so, then the good man is also the happy man.
What can be better worth our study than philosophy, or what more
heavenly than virtue?"[285] All of this was written by Cicero in most
elaborate language, with a finish of words polished down to the last
syllable, because he had nothing else wherewith to satisfy the cravings
of his intellect.

The fourth book is a continuation of the argument "Which when he had said he (made) an end.--But
I (began)."[286] With no other introduction Cicero goes to work and demolishes every word that Cato
had said. He is very courteous, so that Cato cannot but admit that he is answered becomingly;
but, to use a common phrase, he does not leave him a leg to stand upon. Although during the previous
book Cato has talked so well that the reader will think that there
must be something in it, he soon is made to perceive that the Stoic
budge is altogether shoddy.

The fifth and last book, De Finibus, is supposed to recount a dialogue held at Athens, or, rather,
gives the circumstances of a discourse pretended to have been delivered there by Pupius Piso
to the two Ciceros, and to their cousin Lucius, on the merits of the old Academy and the Aristotelian
Peripatetics; for Plato's philosophy had got itself split into two.

There was the old and the new, and we may perhaps doubt to which Cicero devoted himself. He certainly
was not an Epicurean, and he certainly was not a Stoic. He delighted to speak of himself as
a lover of Plato. But in some matters he seems to have followed Aristotle, who had diverged
from Plato, and he seems also to have clung to Carneades, who had become master of the new Academy.
But, in truth, to ascertain the special doctrine of such a man on such a subject is vain. As
we read these works we lose ourselves in admiration of his memory; we are astonished at the industry
which he exhibits; we are delighted by his perspicuity; and feel ourselves relieved amid the crowd
of names and theories by flashes of his wit; but there comes home to us, as a result, the singular
fact of a man playing with these theories as the most interesting sport the world had produced,
but not believing the least in any of them. It was not that he disbelieved; and perhaps among them
all the tenets of the new Academy were those which reconciled themselves the best to his common-sense.
But they were all nothing to him but an amusement.

In this book there are some exquisite bits. He says, speaking of Athens, that, "Go where you
will through the city, you place your footsteps on the vestiges of history."[287] He says of
a certain Demetrius, whom he describes as writing books without readers in Egypt, "that this culture
of his mind was to him, as it were, the food by which his humanity was kept alive."[288] And
then he falls into the praise of our love for our neighbors, and
introduces us to that true philosophy which was the real guide of
his life.

"Among things which are honest," he says, "there is nothing which shines so brightly and so
widely as that brotherhood between men, that agreement as to what may be useful to all, and that
general love for the human race. It comes from our original condition, in which children are
loved by their parents; and then binding together the family, it spreads itself abroad among
relations, connections, friends, and neighbors. Then it includes citizens and those who are
our allies. At last it takes in the whole human race, and that feeling of the soul arises
which, giving every man his own, and defending by equal laws the rights of each, is called
justice."[289] It matters little how may have been introduced this great secret which Christ
afterward taught, and for which we look in vain through the writings of all the philosophers.
It comes here simply from Cicero himself in the midst of his remarks on the new Academy, but it
gives the lesson which had governed his life: "I will do unto others as I would they should do unto
me." In this is contained the rudiments of that religion which has served to soften the hearts
of us all. It is of you I must think, and not of myself.

Hitherto the schools had taught how a man should make himself happy, whether by pleasure, whether
by virtue, or whether by something between the two. It seems that it had never as yet occurred
to a man to think of another except as a part of the world around him. Then there had come a
teacher who, while fumbling among the old Greek lessons which had professed to tell mankind what
each should do for himself, brings forth this, as it were, in preparation for the true doctrine
that was to come: "Ipsa caritas generis humani!"--"That love of the human race!" I trust I may
be able to show, before I have finished my work, that this was Cicero's
true philosophy.

All the rest is merely with him a play of words.

Our next work contains the five books of the Tusculan Disputations, addressed to Brutus: Tusculanarum
Disputationum, ad M. Brutum, libri i., ii., iii., iv., and v. That is the name that has at
last been decided by the critics and annotators as having been probably given to them by Cicero.
They are supposed to have been written to console himself in his grief for the death of Tullia.
I have great doubt whether consolation in sorrow is to be found in philosophy, but I have none
as to the finding it in writing philosophy. Here, I may add, that the poor generally suffer less
in their sorrow than the rich, because they are called upon to work
for their bread.

The man who must make his pair of shoes between sunrise and the moment at which he can find relief
from his weary stool, has not time to think that his wife has left
him, and that he is desolate in the world.

Pulling those weary threads, getting that leather into its proper shape, seeing that his stitches
be all taut, so that he do not lose his place among the shoemakers, so fills his time that he has
not a moment for a tear.

And it is the same if you go from the lowest occupation to the highest. Writing Greek philosophy
does as well as the making of shoes. The nature of the occupation depends on the mind, but
its utility on the disposition. It was Cicero's nature to write.

Will any one believe that he might not as well have consoled himself with one of his treatises
on oratory? But philosophy was then to his hands. It seems to have cropped up in his latter
years, after he had become intimate with Brutus. When life was again one turmoil of political
fever it was dropped.

In the five of the Books of the Tusculan Disputations, still addressed to Brutus, he contends:
1. That death is no evil; 2. That pain is none; 3. That sorrow may be abolished; 4. That the
passions may be conquered; 5. That virtue will suffice to make a man happy. These are the doctrines
of the Stoics; but Cicero does not in these books defend any school especially. He leans heavily
on Epicurus, and gives all praise to Socrates and to Plato; but he is comparatively free: "Nullius
adductus jurare in verba magistri,"[290] as Horace afterward said, probably ridiculing Cicero.
"I live for the day. Whatever strikes my mind as probable, that I say. In this way I alone
am free."[291]

Let us take his dogmas and go through them one by one, comparing each with his own life. This,
it may be said, is a crucial test to which but few philosophers would be willing to accede;
but if it shall be found that he never even dreamed of squaring his conduct with his professions,
then we may admit that he employed his time in writing these things because it did not suit
him to make his pair of shoes.

Was there ever a man who lived with a greater fear of death before
his eyes--not with the fear of a coward, but with the assurance that
it would withdraw him from his utility, and banish him from the scenes
of a world in sympathy with which every pulse of his heart was beating?

Even after Tullia was dead the Republic had come again for him, and something might be done to
stir up these fainéant nobles! What could a dead man do for his country? Look back at Cicero's
life, and see how seldom he has put forward the plea of old age to save him from his share of the
work of attack. Was this the man to console himself with the idea that death was no evil?
And did he despise pain, or make any attempt at showing his disregard of it? You can hardly
answer this question by looking for a man's indifference when undergoing it. It would be to
require too much from philosophy to suppose that it could console itself in agony by reasoning.
It would not be fair to insist on arguing with Cato in the gout.

The clemency of human nature refuses to deal with philosophy in the hard straits to which it may
be brought by the malevolence of evil. But when you find a man peculiarly on the alert to avoid
the recurrence of pain, when you find a man with a strong premeditated antipathy to a condition
as to which he pretends an indifference, then you may fairly assert that his indifference is
only a matter of argument. And this was always Cicero's condition. He knew that he must at
any rate lose the time passed by him under physical annoyance. His health was good, and by continued
care remained so to the end; but he was always endeavoring to avoid sea-sickness. He was careful
as to his baths, careful as to his eyes, very careful as to his diet. Was there ever a man of
whom it might be said with less truth that he was indifferent as to pain?

The third position is that sorrow may be abolished. Read his letters to Atticus about his daughter
Tullia, written at the very moment he was proving this. He was a heart-broken, sorrow-stricken
man. It will not help us now to consider whether in this he showed strength or weakness. There
will be doubt about it, whether he gained or lost more by that deep devotion to another creature
which made his life a misery to him because that other one had gone; whether, too, he might
not have better hidden his sorrow than have shown it even to his friend. But with him, at any
rate, it was there.

He can talk over it, weep over it, almost laugh over it; but if there be a thing that he cannot
do, it is to treat it after the manner of a Stoic.

His passions should be conquered. Look back at every period of his life, and see whether he
has ever attempted it. He has always been indignant, or triumphant, or miserable, or rejoicing.
Remember the incidents of his life before and after his Consulship--the day of his election and
the day of his banishment--and ask the philosophers why he had not controlled his passion. I shall
be told, perhaps, that here was a man over whom, in spite of his philosophy, his passion had
the masterhood.

But what attempt did he ever make?

Has he shown himself to us to be a man with a leaning toward such attempts? Has he not revelled
in his passions, feeling them to be just, righteous, honest, and becoming a man? Has he regretted
them? Did they occasion him remorse?

Will any one tell me that such a one has lived with the conviction that he might conquer the evils
of the world by controlling his passions? That virtue will make men happy he might probably
have granted, if asked; but he would have conceded the point with
a subterfuge.

The commonest Christian of the day will say as much; but he will say it in a different meaning
from that intended by the philosophers, who had declared, as a rule of life, that virtue would
suffice to make them happy. To be good to your neighbors will make you happy in the manner
described by Cicero in the fifth book, De Finibus. Love those who come near you. Be good to your
fellow-creatures. Think, when dealing with each of them, what his feelings may be. Melt to a
woman in her sorrow. Lend a man the assistance of your shoulder.
Be patient with age.

Be tender with children. Let others drink of your cup and eat of your loaf. Where the wind cuts,
there lend your cloak. That virtue will make you happy. But that is not the virtue of which he spoke
when he laid down his doctrine.

That was not the virtue with which Brutus was strong when he was skinning those poor wretches
of Salamis.

Such was the virtue with which the heart of Cicero glowed when he saw the tradesmen of the
Cilician town come out into the market-place with their corn.

Cicero begins the second book of the Tusculans by telling us that
Neoptolemus liked to do a little philosophy now and then, but never
too much at a time.

With himself the matter was different: "In what else is there that I can do better?" Then he takes
the bit between his teeth and rushes away with it.

The reader feels that he would not stop him if he could. He does little, indeed, for philosophy;
but so much for literature that he would be a bold man who would want to have him otherwise
employed.

He wrote three treatises, De Natura Deorum. Had he declared that he would write three treatises
to show the ideas which different men had taken up about the gods
he would be nearer to the truth.

We have an idea of what was Cicero's real notion of that "dominans in nobis deus"[292]--that god
which reigns within us--and which he declares in Scipio's dream to
have forbidden us to commit suicide.

Nothing can be farther removed from that idea than the gods of which he tells us, either in the
first book, in which the gods of Epicurus are set forth; in the second, in which the Stoics
are defended; or the third, in which the gods, in accordance with the Academy, are maintained;
not but that, either for the one or for the other, the man who speaks
up for that sect does not say the best that is to be said. Velleius
is eloquent for the Epicureans, Balbus for the Stoics, and Cotta for
the Academy. And in that which each says there is to be found a germ
of truth--though indeed Cicero makes his Epicurean as absurd as he
well can do. But he does not leave a trace behind of that belief in
another man's belief which an energetic preacher is sure to create.
The language is excellent, the stories are charming, the arguments
as used against each other are courteous, clever, and such that on
the spur of the moment a man cannot very well reply to them; but they
leave on the mind of the reader a sad feeling of the lack of reality.

In
the beginning he again repeats his reasons for writing on such subjects
so late in life.

And when I went to visit my poor Henry a day or two afterwards, I can hardly say that I was
surprised, though I was indignant to learn that his brother and sister had never been near
him at all since he had been in Massachusetts. They knew where and how he was from his letter's
to his mother; they knew, too, from the same letters--for I had notified Henry--at what time
I would be in Boston, and with this information they had come on to swindle me. I have no doubt,
when the young man came the second time to rob me, he would have murdered me, if the landlord
had not come to my assistance. And this was the youngest son of my first and worst wife!!

I found Henry in better condition than I expected, and I took him back with me to Augusta.
I did not tell him of his brother's attempt to rob and kill. Me--it would have been too great
a shock for him. He stayed with me only a few days and then, complaining of being homesick,
he went to visit his mother again.

I remained in Maine nearly two years, hardly ever going out of the State, except occasionally
to Boston on business. Making Augusta my residence and headquarters, I practiced in Portland
and in nearly all the towns and cities in the eastern part of the State. During all this time,
I behaved myself, in all respects better than I had ever before done in any period of my life.
I began to look upon myself as a reformed man; I had learned to let liquor alone, and was consequently
in far less, indeed, next to no danger of stepping into the traps in which my feet had been
so often caught. I may as well confess it--it was intoxicating liquor, and that mainly, which
had led me into my various mad marrying schemes and made me the matrimonial monomaniac and
lunatic lover that I was for years. What my folly, my insanity caused me to suffer, these pages
have attempted to portray. I had grown older, wiser, and certainly better. I now only devoted
myself strictly to my business, and I found profit as well as pleasure in doing it.

What had become of all my wives in the meantime, I scarcely knew and hardly cared. Of course
from time to time I had heard more or less about them--at least, a rumor of some sort now and
then reached me. About my first and worst wife, at intervals I heard something from Henry,
who was still with her, and who frequently wrote to me when he was well enough to do so. Margaret
Bradley and Eliza Gurnsey were still carrying on the millinery business in Rutland, and in
Montpelier, and were no doubt weaving other and new webs in hopes of catching fresh flies.
Mary Gordon, as I learned soon afterwards, was married almost before I had fairly escaped from
New Hampshire in my flight to Canada, and she had gone to California with her new husband.
Of the Newark widow I knew nothing; but two years of peace, quiet, and freedom from molestation
in Maine had made me feel quite secure against any present or future trouble from my past matrimonial
misadventures.

I was living in Maine, prudently I think under an assumed name, and as the respectable, and,
to my patients and customers, well-known Doctor Blank, I was scarcely liable to be recognized
at any time or by any one as the man who had married so many wives, been in so many jails and
prisons, and whose exploits had been detailed from time to time in the papers.

Nor, all this while, did I have the slightest fear of detection. I looked upon myself as a
victim rather than as a criminal, and for what I had done, and much that I had not done, I
had more than paid the penalty. So far as all my business transactions were concerned, my course
had always been honorable, and in my profession, for my cures and for my medicines, I enjoyed
a good reputation which all my efforts were directed to deserve.

Of course, now and then, I met people in Portland, and especially in Boston, who had known
me in former years, and who knew something of my past life; but these were generally my friends
who sympathized with my sufferings, or who, at least, were willing to blot out the past in
my better behavior of the present. One day in Boston a young man came up to me and said:

"How do you do, Doctor?"

"Quite well," I replied; "but you have the advantage of me; I am sure I do not remember you,
if I ever knew you."

"You don't remember me! Why, I am the son of the jailer in Montpelier with whom you spent so
many months before you went to Windsor; I knew you in a minute, and Doctor, I've been in Boston
a week and have got 'strapped;' how to get back to Montpelier I don't know, unless you will
lend me five or six dollars which I will send back to you the moment I get home."

"I remember you well, now," said I; "you are the little rascal who wouldn't even go and buy
me a cigar unless I gave you a dime for doing it; and then, sometimes, you cheated me out of
my money; I wouldn't lend you a dollar now if it would save you from six month's imprisonment
in your father's filthy jail. Good morning."

And that was the last I saw of him.

I was getting tired of Maine. I had been there longer than I had stayed in any place, except
in the Vermont State Prison, for the past fifteen years, and I began to long for fresh scenes
and a fresh field for practice. I had accumulated some means, and thought I might take life
a little easier--make a home for myself somewhere, practicing my profession when I wanted to,
and at other times enjoying the leisure I loved and really needed. So I closed up my business
in Augusta and Portland, put my money in my pocket, and once more went out into the world on
a prospecting tour. My first idea was to go to the far West, and I went to Troy with the intention
of staying there a few days, and then bidding farewell to the East forever. The New England
States presented no attractions to me; I had exhausted Maine, or rather it had exhausted me;
New Hampshire, Vermont, and Massachusetts had too many unpleasant associations, if indeed they
were safe states for me, with my record to live in, and Connecticut I knew very little about.
Certainly I had no intention of trying to settle in New Jersey or Pennsylvania. The west was
the place; anywhere in the west.

Here was I in Troy, revolving plans in my own mind for migrating to the west, just as Mary
Gordon and I had done in the very same hotel, only a few years before; and in the course of
a week I came to exactly the same conclusion that Mary and I did--not to go. I heard of a small
farm--it was a very small one of only twelve acres--which could be bought in Rensselaer County,
not more than sixteen miles from Albany and Troy. I went to see the place, liked it, and bought
it for sixteen hundred dollars. There was a small but good house and a barn on the place, and
altogether it was a cheap and desirable property. I got a good housekeeper, hired a man, and
began to carry on this little farm, raising garden vegetables and fruit mainly, and sending
them to market in Albany and Troy. Generally I took my own stuff to market, and sold medicines
and recipes as well, and in Albany I had a first rate practice which I went to that city to
attend to once or twice a week. While my man was selling vegetables and fruit--I remember I
sold a hundred dollars worth of cherries from my farm the first summer--in the market, I was
Doctor Blank receiving my patients at Stanwix Hall, or calling upon them at their residences;
and when the day's work was over, my man and I rode home in the wagon which had brought us
and the garden truck early in the morning. On the whole, this kind of life was exceedingly
satisfactory, and I liked it.

I made frequent expeditions to Saratoga and to other places not far from home to attend to
cases to which I was called, and to sell medicines; and considering that the main object I
had in settling in Rensselaer County was rest and more leisure than I had enjoyed for some
years, I had a great deal more to do than I desired. Nevertheless, I might have continued to
live on my little farm, raising vegetables, picking cherries, and practicing medicine in the
neighborhood, had not the fate, which seemed to insist that I should every little while come
before a court of justice for something or other, followed me even here. A certain hardware
dealer in Albany, with whom I had become acquainted, proposed to buy one of my recipes, and
to go into an extensive manufacture of the medicine. He had read and heard of the fortunes
that had been made in patent medicines, by those who understand the business, and he thought
he would see if he could not get rich in a year or less in the same way.

After some solicitation I sold him the recipe for one thousand dollars, receiving six hundred
dollars down, and a promise of the balance when the first returns from sales of the medicine
came in. I also entered into a contract to show the man how to make the medicine, and to give
him such advice and assistance in his new business as I could. My hardware friend understood
his legitimate business better than he did that which he had undertaken, and although be learned
how to manufacture the medicine he did not know how to sell it; and after trying it a few weeks,
and doing next to nothing, he turned upon me as the author of his misfortunes and sued me for
damages.

Incidental to this, and only incidental, is the following: Shortly after I purchased my property,
as I was very fond of calling my little farm, in Rensselaer County, I was in Albany one day
when it occurred to me that I wanted a carpet for my parlor. I went to the store of a well-known
carpet-dealer, and asked to be shown some of his goods. While I was going through the establishment
I came across a man who was industriously sewing together the lengths of a cut carpet, and
I recognized in him one of my fellow convicts at Windsor. He, however, did not know me, and
I doubt if he could have been convinced of my identity as the wretch who plied the broom in
the halls of the prison. To him, as he glanced at me, I was only a well-dressed gentleman whom
the proprietor was courteously showing through the establishment in the hope of securing a
good customer. It was this little circumstance, I think--my chance meeting with my old fellow-prisoner,
and my changed circumstances and appearance which put me beyond recognition by him--that prompted
me to the somewhat brazen business that followed:

"I only came in to look to-day," I said to the carpet-dealer; "for the precise sum of money
in my pocket at present is eighteen pence, and no more; but if you will cut me off forty yards
of that piece of carpeting, and trust me for it, I will pay your bill in a few days, as sure
as I live."

My frank statement with regard to my finances seemed to attract the attention of the merchant
who laughed and said:

"Well, who are you, anyhow? Where do you live?"

I told him that I was Doctor Blank; that I lived in Rensselaer county on a small place of my
own; I raised fruit and vegetables for market; I cured cancers, dropsy, and other diseases
when I could; sold medicines readily almost where I would; and was in Albany once or twice a week.

"Measure and cut off the carpet," said he to the clerk who was following us, "and put it in
the Doctor's wagon"

The bill was about a hundred dollars, and I drove home with the carpet. It was nearly six weeks
afterwards when I went into the store again, and greeted the proprietor. He had seen me but
once before and had totally forgotten me. I told him I was Doctor Blank, small farmer and large
medical practitioner of Rensselaer County.

"The devil you are! Why, you're the man that bought a carpet of me a few weeks ago; I was wondering
what had become of you."

"I'm the man, and I must tell you that the carpet doesn't look well; but never mind--here's
a hundred dollars, and I want you to receipt the bill."

"Now," said I, when he returned the bill to me receipted, "the carpet looks firstrate; I never
saw a handsomer one in my life."

"Well, you are an odd chap, any how," said the carpet-dealer, laughing, and shaking me by the
hand. Almost from that moment we were more than mere acquaintances, we were fast friends. In
the course of the long conversation that followed, I told him of my trouble with the hardware
man--how I had sold him the recipe; that he had failed, from ignorance to conduct the business
properly, and had sued me for damages.

"I know the man," said my new friend; "let him go ahead and sue and be benefited, if he can;
meanwhile, do you keep easy; I'll stand by you."

And stand by me he did through thick and thin. The hardware man sued me no less than nineteen
times, and for pretty much everything--damages, debt, breach of contract, and what not. With
the assistance of a lawyer whom my friend recommended to me, I beat my opponent in eighteen
successive suits; but as fast as one suit was decided he brought another, almost before I could
get out of the court room. At last he carried the case to the Supreme Court, and from there
it went to a referee. The matter from beginning to end, must have cost him a mint of money;
but he went on regardless of the costs which he hoped and expected to get out of me at last.

My long and painful experience, covering many years, had given me a pretty thorough knowledge
of the law's uncertainty, as well as the law's delay, and very early in the course of the present
suit, I had quietly disposed of my property in Rensselaer County. I sold the little farm, which
cost me sixteen hundred dollars, for twenty-one hundred dollars, and I had had, besides, the
profits of nearly two years' farming and a good living from and on the place. I also arranged
all my money matters in a manner that I felt assured would be satisfactory to me, if not to
my opponent, and then, following the advice of my friend, the carpet-dealer, I let the hardware
man sue and be "benefited if he could." When, however, the case went finally to a referee who
was certain, I felt sure, to decide against me, I took no further personal interest in the
matter, nor have I ever troubled myself to learn the filial decision. I made up my mind in
a moment and decided that the time had come, at last, when it was advisable for me to go to
the West.

Westward I went, towards sunset almost, and for the two following years I led, I fear, what
would be considered a very vagabond life. I went to Utah, thinking while I was in Salt Lake
City, if they only knew my history there I was sure to be elected an apostle, or should be,
at any rate, a shining light in Mormondom--only I had taken my wives in regular succession,
and had not assembled the throng together. I pushed across the plains, and went to California,
remaining a long time in San Francisco. This may have been vagabondism, but it was profitable
vagabondism to me. During this long wandering I held no communication with my friends in the
East; friends and foes alike had an opportunity to forget me, or if they thought of me they
did not know whether I was dead or alive; they certainly never knew, all the time, where I
was; and while I was journeying I never once met a man or woman who had been acquainted with
me in the past. All the time, too, I had plenty of money; indeed, when, I returned at last
I was richer far than I was when I left Albany, and left as the common saying graphically expresses
it, "between two days." You would avoid the man, as a pagan. The Stoic doctrine would so shock
you, when brought out for real wear, as to make you feel yourself in the company of some mad Atheist--with
a man for whose welfare, early or late in life, church bells had
never been rung. I never
feared coming to want. If I had lost my money and all other resources had failed, I was not
afraid to make a horse-nail or turn a horse-shoe with the best blacksmith in California, and
I could have got my living, as I did for many a year, at the forge and anvil.

But I made more money in other and easier ways, and I made friends. In every conceivable way
my two years' wandering was of far more benefit to me than I dreamed of when I wildly set out
for the West without knowing exactly where, or for what, I was going. The new country, too,
had given me, not only a fresh fund of ideas, but a new stock of health--morally and physically
I was in better condition than I ever was before in my life. I had a clear head; a keen sense
of my past follies; a vivid consciousness of the consequences which such follies, crimes they
may be called, are almost certain to bring. I flattered myself that I was not only a reformed
prisoner, but a reformed drunkard, and a thoroughly restored matrimonial monomaniac.

And when I returned, at last, to the East, and went once more to visit my near and dear friends
in Ontario County, I was received as one who had come back from the dead. When I had been here
a few weeks, and had communicated to my cousins so much of the story of my life as I then thought
advisable, I took good counsel and finally did what I ought to have done long years before.
I commenced proper legal proceedings for a divorce from my first and worst wife. I do not need
to dwell upon the particulars; it is enough to say, that the woman, who was then living, so
far from opposing me, aided me all she could, even making affidavit to her adultery with the
hotel clerk at Bainbridge, long ago, and I easily secured my full and complete divorce. Now
I was, indeed, a free man--all the other wives whom I had married, or who had married me, whether
I would or no, were as nothing; some were dead and others were again married. It may be that
this new, and to me strange sense of freedom, legitimate freedom, set me to thinking that I
might now secure a genuine and true wife, who would make a new home happy to me as long as
we both should live.

Fortune, not fate now, followed me, led me rather and guided my footsteps. He had probably allowed
himself to use the witticism, meaning little or nothing--choosing the phrase without a moment's
thought, because it contained a double meaning. No one can conceive that he meant to imply that
young Cæsar should be murdered. "Let us reward him, but for the moment let us be rid of him."
And then, too, he had in the same sentence called him a boy. As far as evidence goes, we know
that the words were spoken. We can trust the letter from Decimus to Cicero, and the answer from
Cicero to Decimus. And we know that, a short time afterward, Octavian, sitting in the island
near Bologna with Antony, consented that Cicero's name should be inserted in the fatal list
as one of those doomed to be murdered.

In the mean time Lepidus had taken his troops over to Antony, and Pollio joined them soon afterward
with his from Spain. After that it was hardly to be expected that Plancus should hesitate.
There has always been a doubt whether Plancus should or should not be regarded as a traitor. He
held out longer than the others, and is supposed to have been true in those assurances which he
made to Cicero of Republican fervor. Why was he bound to obey Cicero, who was then at Rome,
sending out his orders without official authority? While the Consuls had been alive he could obey
the Consuls; and at the Consuls' death he could for a while follow
the spirit of their instructions. A noble woman, a most worthy wife is mistress of that house;
joyous children move and play among the trees that shade the lawns; and the head of the household,
the father of the family, is the happiest of thee group.

That farm, that family, that cottage, that wife, that happy home are mine--all mine. I have
found a true wife and a real home at last.

My story is told; and if it should suggest to the reader the moral which is too obvious to
need rehearsal, one object I had in telling the story will have been accomplished.

THE END.

