'There, there!  Take comfort, ma'am.  She is in the hands of God!  All that mortal man can
do is being done.  And she is safer with that gallant young giant than she could be with any
other man on the ship.  Look, how he is protecting her!  Why he knows that all that can be
done is being done.  He is waiting for us to get to him, and is saving himself for it. Any
other man who didn't know so much about swimming as he does would try to reach the lifebuoy;
and would choke the two of them with the spindrift in the trying.  Mind how he took the red
cap to help us see them.  He's a fine lad that; a gallant lad!'

CHAPTER XXIV--FROM THE DEEPS

Presently the Captain handed Mrs. Stonehouse a pair of binoculars.  For an instant she looked
through them, then handed them back and continued gazing out to where the two heads appeared--when
they did appear on the crest of the waves like pin-heads.  The Captain said half to himself
and half to the father:

'Mother's eyes!  Mother's eyes!' and the father understood.

As the ship swept back to the rescue, her funnels sending out huge volumes of smoke which the
gale beat down on the sea to leeward, the excitement grew tenser and tenser.  Men dared hardly
breathe; women wept and clasped their hands convulsively as they prayed.  In the emergency
boat the men sat like statues, their oars upright, ready for instant use. The officer stood
with the falls in his hand ready to lower away.

When opposite the lifebuoy, and about a furlong from Harold and Pearl, the Captain gave the
signal 'Stop,' and then a second later: 'Full speed astern.'

'Ready, men!  Steady!'  As the coming wave slipping under the ship began to rise up her side,
the officer freed the falls and the boat sank softly into the lifting sea.

Instantly the oars struck the water, and as the men bent to them a cheer rang out.

* * * * *

Harold and Pearl heard, and the man turning his head for a moment saw that the ship was close
at hand, gradually drifting down to the weather side of them.  He raised the child in his arms,
saying:

'Now, Pearl, wave your hand to mother and say, hurrah!'  The child, fired into fresh hope,
waved her tiny hand and cried 'Hurrah!  Hurrah!'  The sound could not reach the mother's ears;
but she saw, and her heart leaped.  She too waved her hand, but she uttered no sound.  The
sweet high voice of the child crept over the water to the ears of the men in the boat, and
seemed to fire their arms with renewed strength.

A few more strokes brought them close, Harold with a last effort raised the child in his arms
as the boat drove down on them.  The boatswain leaning over the bow grabbed the child, and
with one sweep of his strong arm took her into the boat.  The bow oarsman caught Harold by
the wrist. If I could only live there, I am sure I should never be unhappy again; if I could
stay here and not go back to London; if--"

But at this point her grumbling came to a sudden stop, for at a given
signal all the children, who had been racing over the grass, formed
into line and marched straight up to the house to make their bows
and curtseys to the kind lady and gentleman who lived there, and who
had come out into the porch with her own little girls and boys to
welcome the visitors.

  When they had got close enough ropes were thrown
out, caught and made fast; and then came down one of the bowlines which the seamen held ready
along the rail of the lower deck.  This was seized by the boatswain, who placed it round him
under his armpits.  Then, standing with the child in his arms he made ready to be pulled up.
Pearl held out her arms to Harold, crying in fear:

'No, no, let The Man take me!  I want to go with The Man!'  He said quietly so as not to frighten
her:

'No, no, dear!  Go with him!  He can do this better than I can!'  So she clung quietly to the
seaman, holding her face pressed close against his shoulder.  As the men above pulled at the
rope, keeping it as far as possible from the side of the vessel, the boatswain fended himself
off with his feet.  In a few seconds he was seized by eager hands and pulled over the rail,
tenderly holding and guarding the child all the while.  In an instant she was in the arms of
her mother, who had thrown herself upon her knees and pressed her close to her loving heart.
The child put her little arms around her neck and clung to her.  Then looking up and seeing
the grey pallor of her face, which even her great joy could not in a moment efface, she stroked
it and said:

'Poor mother!  Poor mother!  And now I have made you all wet!'  Then, feeling her father's
hand on her head she turned and leaped into his arms, where he held her close.

Harold was the next to ascend.  He came amid a regular tempest of cheers, the seamen joining
with the passengers.  The officers, led by the Captain waving his cap from the bridge, joined
in the paean.

The boat was cast loose.  An instant after the engine bells tinkled: 'Full speed ahead.'

Mrs. Stonehouse had no eyes but for her child, except for one other.  When Harold leaped down
from the rail she rushed at him, all those around instinctively making way for her.  She flung
her arms around him and kissed him, and then before he could stop her sank to her knees at
his feet, and taking his hand kissed it.  Harold was embarrassed beyond all thinking.  He tried
to take away his hand, but she clung tight to it.

'No, no!' she cried.  'You saved my child!'

Harold was a gentleman and a kindly one.  He said no word till she had risen, still holding
his hand, when he said quietly:

'There! there!  Don't cry.  I was only too happy to be of service.  Any other man on board
would have done the same.  I was the nearest, and therefore had to be first.  That was all!'

Mr. Stonehouse came to him and said as he grasped Harold's hand so hard that his fingers ached:

'I cannot thank you as I would.  But you are a man and will understand. God be good to you
as you have been good to my child; and to her mother and myself!'  As he turned away Pearl,
who had now been holding close to her mother's hand, sprang to him holding up her arms.  He
raised her up and kissed her.  Then he placed her back in her mother's arms.

All at once she broke down as the recollection of danger swept back upon her.  'Oh, Mother!
Mother!' she cried, with a long, low wail, which touched every one of her hearers to the heart's
core.

'The hot blankets are all ready.  Come, there is not a moment to be lost. I'll be with you
when I have seen the men attended to!'

So the mother, holding her in her arms and steadied by two seamen lest she should slip on the
wet and slippery deck, took the child below.

Harold was taken by another set of men, who rubbed him down till he glowed, and poured hot
brandy and water into him till he had to almost use force against the superabundance of their
friendly ministrations.

For the remainder of that day a sort of solemn gladness ruled on the Scoriac.  The Stonehouse
family remained in their suite, content in glad thankfulness to be with Pearl, who lay well
covered up on the sofa sleeping off the effects of the excitement and the immersion, and the
result of the potation which the Doctor had forced upon her.  Harold was simply shy, and objecting
to the publicity which he felt to be his fate, remained in his cabin till the trumpet had blown
the dinner call.

CHAPTER XXV--A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD

After dinner Harold went back to his cabin; locking himself in, he lay down on the sofa.  The
gloom of his great sorrow was heavy on him; the reaction from the excitement of the morning
had come.

He was recalled to himself by a gentle tapping.  Unlocking and opening the door he saw Mr.
Stonehouse, who said with trouble in his voice:

'I came to you on account of my little child.'  There he stopped with a break in his voice.
Harold, with intent to set his mind at ease and to stave off further expressions of gratitude,
replied:

'Oh, pray don't say anything.  I am only too glad that I was privileged to be of service. 
I only trust that the dear little girl is no worse for her--her adventure!'

'That is why I am here,' said the father quickly.  'My wife and I are loth to trouble you.
But the poor little thing has worked herself into a paroxysm of fright and is calling for you.
We have tried in vain to comfort or reassure her.  She will not be satisfied without you. 
She keeps calling on "The Man" to come and help her.  I am loth to put you to further strain
after all you have gone through to-day; but if you would come--'  Harold was already in the
passage as he spoke:

'Of course I'm coming.  If I can in any way help it is both a pleasure and a duty to be with
her.'  Turning to the father he added:

'She is indeed a very sweet and good child.  I shall never forget how she bore herself whilst
we waited for aid to come.'

'You must tell her mother and me all about it,' said the father; much moved.

When they came close to the Stonehouses' suite of rooms they heard Pearl's voice rising with
a pitiful note of fear:

'Where is The Man?  Oh! where is The Man?  Why doesn't he come to me?  He can save me!  I want
to be with The Man!'  When the door opened and she saw him she gave shriek of delight, and
springing from the arms of her mother fairly leaped into Harold's arms which were outstretched
to receive her.  She clung to him and kissed him again and again, rubbing her little hands
all over his face as though to prove to herself that he was real and not a dream.  Then with
a sigh she laid her head on his breast, the reaction of sleep coming all at once to her.  With
a gesture of silence Harold sat down, holding the child in his arms.  Her mother laid a thick
shawl over and sat down close to Harold.  Mr. Stonehouse stood quiet in the doorway with the
child's nurse peering anxiously over his shoulder.

After a little while, when he thought she was asleep, Harold rose and began to place her gently
in the bunk.  But the moment he did so she waked with a scream.  The fright in her eyes was
terrible.  She clung to him, moaning and crying out between her sobs:

'Don't leave me!  Don't leave me!  Don't leave me!'  Harold was much moved and held the little
thing tight in his strong arms, saying to her:

'No darling!  I shan't leave you!  Look in my eyes, dear, and I will promise you, and then
you will be happy.  Won't you?'

She looked quickly up in his face.  Then she kissed him lovingly, and rested her head, but
not sleepily this time, on his breast said:

'Yes!  I'm not afraid now!  I'm going to stay with The Man!'  Presently Mrs. Stonehouse, who
had been thinking of ways and means, and of the comfort of the strange man who had been so
good to her child, said:

'You will sleep with mother to-night, darling.  Mr. . . . The Man,' she said this with an appealing
look of apology to Harold, 'The Man will stay by you till you are asleep . . . '  But she interrupted,
not fretfully or argumentatively, but with a settled air of content:

'No!  I'm going to sleep with The Man!'

'But, dear one,' the mother expostulated, 'The Man will want sleep too.'

'All right, mother.  He can sleep too.  I'll be very good and lie quite quiet; but oh! mother,
I can't sleep unless his arms are round me.  I'm afraid if they're not the sea will get me!'
and she clung closer to Harold, tightening her arms round his neck.

'You will not mind?' asked Mrs. Stonehouse timidly to Harold; and, seeing acquiescence in his
face, added in a burst of tearful gratitude:

'Oh! you are good to her to us all!'

'Hush!' Harold said quietly.  Then he said to Pearl, in a cheerful matter- of-fact way which
carried conviction to the child's mind:

'Now, darling, it is time for all good little girls to be asleep, especially when they have
had an--an interesting day.  You wait here till I put my pyjamas on, and then I'll come back
for you.  And mother and father shall come and see you nicely tucked in!'

'Don't be long!' the child anxiously called after him as he hurried away. Even trust can have
its doubts.

In a few minutes Harold was back, in pyjamas and slipper and a dressing- gown.  Pearl, already
wrapped in a warm shawl by her mother, held out her arms to Harold, who lifted her.

The Stonehouses' suite of rooms was close to the top of the companion- way, and as Harold's
stateroom was on the saloon deck, the little procession had, much to the man's concern, run
the gauntlet of the thong of passengers whom the bad weather had kept indoors.  When he came
out of the day cabin carrying the child there was a rush of all the women to make much of the
little girl.  They were all very kind and no troublesome; their interest was natural enough,
and Harold stopped whilst they petted the little thing.

The little procession followed.  Mr. and Mrs. Stonehouse coming next, and last the nurse, who
manifested a phase of the anxiety of a hen who sees her foster ducklings waddling toward a pond.

When Harold was in his bunk the little maid was brought in.

When they had all gone and the cabin was dark, save for the gleam from the nightlight which
the careful mother had placed out of sight in the basin at the foot of the bunk, Harold lay
a long time in a negative state, if such be possible, in so far as thought was concerned.

Presently he became conscious of a movement of the child his arms; a shuddering movement, and
a sort of smothered groan.  The little thing was living over again in sleep the perils and
fears of the day.  Instinctively she put up her hands and felt the a round her.  Then with
a sigh clasped her arms round his neck, and with a peaceful look laid her head upon his breast.
Even through the gates of sleep her instinct had recognised and realised protection.

And then this trust of a little child brought back the man to his nobler self.  Once again
came back to him that love which he had had, and which he knew now that he had never lost,
for the little child that he had seen grow into full womanhood; whose image must dwell in his
heart of hearts for evermore.

The long night's sleep quite restored Pearl.  She woke fairly early and without any recurrence
of fear.  At first she lay still, fearing she would wake The Man, but finding that he was awake--he
had not slept a wink all night--she kissed him and then scrambled out of bed.

It was still early morning, but early hours rule on shipland.  Harold rang for the steward,
and when the man came he told him to tell Mr. Stonehouse that the child was awake.  His delight
when he found the child unfrightened looking out of the port was unbounded.

CHAPTER XXVI--A NOBLE OFFER

That day Harold passed in unutterable gloom.  The reaction was strong on him; and all his woe,
his bitter remembrance of the past and his desolation for the future, were with him unceasingly.

In the dusk of the evening he wandered out to his favourite spot, the cable-tank on top of
the aft wheelhouse.  Here he had been all alone, and his loneliness had the added advantage
that from the isolated elevation he could see if anyone approached.  He had been out there
during the day, and the Captain, who had noticed his habit had had rigged up a canvas dodger
on the rail on the weather side.  When he sat down on the coiled hawsers in the tank he was
both secluded and sheltered.  In this peaceful corner his thoughts ran freely and in sympathy
with the turmoil of wind and wave.

How unfair it all was!  Why had he been singled out for such misery?  What gleam of hope or
comfort was left to his miserable life since he had heard the words of Stephen; those dreadful
words which had shattered in an instant all the cherished hopes of his life.  Too well he remembered
the tone and look of scorn with which the horrible truths had been conveyed to him.  In his
inmost soul he accepted them as truths; Stephen's soul had framed them and Stephen's lips had
sent them forth.

From his position behind the screen he did not see the approaching figure of Mr. Stonehouse,
and was astonished when he saw his head rise above the edge of the tank as he climbed the straight
Jacob's ladder behind the wheelhouse.  The elder man paused as he saw him and said in an apologetic
way:

'Will you forgive my intruding on your privacy?  I wanted to speak to you alone; and as I saw
you come here a while ago I thought it would be a good opportunity.'  Harold was rising as
he spoke.

'By all means.  This place is common property.  But all the same I am honoured in your seeking
me.'  The poor fellow wished to be genial; but despite his efforts there was a strange formality
in the expression of his words.  The elder man understood, and said as he hurried forward and
sank beside him:

'Pray don't stir!  Why, what a cosy corner this is.  I don't believe at this moment there is
such peace in the ship!'

Once again the bitterness of Harold's heart broke out in sudden words:

'I hope not!  There is no soul on board to whom I could wish such evil!' The old man said as
he laid his hand softly on the other's shoulder:

'God help you, my poor boy, if such pain is in your heart!'  Mr. Stonehouse looked out at the
sea, at last turning his face to him again he spoke:

'If you feel that I intrude on you I earnestly ask you to forgive me; but I think that the
years between your age and mine as well as my feeling towards the great obligation which I
owe you will plead for excuse.  There is something I would like to say to you, sir; but I suppose
I must not without your permission.  May I have it?'

'If you wish, sir.  I can at least hear it.'

The old man bowed and went on:

'I could not but notice that you have some great grief bearing upon you; and from one thing
or another--I can tell you the data if you wish me to do so--I have come to the conclusion
that you are leaving your native land because of it.'  Here Harold, wakened to amazement by
the readiness with which his secret had been divined, said quickly, rather as an exclamation
than interrogation:

'How on earth did you know that!'  His companion, taking it as a query, answered:

'Sir, at your age and with your strength life should be a joy; and yet you are sad: Companionship
should be a pleasure; yet you prefer solitude. That you are brave and unselfish I know; I have
reason, thank God! to know it.  That you are kindly and tolerant is apparent from your bearing
to my little child this morning; as well as your goodness of last night, the remembrance of
which her mother and I will bear to our graves; and to me now.  I have not lived all these
years without having had trouble in my own heart; and although the happiness of late years
has made it dim, my gratitude to you who are so sad brings it all back to me.'  He bowed, and
Harold, wishing to avoid speaking of his sorrow, said:

'You are quite right so far as I have a sorrow; and it is because of it I have turned my back
on home.  Let it rest at that!'  His companion bowed gravely and went on.

'I take it that you are going to begin life afresh in the new country.  In such case I have
a proposition to make.  I have a large business; a business so large that I am unable to manage
it all myself.  I was intending that when I arrived at home I would set about finding a partner.
The man I want is not an ordinary man.  He must have brains and strength and daring.'  He paused.
Harold felt what was coming, but realised, as he jumped at the conclusion, that it would not
do for him to take for granted that he was the man sought.  He waited; Mr. Stonehouse went on:

'As to brains, I am prepared to take the existence of such on my own judgment.  I have been
reading men, and in this aspect specially, all my life.  The man I have thought of has brains.
I am satisfied of that, without proof.  I have proof of the other qualities.'  He paused again;
as Harold said nothing he continued in a manner ill at ease:

'My difficulty is to make the proposal to the man I want.  It is so difficult to talk business
to a man to whom you under great obligation; to whom you owe everything.  He might take a friendly
overture ill.' There was but one thing to be said and Harold said it.  His heart warmed to
the kindly old man and he wished to spare him pain; even if he could not accept him proposition:

'He couldn't take it ill; unless he was an awful bounder.'

'It was you I thought of!'

'I thought so much, sir;' said Harold after a pause, 'and I thank you earnestly and honestly.
But it is impossible.'

'Oh, my dear sir!' said the other, chagrined as well as surprised.  'Think again!  It is really
worth your while to think of it, no matter what your ultimate decision may be!'

Harold shook his head.  There was a long silence.  The old man wished to give his companion
time to think; and indeed he thought that Harold was weighing the proposition in his mind.
As for Harold, he was thinking how best he could make his absolute refusal inoffensive.  He
must, he felt, give some reason; and his thoughts were bent on how much of the truth he could
safely give without endangering his secret.  Therefore he spoke at last in general terms:

'I can only ask you, sir, to bear with me and to believe that I am very truly and sincerely
grateful to you for your trust.  But the fact is, I cannot go anywhere amongst people.  Of
course you understand that I am speaking in confidence; to you alone and to none other?'

'Absolutely!' said Mr. Stonehouse gravely.  Harold went on:

'I must be alone.  I can only bear to see people on this ship because it is a necessary way
to solitude.'

'You "cannot go anywhere amongst people"!  Pardon me.  I don't wish to be unduly inquisitive;
but on my word I fail to understand!'  Harold was in a great difficulty.  Common courtesy alone
forbade that he should leave the matter where it was; and in addition both the magnificently
generous offer which had been made to him, and the way in which accident had thrown him to
such close intimacy with Pearl's family, required that he should be at least fairly frank.
At last in a sort of cold desperation he said:

'I cannot meet anyone . . . There it something that happened . . . Something I did . . . Nothing
can make it right . . . All I can do is to lose myself in the wildest, grimmest, wilderness
in the world; and fight my pain . . . my shame . . . !'

A long silence.  Then the old man's voice came clear and sweet, something like music, in the
shelter from the storm:

'But perhaps time may mend things.  God is very good . . . !'  Harold answered out of the bitterness
of his heart.  He felt that his words were laden with an anger which he did not feel, but he
did not see his way to alter them:

'Nothing can mend this thing!  It is at the farthest point of evil; and there is no going on
or coming back.  Nothing can wipe out what is done; what is past!'

Again silence, and again the strong, gentle voice:

'God can do much! Bessie was among the foremost of these; for now that she was going away so
soon from it, she grew yet more discontented, and that little word
"if" was used more than ever as she went about, not, as the others
did, just to say good-bye to the fields and woods, but to look at
them again and wish they were hers.

I need not stop to tell you of the evening journey, for it was like
the morning one, excepting that now the hopes of a pleasant day had
been fulfilled, and the children talked of what they had done, instead
of what they intended to do.

Bessie Green wondered, as she heard them talking, how it was that they all seemed so much happier
than she did, and how it was that the longed-for holiday had not been altogether a day of enjoyment.
When she arrived at home, she had very little to say about what she had done or seen; but as she
has since then been more contented, we must suppose that her wondering
has had some effect, and that she is beginning to see what made the
day so different to her and to her companions; in which case we may
hope that the next time she goes into the country she will not spoil
her holiday by the too frequent use of the word "if."

THE FORCED RABBIT.

A FUNNY FACT TOLD IN VERSE.

You have heard of forced potatoes, have you not, dear little folks? Of melons forced, and cucumbers,
and grapes in purple cloaks? But I have seen, and handled, too--and oh, the sight was funny!--
A rabbit forced, a tiny one, a snow-white little Bunny.
 And in all my work I can say
before God I never willingly wronged any man.  I am proud to be able to say that my name stands
good wherever it has been used.  It may seem egotistical that I say such things of myself.
It may seem bad taste; but I speak because I have a motive in so doing.  I want you to understand
at the outset that in my own country, wherever I am known and in my own work, my name is a
strength.'

He paused a while.  Harold sat still; he knew that such man would not, could not, speak in
such a way without a strong motive; and to learn that motive he waited.

'When you were in the water making what headway you could in that awful sea--when my little
child's life hung in the balance, and the anguish of my wife's heart nearly tore my heart in
two, I said to myself, "If we had a son I should wish him to be like that."  I meant it then,
and I mean it now!  Come to me as you are!  Faults, and past, and all.  Forget the past!  Whatever
it was we will together try to wipe it out.  Much may be done in restoring where there has
been any wrong-doing.  Take my name as your own.  It will protect you from the result of what
ever has been, and give you an opportunity to find your place again.  You are not bad in heart
I know.  Whatever you have done has not been from base motives.  Few of us are spotless as
to facts.  You and I will show ourselves--for unless God wills to the opposite we shall confide
in none other--that a strong, brave man may win back all that was lost.  Let me call you by
my name and hold you as the son of my heart; and it will be a joy and pleasure to my declining
years.'

As he had spoken, Harold's thought's had at first followed in some wonderment.  But gradually,
as his noble purpose unfolded, based as it was on a misconception as to the misdoing of which
he himself had spoken, he had been almost stricken dumb.  At the first realisation of what
was intended he could not have spoken had he tried; but at the end he had regained his thoughts
and his voice.  There was still wonderment in it, as realising from the long pause that the
old man had completed his suggestion, he spoke:

'If I understand aright you are offering me your name!  Offering to share your honour with
me.  With me, whom, if again I understand, you take as having committed some crime?'

'I inferred from what you said and from your sadness, your desire to shun your kind, that there
was, if not a crime, some fault which needed expiation.'

'But your honour, sir; your honour!'  There was a proud look in the old man's eyes as he said
quietly:

'It was my desire, is my desire, to share with you what I have that is best; and that, I take
it, is not the least valuable of my possessions, such as they are!  And why not?  You have
given to me all that makes life sweet; without which it would be unbearable.  That child who
came to my wife and me when I was old and she had passed her youth is all in all to us both.
Had your strength and courage been for barter in the moments when my child was quivering between
life and death, I would have cheerfully purchased them with not half but all!  Sir, I should
have given my soul!  I can say this now, for gratitude is above all barter; and surely it is
allowed to a father to show gratitude for the life of his child!'

This great-hearted generosity touched Harold to the quick.  He could hardly speak for a few
minutes.  Then instinctively grasping the old man's hand he said:

'You overwhelm me.  Such noble trust and generosity as you have shown me demands a return of
trust.  But I must think!  Will you remain here and let me return to you in a little while?'

He rose quickly and slipped down the iron ladder, passing into the darkness and the mist and
the flying spray.

CHAPTER XXVII--AGE'S WISDOM

Harold went to and fro on the deserted deck.  All at once the course he had to pursue opened
out before him. They petted, nursed and fondled it, and showed it every care, And said before
it went to bed its sheets of straw they'd air; They also begged it very hard itself at home
to make, And hoped, although its bed was strange, it would not lie awake.
  Such confidence demanded full confidence in return;
the unwritten laws which governed the men amongst whom he had been brought up required it.

And the shape that confidence should take?  He must first disabuse his new friend's mind of
criminal or unworthy cause for his going away.  For the sake of his own name and that of his
dead father that should be done. Then he would have to suggest the real cause . . . He would
in this have to trust Mr. Stonehouse's honour for secrecy.  But he was worthy of trust.  He
would, of course, give no name, no clue; but he would put things generally in a way that he
could understand.

When his mind was so far made up he wanted to finish the matter, so he turned to the wheelhouse
and climbed the ladder again.  It was not till he sat in the shelter by his companion that
he became aware that he had become wet with the spray.  The old man wishing to help him in
his embarrassment said:

'Well?' Harold began at once; the straightforward habit of his life stood to him now:

'Let me say first, sir, what will I know give you pleasure.'  The old man extended his hand;
he had been hoping for acceptance, and this seemed like it.  Harold laid his hand on it for
an instant only, and then raised it as if to say 'Wait':

'You have been so good to me, so nobly generous in your wishes that I feel I owe you a certain
confidence.  But as it concerns not myself alone I will ask that it be kept a secret between
us two.  Not to be told to any other; not even your wife!'

'I will hold your secret sacred.  Even from my wife; the first secret I shall have ever kept
from her.'

'First, then, let me say, and this is what I know will rejoice you, that I am not leaving home
and country because of any crime I have committed; not from any offence against God or man,
or law.  Thank God! I am free from such.  I have always tried to live uprightly . . . '  Here
a burst of pain overcame him, and with a dry sob he added: 'And that is what makes the terrible
unfairness of it all!'

The old man laid a kindly hand on his shoulder and kept it there for a few moments.

'My poor boy!  My poor boy!' was all he said.  Harold shook himself as if to dislodge the bitter
thoughts.  Mastering himself he went on:

